Identity and Reality (Émile Meyerson (Kate Loewenberg, trans.), 1930)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: pre-1931 edition scan (https://archive.org/details/dli.ministry.14438). Meyerson's masterwork: science as the reduction of difference to identity — a classic of French epistemology.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

Zibraryp of Pbtlosopby
EDITED BY ].H. MUIRHEAD, LL.D.


IDENTITY AND REALITY


EMILE MEYERSON


IDENTITY © REALITY


AUTHORIZED TRANSLATION


Kate Loewenberg


LONDON: GEORGE ALLEN & UNWIN LT
NEW YORK: THE MACMILLAN COMPAN


Originally published in France under the title ‘‘Identité et Realité”’ in 1908
THIS TRANSLATION FIRST PUBLISHED IN GREAT BRITAIN IN) 1930


All rights veserved


rRINTLD IN GREAT BRITAIN BY
UNWIN BROTHERS LID., WOKING


AUTHOR’S PREFACE
TO THE ENGLISH EDITION


For many years I have wished that this book might be known
to the English-speaking public. The ideas developed in it are
not entirely unfamiliar to that public. The very year of the
book's appearance (1908) Professor A. Wolf reviewed it sym-
pathetically in the Hibbert Journal (October 1g08}, and sum-
marics of it, as well as of later books of mine, have since
appeared. In 1915, A. J. Balfour ‘now Lord Balfour) con-
cluded a chapter of his book, Theism and Humanism 'p. 237},
by acknowledging his “obligation to the acute and learned
work” of the author of Jdentity and Reality. Nevertheless,
material obstacles were difficult to overcome, and to render
possible this translation there was needed all the disinterested
enthusiasm of Mrs. Loewenberg, who devoted four years of
effort to this thankless task. Much is due also to Professor
Muirhead’s very kind and effecuve help. IT hope that they
will accept here this expression of my great gratitude. 1 wish
also to thank very heartily Professors Lenzen and Loewenberg
(of the University of California} for their very competent and
valuable suggestions concerning the translation of many
scientific and philosophical terms.

The first edition of the book appeared in 1908; the second,
revised and enlarged, in 1gt2. Since then IT have changed
nothing inthe text. To the third edition, which appeared
in 1926 and which has been used in this translanon, |
have added only a certain number of short notes designed
especially to refer the reader to my later publications. The
reason for this is, not that 1 was unaware of the need to intro-
duce other corrections and improvements, but solely because
I felt that T should embarrass the reader by a complete re-
modclling of a work which in the meanume has become some-
what known and is even used as a text in courses of instruction.


4 IDENTITY AND REALITY


To leave the book in its present state has, it is true, this
disadvantage: that on certain special points the exposition
may not appear to recognize fully the most recent scientific
ideas. For this condition I can only plead extenuating circum-
stances and ask the reader, on the one hand, to take into
account the later writings referred to in the notes added to
the third edition, and, on the other hand, to return in thought
to the time, not so very distant, when the book originated.
Moreover, since the object in my research has to do, not with
the actual results of the physical sciences, but with the pro-
cesses of thought by which they have been attained, the
observations deduced from a certain phase of scientific know-
ledge cannot be regarded as useless just because a certain
part of a science of a given period may now be judged to
have been superseded. It is sufficient, so it scems to me, to
invade even superficially the domain of the theory of know-
ledge to realize that the form of reasoning——which is here its
essential part-~-strikes us only in so far as we are not in agree-
ment with its content. Indeed from the point of view of the
science of our day, form and content tend in some way to
fuse inevitably: that which one concludes from the facts
appears as flowing directly from them, as if it were there all
present in advance. The science which we recognize as ours
is like a tunic of Nessus which in vain we would try to shed;
the functioning of our mind, in this case, is as imperceptble
as is the progress of a boat to one aboard it who does not
see the shores. In studying a subject with which we are no
longer familiar, we see, on the contrary, the boat passing
and we cannot be ignorant of its movement. This is the ruling
idea which has directed the method of research employed in
the present book, and that is why its results seem to me to
apply not to the particular phases of this or that science but
to scientific knowledge in general.


Paris EMILE MEYERSON
july 1929


AUTHOR’S PREFACE
TO THE FRENCH EDITION


Tue present book belongs, by reason of its method, to the
domain of the philosophy of science or epistemology, to use a
word sufficiently appropriate and now becoming current. We
have, however, in our research been guided by certain cone
ceptions foreign to this domain.

The most important conception is that contained in the
following words of Helmholtz: “The more [ study phenomena
the more I am struck by the uniformity and agreement in the
action of mental processes.” The context of this passage
renders precise what at first sight might appear to be some-
what general and indefinite. The great physicist means that
the unconscious psychological processes inseparably accom-
panying visual perception are identical with those of conscious
thought. Those who have perused the PAystological Optics know
that this is not a random statement but one of the fundamental
ideas of that admirable work. It has seemed to us that the
apphcation of this principle might be considerably extended,
that not only vision but the perception of the external world
in general ought to set in motion the processes which nature
would disclose, at least in part, if one were to scrutinize those
by whose aid conscious thought transforms this image. In
other words, we believe that the best way to solve the problems
concerning common sense consists in examining the methods
followed by science. In so doing we scem to run counter to
that fundamental rule which demands that we proceed from
the simple to the complex; but this is because the simple,
in this case, is not really simple. Berkeley pointed this
out before Helmholtz: the process of visual perception, to
continue the example chosen, contains a number of con-
densed reasonings very difficult to follow. We have therefore
a greater opportunity, assuming the process to be the


6 IDENTITY AND REALITY


same, of tracing the progress of a phenomenon apparently
more complicated, but where the different stages will be
differentiated.

Moreover, the rule that we have mentioned is dominated
by that other more important rule which demands that we
proceed from the known to the unknown. But he who speaks
of the unconscious speaks of the unknown and of something
in its very essence directly unknowable.

It is, however, not at all manifest that because of this the
reasoning which we are accustomed to characterize as conscious
offers to our mind all desirable clearness. Our reason is com-
petent to scrutinize everything except itself. When I reason |
am really powerless to observe the action of my reason. Is
it, indeed, by such or such a way that I have arrived at such
or such a deduction? As soon as I ask myself the question,
doubt overwhelms me, a doubt which I can dispel only by
rehearsing to the best of my ability, methodically, the reason-
ing in question, so that all its phases, which were subconscious
while I was reasoning in order to attain the end as quickly as
possible, appear on the level of my knowledge. It is thus,
as we can readily sec, that we proceed, for example, in logic.
This procedure is not always free from danger. Reasoning
carried on purposely shows us indeed a way by which we may
arrive at a conclusion; but 1s it, in fact, the way which we have
followed? It is certain that we cannot distinguish them
directly, since the intermediary stages had not reached the
level of our knowledge. Consequently, we resort to indirect
means; we say to ourselves, for instance, that if we had
reasoned in such a manner, such other result would have
followed—a result which we are able to verify. But these
investigations, direct or indirect, can casily lead us astray.
It must not be forgotten, indeed, that research is always
dominated by preconceived ideas—that is, by hypotheses;
contrary to what Bacon believed, these are indispensable in


AUTHOR’S PREFACE 7


guiding our advance. We are thus never entirely free from
them; if we believe that we arc, this simply proves that they
have remained subconscious. Let us suppose, what is impos-
sible, that we really have no opinion at the outset of our
investigation of a given subject; an opinion will then come
into being spontancously with the first steps in the new field
of inquiry, and it will come into being under the influence
of dispositions of the mind hidden from ourselves and under
the influence of a knowledge apparently quite foreign to the
ficld we are studying. But the hypothesis once in existence
will influence our entire later work. When we try afresh the
same act of reasoning, we shall unconsciously seck to accom-
modate it to the idea which we had conceived, and, owing
to the many resources which our reason has at its disposal,
reason may be plastic enough to yield to the pressure which
we involuntarily exercise upon it—and this evidently wall
falsify our results. We shall partly avoid this danger by turn-
ing, not to our own thoughts, expressly called forth for the
occasion, but to the thought of others, free from plasticity,
since it rs embodied in writing and hence unchangeable.
Science offers us a summary of these thoughts. But science
of to-day is not sufficient. As a matter of fact, what we are
looking for is less the result than the method, the way by
which we came. Now the scientist on this point does not
differ from the ordinary man. He docs not see himself in the
act of reasoning. He therefore docs not know directly the
way by which he has come to such or such a conclusion;
the motives which have influenced him in adopting it
may be very different from those which he himself supposes.
That is why it is advisable to control his assertions by
turning, not to the individual thought, but to the collective
thought, by searching for the genesis, the evolution, of these
conceptions in history. Finally, therefore, however devious
this way may appear, it is with the help of the history of


8 IDENTITY AND REALITY


science that we shall search for the solution of problems con-
cerning common sense. This is a procedure somewhat analogous
to that extolled by Auguste Comte, and although we do not
think of denying, as he did, the possibility of all introspective
psychology, and since, as we shall see later, the results which
we have obtained are very different from those promulgated
by the founder of positivism, we believe that he merits great
praise for proclaiming the fertility of the @ postertort method to
discover the laws which rule the human mind.

Of course, we do not claim this procedure to be infallible.
The principle upon which it rests, the identity of the progress
of conscious and unconscious thought, is not at all self-evident,
and we have no pretension of demonstrating it a priort. It is
only a keurtstic principle, a working hypothesis, which we hope
the results of this book will tend to confirm to a great extent.
In a sense, moreover, one may maintain that this procedure
is unique and inevitable. Whatever we do, it is always with
our reason that we reason. We do not know and we cannot
know any way to establish a bond between concepts other
than that followed by our reason, a term which can only
signify here “conscious reason.” Even when we beheve that
we most radically deviate from it, it is always with the help
of scraps of conscious reasoning that we try to create another
which is different.

* * * * *

The history of science to which we appeal is especially the
history of the governing ideas in science. All those who know
a little of this domain, know how much there remains to be
done. To the best of our ability we ourselves have attempted
to fill certain very evident gaps by returning dircetly to the
sources; we dispensed with them cach time that it scemed
unnecessary to us, when the subject was sufficiently clucidated.
Moreover, we have no illusions about the inadequacy of our
information relative to certain very important questions.


AUTHOR’S PREFACE 9


Historical research being for us not an end but a means,
it happens that the genesis of conceptions is not always stated
in conformity with chronological order and that considerations
relative to the same science, even to the same phase of evolu-
tion of some particular science, are scattered in diffcrent
chapters; for instance, the evolution of chemistry in the
eighteenth century before Lavoisier and the genesis of the
modern notion of the chemical clement are dealt with in
Chapter VII and in Chapter X. We did not know how to
avoid these inconveniences. It is for the reader to judge
whether the results of our work compensate for the addiuonal
labour imposed upon him by this procedure.

We also wish to apologize for the multiplicity of quotations
and notes. It would have been very difficult to dispense with
the former, since the method adopted by us consists precisely
in forming deductions by examining the processes of reason-
ing of scientists; on the other hand, the meaning of a text
being determined at bottom only by the context, we believed
that the reader would be helped in his verifications by having
the opportunity to turn constantly to the book from which
the quotation was taken. Moreover, is not the greatest merit
ofa work of this kind to prepare the way for later researches?

We have made every effort to acknowledge the work of
our predecessors. There are certain omussions and we apologize
for them in advance. No investigator, especially to-day when
intellectual activity is so intense in a realm contiguous to so
many different orders of thought, knows exactly how much
he owes to the ideas of others. But we wish particularly to
acknowledge the influence of Boutroux and Bergson, Poincaré
and Duhem. This influence is not limited to the passages
where their names are menuoned.

* * * is *

Here in brief is the general outline of our work. We begin

by investigating whether it is true, as Comte and, later on,


10 IDENTITY AND REALITY


Mach affirm, that all science is established only for the pur-
pose of action and prevision. We prove that the principle
thus put into play, the principle of lawfulness (/égalité), is not
enough, that science attempts equally to explain phenomena,
and that this explanation consists in the identification of the
antecedent and the consequent (Chapter I). It is from this
second principle, the principle of serentific causality, that the
atomic theories are derived (Chapter T]). It enters also into
the part of science devoted to law by creating the principles of
conservation (Chapters TI, IV, and V}, and by bringing about
the elimination of time (Chapter VI). An extension of this
same principle creates the concept of the unity of matter
which leads to the assimilation of this latter with space,
and from that to the annihilation of the external world
(Chapter VII). These conclusions are not a result of science,
they come from the a priori elements which science conceals ;
science reacts, and this acuon ts expressed by Carnot’s principle
(Chapter VILL}. After having determined more precisely the
limits of causal explanation, to which is opposed the concept
of the irrational (Chapter IX:, we show that non-mechanical
theories are also evolved from the principle of causality
(Chapter X). We then state that the world of common sense
is created by a process strictly analogous to that which pro-
duces scientific theories (Chapter AL). We end with certain
conclusions relative to the philosophy of science, during which
we again examine, with the help of the results attained, the
problem of the relation between the two principles of lawful-
ness and of causality (Chapter NII).

Paris EMILE MEYERSON

June 1907


EDITOR’S PREFACE


I HAVE been asked by the translator to write a short intro-
duction to this book in its English dress, which may also be
an introducuon, if that is necessary, of Dr. Meyerson to the
English-speaking public.

Born in 1859 at Lublin, at that me in Russian Poland,
Emile Meyerson was sent, while stall very young, to Dresden,
thence to Leipsic, and finally to Berlin for the finishing of his
school education. On leaving school he studied chemistry, first
at Géttingen, then at Heidelberg, where Bunsen was at the
height of his reputation, finally again at Berlin. In 1882
he settled in France, where for some years he was engaged
in business as a practical chemist. In 18q8 he accepted an
administrative post in Paris, which he held ull 1923.

During all these years his mind was occupied with other
things besides the details of business. His interest in the history
of chemistry had been aroused by Hermann Kopp’s great book
on that subject, but it was not confined to the history of
chemistry and extended in the end to the history of natural
science in all its branches, on which he is perhaps to-day the
ercatest living authority.

But these facts, if taken bv themselves, would not explain
the appearance of a work by his hand in the Library of Philo-
sophy. What interested him in the study of the history of
science was not the succession of theorics, however fascinating
the story of these might be, but the principle which seemed to
him to underlie all the efforts of the human mind to penetrate
below the superficial generalizations of ordinary knowledge, and
reach an explanation of phenomena which should satisfy the
reason. What impressed him was the impossibility of under-
standing the various forms which scientific theory has taken,
except in the hight of a single principle which is bound up
with the very nature of the mind itself, and in that sense may
be said to be a prior.


12 IDENTITY AND REALITY


This he found in the demand for something permanent and
self-identical amid spatial and temporal change, and again
amid the qualitative variety of elements. It was under the
impulse of this demand that the atomic theory took shape in
ancient philosophy, and has continued to our own time to
assume one or other of its protean forms. It is this that, in
physics, explains the rapidity with which the conception of
the conservation of matter and energy were accepted on their
first enunciation; in chemistry, the persistence of the belicf in
some one fundamental element into which all others are
resolvable; in biology the old belief in preformation, and the
general acceptance to-day of the idea of heredity.

The significance of this view becomes clear when we
contrast it with such views as that of Comte and, more recently,
of Mach, according to which the work of science is limited to
finding hkenesses in the characters and uniformitics in the
sequences of things,—in fact, the discovery of laws of pheno-
mena in the interest of their practical application. Meyerson
holds to the universality in nature of the principle of conformity
to law—what he calls fegalité ; but this is a conception with
which the human mind can never rest content. Science in its


‘


essence is only a further stage of the ‘natural metaphysic,”
whereby common sense assumes the existence of permanent
substances underlying the appearances of things. It is in vain
that umidity and scepticism would confine it to the generaliza-
tions that are required for practice. Practice is only one of the
phases of the life of mind. Going deeper than practice is the
craving of the mind to discover rationality in the world, and
to find itself at home in what presents itself as a foreign
material.

While in this respect Meyerson parts company with the
positivism that has formed so large a portion of the French
tradition in science and philosophy, there are other respects


in which he allies himself with that tradition. He is at one


EDITOR’S PREFACE 13


with it in approaching philosophy from the side of natural
science, and in finding in Descartes the chief representative of
the genius of modern thought. In spite of his admiration of
the scholastics, of Newton, of Leibniz, and of Kant, Descartes,
Lavoisier, Sadi Carnot are, as Leon Lichtenstein says,! his
“three great heroes.”

But there is a sull decper sense in which his work falls into
line with ideas which are characteristic of French philosophy,
as we know it to-day in such writers as Emile Boutroux and
Henri Bergson. To him, as to them, the aim of science is the
discovery of rauonality in things, and rationality means the
reduction of differences to identity in such a form that they
shall be absorbed without remainder—an identity of which
the mathematical equation ts the type, and the undifferenuated
Being of the Eleatic sphere is a picture. With these writers he
holds also that this ideal is one that can never be completely
achieved owing to the presence of a residual element of
irrationality in nature, which in the end defies us. Our results
are never cither @ postertort or @ pron completely demon-
strable but only, to use his own phrase, “* plausible.” Yet there
are degrees of plausibility and, in proportion as the innate and
indomitable craving of the mind for rationality is satisfied, we
have a right to speak of things as explicable.

The present work, in which Meyerson first expounded this
view of the logic of the mind, amounting in reality to a theory
of knowledge, was published in 1908. A second edition appeared
in 1912, and a third (that from which this translation has been
executed) in 1926.7 It is impossible, except by reading it, to
obtain any idea of the extent of Jearning combined with acute-


' See this writer’s admirable article on the Philosophy of Emile Meyerson
in the Berichten der mathematisch-physischen Klasse der Sdchischen Akademie der
Wissenschaften cu Leipsig, LXXX Band, to which I owe the above bio-
graphical details.


2 Since it first appeared he has also published L'explication dans les science;
(1gat) and La déduction relativiste (1925).


14 IDENTITY AND REALITY


ness of insight and lucidity of style which the book exhibits. Its
importance has been recognized not only in his own country,
but in Germany (where a translation of it is about to appear) ;
not only by the general public, but by the leaders of science.
In a recent article in The Times (February 5, 1929), Einstein
referred to Meyerson’s “brilliant studies in the theory of
knowledge’ as reflecting, in contrast to the suspicious attitude
of so many physicists, the same spirit of faith in the uniformity
of nature and its accessibility to the speculative intellect as has
inspired the work of the mathematician.

Much doubtless might be said from the point of view of
Logic of the complete validity of a conception of rationality
which makes it consist in undifferentiated identity, as con-
trasted with that which finds it in the discovery of unity of
principle in diversity of character, and which, under Hegel's
influence, has recently dominated the work of English logicians.
But a preface of this kind is a place for acknowledgment, not
for criticism.

Besides the debt which we owe to the author himself for
the interest he has taken in the translauon and the preface
he has written for it, and to the translator for the faithfulness
of the rendering and the enormous labour that the verification
of references to the English works, quoted in the French text,
has involved, we have to acknowledge our obligation to Pro-
fessor Lenzen, of the Physics Department in the University
of California, who has read the whole of the translation in
manuscript and been of the greatest assistance in securing
accuracy in the rendering of technical terms.

J. H. MUIRHEAD


May 1929


CONTENTS


CUAPT FR


i.


ii.


IV.


Vi.


Vi.


VIN.


Xi.


xq},


AUTHOR’S PREFACE TO THE ENGLISH EDITION
AUTHOR'S PREFACE TO THE FRENCH EDITION
EDITOR'S PREFACE

LAW AND CAUSE

MECHANISM

THE PRINCIPLE OF INERTIA

THE CONSERVATION OF MATTER

THE CONSERVATION OF ENERGY

THE ELIMINATION OF TIME

THE UNITY OF MATTER

CARNOT'S PRINCIPLE

THE IRRATIONAL

NON-MECHANICAL THEORIES

COMMON SENSE

CONCLUSIONS

APPENDICES


INDEX


FAGE


1}
17
63
11g
157


IDENTITY AND REALITY


CHAPTER I


LAW AND CAUSE


WHEN a certain phenomenon strikes our attention, it appears
enigmatic at first, but after having studied it, we can explain
it and we say that we know its cause.

What do these terms exactly mean? What 3s a scientific
explanation? What is the cause for which we were looking?

A precise answer to this question was given by Berkeley
nearly two centuries ago.(1) ‘For the laws of nature being
once ascertained, it remains for the philosopher to show that
each thing necessarily follows in conformity with these laws;
that is, that every phenomenon necessanly results from these
principles. This is to explain and solve the phenomena; that is,
to assign the reason why they take place.”’ From the context
we sce that Berkeley regarded the laws and the principles
mentioned in this passage as experimental (expertmentis com-
probatae }.

Thus the cause of a phenomenon is the law, the empirical
rule, which governs the entire class of analogous phenomena.
This rule teaches us that one group of phenomena involves
another group. Since we are able to observe only in time,
ic. successively, the empirical Jaw amounts really to a law of
succession of phenomena. -And consequently Berkeley's formula
is equivalent to that enunciated a little later by Hume;
namely, that the concept of cause or causality is reducible to
succession, (2)

Berkeley's formula has often been revived since. “‘A stone
tends to fall,”’ says Taine, “because all objects tend to fall.’(3)
Helmholtz writes: ‘“The principle of causality is nothing else
than the supposition that all the phenomena of nature are
subject to law.’’(4) Hannequin in the same way declares that
“to search for the cause of a fact, is, for a physicist, to search
for its law,’’(§} and Ostwald formulates the principle of
causality as follows: “If we establish the same conditions,

B


18 IDENTITY AND REALITY


phenomena will take place in the same manner,’”’(6) a statement
which, we see, approaches Hume’s conceptions.

Here we find a complete assimilation of the two concepts of
“cause” and “law,” the second entrrely absorbing the first. But
the opposite tendency has also continued-—that 1s, efforts have
been made to include the law in the cause. Thus Lucretius, after
having stated what is, as we shall see later on, one of the forms
of the principle of causality, declares that if we do not admit it,
we are forced to give up establishing any regularity whatsoever
in nature. ‘‘Nor would the same fruits stay constant to the trees,
but all would change: all trees might avail to bear all fruits ;’’(7)
and eighteen centuries later, Jean Bernoulli expresses himself in
an identical manner by declaring that if we reject the principle
of causality “‘all nature would fall into disorder’’.{8}

It seems that this assimilation could be explained only if
there were a real logical identity between the two concepts of
law and cause, if the two terms were synonymous. Everyone
knows that this is not so. Yet it is important to throw some
more light on this question.

Let us take up again the formula of Helmholtz, considering
it for what it really is—that is, as an expression of the principle,
not of causality, but of lawfulness (légalite). Although the use
of this term is not customary in the sense we are giving to
it, yet we believe it is clear: it signifies the supremacy of
law. This will permit us to translate with more exactitude the
last part of Helmholtz’s phrase, which we have cited earlier,
where he stipulates literally “the supposition of the lawfulness
(Gesetzlichkeit) of all the phenomena of nature.’'(9).

How do we arrive at formulating laws? By the observation and
the generalization of phenomena. The human mind’s power
of generalization has at all times occupied the attention of
philosophers; but this is a chapter of logic which we mean
to leave here completely aside. We shall consider as an accepted
fact that the human mind possesses the faculty of forming,
with the aid of the perception of different individuals, the
concept man, just as it will form the concept sulphur with
the aid of the perception of different pieces of a matter
which is yellow, inflammable, etc. The principle of lawfulness
af nature demands evidently the formation of such concepts,

otherwise, phenomena being infinitely diverse we should not be


LAW AND CAUSE 19


able to formulate rules, and having once formulated them, we
should not be in the least helped by them without the faculty
of generalization.

Helmholtz, we have just seen, characterizes conformity to
law as a “‘presupposition” ; but, in certain respects, it 1s much
more than that, it is a real conviction, perhaps the strongest
amongst those we are capable of harbouring. In fact, all of our
conscious acts are intentional acts—that is, acts performed in
view of an end which we foresee; but this foresight would be
entirely impossible if we did not have the absolute conviction
that nature is well-ordered, that certain antecedents determine
and will always determine certain consequences. It is this
which Auguste Comte has summed up in the following terms:
“Knowledge gencrates foresight, foresight generates action.” (10)

It has sometimes been asserted that this convicuon 1s based
solely on experience. But this seems difficult to believe. Without
doubt, from the abstract point of view one can completely
separate observation from action, construct a type of observation
from which every element of action would be absent. But when
one thinks of the functioning of our sense organs, of their
elementary acts, intentional or semi-intentional, which it pre-
supposes (such as turning the eyes or moving the hands) one
begins to doubt the possibility of a real separation of that kind ;
and one doubts especially whether the period of action js or
ever has been preceded in nature by a period of observation
necessary to establish the conviction that order 3s the rule of
the world. It 1s indeed certain that primitive man, however
near to the animal one may imagine him, must have been
imbued with this conviction, since without this conviction he
could not have acted at all; and the animal itself, acting as it
does, implies, by its action, that its intelligence on this point
does not radically differ from our own, unless we suppose, as
did Descartes, that it 1s a simple machine, or that it does
everything impelled only by instinct. The dog to whom I
throw a piece of meat knows how to catch it in the air: this is
because he knows in advance the trajectory that this body will
describe in falling. It appears, without doubt, to him no less
than to us, as a way of behaving, peculiar to the object thrown
under certain circumstances—-that is, as a law. Goethe has said:
«in the beginning there was action.""(11)


20 IDENTITY AND REALITY


But the dog’s processes of generalization and investigation
are extremely limited. He knows how to foresee only a very
limited number of phenomena. Primitive man was already
immensely superior to him. His previsions, it is true, based on
the belief in regularity, were applied only to a part of nature;
a great number of phenomena appeared to him as evading the
rule, being subject to the free-will of invisible powers. But
however general one may suppose this latter conviction, it has
doubtless never embraced more than the smallest part of the
ordinary phenomena of life, the far greater number of pheno-
mena having always been conceived as purely conformable to
law. As Adam Smith has remarked, no people on earth has ever
known a god of gravity.(12)

The progress of science has naturally resulted in hmiting
more and more the domain of the miraculous. ‘‘Science,’”’ as
H. Poincaré has so well said, “‘is a rule of action which
succeeds, :13) and there where our ancestors saw anly
miracles, eluding all prevision, we observe more and more the
effect of exact laws. And yct, however marked may be this
progress, does it suffice to explain even the modern conviction
of the reign of law? The number of phenomena whose rules
we know is necessarily minute compared with the phenomena
comprising al/ nature, the first being finite and the second
infinite ; every general conclusion on the basis of known pheno-
mena, extending to nature in its entirety, would thus seem
logically questionable. This probably explains why certain
philosophers, who emphasize this point of view, have appeared
to doubt the absolute sway of laws in nature. The most striking
example of this is Auguste Comte. He believed that ‘the natural
laws, the true object of our research, could not remain rigorously
compatible in any case with a too detailed investigatuion.”"(14)
Comte does not question the validity of a certain particular
law which we are required to maintain provisionally for lack
of a better one, even though knowing it to be only approximate,
he questions the validity of the very occurrence of law—that is,
of the conformity of nature to law in general. Comte does not
believe that beneath this law a better one may exist, perhaps
more complicated, but adapting itself more closely to the
phenomena; he is convinced that a too detailed investigation
would lead us to the knowledge of phenomena evading all law,


LAW AND CAUSE a1


all rule. And so he rejects very severely all research of this kind ;
piling up terms of reprobation, he declares that the investiga-
tions in which too precise measuring instruments are used
‘are incoherent or sterile,” proceeding from a curiosity that is
always “‘vain and seriously disturbing,” from a ‘“‘childish
curiosity stimulated by vain ambition”; he protests strongly
against the “‘abuse of microscopic research and the exaggerated
merit still too often accorded to a means of investigation so
dubious,” and he does not hesitate to invoke against “‘the
active disorganization” by which the system of positive know-
ledge scems to him menaced because of these endeavours, the
secular arm of ‘the veritable speculative rule” of the future.[15}
We shall discover later on the source of these opinions of
Comte’s. To understand fully how far they are foreign to the
principles which really guide the advance of science, it 1s
perhaps not sufficient to prove, as has already been done very
justly, that science has since followed a direcuion diametrically
opposed to that indicated by the founder of positivism. It has
tirelessly sought for phenomena more and more minute,
measures more and more precise, and its constant care has
been to perfect its instruments of investigation, amongst others,
the thermometer and the microscope so obnoxious to Comte,
far bevond the limits of accuracy at that time./16; We
must still add that in spite of the celebrity of Comte’s work
and the prestige which his writings enjoy, no scienust, in the
course of his studies, has ever tried to follow the principles
laid down by positivism. Without doubt, confronted by a
muluplicity of phenomena, a scientist may ask himself whether
the data which he possesses and which his means of investigation
will permit him to acquire, will be sufhicient to bring to hght
the particular laws which govern them; but never has any
physicist, chemist, or astronomer asked himself whether the
phenomena which he was about to investigate, no matter
what their nature might be, were conformable to law. Never
has any scientust worthy of the name doubted that nature,
even in its Most intimate recesses, was entirely subject to law.
A single doubt in this respect would have been sufficient, as
G. Léchalas has justly said,(17) to put a stop to all research.
Might this be, as has sometimes been intimated, a manner of
thinking peculiar to the scientist or to the modern man trained


22 IDENTITY AND REALITY


in his school? We have seen that, on the contrary, it could not
be acquired by experience, that, even to-day, experience does
not justify it; and it appears that wherever they find themselves
confronted with dead nature alone, in which they suppose
that no intervention of the will ofa living being occurs, primitive
men, and even the animals, have opinions on this subject entirely
analogous to our own. What, then, is the source of this convic-
tion? How does it happen that we have an absolute faith in the
validity of laws, that we inter their existence, even when we
have not yet learned how to formulate them?

To understand it we have only to recall that foresight is
indispensable for action. Now action for any organism of the
animal kingdom is an absolute necessity. Surrounded by hostile
nature it must act. it must foresee, if it wishes to live. “AIL life,
all action,’’ says Fouillée, “is a conscious or an unconscious
divining. Divine or you will be devoured.”"118) Therefore, I
have not the chuice of believing in prevision (that is, in
science,, or of not believing in it. If I want to live, I must
believe in it. Consequently, it is not astonishing that this
convicuon based directly on the most powerful of the organism's
instincts, that of conservation, should manifest itself with such
unusual force.

In defining science in terms of utality from the point of
view of acuon, have we not diminished its domain? At all
times the scientist who is not busy with researches immediately
applicable has been a subject of ridicule to the man in the
strect, and surely at the present moment many physicists,
chemists, geologists, etc., are occupied with problems the
solution of which docs not seem to admit of practical conse-
guences. Are these investigations legitimate?

Auguste Comte believed that there was, indecd, also a limit on
that side; certain speculations were radically useless, and, more-
over, doomed to sterility, such as, for instance, studics of the
physical constitution of the stars. In the following terms Comte
states the existence of this limit: “There exists in all kinds of
research, in all important relations, a harmony that is constant
and necessary between the study of our real intellectual needs
and the actual range, present or future, of our real knowledge.
This harmony . . . springs simply from this evident necessity :
we need only know what can act upon us in a more or less


LAW AND CAUSE 23


direct manner, and, on the other hand, just because such an
influence exists, it becomes sooner or later a sure means of
knowledge for us.’’(19)

It is quite permissible to doubt whether Comte’s deduction
is of any value, even from the point of view of his definition of
science. Thereis, indeed, at the base of his reasoning a postulate:
that by some means or other we are able to distinguish in
advance that which can act upon us more or less directly (that
is, useful knowledge) from that which can never render us any
service. Indeed, if it were not so, the distinction established by
Comte would be meaningless, for it would not permit us to
trace any limit. Now, it is easy to sce that this postulate cannot
be upheld. The universe from the point of view of its relations
to us is a whole. All of its parts must act upon one another,
and all of them may, directly or indirectly, react: upon. us.
A part of the universe which had no possible relation to us
would be something, not “that we should not need to know,”
as Comte says, but which we simply would not know, whose
existence would be inconceivable—in other words, something
Not existing.

Le Dantec, trying to determine the exact meaning of Comte’s
statement, hit upon a very apt example, namelv, of worlds
placed in a ball of ether, separated from our universe by a
substance incapable of transmitung heht..20; Assuming that
this medium transmitted no other form of acuen, not even
gravitation, it i certain that we could never conceive of the
existence of the worlds in quesuon.

In the precise case cited by Comte of the physical constituuon
of the stars we know that he was mistaken about the facts. The
spectral analysis discovered a few decades after the publication
of the Cours de philosophte positive has absolutely contradicted
him on this point. But is it true even that this knowledge must
necessarily remain sterile from the point of view of pracucal
uulity? What do we know about it? May it not reveal to us
data concerning the genesis of the heavenly bodies which wall
permit us to draw conclusions about phenomena, taking place
in the interior of the sun or even of the earth, where it is
impossible for us to make direct observation, but where we
have nevertheless an interest in knowing what is going on in
regard to the future? Is it inconceivable that we should


24 IDENTITY AND REALITY


unearth some facts about the constitution of matter? Indeed,
suppositions of this kind have already been formulated and
no one may say whether they are not destined to revolutionize
the science of to-morrow. Such and such phenomena which
at this time seem to us to be infinitely remote, to-morrow
may reveal to us relations, acquaintance with which would be
of the most immediate usefulness.

Comte, himself better advised than he was at the Qme when
he formulated and jusufied the restriction to which we have
alluded, has given a striking example of his deeper insight by
showing that, according to Condorcet, the sailor of to-day
making astronomical observations profits by the mathematical
discoveries about cones duc to Greck geometers who lived
twenty centuries ago;(21) now it is quite certain that the
latter could not foresee any utilization of this kind.

Thus starting from the utihtarian concept of science, one can
nevertheless justify science, Im its entirety, including even
research about the physical nature of stars, only, of course, in
so far as science has for its aim to learn the relations between
phenomena, the rules and the Jaws which govern them. Such
seems to be, moreover, the almost unanimous opinion of all
those, philosophers or scientists, who define science In accord-
ance with Comte’s conception. No one, it scems, would now
be disposed to renew an injunction such as has just been
mentioned.

While extending its domain science becomes more and more
compact and the same causes explain this evoluuon,

A ray of light passes through water; we notice that it changes
direction and we are able to recognize that for the same angle
of incidence the angle of refraction is idenucal, but that for
different angles, it is different. We must therefore draw up a
table whose principal points of reference at least we must
keep in mind if we arc interested in this part of science; the
more exactly we want to calculate the more detailed the table
will have to be until it becomes impossible to keep it in mind.
But now the law of refraction sums up all of these observations.

sin 1
Knowing that any jy we no longer need a table; we no
longer even need to remember the points of reference. We
have therefore diminished our effort, and in so doing we


LAW AND CAUSE 25


have obeyed the natural and general tendency of every
organized being. Moreover, the facts of nature are infinite, and
infinite 1s their variety. Our desire is to grasp all of them in
order to be able to foresee all of them. Doubtless, we shall
never succeed, but at least we must know the greatest number
possible. Now the more the effort is diminished for each
particular case, the more we shall be able to extend it. This
is what Comte has defined by saying that “‘the utility of laws” 1s
‘‘to dispense, as much as the different phenomena allow, with
all direct observation, by permitting the deduction of the
greatest possible number of results from the smallest number
of immediate data.” (22) In other words, laws have for their
end an ‘‘economy’’ of effort or of thought. We borrow this
expression, not being Comte’s own, but nevertheless summing
up exactly his ideas, from the writings of a modern thinker of
great note, b. Mach, whose concepuions have influenced and
still do influence science considerably.

Does science embrace the totality of the phenomena of
nature? There are some facts which do not appear to me to be
entirely determined. They are those which have to do with
my will. Am I really free? What is certain is that, at this
moment, and within certain limits, I feel that I am free to
act, and that retrospectively [ fecl myself responsible for the
deeds I have done.

Is the feehng only an Hlusion and an epiphenomenon, as the
determinists would have it? At any rate, we seem to be grappling
here with one of the most serious questions that has ever per-
plexed the human mind. Shall we be forced to solve it before
proceeding farther? It seems to be essentially insoluble, being
one of the antinomies through which the unknowable shows
itself. But, happily, we can chmuinate it here, and this procedure
conforms entirely to the methods followed by science. Science,
we have just seen, has an end, prevision. Its domain will thus
include all that is capable ef being foreseen, all of the facts
subject to rules. Where there is no law, there Is no science.
Free will, supposing that it exists, is certainly outside this
domain.

It is evident that the limit thus established can only be
quite indeterminate: this results from the hypothetical import
involved in the proposition of “free will.” According as we


26 IDENTITY AND REALITY


admit or deny free will or as we assign to it a domain more or
less vast, that of science will grow smaller or grow greater. The
same act, according as we consider it as emanating either from
the moral individual supposedly responsible or from the environ-
ment of which he is the natural product, will appear to us now
as free and now as determined, as something possible to have
been foreseen if we had known and properly appreciated the
circumstances by which it was surrounded. Since the name of
psychology has been coined and since this name does not in
itself seem absurd to us, we apparently believe it possible to
formulate rules on the subject of the phenomena of the will;
for psychology, according to the just remark of Fouillée, is
essentially “the study of the will.’(23) When we study the
psychology of the people who surround us, whether we try
to know why they have acted or how they will act, we tacitly
suppose that their actions are determined.' 24} Do we mean
by that to deny their free will? Assuredly not, since we consider
them as responsible for their acts. But in trying to foresee
we are working scienufically, and whoever speaks of science
speaks of predetermination. And thus the lack of precision in
determining limits does not really present here the inconven-
lences which we might expect from it. Lange asserted that
science, if it is not to relinquish its task, must explain the
motion proceeding from reason ‘verninftig; as a special case
of the general laws of motion.{25) The truth is that science, if it
treats of this particular motion, is forced to consider it as
determined. But it does not, it indeed could not, affirm that
it is so. To suppose the existence of free phenomena entirely
detached from the domination of law and from our prevision
in no way assails the principle of science. Nor is it contrary
to its conclusions, for determinism being a fundamental postu-
late of science and science limiting in advance its activity to
what is capable of being foreseen, it is certain that, whatever
results may come of it, they can teach us nothing about what,
by previous agreement, has been omitted from the domain
of our investigations.

In order to indicate better the importance of this thesis we
need only leave momentarily the realm of science to enter that
of religion. All religions, taking the term in its most generally
accepted sense, tend to show us the intervention in the course of


LAW AND CAUSE 24


the world of a superior will placed outside of nature. This is all
the truer the more we consider a primitive theological state.
In the beginning man often symbolizes the power of hosule
nature surrounding him under the form of invisible but active
beings.(26) These beings act ike mcn though with an increased
power. No one indeed can doubt the anthropomorphic character
of the concept of divinity, especially before the transformation it
was forced to undergo by the more or less absolute monotheism
which has become the rcligion ofan important part of humanity.
God, then, just like man, has his free will. The behever can
influence his will by prayers, just as on the human level every
man may influence the wil of another man. But in both cases
all absolute constraint is impossible. To afhirm the contrary,
to believe that by determined acts it is possible to coerce
divinity, is no longer religion but magic, and magic in so far
as itis beliefin the absolute efficacy of its practices literally
establishes a law—that is to say, transforms uUsclf into an experi-
mental science; this explains why alchemy, having retained
to the very end such intimate connection with magic, was able
to develop normally into chemistry.

But in religion, strictly speaking, the acts of God remain
quite frec—thatis to say, they are not determined, or at least not
completely so; just as, in respect to my own acts or those of my
fellow-men, I suppose generally that they are partly determined
by antecedents of different kinds, and partly free; so the
behever considers the acts of the divinity toward him as
partly mouvated by the merit or lack of merit of the supplicant,
by his prayers, etc., and in part free. On the other hand, these
acts determine events which in turn give birth to others and
so on without end. If tracing back a chain of events we find
an act of free will of a divinity, the whole or a part of the chain
will stop right there, and this will be what Renouvier has called


a)


an “‘absolute beginning.””(27) The act there appears as not
determined by its antecedents, but as a departure from laws.
This is commonly styled a miracle.

It is sometimes said that science repudiates miracles; this
is inexactly expressed. As it progresses, we have seen, science
tends to restrict the domain of miracles. Many of the phenomena
which appeared to primitive man as miracles, for us enter the


domain of science. One can say, in this sense, that science


28 IDENTITY AND REALITY


verifies the postulate of conformity to law, but it must be
understood that this confirmation cannot be absolute. As to the
miraculous, like every other act of free will, it remains necessanly
outside the realm of science and separated from it by an
impassable wall. Indeed, in all times the devout have experi-
enced the quite natural desire of showing by experiments the
efficacy of their divinity’s intervention. One may boldly say
that in a way perhaps no other experiment has been so fre-
quently tried. Yet the demonstration has never succeeded:
it is essentially impossible. If the water of the grotto at Lourdes
invariably healed all the paralytics who were plunged therein,
it would be a law, and we should certainly begin to look in
the composition of the water for some characteristic explaining
this action. If needed, we should be forced to invent a hypo-
thetical clement or an unknown form of cnergv. If the sacerdotal
ceremonies constituted a necessary and sufhcient aid, the act
would leave the domain of religion to enter into that of magic,
for there would be a determined act of the divinity. But itis a
religious act because the divinity remains free. The phenomenon
cannot be foreseen, nor reproduced at will—that is to say, it 1s
essentially beyond the control of science. One can invalidate a
miracle—that is, show that the phenomenon in question Is
really consistent with the laws that we know; but one cannot
demonstrate a miracle scienufically. The most one can do 1s
to show that the phenomenon, if it had been ruled by certain
laws, would have had to follow a different course. But the
incredulous will always have plenty of opportunity to insist that
there were circumstances and laws remaining unknown.

Itis a little more difficult to disengage the concept of causahity,
precisely because of the confusion already mentioned. How-
ever, we find a very clear expression of it in the writings of
Leibniz, who calls it “‘the principle of determining reason’”’ or
“sufficient reason.”’ “One must consider,” says Leibniz, ‘that
there are two great principles in our reasoning: one is the
principle of contradiction, which states that of two contradictory
propositions onc is true and the other false; the other principle
is that of sufficient reason—that nothing happens without there
being a determining cause or at least a determining reason,
that 1s to say something which can serve to explain, @ priori,
why this exists in this rather than in any other fashion.”” And


LAW AND CAUSE 29


he adds: ‘‘This great principle takes place in all events and no
contrary example will ever be given; and although most often
these reasons are not sufficiently known, we do nevertheless
catch a ghmpse of their existence.’’(28) Plato had already
stated the same postulate, saying: “Any beginning without
cause is impossible’’ ;{29) and Aristotle: ‘Nature is no wanton
or random creator.’”’(30) Schopenhauer, in his treatise On the
Fourfold Root, adopted the same formula, saying with Wolf,

‘thid est sine ratione cur potius sit guam non stt,/31) which is, we
sec, the literal statement of Leibniz.

But in other passages Leibniz has explained with greater
precision what he means by the cause or sufficient reason. In
the treatise De legtbus naturae ef vera aestimatione virium motricium
(itis a question of demonstrating by the method of reductio
ad absurdum, the principle of the conservation of vrs viva), we
read: “It would follow that the cause could not be entirely
restored nor substituted for its effect, which is, one easily
understands, entirely contrary to the habits of nature and the
reasons for things’’;:32) and in the Dynamica (proposition 5)
he writes: “The whole effect can reproduce the entire cause
or its hke.”"(33; He again expresses the same idea in his Essar
de Dynamique there also the principle of cts ciza is in question) :
“For if this crs tira could ever increase, there would exist an
effect more powerful than its cause, or clse perpetual mechanical
motion—that is to say, something which could reproduce its
cause and something more, which is absurd. But if the force
were able to decrease it would come to nothing in the end, for
never being able to increase and always being able to decrease,
it would always diminish more and more, which is without
doubt contrary to the order of things.”"(34) Finally we see that
the principle of Leibniz comes back to the well-known formula
of the scholastics, causa aequat effectum.

Jean Bernoulli, to whom we have referred previously, uses the
same statement: it is the equality between causes and effects
which seems to him to be the indispensable guarantee of order
in nature. Lucretius writes, Nil posse creart de nthilo,(35) which
is evidently the formula of Anaxagoras, ° ‘Nothing comes into
being and nothing passes away, a formula which has often been
attributed to more modern authors, even to Lavoisier. It 1s
clear, moreover, that this formula is immediately deducible


go IDENTITY AND REALITY


from the preceding one, for all nature being, by postulate,
only a chain of causes and effects, and the sum of the second
being always equal to the whole of the first, there is nowhere
any room for creation or for disappearance.

On the other hand, it is apparent that the postulate of
causality 1s in no way identical with that of conformity to law.
A more profound analysis will but confirm this.

In positing the existence of rules we postulate that they are
knowable. A law of nature of which we are ignorant does not
exist in the strictest sense of the term. Certainly, nature seems
to us ordered. Each new discovery, cach realized anticipation,
confirms this opinion in us. So much so that nature itself
seems to proclaim its own orderliness; this idea appears to
enter our minds from the outside, as it were, without our doing
anything but receive it passively; in the end the orderliness
appears to us as a purely empirical fact, and the laws formulated
by us appear as something belonging to nature, as the “laws of
nature,” independent of our intelligence. This is to forget that
we were convinced in advance of this orderliness, of the existence
of these laws. All the acts of our daily life witness to it. This is
to forget also how we arrived at these laws. We have observed
some peculiar and stnctly umquc phenomena. We have
formed gencral and abstract concepts of them, and our laws, as
a matter of fact, apply only to these latter. The law which
governs the action of the lever considers only the ‘“‘mathe-
matical lever’; but we know very well that we shall never
encounter anything like it in nature. In the same way we shall
never encounter the ideal gases of physics nor the crystals of
which we possess crystallographic models. But even when we
affirm that sulphur has such and such properties we are not think-
ing of some particular piece of the well-known yellow substance.
Sometimes what we affirm applies to a sort of average of the
pieces we are apt to encounter in industry, and sometimes
even (when we speak of ‘pure sulphur’) it apples to an ideal
matter to which we can approach only after many expcriments ;
the qualities of a piece of sulphur taken at random may differ
widely from those of the substance in question. We know of
the formidable amount of work to which Stas had to devote
himself in order to obtain silver approximately chemically
pure. We know, moreover, that he chose this substance as the


LAW AND CAUSE 31


starting-point of his determinations because it appeared to
him to offer the greatest facilities, and we know also that the
silver obtained by him was not really pure, so that it has since
become necessary to rectify the results which he had obtained.
We can see from this typical example how much the substratum
even of the law, the generalized concept, 1s a thing of our
thought. For it will in no way help to affirm that, silver being
a definite element, the pure substance must necessarily exist in
the piece of metal which I am holding, which I call by the
same name, but which I know to be impure. The existence
of the silver-element is only an hypothesis which 1s obtained
after many deductions; and pure silver, hke the mathematical
lever, the ideal gas, or the perfect crystal are abstractions
created by atheory. Itis, as Duhem has justly said, (36) impos-
sible to understand the law, impossible to apply it, without per-
forming the work of scientific abstraction, without knowing
the theories which it presupposes.

If we sometimes have the Wlusion that the laws formulated
by us apply directly to reality it is solely because of the clumsi-
ness of our senses and our imperfect means of invesugation,
which do not permit us to perceive all that differentiates
parucular phenomena from one another. Poincaré has observed
that these circumstances have favoured the discovery of certain
laws and that it may be a disadvantage for a science to be
conceived at a time when measuring instruments permit very
detailed investigations. (37)

In fact, we only attain laws by viclaung nature, by isolating
more or less artificially a phenomenon trom the whole, by
checking those influences which would have falsified the
observation. Thus the law cannot directly express reality.
The phenomenon as it ts envisaged by it, the “pure” phenome-
non, is rarcly observed without our intervention, and even with
this it remains imperfect, disturbed by accessory phenomena.
Experiments performed in academic lectures designed to
illustrate certain laws, claim sometimes to show us this pure
phenomenon. We know with what minute care these experi-
ments must be previously regulated in order to succeed. Even
then they make the impression upon the spectator of some-
thing profoundly artificial; the professor appears as a sort of
prestidigitator.(38) Whoever has worked in a laboratory recalls


32 IDENTITY AND REALITY


how difficult it is to carry on the most simple experiments
indicated in manuals. In tume the habit is formed; precautions
are taken with less and less consciousness, and we begin to
believe that the experiments of verification are accomplished
all by themselves without our having to coerce nature. In
the same way the astronomer, after having observed and cal-
culated the movement of the stars, succeeds in actually seeing
that the moon is falling upon the earth. This does not prevent
the unprejudiced observer from viewing the two bodies as
remaining at about the same distance. In respect to the pheno-
menon directly observed the law is only more or less approxi-
mate; with the aid of successive corrections we try to adapt
progressively the wholc series of laws more and more closely to
the real course of nature. But it must be observed that these new
contributions unceasingly modify cxisting science. ‘Physics
does not progress like geometry, which adds new propositions
to the definitive and indisputable ones which it already pos-
sesses ; it progresses because experiments bring unceasingly to
light new disagreements between laws and facts.”"(39) The law
is an ideal construcuon which expresses, not what happens,
but what would happen if certain conditions were to be realized.
Doubtless, if nature were not ordered, if it did not present us
with similar objects, capable of furnishing generalized concepts,
we could not formulate laws. But these laws in themselves are
only the image of this ordering; they correspond to it only in
the measure that a projection can correspond to a body of
n dimensions. They can only express it in so far as a written
word expresses the thing, for in both cases we must pass through
the medium of our intelligence.

Since time passes unceasingly (this is the untgque independent
variable of Newton), laws if they are to be knowable can only be
so as a function of the changing of time. It will suffice then,
strictly speaking, for nature to scem ordered to us, that we
know the form of this function—that is to say, that we know
how laws are modified as time advances.

Yet it is certain that in our conception of laws we simplify
their relations to time by affirming that this latter is homo-

geneous in relation to them. If sulphur, that ts to say, a piece of
substance which is known to us by means of a whole aggregate
of physical properties, at this moment gives birth by combustion


LAW AND CAUSE 33


to a quite characteristic gas which is called sulphurous anhy-
dride, we affirm that it behaved in the same manner in the
most distant geological ages, and that it will always do so.

In order to understand why this simplification imposes
itself it is sufficient to consider that a modification of laws in
time, in order to be knowable, would imply a knowledge of
time independent of laws. But this knowledge is impossible.
There are two antagonistic opinions regarding the principles
upon which the measure of time rests. Certain modern scientists
propose to deduce it from uniform motion in a straight line—
that is to say, from inertial motion. This theory was formu-
lated, it seems, for the first time by C. Neumann (40}, who
has been followed, amongst others, by Ludwig Lange (41) in
Germany, Hannequin (42) and E. Le Roy (43) in France.
But supposing this conception to be valid for the present era, it
certainly was not so in the past, for the principle of inertia is a
quite modern creation. Now there is no doubt that humanity
has always had a distinct consciousness of the umiform flow of
time, and even for long centuries it has known how to measure
it. Moreover, one need only examine the means by the aid of
which this measuring has been accomplished to recognize its
foundation. For many centuries we have made use of the
pendulum ; before that men used water or sand flowing through
an opening, or even candles of uniform size. At a still previous
epoch, before they knew how to construct any sort of measuring
instrument men measured time bv the visible motion of the
sun or of the stars and by the seasons—that is, by the rota-
tion and the revolution of the earth, measures which even
to-day serve as a check. Now all of these means spring
from the same principle, to wit, that change in nature is of
uniform character, that similar effects take place during similar
time-intervals. This is the definition of the measure of time
formulated by d’Alembert (44), and after him by Poisson,(45)
and now we are able to employ such phenomena as have
only a very remote relation to motion, and where consequently
the concept of inertia counts for nothing; we can, for instance,
take as a starting-point the speed of a chemical reaction;
let us say, to be precise, the transformation of white sulphur
into red sulphur,(46) or, better still, the diminution of the
radio-activity of the emanation of radium, proposed by Curie,


34 IDENTITY AND REALITY


and which appears, in fact, capable of furnishing a precise
unit.(47)

Moreover, whatever the phenomenon which we take as a
starting-point, provided it be properly chosen, so that we can
determine sufficiently the conditions under which it must take
place and observe its progress with necessary precision, we shall
find all the other phenomena being regulated by it. Starting
with the vibration of a pendulum, the flowing of water or of
sand between two fillings of the water-clock or of the hour-
glass, the burning of a candle of uniform size, the production of
a given proportion of red sulphur or a given diminution in the
radio-activity of the emanation of radium, all these will last each
time that we reproduce these phenomena under favourable
conditions as long as a determined number of vibrations of the
pendulum. One could say because there 1s agreement between
these different phenomena that we succeed in conceiving that
time flows uniformly. Yet this agreement amongst phenomena,
in so far, at least, as we shall be able directly to observe them,
will never be absolute. The best clock which we can construct
will need regulating from time to time, and it is supposed that
the rotation of the earth, conceived pnmarily as the change
the duration of which must regulate that of all others, does
not always strictly possess the same valuc; it lengthens, whence
an apparent acceleration of the moon’s motion. We are in
a position to explain this anomaly by saying that the duration
of the earth's rotation 1s modified by the influence of two
factors: the continual shrinking of the earthly globe and the
action of the udes; these two causes act inversely, but the
second is predominant, and the difference between the two
actions brings about precisely the result which we have stated.
However, the very fact that the agreement is not immediately
perfect, that we make it such, that this lengthening of the year
appears to us as an anomaly having need of explanation, warns
us that the concept of the absolute uniformity of the passage
of time cannot be entirely due to the observation of phenomena,
that it must bring into play a higher principle. Now this
principle evidently is none other than the one designated by
us as the principle of the reign of law. We have only to take
up again the formula of d’Alembert, that what takes place
during similar time-intervals has similar effects, and to compare


LAW AND CAUSE 35


it with that of Ostwald (p. 18): “If we establish the same
conditions, the phenomena will take place in the same manner.”
It is clear that the first is included in the second, for the expres-
sion “‘in the same manncr’”’ forcibly indicates that the pheno-
menon must take place in an identical lapse of time.(48)
Morcover, since, as we have seen, laws have prediction as their
end, it is just as interesting for us to know when things will take
place as to know what takes place. If the dog to whom I throw
a piece of meat wants to catch it, he must be able to calculate
at what precise moment the morsel will attain the height of his
jaws. Thus it is our conviction of nature’s regularity which
intervenes; nature lends itself to it, this 1s incontestable, but
this conviction, as we have noted, exceeds the limits of direct
observation; it is absolute and guarantees the future.{49)

And so time-measurement depends, in the last analysis, on
the existence of laws in nature, and consequently time appears
to us, as we have said, to be homogencous In respect to laws.
On the contrary, the postulate of conformity to law in no way
implies that objects themselves remain immutable in time.
Here it is really sufficient to know the form of the function—
that is, the manner in which the objects change with the time.
In stating it we formulate a law. One can even affirm that
this form of the law is its primitive form, since it corresponds
best with its aim. Indeed, since we wish to predict, to know
the future, and since we know how to measure time, the simplest
thing would be to determine how objects in the external world
are modified as a function of the tune.{50} If this proposition
does not seem evident to us at the first glanec, it is because of
the peculiar nature of the concept of displacement. This
concept is ambiguous; a displaced object appears to us to have
undergone a modification and at the same time to have con-
served its identity. We shall have occasion to come back to
this subject at greater length. For the moment Iet us be content
to remark that, putting aside the difficulty which this concept
is apt to add to the question which 1s occupying us, we need
only have recourse to the phenomena already mentioned,
which do not directly conjure up in our minds the image of
motion. Thus, in affirming that in ¢ seconds from a solution
of white phosphorus in tribromure of phosphorus of a given
concentration a determined proportion will be transformed


36 IDENTITY AND REALITY


~~


into red phosphorus, or again, that after ¢ days the emanation
of radium will lose the nth part of its radio-activity, we are
certainly formulating laws. It 1s, moreover, easy to see that
particularly the sciences of living nature are full of Jaws of
this kind, as, for example: after » months of existence the
caterpillar becomes a butterfly; or, during their zth month
tadpoles lose their gills.

The analysis to which we have just devoted ourselves in
regard to time is in a certain measure applicable to space. Here
also it would be sufficient, strictly speaking, so that there may
be order in nature, to know laws as a function of changes in
space. But here also we simplify by affirming that the modifica-
tion of the function is nil, that laws remain immutable through-
out space. It will perhaps not be entirely useless to emphasize
the fact that this homogencity of space with respect to laws 1s
independent of what we call its relativity. One might suppose,
indeed, that we were forced to believe in the indifference of
place, because real place is unknown to us. It is certain that in
this respect we are constantly undergoing a change. The earth
turns around its axis and also around the sun, which tn its
turn progresses in space at a considerable speed. The probability
that we ever come back to the spot which we have occupied
for a moment is very small. If we can formulate abstract laws
while in the act of changing place with such great rapidity,
apparently the changing of place 1s indifferent to these laws,
This reasoning would seem valid for the present state of
science. But it is a comparatively recent state. Dunng an incal-
culable series of centuries humanity firmly believed that the
earth was a motionless table-land, that places marked by
certain objects of considerable height, such as mountains and
high buildings, were really places in absolute space, and that

one could come back to the same “spov” by marking Us


position in relation to these landmarks. |t beheved also that
space had two real directions, distinct from others, height and
depth. Were we to scrutinize our own beliefs we should
discover that we ourselves are not entirely free from these
conceptions ; we always experience some difficulty in picturing
to ourselves the antipodes which, whatever we may do, seem
to us “head downwards.” But even when they believed that
the earth was below and the heavens above, men were firmly


LAW AND CAUSE 37


convinced of the homogeneity of space. To establish this it is
enough to recall that it 1s this idea which constitutes the basis
of geometry. Ifa Greek had been asked at what depth within
the earth such and such a proposition of Euclid ceased to be
truc, the question would certainly have appeared as paradoxical
to him as it Js to us.

But geometry proves to us equally that our belief in the
homugeneity of space implics something more than the per-
sistence of laws. We arc, indeed, convinced that not only laws—
thatis, the relations between things—but even things themselves
are not modified by their displacement in space. This is what
geometry plainly postulates. And one of the masters of con-
temporary scientific thought has very aptly said that geometry
would not exist if there were no solids displacing themselves
without modifications.(51; Now it is very essenual to state
that geometry (and in general those sciences which we include
under the term of “pure mathematics’), though dealing with
the abstract concepts of thought, enjoys evidently the advantage
of application to reality in an absolute manner. We shall later
consider a science which at first sight seems strongly to resemble
gcometry, namely rational mechanics. It also 1s concerned
with abstract concepts, but it does not enjoy the same advan-
tage as pure mathematics, since we can (and even must, as
we shall see later on) conceive that reality does not entirely
comply with it. We shall not here inguire to what is duce this
privilege of pure mathematics; that is a chapter in the philo-
sophy of mathematical sciences which is foreign to the subject
of this book. Let us state only that the fact itself cannot be
contested and that it is impossible to doubt seriously that a
geometric deduction is verified by experience.(52)

What precedes shows us that it would be vain to attempt for
space the deduction which we have carried out for time. The

postulate of lawfulness alone will not suffice, for, as we have
just seen, we attribute to space more uniformity than lawfulness
would strictly demand for it. This proves that a particular
principle or postulate is here at stake, that of “free mobility.”
Russell thinks that a ‘denial of this axiom would involve logical
and philosophical absurdities, so that it must be classed as
wholly @ priori.”(53) What is certain is that it is an integral
part of our concept of space. It is clear, moreover, that tame


38 IDENTITY AND REALITY


admits of no such statement. It appears to us as flowing uni-
formly in the same direction; the supposition that we could
move about freely in it, voyaging in the past and in the future,
implies at least as many absurdities as the contrary supposition
for space. (54)

On this point, then, there is not a complete analogy between
time and space. This dog, just born, I know will be grown in
two years, decrepit in twenty, and dead in thirty years at the
very latest; but if PT carry him into another part of space he
will remain what he is. Without doubt, if I place him on the
summit of Mont Blanc, he will be very uncomfortable, and if |
keep him at the bottom of a pond he will be drowned, but this
will be so because the visible physical conditions of the surround-
ings will have changed and not because of a simple change of
place. Objects are not modified by the action of space as they
are changed by the action of time; the very expression scerns
paradoxical, startling in the first case, trite in the second.
Space ‘the same thing has been affirmed for time, but wrongly)
is really a “pure form” void of all content.(55)

All the postulates which are here enumerated and which are
indispensable for the formulauny of laws are needed when we
speak of causes, vet something else is added. Indeed, if there 1s
always complete equality between causes and effects, 1f nothing
begins and nothing ends, it is because not only laws but also
things persist throughout time. Itis this principle that Aristoue
formulated, applying it, it is truc, to “substances” alone:
“That substances properly so-called, and in general all beings
which exist absolutely, come from a prior cause is Clearly seen.
There is always a being previously existing whence is born
that which 1s born and becomes.’’{56} Lucretius states in a
quite gencral manner: adem sunt omnia semper, and it is this
same idea which Cournot expresses with much precision:
“Every time that we deal with phenomena of the physical
order, if these phenomena appear in the first place to depend
on forces or causes which vary with time, it is inherent in the
nature of our mind not to regard the phenomenon as accounted
for until it has been brought back to depend on permanent
causes, immutable in time, the effects of which alone vary
from a certain given moment in consequence of the dispositions
which the world, or parts of the world, presented at that moment


LAW AND CAUSE 39


—dispositions which our mind accepts not as laws but as
facts.”’(57) Helmholtz, who, we have seen, has tried to reduce
causality to lawfulness, has declared in another passage that
the final aim of science is ‘‘to bring back the phenomena of
nature to the invariable forces of attraction and repulsion, the
intensity of which depends on distance,” and that it is only on
that condition that nature can be rendered completely com-
prehensible. (58)

In summing up what we have just stated, we may say that
the principle of causality demands the application to time of
a postulate, which, under the rule of lawfulness alone, is only
applied to space.

Before proceeding farther we must remove certain difficulties.

Were we right in speaking simply of “‘geometry” ? Would it not
have been better to speak of Euclidean geometry? We know,
indeed, that since the speculations of Lobatschewsky, of
Riemann, and of Bolyai science has had to envisage the
hypothesis of a space in which the axiom of parallel lines would
cease to be valid. We know also that these hypotheses have
not remained confined to the domain of mathematics, since not
only Lobatschewsky (59) and Ricmann,(60) but even Helm-
holtz (61) have expressly claimed their verification by astro-
nomical measurements. Tait has formulated the supposition
that the solar system, and with it our earth, might some day
enter a region of space in which the curvature of the latter
would be modified.(62) On this hypothesis space would no
longer be entrely homogencous, and we could be Ied to relate,
by an empirical rule, the modification of the properties of
bodies to their displacement in space. Poincaré (63) has
admirably shown why these suppositions are inadmissible.
What we call a straight line in astronomy is the path of the
light ray, and if we were to happen to discover anomalies such
as Helmholtz has foreseen, we should certainly attribute them
to the nature of light and not to that of space.(64)

Another difficulty is of rather a logical order. The reasoning
which precedes is based evidently on a distinction between
objects and laws. Now, is an object anything but a group of
phenomena? And since these phenomena are all ruled by laws,
is not what we call an object simply a group of relations
conformable to law? One can immediately render obvious the


40 IDENTITY AND REALITY


truth of this proposition by observing that we only know an
object by its properties, and that cach property in particular
can be so formulated that the statement is a law. What is
sulphur? It is a solid substance, yellow, melting at 114°C,
boiling at 448° C., producing by combustion a gas well known
under the name of sulphurous anhydnide, etc. Now in saying:
Sulphur is yellow in colour, sulphur melts at rr4° C., ete., I
incontestably state laws. How does it happen that I stipulate
the immutability of laws in time and not that of objects?

Let us look a little more closely at our statement about the
properties of sulphur. In saying that it is a solid and yellow
substance, did we mean to afhrm that itis always so? Assuredly
not. We know very well that it can also be a browmish liquid,
and that, even when solid, if precipitated in a solution of
potassium pentasulphide, it will appear as an almost white
powder; moreover, if we dlumine a piece of sulphur with
grecn monochromatic light, it will appear green. In fact, then,
for each property which we stated certain conditions were
presupposed. If we have been able not to specify them expressly
in certain cases it is because we supposed what one calls
ordinary conditions—that is, those which we notice in the immense
majority of cases in the world surrounding us. Thus a tempera-
ture at which sulphur remains solid, and illumination by the
light of the sun or of an incandescent substance, are a part of
the ordinary conditions; and, in the same way, sulphur being
found in industry especially under the aspect of a compact
substance, we can, if necessary, in enumerating its qualities,
omit this condition. But for several of the properties indicated
above we cannot proceed in this way. When I say that sulphur
melts at 114° C., that it boils at 448° C., or that it 1s combustible,
it 1s clear that these are phenomena which cannot be observed
unless the temperature 1s high-—that is to say, they cannot be


observed if the ordinary conditions cease to exist. Without
doubt we indeed assume that to this phenomenon which will
only be produced under determined circumstances, there
corresponds, even in sulphur at an ordinary temperature,
something—a thing badly defined, however—not showing itself
constantly, but being apt to show itself, as is plainly indicated
by the grammatical form of the terms when we say that sulphur
is fusible or combustible. It is not, then, an actual quality, but a


LAW AND CAUSE 41


faculty, and, if we refer to what has been said previously, it is
clear that all the properties which we attribute to substances
are only faculties of this kind, all manifesting themselves only
under determined conditions and apt to be modified if these
conditions happen to change.

We thus see clearly where, in this respect, the difference
between the purely lawful conception of nature and_ the
causal conception is found. The law states simply that, condi-
tions happening to be modified in a determined manner, the
actual properties of the substance must undergo an cqually
determined modification; whereas according to the causal
principle there must be equality between causes and effects—-
that is, the original properties plus the change of conditions
must equal the transformed properties. We shall see later how
the difhiculty, purely specious, which we have just discussed,
has been productive of error./65)

What is the origin of the causal postulate? It is clear in the
first place that the instinct of preservation has nothing to do
with it. Provided IT can foresee the course of events, I find
myself in possession of all the knowledge which I need for
action. The assurance of equality between causes and effects
does not, in itself, bring me any information useful from that
point of view, or, rather, it will only bring me information to
the extent that I shall be able with its help to make predictions—
that is, to obtain rules of experience. Tt is just as evident that
the principle of causality is not, like that of lawfulness, confirmed
unceasingly by our sensations; it is even contradicted by them.
All the objects we know are unceasingly modified in time, and
we have the very distinct feeling that our own individuality
obeys this same rule. When we speak of things eternally
immutable, we know very well—-unless we speak of purely
ideal things--that we are expressing ourselves inexactly. The
very planct upon which we live and the entire system to which
it belongs seem to us to be changing continually. (66)

To discover the real source of the principle it is enough to
recall the name which Leibniz and many others after him
have given it. It is the principle of the determining reason or
sufficient reason. Wherever we establish it the phenomenon
becomes rational, adequate to our reason: we understand it
and we can explain it. This thirst for knowledge, for under-


42 IDENTITY AND REALITY


standing, is felt by each one of us. Comte, without denying it
absolutely, believed, however, that this bent was one of the
least imperative of our nature. This assertion, it seems, Is
emphatically contradicted by the immediate feeling of all those
who are immersed in the work of science, all those who investi-
gate nature. Great scientists have often recognized in them-
selves the force of this tendency, and H. Poincaré notably
declares, not only that we do not easily resign ourselves “‘to
ignoring the foundation of things,’(67) but that in his opinion
this feeling is stronger than the one which impels us to act.
He says: “In my view knowledge is the end, and action 1s
the means."{68) Mach himself admits that scientific thought
“creates its own ends, secks to satisfy itself by suppressing all
intellectual uneasiness.’’(6q) Aristotle had already said: “All
men by nature are actuated by the desire for know ledge 37°70)
and Spinoza declared: ““The mind judges only that to be of
use to itself which leads to understanding.”’(71)

Moreover, if this tendency is abstracted from the human
mind, the evolution of science becomes an enigma. We have
seen, it is true, that a@// learning is, or will certainly be, useful
from the point of view of prediction. But this is a truth which
is far from being immediately evident; it would have appeared
rather as a paradox in the days when the physical sciences
were but hitude developed. How explain the very great ardour
of which humanity has given evidence in the acquisition of a
knowledge “‘the object of which could be neither pleasure
nor necd,”’ according to Aristotle, who expressly places the
mathematical sciences in this category ?(72) In the Alexandrine
period, what conception was there of - possible utilization
of conics? Is it quite certain that the physical doctrines of the
ancient atomusts or those of Aristotle permitted of practical apph-
cation from the point of view of prevision? One could object, it
is true, that this was not science but metaphysics. Then let us
say immediatcly that that branch of human knowledge alone
would suffice, if necd were, to establish the existence of the
tendency of w hich we are speaking. Indeed, however convinced
one may be of the sterility of these rescarclies. one cannot
ignore that humanity, as a matter of fact, has devoted to it an
enormous amount of Hort. and that the most vigorous minds
have made of it their most cherished work. Now metaphysics,


LAW AND CAUSE 43


according to its own avowal, aims at knowing, at understanding
the essence of things, and this without any utilitarian end, as
Aristotle had already shown. Therefore this desire must be
very strong in us; and if itis true that the end is inaccessible,
the sterility of efforts constantly repeated is but one more
proof of the strength with which humanity strives toward it.

It is, moreover, easy to establish the union between the
nouion of the rational and that of the persistent throughout
time. The principle of identity is the truce essence of logic,
the real mould into which man pours his thought. “I agree,”
says Condillac in the Langue des Calculs,(73} “uUnat in this
language, as in all others, one only makes identical propositions
when the propositions are true,” and in his Logigue (74) he
affirms that “the evidence of reason consists solely in identity.”

To afirm, however, that an object 1s identical with itself
seems to be a proposition of pure logic and, moreover, a simple
tautology, or, if you prefer, an analyucal judgment, according
to the terminology of Kant. But as soon as the consideration
of time is added, the concept becomes twofold, so to speak,
for beside the analyucal sense, it acquires a synthetical sense,
as Spir excellently says. It is analytical “‘when it expresses
simply the result of an analysis of the concept; syntheuc, on
the other hand, when itis understood as an affirmation relative
tu the nature of real objects.”.75; But this relation between
the principle of suthcient reason and that of identity was already
perfectly clear to Leibniz, as one can see by Couturat’s exposi-
tion,(76) and, moreover, as is indicated by the manner in
Which Leibmiz places the two principles on the same level in
the passage which we have already cited {p. 28).

Thus the principle of causality is none other than the
principle of identity applied to the existence of objects in ume.
We have been looking, according to the expression of Leibniz,
for “something which can be used to justify why this exists in this
rather than in any other fashion.” What can be the determining
reason for that which 1s conditioned in time? One only is
possible: that of pre-existence. Things are thus because they
were already previously thus.

It is clearly shown from what precedes that the principle of
causality 1s profoundly different from that of lawfulness. But
an error so great in its consequences as the confusion of these


44 IDENTITY AND REALITY


two principles, so generally shared by many great minds, can
only be considered as removed if we are in a position to explain
it. Above all, it seems due to the lack of precision with which
we gencrally employ this term cause. Not that we really use it
falsely; but constantly, of necessity, and most often uncon-
sciously, in speaking of causes, we use the trope which the
Greeks called synecdoche—-that is to say, we replace the whole
by a part.

I missed my train this morning. What was the cause of 1t?
My watch was slow. Assuredly if my watch had been exact
I should have risen earlier or dressed more quickly and I
should have been able to arrive in time. But if I had not lived
so far from the station I should have arrived equally well;
and also if carriages in Paris had better horses or if the train
had been a few minutes late, etc.—I could continue thus
indefinitely.

What, then, do I designate originally by the term cause? It is
one of the conditions determining the phenomenon, But do I
mean to affirm that it is the only one? In no way. It simply
appeared to me for the moment as the most remarkable, and
one sces immediately that there may be many reasons for this:
it is the condition the least known to my interlocutor ; it is also
the least stable, and that which appears to me the easiest to
modify. I have no influence over the trains or carriages of
Paris, and it would be a great undertaking to change my
residence in order to live nearer the station; but had I pos-
sessed a better-regulated watch or had I examined its state
the evening before, the event which I regret would not
have taken place.(77} And vet IT have never ceased to be
convinced that the conditions determining the event were
many, and that each one of them was determined by a
host of others going far back into the past. For, in the last
analysis, in order to miss my train because of my watch, it
was necessary in the first place that there should be railroads
and watches with springs and balance-wheels, two modern
Inventions which are certainly the very direct consequences
of that great spiritual movement called the Renaissance, which
took up and continued the admirable work accomplished by
the Hellenic mind twenty centurics ago. Thus, in pushing the
analysis to its very end, I find myself convinced that if I missed


LAW AND CAUSE 45


my train this morning Marathon and Salamis had something
to do with it, since those two battles prevented Persian despotism
from crushing Greek culture in its embryo. As Mill said, “the
real Cause 1s the whole of these antecedents.”’ (78)

About all of that we have a vague feeling. But precisely
because we feel that here is a chain of events in which we
risk losing ourselves, we simplify. We set aside all the condi-
tions, however essential they may be, for the benefit of
one alone which we desire to accentuate. T have omitted to
speak of the invention of railroads and of watches, and I have
rid myself in that way of all temptation to go back to the
battle of Marathon, and likewise I have omitted a host of
other circumstances, because I beheved they were without
interest to my interlocutor.

And so to go back to the causes, whatever be the phenomenon,
constitutes an impossible task. We must limit it; we must be
satisfied with a partial success. For this reason, in speaking of
causes, we all resemble children satisfied with the most imme-
diate answers to the questions they put, or rather we resemble
that confiding Hindoo to whom the Brahmins explained that the
earth rests upon the back of an clephant, which is standing upon
a tortoise, which is perched upon a whale. Whatever seems
a step in the way of explanation is invested by us with the
name of “cause.”” We are not surprised, then, that this term is
employed where really there is a question of a law. The search
for the law is included in that of the cause. Indeed, all the
conditions which lawfulness imposes upon us, in whatever
concerns time and space, these also causality demands; and
it adds another exigency, that of the identity of objects in
time; from which it follows that as long as the lawful bond
docs not exist, there can be no question of establishing the
causal bond. Conversely, the establishment of the first is
always a step in the way which leads to the second. We say,
for example, that the low boiling-point of gasoline is the cause
of the disappearance in a short time of a spot made with this
liquid. We have thus connected the disappearance of the spot
with the phenomena of boiling. If these latter phenomena
(as we understand them) could be explained, if we knew their
causes, those of the disappearance of the spot would be deter-
mined at the same time.


46 IDENTITY AND REALITY


Moreover, we proceed in the same way outside the proper
domain of the physical sciences. When we speak of explaining a
phenomenon, of searching for its causes, we are trying to
know either its pre-existence in time, which is really applying
the postulate of causality, or the empirical rule determining its
change in time, which amounts to applying only the postulate
of conformity to law provisionally while waiting for something
better. And since we have to do with phenomena which appear
to us to be, from the strictly scientific point of view, of very
great complexity—and it is for this very reason that their
study does not fall within the field of physical sciences strictly
speaking—their solution in accordance with the postulate of
causality seems to us to lie in an almost infinite future. Thus
cause and law seem to be synonyms here, almost coinciding.
When a historian, in order to explain the decadence of the
Roman Empire, refers to analogous facts which have taken
place in the history of other peoples, when the psychological
novelist analyses his hero to show us that his actions, however
peculiar they may appear to us, are nevertheless determined
by motives which we recognize very well in the men about
us and in ourselves, the historian and the novelist make an
appeal to lawfulness. But, of course, whenever possible, they
will take care to conform to the postulate of causality. The
historian will show us that the progress of Christianity was
duc to a previous mystic tendency of the ancient world, and the
psychological novelist will make us see that the fatal blindness
of the hero was, at bottom, the consequence of his passionate
temperament, although its manifestations had been repressed
previously by his active life. Law or identity in time is funda-
mental in all our explanations, even outside the physical
sciences, sometimes the one, sometimes the other, more often
the one and the other combined, though the combination of
them may never be perceived by us.

In addition to what we have stated another circumstance
obscures our knowledge of the role of causality. It is the lack
of precision in the term cause. The meaning which we have
just set forth docs not exhaust its contents. To make sure of
this, it is enough to think of an act emanating from free will.
When, by an act of volition, f produce an external change, or

when the believer attributes a phenomenon to the intervention


LAW AND CAUSE 47


of God (we have previously shown that these are associated
concepts), it is certain that one does not hesitate to speak of
cause and effect. But here no identity is possible, and, what is
more, I have the immediate intuition of it. Not for a single
moment can [ nourish the illusion that my wil 1s something
analogous to the movement which it produces; here, then, is a
concept of causality fundamentally different from that which
we have just stated and which is based on identity. In order
to mark the distinction we shall designate the latter concept
as that of scientific causality, and we shall apply to the first
the term theological causality, since, as we have just seen, the
supposiuon of God’s intervention in natural events makes
usc of it. Is it not astonishing that two concepts so different,
sO antagonistic, as scientific causality and theological causality,
can be designated by the same term? We see clearly their
common ground: the cause is what produces—what must pro-
duce—the effect. In one of the two cases the conviction of the
bond which unites cause and effect will come to me because
I shall have shown the tundamental identity of the two terms:
it will rest upon reasoning; in the other case I shall obtain it
from my act of voliuon, which constitutes, as Schopenhauer
has shown, the essence of the self. The concept of cause 1s,
then, really double, belonging in part to the world of reason
and in part to that of will. Pt may well be that this latter idea
is, from the psychological point of view, prior to the first—
that is, that the idea of the Ue came to me primarily because
I feel myself able, according to my will, to perform an action,
identity coming to graft itself on this primitive concept in the
presence of the need of understanding and the impossibility
of attributing to things a voliuon analogous to mine. However
we may dispose of this problem of metaphysical psychology,
it ais certain that what prevails in science is the second
concept, that of causality derived from idenuty, and hence
to be called scientific causality. (79)

We have just recognized that the savage and even the animal
make use of the principle of lawfulness. Does the same hold
true of the principle of causality? Itus difficult to affirm it as
regards the animal. The desire to understand, the philosophical
instinct, “‘wonder at one’s own existence,” as Schopenhauer
says,(Bo) seems to us to be a privilege of man; we shall see,


48 IDENTITY AND REALITY


however, a little later that in a certain sense we are indeed
forced to attribute causal deductions to animals. At any rate, we
could not imagine a human intelligence, however untutored
we may suppose it, without attributing to it deductions of this
kind. The child, as soon as it knows how to express itself,
formulates so many whys that one is tempted to believe that the
causal tendency existed within it, however obscurely, anterior
to speech.

In the pages which follow we shall study the rdle played by
the postulate of causality in the physical sciences. We hope to
show that this réle is of fundamental importance, and that
neither the evolution of science in the past nor its present
condition can be explained if we exclude it.

It is in the attempt to understand a phenomenon that we
apply the principle of causality. It is therefore in that portion
of science devoted to explanations that we ought to see it play
a most conspicuous part.

Does this part exist? It is evident, at any rate, that from the
point of view of the opinions of Berkeley, Taine, and Helmholtz
it constitutes an anomaly; if law explains the phenomenon it
would seem useless to go bevond it. It 1s enough, moreover,
in order to banish from science the study of “explanation”
proper, to declare that the aim assigned by us previously to
the empirical part of science, defined as the totality of laws, 1s
that of all science. This opimon has been most clearly formulated
by Auguste Comte.(81) [It appears, indeed, from the context
of the passage previously quoted (page 25) that what he
defines as the “‘use of laws’”’ seems to him equally to be the aim
of ‘‘all science.” Comte rigorously condemns all attempt to
know anything beyond the law. He repeats on several occasions
that injunction, which constitutes, we know, one of the corner-
stones of his philosophy: ““We evidently cannot know what at
bottom this mutual action of the heavenly bodies and this
weight of the terrestrial bodies are; any attempt in that direc-
tion would be necessarily profoundly disillusioning as well as
perfectly useless. Only minds entirely alien to scientific studies
can occupy themselves with it to-day.” (82) “All scientists admit
to-day that our real search is strictly limited to the analysis of
phenomena in order to discover their effective laws—that is,
their constant relations of succession or of similitude, and that


LAW AND CAUSE 49


it in no way can be concerned with their intimate nature,
nor their first or their final cause, nor their essential mode
of production.” (83) Even if we are called upon to formulate
suppositions or hypotheses they must have as their sole object
a still unknown empirical rule: “Every physical hypothesis,
to be really legitimate, must deal exclusively with the laws of
phenomena and never with their mode of production.” (84)

To Mach also “the economy of thought’? seems to be the
sole and definite aim of science. He has applied this principle
with much rigour in the exposition of certain chapters on
physics, and he has particularly insisted upon the idea that
science can only be descriptive. Independently of him, one of
the greatest physicists of the nineteenth century, Kirchhoff,
has maintained the same idea. Both, moreover, appear to have
ignored Comte, who we have just scen expresses very analogous
ideas. (85)

Comte’s attitude in regard to explanatory theories necessitates
withdrawing them entirely from science. The founder of
positivism has not hesitated before this consequence. Starting
from this point of view, he arrives at the denial that the undu-
latory theory, so magnificently developed by his great contem-
porary, Fresnel, has exercised any influence whatsoever upon
the development of optics.(86) But this radical solution is
Inconveniently in contradicuon with the facts. A glance at
the evolution of science is suficient to convince us that the
experience of scientists has been quite different. Newton in his
Principia expresses himself in these terms: ‘Hitherto we have
explained the phenomena of the heavens and of our sea by
the power of gravity” ;(87) and farther on: ‘I have not been
able to discover the cause of those properties of gravity from
phenomena, and I frame no hypotheses.”’(88) An attempt has
sometimes been made to makc of this Aypotheses non fingo a
sort of profession of faith, as if Newton had declared the search
for the exphcative hypothesis illegitimate. It has even been
fancied that Newton had made possible the cxecution of this
programme. ‘All hypotheses are banished,’ Musschenbroek
affirms in 1731,(89) at the moment when Newton’s authority
was at its zenith, and he utters this cry in expounding the
theories of the Newtonian School on action at a distance—
theories the hypothetical character of which is quite evident.

D


50 IDENTITY AND REALITY


Moreover, Newton himself, toward the end of his life, seemed a
little inclined to attribute to his famous statement a rather
pretentious meaning.(go) Now the text of the very passages
which we have just cited proves very clearly that Newton had
sought for an hypothesis without finding it. We shall sce later
on (p. 78) that the Opticks has preserved traces of these investiga-
tions.(gt) On this point all the contemporaries of Newton
were substantially in agreement with him. Some supposed the
existence of forces operating at a distance, whereas others
devised extremely complicated theories reducing this apparent
acuion at a distance to action by contact. But whether they
were partusans or adversaries of what were called the Newtonian
conceptions, they were in agreement in thinking that the
phenomena of gravitation demanded explanation. Now, what
they were searching for is not casy to imagine if one wishes to
remain in the domain of pure conformity to law. Newton’s
Jaw is of a marvellous simplicity; it 1s, moreover, absolutely
general, since it embraces the totality of mater. Doubtless one
can conceive of still more general laws, and the contemporaries
of Newton were able to foresee that the phenomena of gravita-
tion would some day be connected by a common rule with
such or such a series of phenomena. What seems strange is
that unanimously and imperatively they demanded this ex-
planation /uc et nunc—that is, something going beyond the law
—and it is almost superfluous to say that everyone, beginning
with Newton himself, used the terms cause or reason to indicate
the object of these researches. We can characterize it more
nearly by remarking that Leibniz, Huygens, and many others
after them were seeking for a mechanical theory of gravitation,
and that, without a doubt, if a valid one could have been
produced, the partisans of action at a distance would have
been forced immediately to accept it.

Is the example cited an exceptional one? It is, on the contrary,
entirely typical. Everyone knows that science is full of these
mechanical theories or hypotheses. Doubtless there exist scien-
tific treatises and even books dealing with whole departments of
science which contain only laws or assumptions relative to laws.
But how many others differ on this point! The works of the
most illustrious protagonists of science—we may choose between
those of Laplace, of Lagrange, of Lavoisier, of Fresnel—are full


LAW AND CAUSE 51


of hypotheses, and more recently Maxwell, Lord Kelvin, Hertz,
Cornu, H. Poincaré, to mention only a small number of illus-
trious names, have devoted an important part of their works
to these theories.

As a matter of fact, Comte’s solution is not the only possible
one in this case. Instead of brutally suppressing theories one
can try to make them enter the realm of scicnce—that 1s
(according to Comte and to Mach) the realm of laws, by
assimilating them.

Laws establish relations between elements of fact which can
be directly observed and controlled. When I say that benzene
boils at 80°C., or that, subjected to the action of bromine under
fixed conditions, it produces a substance which boils at 154°C.,
I am only affirming a series of facts which every physicist and
every chemist can verify. If there is no mistake about what I
call benzene, and if I have properly explained the conditions
of the experiment, anyone who will reproduce it in the labora-
tory will arrive at the same result.

Now here is an hypothesis: the molecule of benzene contains
six atoms of carbon, forming a hexagon attached alternately
by simple and double bonds. All direct verification is evidently
impossible. No one has ever seen either a molecule, an atom,
or an atomic bond, and still less has anyone ever seen this
hexagon of which we are speaking, nor doubtless will any one
ever see them.

And yet, if we have been Ied to assume these things, it is
because they seem to correspond to a whole series of facts
which are known to us by experience. It ts these latter, connected
by more or less convincing reasons, which I summarize in
speaking of the hexagon. To use a figure familiar to the
mathematician, we have introduced an imaginary term which
eventually will be climinated.

Therefore, according to this conception, theories have no
value, no virtue in themselves. They only serve to bind laws
together in a provisional manner. Their hypothetical elements
have no more existence than the mathematical expression
which we use in the statement of certain laws. Thus when, in
order to formulate the law of refraction, I say that the quotient
of the two sines must be equal to a constant quantity, I seem
to suppose the existence of this function. But it is only an


52 IDENTITY AND REALITY


appearance. At bottom I am perfectly convinced that angle
and sine are only concepts which I have created for convenience.
I have not supposed for a moment that nature calculated with
the aid of a table of logarithms. In the same way, molecules,
atoms, forces, and cther, of which we speak so frequently,
are only pure concepts, like the angles, the sines, and other
abstractions.(g2) Hypotheses, then, are no longer assumptions
about real happenings of nature, about their mode of production,
so energetically outlawed by Comte. They are simple figurative
representations, destined to serve as mementocs, to fix ideas, as
we say in mathematics. If I assert that benzene contains six
atoms of carbon forming a hexagon, I am expressing myself
inexactly ; what I want really to affirm is that benzene acts in
certain respects as if it were thus constituted. So, contrary to
appearance, I do not affirm the existence of the hexagon. I
use it as a convenient term, because it would be too complicated
to establish a direct relation between different elements which,
however, are all elements of fact. “Mathematical theories.”
says Poincaré, speaking of the undulatorv theory, “have not as
their object to reveal to us the true nature of things; that would
be an irrational pretension. Their sole end is to co-ordinate
the physical laws which experience makes known to us, but
which, without the help of mathematics, we could not even


93


state.”’/93:' Duhem affirms in the same way that the physical
theory is not an explanation, but a system of mathemaucal
propositions 3/94) it classifies laws.{95}

One can, indeed, with the aid of devices of this kind, assimilate
hypotheses to laws, the latter being expressed by formulae
analogous to those which we have used for the former. We
can say, therefore, that the celestial bodies move as uf they
were mutually attracted in proportion to their masses and
inversely to the square of the distances, and also that the
light ray acts as if the sines of the angles of incidence and of
refraction must observe a certain proportion. But it will be
noticed that this manncr of expression seems natural for the
law of gravitation (which, moreover, was expressed by Newton
in about this same form) and not for that of the sines. That is
because Newton’s law really contains an hypothesis, an
assumption about the real happenings of things, whereas for
angles and sines it is only a question of concepts of our


LAW AND CAUSE 59


imagination ; consequently the precaution seems to us entirely
superfluous here.

In other words, the assimilation which we have just tried is
purely artificial. There is a real chasm between physical con-
cepts and mathematical abstractions. To declare that the atom
of carbon is the limit of a series of concepts like the point, the
line, or the infinitely small quantity, is really to do violence
to our intelligence.

Morcover, there cannot be the slightest doubt about the
opinion of the scientists of the past concerning hypotheses.
Duhem, whose very great authority in these matters 1s reinforced
by the fact that his own ideas are diametrically opposed to this
manner of thinking, writes: “It is not at all doubtful that
several of the geniuses to whom we owe modern physics have
constructed their theories in the hope of giving an explanation
of natural phenomena, that some have even beheved themselves
to have realized this explanauon.”(g6,; He states also that the
great scientific theories, notably the doctrines of the peripatetics,
of the atomists, of Descartes, of Boscovich, were enurely domi-
nated by metaphysical concepuons, and, in fact, were only the
prolongation of philosophical systems,/g7)} an evident proof that
both had the same aim, to wit, the explanation of reality.
But, even in perusing the works of those who actually use these
hypothetical concepts, without excepting the most cautious
amongst them, one feels that they attribute to them quite
another degree of reality than to a purely mathematical
concept. Without doubt the expheit affirmations about reality
have become a litde less frequent recently. The anathemas of
Comte and of Mach have had much to do with it, as have also
certain critical works, such as those of Stallo and of Hannequin,
of whom we shall speak later, but the principal reason hes
probably in the fact that scienufic hypotheses themselves are
even now in the act of undergoing a profound transformation,
of “moulting,” if one dares to use this term. This does not
prevent scientists, as soon as they bring into play atoms and
ether, from reasoning implicitly as if they were not concepts
but real things—nay, even the only real things, since they
must explain all reality.(g8) Far from limiting science to laws
or from considering hypotheses as provisional substitutes for
future laws, the scientists manifestly and constantly subordinate


54 IDENTITY AND REALITY


the second to the first. Duhem furnishes us with excellent
examples of this subordination.(99) Thus when optics classifies
the phenomena of the prism and of the rainbow in the same
category, while Newton's rings are classed with the inter-
ference fringes of Young and of Fresnel, or when biology
treats the swimming bladders of fish as homologous to the
lungs of mammals, both of these sciences yield to the considera-
tions of pure theory and to hypothetical conceptions. “The
physicist, whether he brings everything back to mechanics,
or whether, adopung a more recent way of thinking, he
considers, on the contrary, clectrical phenomena as funda-
mental, has implicitly the pretension of explaining nature to
us with the help of his theory. And the most flagrant anomaly
which one can discover in the application of a law ‘for example,
the phenomenon of Gouy in respect to the impossibility of
perpetual motion: appears fo be explained as svon as the theory
takes account of it.

Such is, incontestably, the pracuce of scientists. But does it
follow that it is accurate? We are accustomed tu treat. as
erroneous the ways which science has followed at) certain
epochs---for instance, when it tried to explain phenomena
with the aid of substantial qualtues. May it not be that there
is in thts tendency of science to erect explanatory theories—
a tendency of which we cannot deny the reahty-~a vicious
propensity from which it would be wise to keep science as free
as possible? We have seen that this was Comte’s opinion.
Mach, at bottom, ts not far from agreeing with him. Duhem
also believes that scientists have been, and stl are, the victims
of an illusion hke that which made the Spanish explorers
catch glimpses of the fabulous Eldorado. The search for the
explanation is not Anadne’s thread, capable of guiding us in
the labyrinth of phenomena; the explanatory part of science
is only a parasitic growth.(100}

To try to settle this question, let us examine, in the first
place, scientific theones in themselves. The accomplishment of
this task is greatly facilitated by the remarkable works which
have been devoted to this subject, amongst which we shall
here mention especially the works of Lange, Stallo, Hannequin
and Duhem.({101)

But before entering into the heart of the subject, let us


LAW AND CAUSE 55


formulate one restriction: we shall at the very outset exclude
from the chapter which follows the most recent phase of
theoretical conceptions—that of electrical theories—and we shall
be content to envisage the entirety of the hypotheses about the
constitution of matter as they appeared to dominate science
but a few years ago. Our principal reason for proceeding thus
is that the new theories of electricity, being still in a great
measure in the process of claboration, offer for that very
reason, from our point of view, a less propitious subject of study
than their elders, mechanical theories, more advanced as to
their evolution. Moreover, it is only with evident cxaggeration
that one can treat this phase of science as belonging entirely
to the past. Many physicists, amongst those of the greatest
authority, would protest doubtless against such a pretension.
Some because they do not accept these new ideas or because
they accept them only incompletely; others because, although
adopting these theories, they consider them more or less
consciously as a simple stage. For the moment one may reduce
to clectricity all the diversity of natural phenomena, including
even those of mechanics, but later on electricity itself will be
explained by a still undetermined modification in the hvpo-
thetical medium, a sort of local tension which evidently one
would hike to have appear as purely mechanical.

Tt is only after having studied the purely mechanical theories
that we shall pass to the examination of the electrical hypothesis,
an examination which, we hope, will tend to confirm the
results already reached.


NOTES


1. BerkeLry: De motu. Works, ed. Fraser. Oxford. 1871, Vol. HT, § 37:
Nam tncentis semel naturae legibus, detnceps monstrandum est philosopho, ex constanti
harum legum observatione, hoe est, ex tis principiis phenomenon quodvis necessario
consequt: td quod est phaenomena evplicare et solvere, causamgue. td est rationem
cur fant, assignare. ‘Vhis is not an isolated passage of Berkeley’s: over and
over again he comes back to this question. Cf especially Ao Treatise con-
cerning the Principles of Human Knoicledge. Works, Vol. 1, § 62, 105.

2. Hume: Essay on the Haman Understanding. London, 1739. p. 74

3. Taine: De intelligence. Paris, 1869, Vol. IT, pp. 403 -404.


56 IDENTITY AND REALITY


4. Hecmnorrz: Ueber die Erhaltung der Kraft (Wissenschaftliche Abhandlungen.
Leipzig, 1882), p. 68: Ich habe mir erst spaeter klargemacht, dass das Prinztp
der Causalttaet nichts anderes sei als die Voraussetcung der Gesetziichkeit aller
Naturerschetnungen.

5. Hanngqurn: Exssat critigue sur Uhypothese des atomes dans la science con-
temporaine, Paris, 1895, p. 8.

6. Ostwarn: Vorlesungen ueber Naturphilosophie. Leipzig, 1902, p. 302.

7. Lucretius: De rerum natura, trans. Bailey. Book I, line 160 and {fF

8. Jean Bernovurvzir: Discours sur les lors de la communication du moucement,
CEurres. Lausanne and Geneva, 1742. Vol. Il, p. 58 We also find this
deduction expressed with much precision with respect to the principle of
the conservation of matter by Kozlowski, Bibhothéque du Ceonerés de
Philosophie. Paris, rgor, Vol. TIL. p. 536; cf. later, p. 445. n. 96.

g. What we here call lawfulness G/e¢galie’, a term which we borrow
from Helmholtz, but of which he has badly defined the import, corre-
sponds very nearly to what Kroman ;, Unsere Nattinerkenntats, trans. Pischer
Benzon, Copenhagen, 1003) designates as cousality, ust as our concept of
setentific causality approaches that of tdentih of the same author, And yet
Kroman seems at times to underestimate the true Himits of the first of
these two concepts cef., for example, p. 20g, where he confuses it, just as
Helmholtz dees, with the postulate of comprehensibilitw: po art and fh.
where he would like to derive from it the existence of the noumenon ccf.
also pp. 22, 195-196, 199, 250°, and deduces the second from the first,
because of an error analogous to that in Helmholtz and in Hertz ‘ct. later
pp. 201, 210). The concepts of empirical causality and of rational ceusalrty
formulated by Kozlowski / Recue philosophigue, 1405, p. 250° differ still more
from those defined by us, since that author, on the one hand. uses the term
rational to designate what is simply conformable to the rule- that is. in
accordance with our terminology. conformable to law jet Pupcholeete cae
zrodla. Warsaw, 1Gag, po ii: Revue philosophique, October rqob, p. 4o7 . and
on the other hand his concept of causality implies that of irreversible
becoming (Prrevlad fluzoficcny., 1q0b, pp. 200, 204°.

10. Comte: Cours de philosophie positive, 4th ed. Paris, 1877. Vol Pop. qr.

ti. GortHue: Faust, 1 Theil. Studirzimmer.

12. Comte, we know, often used this example, which is indecd adnurably
chosen. Cf. Lévy-Bruny., La Philosophie d’ Auguste Comte, and. ed. Paris,
F. Alcan, 1905, p. 49.

13. Porncareé: La cater objectice de la serence, Reoue de Metaphy sique, Vol. X,
1902, p. 265.

14. Comte: ic., Vol. VI, pp. 637-648.

15. Cf. also 24... Vol. TET, p. 369; Vol Vin p. sq6. The researches which
scemed particularly condeninable to Cornite were those of the biologists
which resulted in recognizing the importance of the cell (Comte describes
it, with scorn, as the “true organic monad™) and those of Regnault on
the anomalics in Mariotte’s law. Lévy-Bruhl f/.¢., po ras believes that
Comte nevertheless conceived these phenomena as subject to laws, but
that he supposed these laws accessible only to minds more powerful than
ours. One indeed finds passages which seem to admit of this interpretation


LAW AND CAUSE 57


(cf., for example, Cours, Vol. VI, p. 640). At any rate, since Comte sets
limits, not temporary, but permanent, springing from the very nature of
the human mind, this conception is tantamount to the one which we are
expressing in the text. The law being certainly a subjective construction, to
say that it exists but that it will remain eternally inaccessible to us is
equivalent to denying its existence. Later Comte, acquainted with the
discoverics of Schwann, came to a more just appreciation of the work on
the cell (Politique positive, Vol. 1, p. 649). On the other hand, it is curious
to remark that even in 1878—that is, at a time when the usefulness of
Regnault’s researches had been evident for a long time—P. Laffite, the
authorized disciple of Comte, renewed his master’s anathemas, alluding to
Reenault as “an academic factionist” (Reiue occidentale, Vol. 1, 1878, p. 288).

16. Asan example of the concern for exactness which dominates modern
science we may cite as one of thousands the results of Stas on atomic
weights, with their minute precautions; and yet these precautions have
scemed insufficient to the chemists of following generations, who have
constantly amended Stas’s figures, as may be seen by the work of special
commissions engaged in the task of controlling these measures. Two articles
at the Conerés international de physique de 1900, that of Benoit on Préciston dans
la détermination de loneueur en métrologte and that of Rubens on the Spectre
infra-reuge, give an excellent idea of the precision obtained and the constant
concern of physicists for it, Naturally, new results have been obtained since
that date.

G. Lécuaras: Les confins de la science et de da philosophic. Revue des
questions sclentifigues, MUN. rq0r, p. 305. [tis hardly necessary to recall that
In Kant cf especially Arits& der remnen Vernunft, ed. Kirchmann, pp. 215, 229)
the concept of experience presupposes a strict order in the domain of
phenomena.

mS. A. Fourcnkrn: Les arryines de notre structure, ete. Recue Phil, NXXAMU,
BQ. p. 376.

1q. Cone: Corr Vol TE, po ri. Ci 14. pp. 6-8.

200 Flour Dasric: Les demstes du connatssable. Paris, F. Alcan, 1903,
pp. a8) 94.

at, Comrr: de, Volo To op. 43. Lévy-Bruhl, although elsewhere he
attempts to defend the unity of Comte’s doctrine c/r., p. 12), recognizes
that Comte changed his opinion on this question and that this change
was due “to the increasing subordination of the scientific to other interests,”
which he believed “superior”? (4,, pp. 173-175). This evolution continued
after the publication of the Cours, and in the Polttigue positive (1851) Comte
succeeded in limiting astronomy to the solar system (Vol. IT, p. 310) and in
ridiculing the “supposed discovery”? of Le Verrier, ‘which, even if it had
been real, would only have been of interest to the inhabitants of Uranus.”

22. Td, Cours, Vol. T, p. aa.

23. A. Fouraéte: Le probleme porchelogique. Revue Phil. NNNIT, 1891,
P. 23%)

24. Aan kann also etnraenmen, dass wenn es fuer uns moeglich waere, in eines
Menschen Denkungsart, sowie sie sich durch innere sowokl als acussere Handlungen
cetgt, so ltefe Einsicht zu haben, dass yede, auch die mindeste Trichfeder dazu uns


58 IDENTITY AND REALITY


bekannt wuerde, imgleichen alle auf disse wirkenden aeusseren Veranlassungen, man
eines Menschen Verhalten auf die Zukunft mit Gewissheit, so wie cine Mond und
Sonnenfinsternis, ausrechnen koennte. Kant, Kritik der praktischen Vernunft, ed.
Rosenkranz and Schubert. Leipzig. 1838, p. 290.

25. F. A. Lance: Geschichte des Materialismus, 4th ed. Iserlohn, 1882,
p. 20.

26. This reasoning may be compared with that by the aid of which
Lucretius infers the materiality of air (see later, p. 306); it is the same
which compels us to suppose the existence of the ether. The gods exist, for
they act. To say that the gods are not interested in the world is atheistic,
as if one were to deny mass to the cther: it would immediately become
useless, inexistent.

27. Renovvier: Critique philosophique, Vol. VII, 1878, p. 186.

28. Lerniz: Opera philosephica, ed. Erdmann. Berlin, 1840, p. 515.

29. PLaTo: Timaeus, trans. Jowett. New York, 1892, § 28.

go. ArisroTLte: De Caelo, trans. J. L. Stocks. Oxford, 1g22. Bk. IT,
Chap. XI, § 2.

31. SCHOPENHAUER: Sacmmiliche Werke, od. Frauenstaedt. Leipzig, 1877,
Pp. 5.

32. Lersniz: Mathematische Schriften, ed. Gerhardt. Halle. 1860, Vol. VI,
p. 206. Sequeretur etiam causam non posse tterum restihas suogue effectui surrogari
quod quantum abhorret a more naturae et rerum rationibus facile intelligtiur.

33. Ib., p. 439. Effectus integer causam plenam vel gs


44. 1b., p. 219.

35. Lucretius: l.c., Book I, line 156.

36. Dunem: La théorie physique. Paris, 1g06, p. 272.

37- H. Porscareé: La science et Uhypothése. Paris, s.d., pp. 211-212.

38. Cf. the amusing exposition of the difficulties of class experiments
and the lack of agreement between their results and those described in
books, in WeLis’ The New Machiavelli. Leipzig, 1gtt, Vol. I, p. 33.

39. Dunem: /c., p. 2go.

40. C. Neumann: Ueber die Principien der Galileit-Newton'schen Theorie.
Leipzig, 1870.

41. Lupw. Lance: Ueber die wissenschaftliche Fassung, etc. Wundt's |
phische Studien, Vol. 11. Leipzig, 1883. Id., Nochmals ueber das |
th. Id., Ueber das Beharrungsgesetz, Kgl. Saechs. Ges. der
Vol. XXXVII. Leipzig, 1885, p. 336 and ff. Id., Die geschichiliche Entwicklung
des Bewegungsbegriffs. Leipzig, 1886. Id., Das Inertialsystem, Wandt's phil.
Studien, Vol. XX. Leipzig, 1902.

42. Hannequin: Essai critique. Paris, F. Alcan, 1895, p. 79.

43. E. re Rov: La science positive et la liberté. Congrés international de philoso-
phie. Paris, 1g00, Vol. I, p. 331.

44. D’ALemment: Traité de dynamique, 2nd ed. Paris, 1758, pp. 13-14.

45. Pomwson: Trailé de mécanique. and ed. Paris, 1833, p. 204 and ff.
In Streintz’s book, Die physikalischen Grundlagen der Mechanik, Leipzig, 1883,
p- 81 and ff., there is found an excellent discussion of the two principles of
the measure of time.


LAW AND CAUSE 59


46. See on this subject R. Schenck, Ueber den rothen Phosphor, Berichte der
deutschen chemischen Gesellschaft, XXXV, 1905, p. 352 and ff.

47. The importance which the measure of the diminution of radio-
activity in time had in this part of physics is well known. It is considered
as the most characteristic property of radio-active bodies, that according
to which their identity or non-identity is decided. Cf. Rutherford. Radio-
Activity, 2nd ed. Cambridge, 1905, pp. 223-32, 411, 412, and Madame
Curie, Revue scientifique, November 17, 1906, p. 654.

43. Lucretius, while trying to prove that nature obeys the law, insists
alsy on the condition of duration (Book H, v. 175 and ™.),

49. Pamcevél: Bulletin de la Société frangaise de philosophie, 1905. pp. 64-65,
asserts that the notion of the homogencity of time and space with respect
to laws exists in man prior to any science, as it also does in the animal.

5,0. Henri Porxcaré very justly deduces this form of the law directly
from the ‘scientific conception” of the world—that is, according to our
terminology, from the principle of lawfulness (légaltté). Cf. Cournot et le calcul
inginitésimal. Revue de métaphysique, XIII, 1905, p. 295.

51. Henri Poincaré: L'espace ef la géométrie. Resue de métaphysique, 1895,
p. 638. Cf. id., La géom#trie non-euclidienne. Revue générale des sciences, 1891,
Pp. 772.

52. Cf. on the manner with which this relation between geometrical
deduction and physical statements is found to be modified in recent con-
ceptions, La Déduction Relativiste, especially paragraphs 86, 98, 156.

53- Beatranp Russert: An Essay on the Foundations of Cceometry. pp.
150-151.

54. Cf. p. 216. It is easy to understand that the recent theory of “local
time,’? so profoundly revoluuionary in many respects, has, however, in
spile of appearances, respected this fundamental distinction between time
and space. Minkowski's formula, according to which space and time must
blend into a more general notion, that of the Universe (cf. P. Langevin,
L' Evolution de CVespace et du temps. Revue de mélaphy sigue et de morale, July 1gtt,
p. 459) nught, in truth, give nse to some doubt. But Einstein's fundamental
argument, which consists in showing that one cannot “telegraph into the
past,’ is cnough for us to sce that in this respect nothing is modified
(1b., p. 463). The new theory leads, however, to an assimilation of the
notions of time and space from a definite point of view (cf. later, p. 257,
n. 73), and it results from this that two observers who move differently
do not appreciate the time clapsed in an identical manner. One may,
therefore, imagine, as Langevin proves by a pleasant and ingenious fiction,
an observer leaving the earth and finding it again after two centuries, where-
as he himself would only have lived two years (28., p. 466). But this fiction
in no way contradicts what we said about the impossibility of a voyage
into the future, since having once succeeded in traversing the space of
two centuries, the traveller could no longer by any means retrace his
steps. This invention therefore is to be classed with romantic anecdotes,
where a cessation of animal life is supposed, as in About’s [Homme a
oreille cassde or in Wells’ Sleeper, inventions which do not shock too greatly
our sense of possibility.


60 IDENTITY AND REALITY


55. Spm, who had a very genuine feeling for diversity between space and
time, did not always indicate exactly the difference between the two
concepts. What he says about the impossibility of conceiving an empty
time (Denken und Wirklichkeit. trans. Pensée et réalité. Paris, 1876, pp. 327-
328) is just as applicable to the space which would be marked by nothing.
The example which he uses as a basis, that of man who would have slept,
finds its analogy in the man, who with the world would have been carried
through empty space.

56. ArrsToTLe: Physics, Book I, Chap. VIII.

57. Cournot: Traitd de l’enchainement, etc. Paris, 1861, p. 276.

58. Hetmnortz: Wissenschaftliche Abhandlungen. Leipzig, 1880, p. 16.

59. LoparscHewsky: Etudes geoméirigues sur la théorie des paralidles, trans.
Houel, Mémoires de Bordeaux, Vol. IV, 1866, p. 120.

60. Riemann: Ueber die Hypothesen, etc. Abhandlungen der Kgl. Gesellschaft
zu Goettingen, Vol. XIII (1854), p. 148.

61. Hermuortz: Veber den U'rsprung, etc. Populaere Vortraege, Brunswick,
1876, pp. 42-43, and Ueber den U’rsprung, etc., Wissenschaftliche Abhandlungen,
Leipzig, 1882, p. 954.

62. P.-G. Tarr: Conference sur quelques-uns des progres récents de la physique,
trans. Krouchkoll. Paris, 1886, p. 12 and ff.

63. H. Pomcareé: Les géométries non-euclidiennes. Revue génerale des sciences,
TI, 1891, p. 774. La science et Phypothése, p. 93. La valeur de la science, p. 109.
This argument had already been proposed by Lotze. Cf. Bertrand Russell .
An Essay on the Foundations of Geometry. Cambridge, 1897, Pp. 100.

64. We are obliged to recognize that Poincaré’s prevision which we had
followed in this matter has not been confirmed by the later progress of
science. Cf. on this subject La Déduction Relativiste, § 121.

65. See p. 219 and ff.

66. Spm (cf. amongst others Pensée et Réalite, p. 128) greatly insisted on
this disagreement between the postulate of identity and reality, and saw
in it justly a direct proof of the a priori character of this postulate. Wundt
had already pointed out (Die physikalischen Axiome und thre Bezichung zum
Causalprincip. Erlangen, 1866, p. 125) that at the time of a change “‘intuition
(Anschauung) compels us to posit two things, whereas the concept would
allow the subsistence of only one thing.’’ And yet he declares in another
place that this conception of something which remains through change
is not a priori, but is, on the contrary, suggested by the phenomena them-

selves (ib., cf. and ed., Stuttgart, 1g10, p. 178, the somewhat modified and
more precise expression of the same thought).

67. H. Pomcarsé: La science ef Phypothése, p. 258.

68. Id., Sur la valeur objective de la science. Revue de métaph., 1902,
p. 266.

69. E. Macnu: Erkenntris und Irrtum. trans. La connaissance et l'erreur,
Dufour. Paris, 1908, p. 13.

7o. Anistotie: Metaphysics, Book 1, Chap. I.

71. Spwvoza: Ethics, Part IV, Prop. 27.

72. Anisror.e: i.c., Plato had already pointed out that geometry, in
spite of appearances, pursucs no practical end, and ‘knowledge is the real


LAW AND CAUSE 61


object of the whole science." Republic, Book VIII, trans. Jowett. New
York, 1892; Vol. III, p. 229.

73. Conpitrac: La langue des calculs. Paris, an VI, p. 60.

74. Id., Logique. Paris, an VI, p. 177.

75. Spm: l.c., p. 192.

76. L. Coururat: La logique de Leibniz. Paris, F. Alcan, 1901, pp. 186,
20g and ff.; see also the exposition made by the same author at the Société
frangaise de philosophie. Bulletin 2nd year, 1902, February 27th. This is also
Cassirer’s opinion (Letbniz’s System in seinen wissenschaftlichen Grundlagen.
Berlin, 1902, p. 325). And yet the principle of the equality of cause and
effect appears more often in Leibniz as independent and sometimes even
has the appearance of a statement deduced from experience. Cf. Mathe-
matische Schriften, ed. Gerhardt, Vol. II, p. 308.

77. ‘In the purely physical order no necessary condition is at bottom
the cause more than another.”” Renouvier, La Méthode phénoméniste.
Année philosophique, 1890, p. 20.

78. JouHN STUART MILL: A System of Logic. London, 1884, p. 340.

79. We shall show (p. 308) that within very restricted limits science is
equally forced to make use of a concept derived directly from that of
theological causality.

80. SCHOPENHAUER: Die Welt als Wille und Vorstellung, ed. Frauenstaedt,
Vol. IT, p. 175.

81. Did Comte share at bottom the opinion expressed later by Taine,
and did he confuse law and cause? One would be tempted to believe it,
seeing that identity between the weight of terrestrial objects and the
attractions of the plancts appears to him to constitute the true mutual
explanation of the two orders of phenomena (Cours, Vol. I], p. 169).
And yet we shall see later that Comte conceives one cause “first or last’’
distinct from law, although he condemns the search for it.

82. Comte: 14., Vol. I, p. 169.

83. /b., Vol. II, p. 298.

84. 1b., Vol. H, p. 312.

85. The analogy between the opinions of Comte on the one hand and of
Kirchhoff and Mach on the other has been brought to light by Kozlowski
(Psychologicene Crodla. Warsaw, 1899. p. 30; Przeglad filozoficzny. Warsaw,
1906, p. 193).

86. mre: Cours, Vol. II, p. 442. In other circumstances, however,
Comte formulated less decided opinions. Thus, if he rejects the ether, be
admits the corpuscular theory of matter, which he calls a “‘good hypothesis”
(ib., TV, p. 641). It is probable that in this case Comte has yielded less to
his principles and more to his powerful scientific instinct. His conception
then draws markedly nearer that which tends to consider these hypotheses
as instruments devised to fix our thought.

87. Newton: Principia, Book III, p. 506.

88. Ib., p. 179.

89. Cf. Rosenzercer: Geschichte der Physik. Braunschweig, 1884, Vol. IIT,
Pp. 3-

90. Cf. especially in Eddleston, Correspondence of Sir Isaac Newton, etc.


62 IDENTITY AND REALITY


London, 1850, Cote’s letter of February 18, 1713, and Newton's replies
of March 28th and gist (pp. 151-156).

91. There is also in the Opticks a complcte exposition of the principles of
the atomic theory (cf. later on, p. 424). It is known, moreover, that in this
work the theory of emission—that is to say, an hypothesis with the best
characterizations on the mode of production—plays a considerable part.
Cf., on the real sense of Newton’s declaration, Appendix I, p. 454.

g2. Berkevey (De motu. Works. Fraser. Oxford, 1871, Vol. III, § 39)
formulates with great precision this analogy between mathematical con-
cepts and physical concepts.

93. H. Pomcaré: Lesons sur la théorie mathématique de la lumiére. Paris,
1889, p. 1.

94. P. Dunenm: La théorie physique. Paris, 1906, p. 26.

95- 41b., p. 33-

96. P. Dune: La théorie physique. Paris, 1906, p. 46. Planck is still more
affirmative; he states that “all the great physicists have believed in the
reality of the image of the world” (Die Einheit des phystkatischen Weltbildes.
Leipzig, 1909, p. 36). Wundt compares the theories of ‘‘economy” and of
“convention” to “legal fictions” which abound in the history of law;
these are attempts which aim at establishing the gencsis of knowledge
independently of all real history; even the most determined partisan of
these conceptions is forced to recognize that the principles of science have
not really been created in this way (Die Prinzipten der mechanischen Naturlehre.
Stuttgart, 1910, pp. 7-8).

97. Id., le., p. 11 and ff.

g8. Planck expressly affirms that atoms or electrons are as real as the
heavenly bodies or the objects which surround us and that contemporary
physicists “‘speak the language of realism and not that of Mach’ (/.c.,
Pp. 33-37). Henri Poincaré declares in the same way (Science et Méthode.
Paris, 1908, p. 186) that in the physical sciences the term “existence” has
not the same meaning as in mathematics; “it no longer signifies absence of
contradiction ; it signifies objective existence.”

99. P. Dunem: /.c., pp. 33, 35. Ina recent article Planck has pointed out
to what a degree this procedure is general and characterizes the true
direction of the evolution of science. Thus we now classify acoustics with
mechanics, and, on the other hand, magnetism and optics with electro-
dynamics. What used to be called the physics of heat is now divided;
radiant heat is ranked with optics (and electro-dynamics), whereas the rest
is dealt with in connection with mechanics and kinetic theory (/.c., p. 6).

100. Id., L.c., pp. 46-47.

ror. J. B. Stato: The Concepts and Theories of Modern Physics. New York,
1882. We have already cited the titles of other works.


CHAPTER II


MECHANISM


In perusing a book of popular science or materialistic philosophy
(let us take as an example The Riddle of the Universe, by Ernst
Haeckel,(1) the celebrated biologist), one gains the impression
that the mechanical theory is a logical conception, complete
and finished, directly applicable if not to the totality, at least
to the great majority of natural phenomena. But looking more
closely it is easy to see that this is an illusion. That all the
phenomena of organic matter should be explained by those of
inorganic matter has always been postulated by a great number
of thinkers. “I suppose,” says Descartes, “that the body (of man)
is nothing but a statue or a machine made of earth.’’(2)
Leibniz writes: ‘‘All that takes place in the body of a man or of
any animal is as mechanical as that which takes place in a
watch,’’(3) and, in the nineteenth century, Claude Bernard
affirms in the same way that there can be no barrier “between
the science of living bodies and that of inorganic bodies.’’(4)
But in reality these are simple postulates, and every impartial
observer is obliged to recognize that, if some progress has been
made in this direction, thanks to the conceptions of Lamarck
and Darwin, and if, on the other hand, thanks to certain works
of Jagadis-Chunder Bose,(5) Traube, A. L. Herrera, Stéphane
Leduc, (6) we are beginning to catch glimpses of vague analogies
between brute matter and living matter, what has been done
is extremely little compared to what remains to be done.
Indeed, one can scarcely discover in modern physiological
doctrines the faintest traces of mechanical explanation. Let us
reflect: here are two germs between which the most minute
microscopic examination is incapable of finding the slightest
difference; and yet one is the germ of a man and the other
the germ of a cat. Sull, there must be differences. In two men,
each of whom will resemble his father, all the peculiarities of
their final evolution, the infinitely slender differences which
distinguish them from each other, must be explained by some
mechanical arrangements in these germs.

These difficulties have been shown many times, and E. von
Hartmann, in one of his last memoirs, has given an admirable


64 IDENTITY AND REALITY


summary of them.(7) But even in inorganic science is there
not much that is illogical? To be sure, in almost every treatise
there is talk of atoms and molecules. But it would be a mistake to
believe that, under these names, there is a question of identical
or even very analogous conceptions. Chemistry, for instance,
since Dalton and Avogadro, seems at first sight to be the chosen
field of atomic theories. It refers incessantly to these atoms and
molecules and even to formulae of ‘‘constitution,”’ pretending
to show their arrangement in space. But this is pure appearance.
The chemical! atom, with its multiple and mysterious qualities,
which just as mysteriously engender still others in the molecule,
has little in common, apart from the name, with the atom of
the mechanical theory, whose essential characteristic is to
possess but one unique property, mass, and to know but one
unique mode of action. The most recent works connected with
Svante Arrhenius’s theory of ions hint but slightly at the
possibility of a transition (not to speak of a conciliation)
between these antagonistic concepts.(8) This contrast is so
shocking that a theorist of chemistry and a most distinguished
one,(g) after long and fruitless attempts, despaired publicly of
any hope of success in this order of studies and looked for
solutions in an entirely different direction.

In physics there exists in fact only a mechanical theory
relevant to phenomena in a gaseous state,(10) a theory to
which recent results permit the assimilation, from certain
points of view, of those phenomena produced in dilute solutions.
As for the different forms of energy, their unification has made
an immense progress through the work of Hertz, confirming
the very penetrating ideas of Maxwell on the identity of elec-
tricity and of light. But we are still very far from the possibility
of reducing different forms of energy to mechanical motion.
There has incontestably been a backward step in this respect.
Indeed, according to the theory of Fresnel, light was reduced

to undulations of the ether, a motion undetermined in certain
respects in a medium still less determined, but a motion whose
nature was postulated as purely mechanical. Yet at the present
rey _ is an ye phenomenon. But at no time since
ectric phenomena have become a of science h
formula been devised which might paged way es mid
mechanical theory consistent with these phenomena. Nor is this


MECHANISM 65,


for want of searching. One of the greatest scientific theorists of all
time, Clerk Maxwell, as we know, devoted incessant efforts to
this task. He took infinite pains to establish in each case the
possibility of a mechanical explanation. But in this endeavour
he very often had to stay his efforts, and when, on the
contrary, he attempted to render his ideas precise, his efforts
only resulted in contradictory images. Poincaré, who among
contemporaries is doubtless the most competent judge of such
matters, has clearly shown, in spite of his profound admiration
for Maxwell, the hesitation which every logical mind necessarily
feels toward that part of the great theorist’s work.(11) Moreover,
one has only to open a more recent book, such as that of
Sir Oliver Lodge, (12) and consider the extremely ingenious,
mechanical models, proposed by that eminent physicist, in
order to realize that the question has not progressed much
since that time.(13) It is, let us remark in passing, this evident
retrogression of the mechanical theory which explains in great
part the birth of the opposite tendency, that which seeks to
reduce mechanical phenomena to those exemplified by elec-
tricity.

But setting aside this evolution and considering the still
recent past, we easily perceive that even in the great heyday
of Fresnel’s theory there could be no question at bottom of a
complete mechanical reduction. That is because, if the undula-
tion, the motion, furnished a sufficiently clear image to the
mind, the substratum of this motion, the ether, remained
enveloped in the thickest of shadows. We believe it useless to
emphasize the difficulties and contradictions confronting all
those who have tried to form a somewhat precise idea of this
‘“‘medium”’ which one is forced to conceive of as sometimes con-
tinuous and sometimes composed of tiny particles, or again as
an extremely rarefied gas and as a solid infinitely more rigid
than steel.(14) One particular difficulty which for some years
has occupied many physicists is the difficulty resulting from
the work of Michelson and Morley; this cannot be reconciled
with Bradley’s theory of aberration, so that it is now possible
to say that we cannot imagine the ether which surrounds us
as being either at rest or as following the earth in its motion,
or rather that we are forced to accept cach supposition alterna-
tively. If, on the contrary, we consider this strange anomaly as

E


66 IDENTITY AND REALITY


a definitely established fact, we are forced to make it the base
of a theory embracing all of the phenomena of the visible
world, thus destroying entirely the foundations of mechanism
as Maxwell conceived of it.(15)

The difficulties just mentioned, whose enumeration can be
prolonged indefinitely, are quite impressive. But it certainly
would be wrong to exaggerate their importance. Are they
absolutely insoluble? This has often been affirmed, but without
sufficiently valid proof, and it does not seem unlikely that
“negative dogmatism” in this question has often been pushed
too far. Thus Spir has denied that the mechanical theory can
ever embrace not only organic phenomena, but also the diversity
of chemical substances.(16) Hannequin has declared that a
specific ether would always be necessary for each class of
phenomena, the properties of these different media ‘being
profoundly opposed and distinctly irreconcilable,’’(17) and he
has rejected in particular the electro-magnetic theory of
light ;(18) according to him, in descending to the atom the
theory simply creates ‘‘a microcosm where are assembled all
the essential traits which its mission 1s to explain” ; one “‘always
surprises it, in one way or another, transferring to the atom
and to the individual the qualities required by the whole
which it composes.’’(19) We shall see later on that there is a
partial truth in these negations if we understand by the term
quality its guid proprium considered as sensation. But, if taken
literally, they are certainly inexact. If scientific theories were
as sterile as this they would not even have a value of apparent
explanation, and, for the same reason, they would be useless
from the point of view of establishing relations between laws ;
one could not really understand why humanity should have
lingered, and should linger still, over such vain occupations, its
very illusion becoming quite inexplicable.

As a matter of fact it is quite impossible to place limits to
scientific explanation in this realm of ideas. Many obstacles
which appeared almost insuperable at some given moment have
been overcome or altered. The differences existing between
classes of phenomena are being gradually diminished by the
patient research of scientists who refuse to accept them as
ultimate. It is certain that the electro-magnetic theory of light
has been an immense step in this direction; so also the theory


MECHANISM 67


of ions, which seems to show the way by which the specificity of
chemical phenomena may be made to disappear; and so also,
finally, the electric theory of mass, which connects mechanical
with electric phenomena. To mention another particular
instance : the purely mechanical theory of the ether has for some
years been more or less abandoned because of the predominance
of electrical theories; but we can see from a paper presented
by Lord Kelvin at the International Congress of Physics in
1g00 (20) that the opposition between diverse properties, so
discordant in appearance, of this hypothetical medium had
already been quite noticeably diminished. If some day favour
is again accorded to purely mechanical theories—and this, after
all, is quite possible—it is not at all certain that there will not
be found a way of more or less conciliating these divergences.
At any rate, this hope is not denied us because, once again,
no one has proved that the task is impossible.

But if one penetrates to the very foundations of mechanical
theories there appears an obstacle of a nature different from
those which we have just dealt with.

All mechanical hypotheses present the common trait of
trying to explain the phenomena of nature by the aid of
motion; that is why they are sometimes designated by the
word kinetic, which, however, has more often been applied to a
particular theory concerning the gaseous state. In addition
to motion these theories make use of the concepts of mass and
of force, sometimes one of the two only, at other times both
together. For our analysis it is wise to distinguish between
these three classes. We shall designate as corpuscular (a term
invented by Boyle (21), which seems to characterize them
well enough) those which only employ mass and motion, and
we shall call dynamic those which use only force and motion.
This term has sometimes been used in a very different sense, (22)
but it suffices to fix its signification. Finally, we do not know
any special term applicable to the theories which at once use
the concepts of force and of mass.

The corpuscular hypotheses are those which have always
appeared the most satisfactory from the theoretical point of
view. Many theorists of science firmly believed, during a
certain period, in the possibility of reducing all phenomena
to the simple terms of mass and motion. Some have even


68 IDENTITY AND REALITY


believed this reduction to be quite near. The attempts of those
great physicists, Lord Kelvin and Hertz, show to what an
extent scientists wish to rid themselves of the concept of force,
a concept which seems to some of them nothing short of
scandalous.

It is easy to realize whence difficulties arise. The corpuscular
theories—one sees this clearly in the kinetic theory of gases,
which is the only part of the system really completed—assume
the existence of separate particles, atoms or molecules. We
have intentionally used this vague expression of parteles,
whereas very often that of particles of matter is employed. Matter
is a complex concept. It has temperature, colour, sometimes
even flavour. Corpuscles are stripped of all these properties.
Of matter they have kept only a few characteristics, the most
important of which is mass. That is essential to them, since it
is inevitable that they should act upon one another.

This action can occur only in impact. This is clearly seen in
the kinetic theory of gases. But, although the Hydrodynamica of
Daniel Bernoulli, where this theory was outlined for the first
time, appeared only in 1738, one will not be surprised to
notice that the problem had been raised by Leibniz and by
Huygens long before that time; we have just seen, indeed,
that action by impact constitutes the essential element not
only for the theory of gases but for every corpuscular theory.
In studying the writings of these great thinkers we are easily
convinced that the question has not made much progress since
their time.

But for the moment let us remain in the domain of the theory
of gases more familiar to our contemporaries. We know that
pressure is here represented as resulting from the impact of
manifold particles against one another and against the sides
of the vessel enclosing them. Since we know from expericnce
that the pressure exerted by a gas in a tightly closed receptacle
of impermeable material does not diminish with time (unless,
of course, there is chemical reaction between the gas and
the sides), it follows that, in spite of impacts being extremely
numerous between molecules, the kinetic energy must have
remained constant.

We know of bodies which act in about the same way; we
call them elastic. Let us say, then, that the molecules of gas


MECHANISM 69


must be considered as completely elastic bodies,(23) resembling
very perfect billiard balls; moreover, it is of billiard balls
that physicists are accustomed to think when speaking of the
impacts of atoms. How does the elasticity of a billiard ball
show itself? Let us see what happens when one ball hits the
other ball or the side of the table. At first the side yields and
the ball flattens itself a little; then side and ball come back
to their original form and the rejection of the ball is a
consequence. But why do these deformations, once produced,
not persist?

Attempts have been made to avoid the necessity of an
explanation of this point. During the collision of imperfectly
elastic bodies, a part of the kinetic energy disappears, or
rather is transformed, so that it manifests itself in the deforma-
tion of the bodies and the increase of their temperature. But,
by definition, molecules are indeformable and, moreover, they
cannot become warm, since it is precisely their motion that
constitutes heat. Consequently, we are told, granting that
energy must remain and that, in this particular instance, it
cannot transform itself into anything else, we ought necessarily,
after the impact, to find it again as kinetic energy.(24)

But in truth this is an illegitimate way of solving the problem.
Conservation of energy, we shall sec, is not an axiom, and no
one can pretend that its disappearance is unimaginable. If
pressure is the result of molecular impacts, the kinetic energy
must be preserved. To make this affirmation is simply to state
that the pressure of the gas is maintained—that is, to state a
law and formulate the problem whose solution is in question,
and not to furnish a solution. What we should ask for is a
theory telling us how this can be accomplished mechanically
without the need of endowing the molecules with a special
elastic force.

This problem may be approached from still another side. We
can imagine elastic bodies which, during impact, deform them-
selves less and less. In the end there will be no deformation, and
the substance, perfectly elastic, will conserve during the impact
all of its kinetic energy. But, on the other hand, since the body
in question is not deformed, we can consider it as absolutely
inelastic, and therefore, during the central impact of two
molecules of equal and opposite velocity, this velocity will be


70 IDENTITY AND REALITY


simply neutralized and the molecules will remain at rest. That
is, from a purely rational point of view, every time that two
molecules encounter each other there will be absolute indecision
as to the consequences. This is evidently inconsistent with
determinism, which is the base of all science.

It is curious to see from a passage in Newton’s Opticks that
arguments analogous to those drawn from the conservation of
energy had been set forth even in his time. Only those will
be astonished at this for whom the history of the principle of
conservation of energy begins with Mayer and Joule; but, in
reality, since Huygens and Leibniz, the principle of the con-
servation of vs viva served the same purpose many times.
“If two equal Bodies,’”’ says Newton, “‘meet directly 1 vacuo,
they will, by the laws of Motion, stop where they mect and
lose all their motion and remain in rest, unless they be elastic
and receive new motion from their Spring. . . . If it be said,
that they can lose no motion but what they communicate to
other Bodies, the consequence is, that in vacuo they even lose
no motion, but when they meet must go on and penctrate one
another’s Dimensions.”’(25)

We see that Newton does not treat very seriously the postulate
which considers the conservation of wuts viva as axiomatic;
evidently this principle had not acquired the authority
which the conservation of cnergy enjoys in our day. But
what is especially remarkable in these few lines is that they
establish the fact that not only the elasticity but also the
hardness of substances require explanation. We shall return
to this point.

As long as it is only a question of billiard balls it is not too
difficult, if not to solve the problem, at least to defer its solu-
tion. We can suppose that the tendency toward the return to
the original form shown by the ball and the side is only an
appearance; in reality it is due to molecular motions which we
leave undetermined. But when it is a question of the impact of
molecules themselves we no longer have that resource. If we
suppose that their elasticity is due to motions of a more tenuous
medium, since we shall have to explain in its turn the elasticity
of this medium, we shall have to imagine another more tenuous
still, and so on without end. This is a consequence which
Leibniz clearly perceived ; yet it did not cause him to withdraw


MECHANISM a


from his position, as we can see from a passage in his Essai de
Dynamique.(26) But modern physicists will certainly refuse to
follow him in this path.

Cannot the elasticity of molecules be due to the movements of
ponderable masses themselves? Many attempts have been made
in that direction. Thus A. Secchi believed that he was able to
establish an explanation based upon a proposition of Poinsot,
and that theory, which, in fact, rested only upon a simple
misapprehension by the Italian astronomer,(27) has since had
a little merited success amongst philosophers.(28) The attempts
of Lord Kelvin and of Hertz are much more remarkable. But
as soon as one pursues the problem closely, enormous difficulties
are encountered, as Boltzmann has stated,(29) in the sense
that complication of auxiliary hypotheses and of construc-
tion becomes enormous without representing in a satisfactory
manner even the simplest phenomena. Now the complication
here constitutes a radical defect. We feel sure that if it is to
explain something, the atom must be simple. To attribute to
atoms a structure and complicated motions is, in fact, to impute
to them differentiated parts, to postulate solidarity and cohesion
of these parts. When one speaks to me of atoms I do not con-
ceive of them distinctly, and I attribute to them a sort of unity
quite ideal. Then their rigidity baffles me less, although, at
bottom, the difficulty is the same. But here I feel it immediately,
and I realize that the hard atom demands an explanation as
much as the elastic one.

We have just seen that the corpuscular atom is analogous to
the substances which we know; like them it has mass. It
resembles them also, or rather it resembles a determined class
of substances, called solids, in that it must have shape. Very
often, it is true, physicists or chemists, in speaking of the atom,
leave this point undetermined, attributing to it, at most, a
shape vaguely spherical.(30) This is simply because the theories
are not yet very far advanced and the lack of precision on this
point is not an inconvenience. But there is no doubt that in
corpuscular theories the atom is really a small solid, and even
an ultra-solid. ‘These primitive Particles,” says Newton, “being
Solids, are incomparably harder than any porous Bodies
compounded of them; even so very hard, as never to wear out
or break in pieces.” (31) These little solids, certainly, must have a


72 IDENTITY AND REALITY


shape and occupy a strictly limited part of space. This makes
Lasswitz (32) say that the atom is, above all, a ‘mobile part
of space whose geometrical parts are relatively at rest each
toward the other.” Considered from this point of view, there
can no longer be question of that vague ideal unity which we
just postulated. Space, within the corpuscle, has parts; how
does it happen that they are dependent one upon the other?
Why are they not detached in impact? Why cannot a foreign
substance penetrate these parts?

Descartes’ theory was not, properly speaking, corpuscular.
And yet since for him the essence of substance consisted in its
spatial extension, this problem presented itself to him in quite
an analogous manner. He solved it by supposing that this
cohesion of parts was the simple consequence of their being
mutually at rest.(33) This solution was hardly satisfactory,
and Leibniz recognized clearly that in order to act mechanically
the corpuscle had to be endowed with a special principle of
action.(34) Newton also, as we have just seen (p. 70), understood
that, deprived of a special principle of action, the corpuscle
was incapable of acting during impact. There have been,
however, some attempts at an explanation. The most remark-
able, doubtless, is that of Denis Papin, who in a letter to
Huygens formulates the hypothesis that “‘matter itself has
no linkage of parts and that the hardness which 1s experienced
in certain substances comes only from the motion of the
surrounding liquids which press against the parts the least dis-
turbed by one another.’’(35) The theory thus outlined is analo-
gous to that of Leibniz on elasticity—that is, it ends in the
indefinite multiplication of media. Apparently none of these
“‘explanations’’ has remained in science, since in opening a
manual of physics we find the active principle of Leibniz
admitted under the name of impenetrability.

Thus we shall not gain much in substituting hard bodies
for elastic ones, for in the end we cannot represent to ourselves

resistance which a body opposes to the penetration of
another except under the aspect of a mysterious “principle of
action.”

Finally, here is an argument drawn directly from experience.
The corpuscular theory rests upon action in von But th a
is no real contact betw i a

een two bodies. When one body has


MECHANISM 73


collided with another it seems to have touched it, but this is
an appearance. In reality, at the moment of the impact the
particles nearest to one another have remained separated by
quite appreciable distances. We know the phenomenon called
Newton’s rings, occurring when a lens is pressed against a
level sheet. The colour of these rings permits us to calculate
the thickness of the intermediary layer. In the centre, where this
thickness is least diminished, a black spot is produced. It is
“optical contact,” yet it is not a real contact. The two bodies
may be brought more closely together, but then there 1s
adhesion. (36)

These difficulties, we have just seen, have been known for
the most part since the time of Leibniz and Huygens. And so
when Newton had established the law of universal gravitation
a quite different theory of matter arose—a theory which, based
upon the existence of forces acting at a distance, tended in
the first place, as Poincaré aptly remarked, to transform the
substances into something analogous to a stellar system, thus
disclosing that it had its origin in celestial mechanics. This
theory was clearly formulated by the English physicist Cotes
in the preface to the second edition of Newton’s Principia,
which appeared in 1713. Newton never committed himself
definitely in that respect, but it seems probable that he was in
agreement with his disciples regarding it.(37) In the beginning
of the nineteenth century the theory seemed to receive con-
firmation in Lagrange’s Mécanique Analytique (38) and in the
experimental results of Coulomb,(39) which seemed definitely
to assimilate gravitation with other forces acting at a distance,
more especially electricity. But still earlier the hypothesis had
already found a theorist, who developed it to its logical
conclusion. This was the Jesuit Boscovich, whose principal
work appeared in 1759.(40)

Boscovich supposes that atoms are not corpuscles but
geometrical points absolutely divested of space. Each of these
points is a centre of forces, or rather of a single force identical
with itself at equal distances round the point but varying
according to the distance. At a very slight distance it is repulsive
and increases in intensity indefinitely as one approaches the
centre, so that it is susceptible of resisting, no matter what the
impulsion is, and so that no two centres can ever coincide.


74 IDENTITY AND REALITY


If one withdraws, the repulsive force diminishes, and at a given
distance becomes nil, so that there is neither repulsion nor
attraction. If one departs still more from the centre, the force
becomes attractive, increases, reaches a maximum, and de-
creases in such a way as to become nil at a given distance;
after which 1t becomes repulsive, in order to increase, decrease,
and become nil again. This happens several times until at a
certain distance, the force having become definitely attractive,
diminishes in proportion to the square of its distance to infinity
or “at least to distances greatly surpassing those of all the
planets and comets.’’(41) Boscovich represents the variations
of this force by a curve the two extreme parts of which are
the arcs of an hyperbola, having for their asymptotes, one the
axis of the distances and the other that of the forces, while the

middle part cuts the axis of the distances several times.
Boscovich’s system has rarely been applied in its entirety by
scientists. We hear very little said of his unique curve of forces.
In the nineteenth century Saint Venant (42) resuscitated and
simplified his hypothesis. Saint Venant’s curve is still asymptotic
to the two axes, but it cuts but once that of the distances.
It is rather doubtful whether a single curve of this kind can
take account of the different molecular and atomic actions
which one is obliged to suppose in order to explain all the
phenomena observed. However, the simple force of Saint
Venant has not had much greater success than that of his
predecessor. And yet Boscovich’s ideas have had considerable
influence upon science because he was the first resolutely to
strip the atom of extension. In this sense all the physicists
who since then have used atom-points are following in his
footsteps. Boscovich, moreover, did not fail to establish his
system on a criticism of the corpuscular theory based upon
considerations relative to the transmission of motion. ‘Quid
autem est impenetrabilitas ista? Unde fit ut idem spatium bina corpora
occupare non possint ?’’(43) This impenctrability can be but a
force, and all transmission of the motion must be effected by
of a force: “nullam mutationem motus fiert per


sed semper per vires agentes in aliqua distantia;’ and,
of course, in this system the absolute elasticity of the atom:
and the molecules offers no further difficulty.


It is easy to understand why Boscovich’s “unique force” had


MECHANISM 45,


so little success; it is really too baffling for our imagination.
Why does it change at a determined distance? And how can
it transform itself at a given point from repulsion to attraction
and vice versa? If the single force is to be conceived as the
force related to the central force emanating from the centre,
we necessarily imagine that near the origin, at a very small
distance from the centre, it must have the same character as at
a greater distance—that 1s, 1t should always be either attractive
or repulsive. But it is, of course, absolutely impossible to
construct the world with the aid of either of these two supposi-
tions. Boscovich’s force doubtless is always, either as attractive
force or as repulsive force, directed toward the centre, but it
does not appear to emanate from it.

It may be contended that that modification of force is the
consequence of a law. This argument, which seems to have
been suggested by Boscovich himself, as is shown by the ttle of
his principal work (Theorta . . . redacta ad unicam legem . . .),
is as little acceptable as that which aims at explaining the
elastic collision of corpuscles by the conservation of energy.
It is really a question here of an hypothesis about the mode
of production, and not of a simple artifice of arithmetic, such
as the introduction of the sines in the statement of the law of
refraction. The manner in which Boscovich expounds his theory
leaves us no doubt in this respect, and his argument against
impenetrability would have no sense were it otherwise. We
have here, therefore, nothing to do with a law.

And so it is not surprising that the dynamicists have generally
preferred to surround their point-atom with many forces,
varying according to different laws. Such amongst others was
Kant’s view.(44) Thus modified, the conception becomes less
logical; it lacks that fine unity which Boscovich had given to it
without becoming any more acceptable. How admit that the
same point-atom emits simultaneously rays of attractive and
repulsive force?

But there are objections applicable to all purely dynamical
systems. Lt is not at all certain that all the forces whose existence

one is obliged to postulate can be considered as central. This
is at least doubtful for molecular forces. It seems, indeed, that
the exclusive action of central forces would demand certain
relations between the different forms of the resistance of bodies—


76 IDENTITY AND REALITY


relations whose existence is denied by experience. In the same
way one cannot explain permanent deformation by supposing
only central forces. The phenomena of crystallization also
seem to demand that the action of molecules be not exclusively
exerted along the straight line which joins their centres of
gravity; they should be able to exercise a rotating action one
upon the other.

The following objection is still more fundamental, since it is
the very concept of purely dynamic atoms which is at stake.
Let us penetrate the forces which surround this atom. The
centre of these forces is a point which is, properly speaking,
empty (since the point is a geometrical abstraction). All
objects of our knowledge located in the external world have
extension. Can we imagine the existence in space of that which
is unextended? We admit, if necessary, the radiating force of
the centre; we represent it to ourselves as a straight line.
But when it comes in contact with another atom, upon what
does it act, since it finds it empty? How can this nothing resist
motion? How, once in motion, can it preserve it? How, in a
word, can it possess a mass, manifest inertia? ““No arrangement
of centres of forces, however complicated, could explain this
fact,’ says Maxwell; and he adds: “No part of this mass can
be due to the existence of the supposed centres of force.’’(45)
Let us observe that we have here to do not simply with what
one usually calls an occult quality—that 1s, a quality which is not
explained by those which define the centre of forces. No, it is
a property which our imagination refuses to join to the mental
image which we possess—a property which clashes with that
image. After all, the difficulty here is analogous to that which
we encountered with respect to the corpuscular atom. If this
latter appears unable to act, we do not understand how the
dynamic atom can be acted upon. So that of these two systems,
one represents only the passive side, and the other only the
active side of a phenomenon, which, of course, can only be
conceived as bilateral.

From the point of view of our imagination the dynamic
representation is even incontestably inferior to the corpuscular
representation. To convince ourselves of this we have only to
think of motion, which is, after all, the essential function of the
atom, the only modification of which it is susceptible. As to


MECHANISM 77


the dynamic atom, we have as much difficulty in representing
to ourselves the displacement of that “‘nothing’’ which con-
stitutes its nucleus as in representing that of the forces which
surround it, and which, in fact, we figure to ourselves necessarily
as a sort of gigantic spider’s web, which in each atom embraces
the entire universe. “Can a force be moved and displaced
from one place to another ?”’, asks Spir with much propriety. (46)
The concept of displacement seems natural when applied to
the corpuscle, limited in its extension, but it seems para-
doxical applied to the dynamic atom. We are compelled to
consider as more simple and more logical a direct variation
of the dynamic force as a function of the tume, which is, we
shall see later on, a sure sign that the theory has failed.

And so we must not be astonished that the physicists have
generally preferred less absolute solutions, departing still
farther from rigorous logic, but offering more of a hold on our
imagination. We preserve the corpuscular atom; we surround
it with forces acting at a distance. This composite system is
evidently exposed to a number of the objections formulated
against the two extreme conceptions. It meets, moreover,
with difficulties which belong to it particularly. How can the
atom, an existence supposedly simple, be constituted by the
union of two components as heterogeneous as a corpuscle and
forces? What can be the bond between them? And then—
and this is but another side of the same problem—the force
emanating from an atom, when it comes In contact with another
atom, easily finds a nucleus upon which it can act. But how
can it act? The only picture we can form to ourselves of a force
is that of a straight line. Between this picture and that of the
corpuscle which it is supposed to influence we can find no
connection. Nor shall we discover any between the concept of
force and that of motion. When I see a body set in motion by
impact I have the illusion of understanding, because in appear-
ance the motion springs from another motion, but here the
motion must be born from force—that is, from something
absolutely heterogeneous to it.

But does not the idea of forces acting at a distance, common
to all the systems which deviate from the strict corpuscular
hypothesis, seem really quite paradoxical? Doubtless, even
before Newton, a tendency of bodies toward a determined


78 IDENTITY AND REALITY


motion had been many times supposed—in fact, an ‘‘appetence”
of bodies each for the others. It is thus that Aristotle supposed
that among the four elements, two, earth and water, had a
natural tendency toward a lower level, whereas the other two
tended toward a higher level.(47) Galileo (48) and Kepler (49)
supposed that all terrestrial objects had an appetence for the
earth. But these were rather substantial forms, qualities more or
less occult, with which the schools had been so unsparing. It is
not apparent that there had been any question before Newton
of something transmitting itself instantaneously across space
like the Newtonian attraction. Descartes protested vigorously
against all supposition of action at a distance, which seemed to
him to culminate in endowing material particles with know-
ledge, to the point of making them “‘truly divine, so that they
may know without any intermediary that which happens in
places far away from them and exercise their actions upon
them.’’(50)

When the hypothesis of universal gravitation was formulated,
in spite of the enormous progress which the law discovered by
Newton had made in celestial physics, it met with very strong
resistance on the part of its contemporaries. Leibniz especially
was very emphatic upon this point.(51) Huygens also declared
that to attribute gravitation to some interior and inherent
quality is “to formulate obscure and unintelligible prin-
ciples.” (52) He, moreover, took great pains to construct a
mechanical theory of gravitation, but he arrived at no very
satisfactory result. Newton himself seems, at least at the begin-
ning of his work, to have envisaged the possibility of reducing
gravitation to the action of the medium.(53)

The new idea seemed to flow directly from the law established
by Newton, and that law dominated absolutely one of the
most important parts of physics, the development of which
had been the most rapid and the most complete. In other parts
it permitted important simplifications of calculation, and it
promised, we know, to furnish the basis of a general theory
of matter. It was natural, then, that it should triumph. What
is apt to surprise is, on the contrary, the resistance which it
encountered. Doubtless one can attribute the first resistance to
the influence of Descartes, who had entirely remade science and
philosophy, dominating minds even as powerful as those of


MECHANISM 79
Leibniz and Huygens. But if we examine what happened
afterwards we see that there had always been in science a
strong current of opposition to the conception. of action at a
distance. D’Alembert in 1755 calls forces, considered as efficient
causes, existences “obscure and metaphysical, which are only
capable of spreading shadows upon a science clear in itself.” (54)
A hittle later Euler states that, in supposing action at a
distance, we place ourselves in contradiction with the declara-
tion of the principle of inertia, according to which a body must
modify its motion only by impact against another.(55) In
1771 Aepinus states that forces are still considered as occult
qualities.(56) Even after Lagrange and Coulomb, although
using unscrupulously ‘“‘central forces,” many physicists did not
cease to see in the conception of an instantaneous action across
space a kind of stumbling-block for physics nothing short of
scandalous. In Stallo (57) there is to be found a long list of
very convincing citations to this effect, borrowed exclusively
from the physicists in the nineteenth century. The list might
be prolonged almost indefinitely. Let us be content to add
to it as particularly significant the declaration of Sir William
Thompson (Lord Kelvin), who thinks that the hypothesis of
action at a distance is “‘the most fantastic of paradoxes.’ (58)
It is perhaps still more curious that physicists whose theoretical
convictions were less pronounced have not ceased on every
propitious occasion to give evidence of their desire to rid
themselves of action at a distance. Thus Gauss (who, however,
calls himself a Newtonian) believes (when nothing from the
experimental point of view justified such a proposition) that
for electricity the notion of a propagation in time would be
much preferable to that of an instantaneous propagation.(59)
Faraday, also, though pretending to follow in theory the ideas
of Boscovich, felt a great repugnance to the conception of
forces acting far from their base and without physical connec-
tion with their source.(60) Maxwell declares that were a
scientific theory able, with some probability, to lead to an
explanation of gravitation men of science would gladly devote
the rest of their lives to its study.(61) Helmholtz, who had
established his demonstration of the principle of conservation
of energy on the hypothesis of central forces, is of the same
opinion. (62)


80 IDENTITY AND REALITY


Thus J. J. Thomson simply sums up the actual situation by
declaring that action at a distance, although the facilities it
offers to calculation have made it plausible to many mathe-
maticians, is a concept which the greatest physicists have
never been able to accept.(63) They have made numberless
efforts to free themselves from it. Hooke, Varignon, Fatio de
Duillier, Redeker, Euler, Challis, Guyot, Schellbach, Guthrie,
Thomson,(64) and many others, have made the attempt after
Huygens. The theory which has had the greatest success is
indisputably that of Le Sage.(65) Maxwell was of the opinion
that it was the only consistent theory of gravitation which had
ever been formulated.(66) It is well known that Le Sage’s
hypothesis consists in supposing that gravitation is the result
of the impacts of an enormous number of ultramundane
corpuscles with respect to which the celestial bodies mutually
become screens. The difficulties raised by this theory are
enormous. It is not only necessary to suppose that a body of
the density of the earth is almost translucent in respect to
the corpuscles in question, but again it is almost impossible,
as Maxwell stated,(67) to make this theory or any other
mechanical hypothesis agree with the principle of con-
servation of energy. Moreover, Laplace had indicated as the
lower limit of the velocity of propagation of gravity, a velocity
100 million, or at least 50 million, times greater than that of
light.(68) That is, one was obliged to suppose this velocity, and,
in consequence, that of the ultramundane corpuscles, almost
infinite. It is extremely significant that all these difficulties
have not prevented renowned physicists from devoting serious
efforts to the examination and the development of this theory.
Consequently we are obliged to suppose that the profound
dislike for the hypothesis of action at a distance must have
acted upon their minds with great intensity.

It must be remarked that in this matter the physicists could
in no way count on the help of the philosophers, who, on the
contrary, seemed to get along perfectly well with action at a
distance. Kant in his Metaphysische Anfangsgriinde expressly postu-
lates it and makes it the corner-stone of his theory of matter.
If, later on, in his posthumous work, Vom Uebergange von den
metaphysischen Anfangsgriinden der Naturwissenschaft zur Physik, he
became less positive in this respect, he, nevertheless, never


MECHANISM 81


denied the concept in question.(69) Schopenhauer is, if possible,
still more positive ; force appears to him as something primordial,
whose rationality it would be vain to look for.(70) In the same
way the Naturphilosophen have operated incessantly with forces.
This tradition persisted, and the concept of action at a distance
became current in German metaphysics, as may be seen in
Hartmann.(71) In France, Auguste Comte considered the
concept of gravitation as above all dispute, and reproached
astronomers of the past with having been “‘almost always
dominated by contemporaneous prejudices concerning the vain
search for causes.”(72) In England, John Stuart Mill spoke of
the “‘prejudice”’ against action at a distance and congratulated
his contemporaries on being free from it.(73) Herbert Spencer
made use of the concept of force without any hesitation after
the fashion of the German Naturphilosophen.(74)

The attitude of physicists on this question has forcibly
struck Stallo,(75) a witness all the less questionable since their
resistance appeared to him, as to John Stuart Mill, based upon
simple prejudice, having its sole source in the fact that we
ourselves act upon bodies only by contact. It is to be observed,
moreover, that the adversaries of action at a distance have
generally adopted an analogous point of view. We shall have
occasion to return to these considerations later on. But the
real reasons for the resistance of scientists to the assumption of
action at a distance seem to us to be much more profound.

When we try to render intelligible the action of gravitation,
we certainly have recourse to the procedure which was often
used to make plausible the concept of forces radiating from a
centre in general. We represent to ourselves surfaces placed,
normally to the radius, at different distances from the centre,
and we easily come to the conviction that (to use light as an
example) the same light is spread over a greater surface the
farther it is removed from the centre, and in proportion to the
square of the distance. We then see for gravitation the same
force expand, so to speak, like a fluid over spherical surfaces of
increasing diameter, which furnishes an apparently satisfactory
spatial image. One can well ask with Lotze what produces the
continual flux of this pseudo-fluid and what happens to it if it
encounters nothing upon its path.(76) One can be equally
astonished that this flux does not rather repel the bodies which


82 IDENTITY AND REALITY


it is supposed to attract. But what is most essential to note is
that the spatial image itself is only a decoy and that the concept
of action at a distance is certainly in reality anti-spatial.

We know matter only by its effects. This is true by definition.
The conception of a material body which would be really and
absolutely inert, neither acting upon our senses nor upon other
bodies and not reacted to by them, is, indeed, contradictory ;
such a material body could not exist, existing and acting in
this case being terms strictly synonymous. “‘Its being,” says
Schopenhauer, in speaking of matter, ‘‘is its action; one could
not conceive of a manner of being other than that.’’(77) It
follows that a material body which is supposed to exercise a
simultaneous action in entire space exists simultaneously,
strictly speaking, in the entire universe. This is what one
clearly sees in the purely dynamical theory: the atom of
Boscovich is anywhere rather than in its “‘centre.”’ In order to
reply to this objection, the dynamicists have made every
effort to establish the necessity for the assumption that a
material body acts where it is not. According to Kant, “‘every-
thing in space reacts upon something else only in a place where
the acting body ts not. For if it had to react in the place where
it is itself, the thing upon which it reacts would not then be
outside of itself. Even if the earth and the moon were to touch
each other the point of contact would still be a place in which
there would be neither earth nor moon.’’(78) In reasoning in
this way one neglects completely the continuity of space. This
is clearly seen if time is substituted for space. The hypothesis
of action at a distance consists in supposing that one phenome-
non is the condition of another and that nothing happens in
the intermediary space. Assuredly it will be affirmed that that
intermediary space is traversed by force. But the two phenomena
being simultaneous, force does not cross space; it leaps over it,

if we dare to express it thus. Can we admit something analogous
for time? Can one phenomenon be the cause of another
through time without anything being modified during the
intermediary moments? Apparently not. Doubtless we often
express ourselves as if an event were the consequence of a
distant past. But that is only a manner of speaking. We know
very well that there must have been modifications during the
intervening epochs, although they have escaped notice. We


MECHANISM 83


are not attempting here to decide the question whether time
and space are or are not really continuous. What is certain is
that in order to picture to ourselves action we are forced to
suppose them such.(79) It is thus natural to postulate that each
part of space is influenced only by the active principle of the
part immediately contiguous to it, just as every moment is
conditioned by the preceding moment and in turn conditions
the moment immediately posterior. So if this restriction is
abandoned in regard to space, if a body can really act, produce
a modification in a part of space without modifying anything
in the intermediary spaces, why can it not equally well appear
in a far distant place without passing through the spaces which
separate the two positions? Why, since it acts simultancously
everywhere, could it not appear simultaneously in two
different places?(80) Ideas of this kind, however extravagant
they appear, were formulated as early as the eighteenth
century by Prémontval; one can see in the curious little
work in which they are contained (81) that they are very
directly connected with the concept of action at a distance.
It is significant in this connection that a recent author, in a
book of genuine interest,(82) has connected the action of
gravitation with the hypothesis of the fourth dimension. It is
upon this same assumption that the idealists base those ideas
whose relationship with Prémontval’s cannot be denied. It is
well known that Zoellner (83) made use of them for an analo-
gous purpose. As a matter of fact, action at a distance is
destructive of the idea of space. It goes on, as a celebrated
philosopher, himself a partisan of action at a distance, has
picturesquely said, ‘behind the back of space.’(84) The
conception is anti-spatial, or at least non-spatial.

The resistance of physicists is therefore justified. Science
has always unwillingly accepted action at a distance, and only
very reluctantly does it preserve it. This will always be necessary
as long as it remains understood that the motions of celestial
bodies cannot be explained without the assumption of an
instantaneous action of gravitation. But as soon as that hypo-
thesis is no longer absolutely indispensable, as soon as one can
attribute a finite velocity to gravitational action, it is quite
certain that this idea will disappear for ever, for no one has
ever admitted, nor ever probably will admit, a leap in time


84 IDENTITY AND REALITY


analogous to the leap in space, which the notion of action at
a distance postulates. This, moreover, has happened for the
forces at a distance which have successively been reduced to
a step by step action as soon as it was ascertained that their
propagation required time. Hertz in his famous work on the
Relation of Light to Electricity (85) had already brought out this
evolution and foretold that gravitation would undergo it. It
seems that this prophecy is about to be accomplished, especially
by the work of Lorentz, the illustrious Dutch physicist, of
Wien, and of still others. Laplace, we have seen, believed that
there should be assigned to gravitation a prodigious velocity of
propagation, as a lower limit. This was, Wien tells us, an error
of principle. In order that calculations of this kind could be
valid, one would have to be able to increase or diminish the
force of the gravitational attraction of a body and to observe
the disturbances to which these modifications would give rise.
But we are completely powerless to modify in any way the
gravitation of a body; it remains absolutely constant, therefore
there can only be a question of changes initiated by the motion
of celestial bodies. Now these changes are, as Lorentz points
out, of very slight importance: they are of the second order
of magnitude. Henceforth nothing precludes the acceptance
for gravitation of a finite speed of propagation identical, for
example, with that of electricity and of light.(86) This theory
does not seem yet to be generally accepted by physicists,
but it has numerous partisans amongst them; the names we
have just cited are enough to show to what a point it merits
attention. If it succeeds in establishing itself, it is clear that the
concept of action at a distance will be definitely eliminated, for
in the whole domain of science there will be no longer a single
fact imposed upon us by that “extravagance,” to use Lord
Kelvin’s words. (87)

To sum up in a few words the results of this rapid examina-
tion, mechanical theories show themselves to be at once very
complicated and irremediably contradictory. Does this con-
clusion not seem to support those who would cither exclude
them completely from science or keep them only as a help to the
memory?

Yet if one tries to take in at a glance the physical theories of
all the centuries, one must be struck with the common character


MECHANISM 85


of the elements composing them. Sometimes, especially in
scientific books of a popular nature, atomism is represented as
the last word of science, being a result at which science has
arrived with great difficulty. Since the great antiquity of
atomic systems can scarcely be denied, some have tried to
make a distinction between the ancient and the modern
systems, declaring that the first were arbitrary, speculative
conceptions, whereas the second are genuine discoveries
of science. Lange in his History of Materialism has already
refuted this allegation of Biichner.(88) As a matter of fact, the
likeness between the two is complete.

However fragmentary our knowledge about the begin-
nings of human knowledge, it permits us to ascertain that
atomism under one form or another appears at the very
dawn of science. In India atomism is complete from the
twelfth century B.c.; it was, as its historian Mabilleau states,
“not only the first, but the most constant and almost the
only form of the philosophy of nature.’’(89) We find two
principal systems of atomistic philosophy; the first chrono-
logically, that of Kanada, resembles the ideas of Anaxagoras in
the sense that he admits of atoms qualitatively different from
one another. The atoms of Kanada are inextended; they are
endowed with a kind of faculty or power (which is singularly
like the antitypy of Leibniz, if we may judge from the frag-
ments of the text which we find in Mabilleau’s book), and also
with gravity, the cause of their fall. It goes without saying
(for we have here the essential foundation of every mechanical
theory) that every material fact reduces itself to local displace-
ment.(g0) The Jainas, contrary to Kanada, do not recognize
different elements from a qualitative point of view, but homo-
geneous atoms, like those of Leucippus and Democritus.(91)
It is their system especially which seems to have prevailed
later with the Hindoos. In Greece atomism is generally dated
from the time of Leucippus. We know but little of the relation
between Leucippus and Democritus,(g2) nor do we exactly
know the contribution of each to the system more commonly
presented under the name of the second but belonging cer-
tainly in great part to the first, anterior in date. All that
one can say about this system, and assuredly the least one
can affirm, is that it is absolutely complete. As it came from


86 IDENTITY AND REALITY


the hands of the Greeks of the fifth century B.c., so we see
it reappear almost without change or with insignificant addi-
tions in the writings of philosophers and scientists until the
end of the nineteenth century—that is to say, until the appear-
ance of the electrical theories of matter. To summarize this
system it is sufficient to cite some of the admirable but, alas,
very rare fragments which have come down to us from
Democritus. ““There are two kinds of knowledge: real know-
ledge and obscure knowledge. To obscure knowledge belong all
things of sight, sound, odour, taste, and touch; real knowledge
is distinct from this.” “Sweet and bitter, heat and cold, and
colour are only opinions; there is nothing true but atoms and
the void.” ‘“‘We perceive nothing true in what concerns the
thing itself, unless it is that which is modified from the point
of view of the position of the body and the things which fall
upon or resist us.’’(93) The atomism of Epicurus, which differs

little from that of Democritus (we are not even very sure of the

nature of these differences), (94) was one of the dominating
philosophies of antiquity and produced in the Latin world that

imperishable masterpiece, the De rerum natura of Lucretius.

The works of Hero of Alexandria and of Vitruvius (95)

show that the physicists were accustomed to take atomic con-

ceptions as a foundation, but sometimes fused them with

conceptions borrowed from philosophers who made ‘“‘quality”’

predominant. Even in medicine a corpuscular theory was very

common, as we see from the book of Caelius Aurelianus, (96)

which had great authority. The early Christians willingly quoted

from Lucretius; even after the definite victory of Christianity,

and while combating the doctrines of Epicurus, Saint Ambrose

and Saint Hieronymus preserved his physics.(97) In the
eighth century Rabanus Maurus voiced opinions distinctly
atomistic which he seems to have borrowed from Lucretius. (98)

About this same time a school of Jewish atomists sprang up;

we know of it from the refutations of Saadia,(g9) a philosopher

of the eleventh century. The movement is continued in the
Orient by the Arabian school of Motekallim or Motckallemin;
and Maimonides, who rejected their opinions, has left us a
summary which leaves no doubt as to the real character of
their doctrines. “They maintained that the entire universe—
that is, each of the bodies which it encloses—is composed of


MECHANISM 87


very little particles which because of their subtility cannot be
divided. Each one of these particles is absolutely without
quantity, but when they are reunited this whole has quantity
and is then a body. All of these particles are similar and equal
to one another, and there is between them no kind of difference.
It is impossible, they say, for any body to exist which is not
composed of like particles by juxtaposition, so that for them
birth is reunion and destruction is separation.”’(100)

In the West, after Rabanus Maurus, atomism suffered an
eclipse because of the domination of peripatetic theories. And
yet we know from recent investigations that the oblivion was
less complete than we had been led to suppose until now.
There was, it seems, almost constantly a kind of undercurrent
distinctly atomistic, of whose protagonists we know only little,
but whose power we can appreciate somewhat indirectly by
the refutations of great scholastics, such as Roger Bacon,
Duns Scotus, Occam, Albert of Saxony. Beginning with the
first part of the fourteenth century, we can cite the following
names : Gerard Odon and Robert Holkot, whose atomism seems
to have been especially geometrical; Egidius de Colonna,
who admits, on the contrary, the infinite divisibility of geome-
trical magnitude, but denies it of material magnitude, so that,
if one were to divide a minimum volume of water, one would
transform it into a different substance;(101) and finally
Nicholas of Autricuria, or Ultricuria, (102) who is only known
because he was forced in 1348 at Paris publicly to renounce
certain doctrines formerly professed by him, amongst which
was found the thesis that all phenomena of nature are reducible
to motions of union and separation of atoms. But the broken
chain was definitely resumed at the Renaissance. Prepared
by Giordano Bruno, Fernel, Gorlaeus, Sennert, Basso,
Maquedus, the atomism of Democritus and of Epicurus was
rigorously formulated by Gassendi. In the meantime Galileo
and Descartes had transformed physics, definitely putting
aside the Aristolelian conceptions. Both were mechanists, and
Descartes especially, with incomparable brilliancy and authority,
proclaimed that every phenomenon must be reduced in the
last analysis to a mechanical change. It is useless to follow
this analysis farther. Until the end of the nineteenth century
the principles of Descartes have dominated science in the


88 IDENTITY AND REALITY


most absolute fashion. No scientist of renown can be cited
who has consciously set them aside.

Doubtless in our rapid survey we have only mentioned the
outlines of the theory, thus neglecting the less important
details. The atomism of the Motekallemin, resolving space into
points and time into indivisible instants, necessitating incessant
acts of creation by God, approaches the conceptions of the
Hindoos but differs distinctly from the corpuscular atomism
of Democritus. Neither Galileo nor Descartes are atomists
in the strict sense of the term,(103) and amongst later physicists,
many, even those who assert that they adhere to this doctrine,
formulate its principles in a very different way, often with
inexactness, and, in practice, frequently straying from it. Yet
it is certain that one can unite all the conceptions under the
term mechanical and that their common characteristics are of
considerable importance.(104) On the whole, it does not seem
too bold to affirm that the mechanical hypotheses had their
birth with science and have formed one body with it during all
the epochs in which it has really advanced; likewise the
period when science ignored these hypotheses was an epoch
of very slow progress.(105) Does this coincidence not astonish
us? Stallo himself, who is a determined adversary of mechanism,
considering it as prejudicial to the progress of science, as a
vestige of the realism of the Middle Ages (106) (a curious
opinion, as can be seen from the above exposition), 1s neverthe-
less forced to agree that the atomic theory has “‘held its ground
more persistently than any other tenet of science or philo-
sophy.””(107)

The historians of atomism have generally supposed an afhilia-
tion between these ideas. That is not at all impossible. How-
ever different the atomism of Leucippus and Democritus from
that of Kanada and of the Jainas, it may well be that some
germs of the Oriental ideas penetrated Hellenic philosophy
in the beginning.(108) The Jews were certainly inspired by
the Greeks. The Motekallemin may have been influenced by
Hindoo conceptions, by Jewish writings, and also by atomic
theories as they were expounded by certain medical books,
such as that of Caelius Aurelianus. Finally, the modern
renaissance of mechanical theories is certainly due to the
renewal of classical studies. Yet this perennial character of


MECHANISM 8g


mechanical conceptions is somewhat strange. Must it not be
true that the ground where they flourished was of a particularly
favourable nature, since germs often minute soon led to such
prodigious results?

Finally, during the last few years we are witnessing an
impressive sight. The rapid strides of science seem to shake its
most solid foundations. And yet in this universal upheaval
certain conceptions, allied to mechanical or atomic theories,
give proof of a singular stability. Impartial observers are
struck by it. Thus Henri Poincaré declares that the greater
part of Fresnel’s conclusions, although they are founded upon
a molecular hypothesis, remain without change when one
adopts the electro-magnetic theory of light.(109) Etard,
while expressing doubts about the existence of atoms and
molecules, shows that all of the most recent investigations
may without difficulty be fitted into S. Arrhenius’s theory
of tons, which itself is but a form of the kinetic theory, so
that in the end general chemistry ‘“‘fuses with the atomic
theory taken in its widest sense.”’(110) Sir E. Rutherford,
summing up the conceptions which dominate the science
of to-day, to the development of which he has contributed
so much, declares that they confirm “‘the old theory of
the discontinuous or atomic structure of matter.’’(111)
Larmor believes that the development of electrical theories
tends constantly toward atomism,(112) whereas during the
greater part of the nineteenth century the theories prevailing
in that phase of science appear to be founded on very different
assumptions.(113) J. Perrin, too, declares that the atomic
hypothesis, which he qualifies as happy, “‘more and more, and
in spite of all the astonishment which one may feel, seems well to
merit the name of exact.’’(114) Lucien Poincaré, while examin-
ing the progress of modern physics, notes with surprise that
kinetic hypotheses are about to gain new conquests. “‘Is the
history of physics, like the history of peoples, but an eternal
recommencement, and must we periodically come back to the
conceptions which philosophers have imagined since antiquity?
The progress of thermo-dynamics gave birth to other hopes;
it alone seemed able to guide us into the domain of physics,
while laying emphasis only on the reasonings and the principles
formed by the natural generalization of certain experimental


90 _ IDENTITY AND REALITY


laws. Must we always have recourse to imagery, to mechanical
interpretations, doubtlessly resembling nature but little?’’(115)
This physicist, we see, shows no enthusiasm for the theories in
question, which gives additional value to his words.

What must be particularly noted in this recent phase of the
history of atomism is that it is not a question of a simple
renaissance, but of a true and an enormous progress. This
progress has worked in two directions. On the one hand,
atomism, it seems, has definitely conquered the immense
domain of electrical phenomena (this aspect of the theory
interests us particularly, and we shall have opportunity of
returning to it), but, on the other hand, it has become definite
to an extent that a generation ago would doubtless have seemed
unbelievable, even to the most determined partisan of these
conceptions. Indeed, even quite recently, when one spoke of
the size or the weight of molecules, it was well understood
that the figures indicated could have only a relative value : that,
for instance, the molecule of water must weigh eighteen times
more than an atom of hydrogen, but that all speculation on
the absolute value of this weight was out of the question. Now
it is no longer so. By methods of an extreme ingenuity physicists
have arrived at determining definitely the weight in question.
This seems so astonishing that at first sight one is almost
tempted to ask whether these investigators have not been
victims of an illusion in this case, if they have not succumbed
to an unconscious trick of their own minds. But to be entirely
free from this doubt it is enough to look at a table summing
up the results reached in this domain of ideas, such, for example,
as the one presented by Perrin.(116) Indeed, the data obtained
in ways that were different and entirely independent of one
another are all of the same order of magnitude and the more
often (this is the case with six of the fifteen results cited by
Perrin, and they are those which proceed from the surest
methods) converge in the most astonishing way toward one
single and identical numerical datum: 7 x 10” for the number
of molecules contained in a gramme-molecule (for instance, in
2 grammes of hydrogen).

Let us notice also that this evolution did not take place with
constant progression, but by fits and starts, a sort of flux and
reflux. During a part of the nineteenth century atomic theories


MECHANISM g!


were somewhat discarded, discredited at least in appearance.
Ostwald proclaimed the ‘defeat of atomism.”(117) Duhem
wished to direct science toward a return to peripateticism.
It is certain that at the present moment these two thinkers,
in spite of their great authority, are no longer followed as
regards this question, save by an extremely small part of
scientific thought; scientific thought on the whole has mani-
fested, as we have just said, a very strong leaning toward
atomistic doctrines.

Cournot had already foreseen that the success of mechanical
theories must have profound causes. ‘No ideas of antiquity,”’
he said, “have had a greater or even a like fortune. The inventors
of the atomistic doctrine must have fallen immediately upon
either the very key to natural phenomena or upon a conception
inevitably suggested to the human mind.”’{118)

Cournot was right, and we can now pursuc the question more
closely than has been done. Let us establish in the first place
this essential point: kinetic theories are explicative. Our mind
often imperatively demands them, and is always satisfied when
it recognizes them as valid or as having even a chance of
appearing as such. We have already seen that this clearly
follows from the experience of scientists. But, moreover, some
of these latter have expressly affirmed it. Leibniz, in a passage
frequently cited, states rather ironically this peculiar character
of atomic theories.(119) But his 1rony was directed only toward
the concept of the atom. As to the principle according to which
every phenomenon must be reduced to a mechanism, Leibniz,
we have seen, proclaimed it as firmly as Descartes, and he
noted with perfect clearness that this reduction appeared
to be necessary in order to render phenomena intelligible. His
great contemporary, Huygens, after having defined the “true
Philosophy” as being that “in which one conceives of the
cause of all natural effects in terms of mechanical reasons,”
adds: ‘‘This must be done, in my opinion, or else all hope
of ever understanding anything about Physics must be
renounced.”’(120) Modern scientists have been, if possible,
still more explicit. E. Du Bois-Reymond, in a passage which
recalls strangely that of Huygens, defines science as “‘the
action by which we reduce modifications in the physical
universe to the mechanics of atoms,” and continues: “It is a


92 IDENTITY AND REALITY


psychological fact that where this reduction is successful our
need of causality is satisfied for the moment.”(121) Lord
Kelvin writes: ‘‘It seems to me that the test of ‘Do we or not
understand a particular subject in physics?’ is ‘Can we make a
mechanical model of it??’’(122) In another place he expresses
himself in these terms: ‘I never satisfy myself until I can make
a mechanical model of a thing. If I can make a mechanical
model, I can understand it. As long as I cannot make a mechan-
ical model all the way through, I cannot understand it.”’(123)
Maxwell begins by declaring that “‘when a certain phenomenon
is susceptible of being described as an example of a general
principle applicable to other phenomena, this phenomenon may
be said to be explained,” which seems to conform to the opinion
of Comte and Mach. But he also adds: ‘‘On the other hand,
when a physical phenomenon can be completely described as a
change in the configuration and motion of a material system,
the dynamical explanation of this phenomenon is said to be
complete. We cannot conceive any further explanation to be
either necessary, desirable, or possible.’’(124) For Maxwell, we
see, the explanation by law is not as complete as that by
mechanics. It is this latter alone which seems ultimate.

If the analysis, which we have made concerning the principle
of causality, 1s correct, if this principle consists essentially in the
application to the object in time of a postulate which, in
science limited to lawfulness, is only applicable to the object in
space, we ought here to see the proof of it; atomic or mechanical!
theories, at least as far as their essential and durable traits are
concerned, must be capable of being reduced to this principle.
It is easy to verify the truth of this.

The external world, nature, appears to us as infinitely
changing, becoming incessantly modified in time. Yet the
principle of causality postulates the contrary: we must needs
understand, and yet we cannot do so except by supposing
identity in time. It follows that change is only apparent; it
must necessarily disclose an identity which alone is real. Yet
there seems to be a contradiction there. How can I conceive
as identical that which 1 perceive to be different? There does

exist, however, a way, a single means, of conciliating to a
certain extent what appears at first sight to be irreconcilable.
I can suppose that the elements of things have remained the


MECHANISM 93


same, but that their arrangement has altered; consequently
with the same elements I can create different manifolds just as
with the aid of the same letters one can compose a tragedy or a
comedy (the metaphor is Aristotle’s).(125) I thus can conceive
that “the production and the destruction of things are only
the union and the dissolution of their elements” ; it is Leucippus
himself who in these terms stated the foundation of his system ;
but before him Anaxagoras and Empedocles had said
analogous things.(126)

The possibility of this conciliation depends evidently upon the
particular nature of our concept of displacement. Displacement
is and 1s not a change. When a body is displaced it undergoes a
modification, and yet it appears to me to be identical to itself.
That comes, we have seen, from the very essence of our concept
of space, such as we find it at bottom, not only in physical
sciences, even when reduced solely to their essentially lawful
nature, but also in geometry.

Displacement, then, appears to me as the only intelligible
change. If I wish to explain modifications—that 1s, to reduce
them to identity—lI shall be forced to have recourse to it. Here is
a body, which a moment ago gave me a sensation of cold and
which, brought close to another body, reduced its volume.
Now it burns me if I touch it, and produces, on the contrary,
an increase of the volume of contiguous bodies. This is
because, (1) cither to the substance of this body was added
another invisible one, but one which existed before, or else
(2) the arrangement or the movement of parts of the body
itself has changed. These two explanations have dominated
science by turns. The first has given birth to the hypothesis
of fluids, whereas the second is the foundation of mechanical
theories, but they both come from the same principle.

Let us sect aside, for a moment, the first alternative; we shall
come back to it later on. Our deduction being quite general,
what we have established for the thermal phenomenon applies
to any phenomenon whatsoever. We shall then necessarily
reduce all changes of bodies to arrangements, to modifications
in space, to displacement of parts.

By the aid of reasoning I have inferred the existence of those
parts whose displacement will be the essential phenomenon of
reality, the only real phenomenon; but it goes without saying


94 IDENTITY AND REALITY


that I cannot directly perceive them ; they must, then, be very
small. These parts or particles always remain self-identical,
eternal, unchanging; this is also a direct consequence of the
fundamental postulate. And since they must be displaced
without undergoing any modification, and since this manner of
displacement is, in the material world, the privilege of solid
bodies, the particles will necessarily be unmodifiable ultra-
solids, consequently unable to break or be divided mechanically
—that is, they must be atoms.

We are now at the end of our deduction; later on we shall
show that another distinctive feature of atomic theories, the
unity of matter, which they presuppose, can be explained in an
analogous manner. But our exposition is sufficient to establish
what is the true foundation of the “‘psychological fact” of
which E. Du Bois-Reymond speaks: the explanatory force of
the theories resides essentially in the application of the postulate
of identity in time. It is also clearly seen that it is in virtue
of this postulate that physical theories are dominated by the
concept of discrete particles. It is this which differentiates
them from mathematical conceptions, where the infinitely
small, the indivisible, appears only momentarily to lose itself
again in the continuum.(127) This difference has its source in
the fact that in pure mathematics we are not preoccupied
with change in time.(128) But in physical sciences, where there
is question of this latter, since change in time must be explained
and since the identity of the whole cannot be postulated, we are
forced to fall back upon the parts, and these, required to
be unchanging, can only be conceived as discrete individuals,
limited in space.

Evidently the mental process which we have just traced must
be mainly an unconscious process. Consequently it may seem
rather vain a@ priori to expect to discover in the individual
scientist, creator or follower of a mechanical theory, the motives
actuating him, since those motives, not having come directly to
his knowledge, would only have been revealed to him if he
had been capable of applying himself to an introspective
analysis of his thought—an arduous task, and one for which the
scientist is in no way especially qualified.(129) But we have
already shown that there are cases where the quest for the
genesis of collective thought may in a certain measure correct


MECHANISM 95


the limitations presented by individual thought; the question
now occupying our attention is, we believe, capable of fur-
nishing a particularly striking example of the efficiency of
this method. It so happens that, at least once in history,
atomism arose under known conditions—conditions noted
with admirable precision by an observer of a truly unique
character—namely Aristotle—and the evolution which he
has retraced is that from which was born the doctrine of
Leucippus and Democritus. The dominant feature of this
evolution upon which Aristotle lays the most emphasis is that
the atomic conception sprang from the notion of the Eleatics,
who assumed that being was one, permanent, and immovable.
It was a theory consistent with itself but in disagreement
with the facts attested by the senses, which show us the produc-
tion and the destruction, the motion and the plurality of beings.
To save the reality of these phenomena, Leucippus supposes,
contrary to the Eleatics, that being is not one but composed
of an infinite number of elements, invisible because of their
great tenuity. In a word, as Zeller has summed it up, in
drawing attention to the great importance of this exposition
of Aristotle, “‘the only difference that there is under all con-
ditions between the atomic theory of being and that of the
Eleatics is that the former transfers to the particular multiple
substance what Parmenides had said of the universal substance
or of the whole of the world.’’(130) It would seem unnecessarv
to set forth to what extent the genesis of the atomic theory
retraced by Aristotle confirms the deduction attempted by us.

The fact that the postulate of identity in time is an integral
part of our reason explains the spontaneity with which
these theories arise and the ease with which they develop.
We understand, likewise, why there is in science not one
atomic doctrine, but a multiplicity of doctrines, which, though
having certain fundamental and common features, differ
widely, and even often contradict one another. This is because
these are the conceptions created more or less independently
under the influence of one and the same tendency, through
the consideration of a determined group of phenomena; they
are not, as one might believe, derivations of a single theory.
From this arises also the illusion, so frequent amongst scientists
and even amongst a few philosophers, who pretend to dis-


96 IDENTITY AND REALITY


tinguish the atomic conception peculiar to one part of science
as “experimental truth” from the general atomic theory
qualified as ‘‘hypothetical’’(131)—nay, even all of the modern
atomic theories from those of the ancients ;(132) whereas it is
casy to see that really all these conceptions hold together,
that there is amongst them a genuine sameness of foundation.
This sameness continues in spite of what appears at first sight
to be a fundamental diversity of the starting-point. What
differs more from the corpuscle of Lucretius, Gassendi, and
Boyle than the point-atom of Boscovich or the electron of
contemporary theories? And yct we feel instinctively that the
elements common to these conceptions are far more important
than their distinctive traits. They are ‘“‘atomic theories”:
we may on the whole think of them as being such without
specifying the nature of the atom—in fact, physicists have
frequently built up atomic theories leaving this question
undecided.

Having firmly adhered to a particular form of the atomic
theory, scientists and philosophers have taken great pains to
find the motive for what appeared to them as its essential
foundation. They tried to establish that their conception of the
atom was logical and (what was infinitely easier) that the oppo-
site conception harboured irretricvable contradictions. (133)
At other times they have sought to disengage the foundations
of the theory by a psychological analysis of the sensory elements
which contribute to create the concepts forming the ultimate
terms of the reduction, such as those of the atom or of force. (134)
It is certain that we try to make our theories as little illogical
as possible. It cannot be denied, on the other hand, that the
concept of the corpuscular atom comes from our tactile sensa-
tion, just as that of the dynamic atom issues from the sensation of
effort. We shall try to specify in a later chapter the manner in
which these conceptions were introduced into science. But it
clearly appears that neither the logical nor the psychological
factor has nearly as much authority as is attributed to them.
We repeat: the explanatory force of the theories comes solely
from the principle of identity in time which these theories
attempt to make predominant, in other words, from the principle
which accounts for the persistence in time of something, the
inherent nature of the thing which persists being quite secondary.


MECHANISM 97


The exposition of atomic theories in conformity with a logical
system can be reduced to the following reasoning. The
phenomena which we perceive appear inexplicable to us with
the exception of one alone: the impact of two bodies. This
latter is entirely clear and intelligible; if we suppose it funda-
mental, if we succeed in reducing the others to it, all will be
explained. Now we have seen that this reasoning is defective at
the very outset. No one has ever understood either the impact
of two bodies or action at a distance, and no one ever will.
Shall we say, following the psychological system, that we had
the illusion of understanding? Doubtless. But how could this
illusion, so easy to recognize, which, moreover, has been so
clearly exposed by philosophers, come into existence? How
does it persist with such vigour? How can it serve as a basis
for our conception of science? And how does it happen that this
conception satisfies us to such a degree? Reverse the terms and
the enigma is explained. It is not because we understand the
corpuscle that we choose it as the starting-point. What we
postulate is the persistence of something. Among the things
whose persistence we can postulate, the least incomprehensible,
the nearest to our immediate sensation, or rather to the common
sense which creates the external world, is the material corpuscle ;
it is from this that we start out. It is incomprehensible at
bottom, you say? I agree with you, but can you offer a more
solid starting-point? If not, we shall keep to this one, for we
must at any price have something which persists in time, and,
neglecting entirely what it contains that is at bottom inexplicable
and contradictory, we shall try to explain with its aid the
sensible world. It is only in case this last operation fails that
we shall think of modifying our starting-point; then we shall
substitute for the corpuscle a centre of force, or the atom
which is at the same time corpuscle and a centre of force—con-
cepts still less comprehensible than the corpuscle itself but
whose contradictions will embarrass us no more than that of
the corpuscle.

If a more direct proof were necessary that such indeed is
the unconscious logical process by which atomic theories are
constituted, this proof would be furnished us by the aggregate
of the conceptions designated as “electric” or “electronic” theory
of matter, and these are more especially associated with the


98 IDENTITY AND REALITY


illustrious name of J. J. Thomson. It can be affirmed without
exaggeration that at the present time this theory is triumphing,
that it dominates entirely all of the physical sciences; perhaps
in the history of science no general theory has so rapidly
obtained such sway. Let us hasten to recognize that the
theory by its essential merits explains and fully justifies this
enthusiasm. It 1s marvellously general, penetrating to the very
depths of phenomena, not only of the science of electricity
and of optics (indissolubly interdependent since the ume of
Maxwell and Hertz), but of all other branches of physics and
of chemistry. It seems definitely to vindicate the old principle
of the unity of matter which was the “secret postulate’’ of the
atomic theory, though chemists who pretended to adhere to this
theory constantly denied it.(135) It explains also without effort
those mysterious phenomena of radio-active bodies which
seemed at first to threaten the most fundamental conceptions
of science. Finally, though so general and so abstract, since it
resolves what is the very heart of our sensible representation
—namely maiter—into something which no longer is anything
material, this theory is at the same time astonishingly concrete.
Indeed, this last element, this component of the atom, whose
size in relation to the latter is of about the same order as that
of a planet in relation to the whole of the solar system, this
mysterious electron is made palpable, so to speak, by this
theory. Thanks to the observation of Wilson, we can surprise it
at the instant when it serves as a nucleus round which a drop of
water is condensed. We also know that in combining the results
of this experiment with the formula of Sir George Stokes, relat-
ing the speed with which small spheres fall in the air to the size
of these spheres, J. J. Thomson has succeeded in measuring this .
minimum charge of electricity which we call an electron, and
has found it to be identical in chemically different gases.(136)

We have indicated some of the characteristic data of the
theory. Let us, however, retrace the principal features, following
especially the masterly exposition of J. J. Thomson.

The simplest being which science has envisaged to this day,

the chemical atom, is in this new theory conceived as a structure


of great complexity. Prout believed that the atoms of all
chemical elements were composed of atoms of hydrogen, and
J. B. Dumas envisaged the possibility of reconstituting them


MECHANISM 99


with the help of half or quarter atoms of hydrogen; the new
theory presupposes a unit which about equals 1/1800 of an
atom of hydrogen. What we call an atom becomes a sort of
nebula without sun, formed of a great number of equal bodies
possessing inertia and subject to mutual electrical forces of
attraction and of repulsion of a very considerable magni-
tude.(137) Theorists treat this nebula according to the usual
procedure in astronomy, calculate the disturbances and apply
Kepler’s laws.(138) Chemical atoms differ from one another
in the number of these corpuscles (according to the terminology
of J. J. Thomson) of which they are composed, but especially
in the manner by which these latter are arranged; and one
can see how by an ingenious conception, in using the experi-
ments of Mayer on the spontaneous arrangement of little
magnets floating on water, J. J. Thomson is able to explain
the periodic properties of the elements as being due to the
analogous arrangements reappearing from time to time as
the atomic weight of the elements increases.(139)

But what is this fundamental element, this corpuscle, which
constitutes the chemical atom and consequently all that common
sense qualifies as matter? J. J. Thomson tells us that it is a
unit of electricity.(140) Thus matter becomes an electrical
phenomenon. Perhaps we shall see more closely the consequence
of this conception if we consider in this connection the concept
of mass. The atomic theory, taken in its most general sense, and
excepting, of course, the theories at once atomic and qualitative
(which we shall take up later on), deprives the atom of any
quality save the property of displacement and that of occasion-
ing motion either by contact or by action at a distance. The
second of these essential properties we call mass, and mass
thus becomes the essence of materiality in general.(141) In
explaining matter by electricity, the new theory must certainly
hold mass to be an electric phenomenon. This bold hypothesis
has been reached very gradually. It was recognized at first that
electricity could produce phenomena which made it appear
as if the mass of bodies was increased by it. The apparent
inertia which the body thus manifested on account of the
electric charge was called “‘electric inertia,” to distinguish it
from the inertia in the strict sense of the term which it possessed
in virtue of its mechanical mass, the action of the two inertias


100 IDENTITY AND REALITY


appearing, moreover, as entirely analogous: a charged body
which is displaced ‘‘simulates exactly the familiar mechanical
inertia of a lump of ordinary matter.”(142) Later on it was
seen that what in the first place had appeared as accessory
might very well be the principal; that the electric inertia of the
elementary particle, which was calculated from precise experi-
mental data, would easily outweigh the mechanical inertia.
Finally, it appeared that there was no longer any room, so
to speak, for this latter, that all the apparent inertia of the
element might be of electric origin. From that to declaring
that it was so was but a step, and this was cheerfully taken.
Thus by a process of evolution the mechanical element finally
is absorbed, so to speak, in the electric element; the mechanical
atom resolves itself into corpuscles which are pure electric
phenomena, having no mechanical mass—that is, nothing
material. This supposition evidently constitutes the essential
feature of the theory, and that is why Kaufmann’s experiment,
from which it follows, is really, according to H. Poincaré’s (143)
expression, the “knot” of the whole system.

In thus summing up the theory, we have perhaps represented
it as more absolute than it appears to many physicists; they
sometimes express themselves as if they supposed that behind
the electric phenomenon there must be a mechanical pheno-
menon—in other words, as if, after having reduced the appa-
rent mechanical phenomenon to an electric phenomenon, this
latter in its turn must be reduced to a still more fundamental
mechanical phenomenon, which evidently seems not very
logical. It is not only Lord Kelvin (who may be considered
as a belated partisan of the old order of things) who speaks
in this way; in the writings of the most pronounced founders
and adherents of the new doctrine a number of passages
where this conception is held can be easily found. But
that is due for the most part, it seems, to the novelty of
the theory; time must be granted it to gain strength, so that
even those who employ it may entirely assimilate this new
kind of thought and clearly perceive all its consequences.
Yet it can hardly be contested that the principles of the new
conceptions are defined with sufficient clearness; the electric
phenomenon is really conceived as serving as a term of
reduction for all the others. Hence it is very characteristic


MECHANISM 10!


that, as Langevin has remarked in the preface to the trans-
lation of Lodge’s Electrons,(144) the very ingenious mechanical
constructions, which filled a preceding work of the celebrated
physicist, should have entirely disappeared in the more
recent book.

Therefore the fundamental phenomenon is no longer the
impact of two corpuscles, nor is it the action of two centres of
mechanical force; it is that of two electrons. We know the laws
that govern this action; they are experimental laws. But who
can say that he understands how this action is exerted, that he
understands the mechanism of it? To do this it would be
necessary, as the synonym we have just employed indicates, to
furnish a mechanical theory of it; but this hope has been
denied us if the electric phenomenon is ultimate. Thus even
the illusion of understanding, which the corpuscular hypothesis
aroused in us, and to a less degree the dynamic hypothesis,
disappears; that which 1s laid down as a fundamental pheno-
menon in the electric hypothesis is an X, a phenomenon
clearly unexplained and which is even declared unexplainable
by the very fact that it is laid down as the last term of the
reduction. And it is to this X, to this unexplainable thing, that
the phenomena which we believed we understood must be
reduced. In seeing the action of two masses we had thought
that we grasped what was happening; without doubt it was
only an illusion, since, we have seen, neither impact nor
action at a distance is really explainable. But this time we
cannot even preserve the illusion, for the mechanical action
which we thought we saw is only an appearance ; the mechanical
mass does not exist; it is only a function of the electric mass.
It is also clear that the electron has nothing to do with our
sensation. We have no special organ sensitive to that form of
energy—which explains, moreover, why it has remained un-
known for such a long time—and we shall have to make long
detours if we wish to describe these phenomena in terms
borrowed from common sense.(145)

This is not the place to examine the merits of the electric
theory from the experimental point of view. It has already
rendered enormous service, and it is almost certain that it is
capable of rendering still greater service in the future. But the
fact that a theory of this kind has been able to spring up,


102 IDENTITY AND REALITY


that it has been immediately welcomed with extreme favour,
and that in such a short lapse of time it has dominated all
science, proves clearly that neither the logical nor the psycho-
logical bases ordinarily attributed to theories (p. 96), play a
really important rdle in their genesis. It is not from such bases
that hypotheses derive their explicative forces, but almost en-
tirely from the considerations of time and of space, above all
from persistence of identity in time. Something, as we have
said, must persist, the question of knowing what persists being
relatively of little importance. Our mind, conscious (uncon-
sciously conscious, if we may be permitted this apparent
paradox) of the difficulty involved in the causal explanation,
is, so to speak, resigned in advance and consents to accept
almost anything, even something unexplained and radically
unexplainable, if only the tendency to persistence in time is
satisfied.

At the same time one must admit that, since it is a question of
an eternal and invincible tendency of the human mind, nothing
will be gained by opposing to it artificial barriers. Science, even
if it wished, could not rid itself completely of kinctic theories,
expressing as they do a necessary form of our understanding.

Moreover, in supposing this elimination possible, what would
remain of science would not conform to any greater extent to
the programme laid down by Comte and by Mach. In what
precedes we have sometimes expressed ourselves as if there
really existed a part of science depending solely on the principle
of law; but this was pure fiction. Science, really, even in the
part appealing apparently purely to law, is profoundly impreg-
nated with the search for causality. This is what we propose
to attempt now to establish.

In science there exist several statements whose nature
seems somewhat ambiguous. They are designated sometimes
as principles, sometimes as laws; some attribute to them an
origin purely empirical, others consider them a priori in nature.


Sometimes scientists admit their embarrassment. “In the
opinion of many physicists,” says Hertz, “it will appear as
inconceivable that the most remote experience can ever
change anything in the immovable principles of mechanics;
and yet what comes from experience can always be rectified
by experience.”(146) It is especially because this ambiguity


MECHANISM 103


seemed to him to taint with obscurity the entire foundation of
mechanics that Kirchhoff felt that he must limit the task of
that science to the simple description of motion.(147) And
although, as we shall see later, more accurate opinions have been
expressed for a long time, they do not seem to have prevailed
till now.

One can include the statements of which we speak under
the common name of principles of constancy or of conserva-
tion, the conservation of velocity or the principle of inertia,
the conservation of mass, the conservation of energy. These
principles or laws are, as we see, among the most vast and the
most important generalizations to which the human mind has
attained to this day. We propose to show that in their genesis
the search for identity in time has played a preponderant
role, and that this origin influences the nature and the import
of these propositions.


NOTES


1. Ernst Hagcxer: The Riddle of the Universe, trans. Joseph McCabe.
New York, 1905.

a. Descartes: L'Homme, Oeuvres, ed. Adam et Tannery. Paris, 1909,
Vol. XI, p. 120.

3. Lespniz: Opera, ed. Erdmann, p. 777.

4. Craupe Bernarp: Legons sur les phénoménes de la vie. Paris, 1879,
Vol. I, p. gor.

5. Jacapis-CHuNperR Bose: De la généralite des phénoménes moléculatres,
etc. Congrés international de Physique. Paris, 1g00, Vol. ITI, p. 584 and ff.

6. SrépwHane Lenuc: Les lois de la biogenédse. Revue scientifique, February 24
and March 3, 1906.

7. Ep. v. Hartmann: Mechanismus und Vitalismus in der modernen Biologie.
Archiv fuer systematische Philosophie, UX, 1903.

8. Because of the theories following those of which we speak in the text,
and especially because of the theory of the atom of Sir Ernest Rutherford
and of Bohr and Sommerfeld, the gap which formerly existed between the
concepts of the elementary particle in the two sciences seems now about
to be bridged. But the reader will be convinced, in glancing at an exposition

by the present writer of these conceptions (La Déduction Relativiste, § 127
and ff.), of the difficulties which must be adjusted in this case.

g. Ostwarp: Lettre sur l'dnergétique. Revue générale des science
1895, p. 1071. ;

to. Pranck has quite recently declared that if we wish to be sincere
we ought to admit that a satisfactory mechanical theory of polyatomic


104 IDENTITY AND REALITY


gases has not yet been found, so that we still do not know what place in
the system of theoretical physics we ought to assign to intramolecular
phenomena. (Acht Vorlesungen ueber theoretische Physik. Leipzig, 1910, p. 66.)

11. H. Powncars#: Electricité et Optique. Paris, 1901, p. 111 and ff.

12, Oxrver Lopce: Modern Theories of Electricity.

13, In recent works (Ueber den gegenwaertigen Stand der Frage nach einer
mechanischen Erklaerung der elektrischen Erscheinungen, Berlin, 1906, and
Weitere Untersuchungen, etc., Annalen der Physik, 4th series, Vol. XXVI,
Leipzig, 1908) Hans Witte has endeavoured to examine methodically the
question of the possibility of a mechanical explanation of electrical pheno-
mena. He states that there exist in all nine classes of explanation. He shows
in the first place the impossibility of action at a distance (classes 1 and 2)
and of emission (class 3). Six classes remain which admit the existence of
an ether. The author establishes that if one supposes the ether continuous,
each one of these six systems ends in contradictions which make it inadmis-
sible. On the hypothesis of a discontinuous ether, a demonstration of this
kind is not possible, but one can show that all the systems of explanation
then become extrememly complicated. Physicists would only have the
right to be concerned about them if phenomena, entirely unsuspected at
the moment, were to come and force them to posit discontinuities in space
deprived of matter and of clectrons.

14. An exposition of these difficulties will be found in Stallo, lc.,
especially p. 119 and ff., and in Hannequin, /.c., pp. 178-224. Cf. also on
this subject Stewart and Tait, The Unseen Universe, L’univers invisible, Paris
1883, p. 194 and ff., and H. Bouasse, De la nature des explications, etc., Revue
de métaphysique, Vol. 11, 1894, p. 312 and ff. Men of science, moreover, have
themselves recognized the contradictory character of these assumptions.
Cf. Maxwell, On the Dynamical Evidence, etc. Scientific Papers, Cambridge,
1890, Vol. IT, p. 433 and ff., and On the Dynamical Theory, ib. p. 26. Hertz,
Ueber die Beziehungen zwischen Licht und Elektrizitaet. Gesammelte Werke.
Leipzig, 1896, Vol. I, p. 341. H. Poincaré, Electricité et Optique, Paris, 1890.
Vol. I, p. 88 and ff. La science et Vhypothése. Paris, s.d., p. 198 and ff.

15. Cf. later, p. 136.

16. Spm: Penséde et réalité, p. 416. Paris, F. Alcan.

17. HANNEQUIN, J.c., p. 227.

18. Id., pp. 217, 222, 223. The elasticity of two media (electricity and
light) indicates ‘‘a profound and probably irreducible difference.”’ This is a
“fundamental and probably definite opposition.”

19. /b., pp. 231, 237.

20. Lorp Ketvin: On the motion of an elastic solid, etc. International Con-
gress of Physics of sgoo, Vol. II, especially pp. 21-22.

21. Boyre: Works, London, 1772, Vol. III, p. 5. It is certainly to be
regretted, from the point of view of clearness of nomenclature, that the
creators of the electric theory of matter felt that they must employ the term
corpuscle to designate the ultimate element postulated by them. But we
may guess the motives, very likely unconscious, which guided them. This
element, being a purely electrical phenomenon, has no longer anything really
material and therefore is no longer attached by anything to our sensation.


MECHANISM 105


(Cf. pp. 99 and 307.) The name by which it is designated creates at
least a factitious bond where any other connection is lacking.

a2. Cf. Hertz: Gesammelte Werke, Vol. UI, p. 91.

23. This condition of perfect elasticity was clearly postulated by Leibniz,
Essay de Dynamique. Mathematische Schriflen, ed. Gerhardt, Halle, 1860,
Vol. VI, p. 228: “Now this elasticity of bodies is necessary in nature to
obtain the execution of the great and beautiful laws which its infinitely
wise author has proposed.’? One will find in Stallo, l.c., p. 42, a whole
collection of passages from Kroenig, Clausius, Clerk Maxwell, and Lord
Kelvin, showing that these creators of the theory of gases were also obliged
to insist upon the same postulate.

24. A theory of this kind was formulated amongst others by Lasswitz,
Geschichte der Atomistik. Hamburg, 1890, Vol. II, p. 368 and ff. Kozlowski
(<asady, p. 188) appears partisan of it, Kroman (Unsere Naturerkenntnis.
Copenhagen, 1883, p. 310 and ff.), and Hannequin (J.c., pp. 133-194)
have justly refuted it.

25. Newton: Opticks, 3rd ed. London, 1721, p. 373. “If two equal Bodies
meet directly in vacuo, they will by the laws of Motion stop where they
meet and lose all their Motion and remain in rest, unless they be clastick
and receive new Motion from their Spring. .. . If it be said that they
can lose no Motion but what they communicate to other Bodies, the
consequence is that in vacuo they can lose no Motion, but when they
meet they must go on and penetrate one another's Dimensions.”

26. Lersniz: Mathematische Schriften, ed. Gerhardt, Vol. VI, p. 228.
‘I shall add but one remark which is that many distinguish between hard
and soft bodies and the hard into elastic or not and establish thereon
different rules. But one can take bodies naturally as Hard-Elastic, without
denying, however, that the Elasticity must always come from a more
subtle and penctrating fluid the motion of which is disturbed by tension
or by change of the Elastic. And, since this fluid must itself be composed in
its turn of little solid elastic bodies, one clearly sees that this Duplication
of Solids and of Fluids continues to infinity.”

27. Cf. on this subject, Stallo, /.c., p. 46 and ff.

28. Cf. Arrrep Fourtite: Le mouvement idéaliste. Paris, F. Alcan, 1896,
p. 118; Le mouvement positiviste, Paris, F. Alcan, 1896, p. 136.

29. Borrzmann: Anfrage, die Hertz'sche Mechamk betreffend. Wiedernann's
Annalen, Suppl. 1889; id., Die Druckkracfte in der Hydrodynamik, ib., 1900;
id., Legons sur la thdorie des gaz, trans. Galotti, Vol. I, Paris, 1902, P- 3-
It is also known that the Mechanik of Hertz, a remarkable effort in its
ingenuity, has remained to this day almost sterile, in spite of the great
authority of its author’s name. On Lord Kelvin’s attempt, cf. his com-
munication in the Comptes rendus de [ Académie des sciences, Vol. CTX, p. 454.
Sur une constitution gyrostatique adynamique pour [ éther.

30. Of course, physicists and chemists have sometimes made precise
statements, rather in self-defence, so really difficult has this question seemed
to them. It is scarcely necessary to recall here the speculations on the
tetrahedron of carbon.

31. Newron: Opticks. Cf. the more complete quotation, later on, p. 424.


106 IDENTITY AND REALITY


92. Lasswitz: Cur Rechifertigung der kinetischen Alomistik. Vierteljahrsschrift
Suer wissenschafiliche Philosophie, Vol. TX, 1885, p. 151.

33. Descartes: Principes. CEucres, ed. Adam ct Tannery, Paris, 1904,
Vol. IX, and Part, Chap. LV, title: “That there is nothing which joins
the parts of hard bodies, unless (1! be the fact that) they are at rest with respect
to each other.”

34. Cf. Appendix I, p. 447 and ff.

35. Huycens: Cuvres completes, Vol. IX. The Hague, 1901, p. 429.

36. Maxwe ct: On Action at a Distance. Scientific Papers, Cambridge, 1890,
Vol. IT, p. 914.

37. Cf. Appendix I, p. 452 and ff.

38. Lacrancg’s opinions have been admirably summarized by Duhem:
L’évolution de la Mécamgue. Paris, 1903, pp. 439-45 and 71~72.

39. Concerning Coulomb’s influence, cf. Rosenberger, /.c., p. 971.

40. P. Rocerivs Josepnus Boscovicn: Philosophiae naturalis theoria redacia
ad unicam legem virium in natura existentium, Vienna, 1759. In the introduction
of this work there will be found a list of the previous studies of Boscovich
on this same matter. Priestley, who was a convinced adherent of dynamism,
affirms (Disquisitions relating to Matter and Spirit. London, 1777, p. 19)
that a theory analogous to that of Boscovich had been formulated simultane-
ously and independently by the astronomer John Michell.

41. Boscovicn, /.c., p. 6.

42. De Saint-VENANT: Mémotre sur la question de savoir s'il existe des masses
continues, etc. Paris 1844, p. g. Saint-Venant changed his opinion later
and tried to put aside completely the notion of force. Cf. Padé, Revue
générale des sciences, 1905, p. 765.

43. Boscovicn: De Viribus vivis dissertatio. Rome, 1745, p. 33-

44. Kant was hostile to the hypothesis of atoms (Vom Uebergange, ed.
Krause, Frankfort, 1888, pp. 96-97, 111-112, 164). Nevertheless, his
scientific explanations in the Met. Anfangsgriinde, etc., are entirely dynamical,
in the meaning which we give to this term. Later, in the Vom Ucbergange,
he leans a little more toward explanations by motion.

45. MaxweLc: Theory of Heat, London, 1875, p. 86.

46. Sem: l.c., p. 407.

47. Cf. p. 159.

48. Gatice0: Due massimi sistemi. Opere. Florence, 1842, Vol. 1, giorn.
1, p. 40. There is an excellent account of the concept of gravitation in
Duhem: La Théorie physique. Paris, 1906, p. 367 and ff.

49. Kerrier: Opera Omnia, ed. Frisch. Frankfort, 1870, Vol. IIT, p. 151.
In Kepler this appetency was mutual as in Newton: Gravitas est affectio


. 50. Descartes: ed. Adam et Tannery, Vol. IV, p. 396. Cf. Duhem,
Ly Pp. 19.

§1. On Larenrz, cf. Appendix I, p. 447 and ff.

52. Traitéd de la lumiére, ou sont expliqudes les Causes, etc. Avec un Discours
ds la Cause de la Pesantewr. By C. H. D. Z. Leyden, 1690, p. 93.

53- Newron : Opticks,grd ed. London, 1721. Question XXI, and especially
the 2nd Advertisement to this question. Cf. Appendix I, p. 455 and ff.


MECHANISM 107


54. D’ALEMBERT: Traitéd de dynamique, 2nd ed. Paris, 1758, p. 16.

55. Eutzr: Theoria motus. Rostock, 1765, p. 51.

. §6. Rosensencer: Dis moderne Entwicklung der elektrischen Prinzipien.
Leipzig, 1898, p. 43.

57. STALLO, l.c., p. 53 and ff.

58. Wrttiam THOMSON : Papers on Electrostatics. London, 1872, p. 318.

59. Cf. on Gauss, Larmor: Aether and Matter, Cambridge, 1900, p. 72,

and Rosenberger, Die Moderne Entwicklung, etc., pp. 7o—71.

60. Cf. Maxwet_, Scientific Papers. Cambridge, 1890, Vol. H, pp. 155
and ff., 11.

61. Jb., Vol. IT, p. 341.

62. Hertz: Gesammelte Werke, Vol. 11. Introduction by Helmholtz, p. 18.

63. J. J. THomson: Electricity and Matter, New York, 1904, p. 7.

64. Writings previous to Le Sage have been enumerated in Prevost’s
Preface to the Tratté de Physique of the latter, Paris, 1818, pp. 24-33. Certain
details on the later writings will be found in Maxwell, Encyclopedia Britannica,
goth ed., article Altraction, p. 74, and in Stallo, l.c., p. 53 and ff. On Euler's
attempt, cf. Opuscula, Berlin, 1745, p. 287.

65. Le Sace has shown the chief features of his theory in Lucréce
Newtonien. Mem. del’ Ac. de Berlin, 1872. The Traité de Physique, Paris, 1818,
edited by Prevost in conformity with the notes of Le Sage contains a more
detailed exposition.

66. Maxwe cc: Encyclopedia Britannica, gth ed., article Atom, p. 47.

67. MAxweLt: Encyclopedia Britannica, article Attraction, p. 65.

68. The first of these indications is found in the Curres, Paris, 1880,
Vol. IV, p. 3927; the second id., Vol. VI, p. 471.

69. Cf. p. 176 and ff.

70. SCHOPENHAUER: Dre Welt als Wille und Vorstellung, ed. Frauenstaedt,
Vol. I, p. 45 and ff.

71. Ep. v. Hartmann: Das Grundproblem der Erkenntnistheorie. Leipzig, s.d.,
pp. 16, 18, 20.

72. Comte: Politique positive, Vol. 1, p. 501.

73. Cf. Sratro: Le., p. 53 and fff.

74. Cf., for example, Spencer, First Principles, Vol. I, pp. 54, 231, 248,
251-254.

75. STALLO: 18., p. 53 and ff.

76. Lotrze: Grundzuege der Naturphilosophie, and ed. Leipzig, 1889, pp. 27—-
28. It is to be noted that Lotze esteems these reasons sufficient to declare
that the picture of an emanation in spherical surfaces must be abandoned:
“One should speak only of a linear relation between two elements.”
Kepler, in examining in what manner the action of the sun on the planets
must be modifiable with distance, comes to the conclusion that it would
be in inverse proportion to the distance (Opera omnia, ed. Frisch. Frankfort,
1870, Vol. VI, p. 349), proof that the picture of spherical emanation did
not arise in his mind. ;

97. the Seyn ist ihr Wirken. Kein Anderes Seyn ist auch nur zu denken moeglich.
Scuopannaver: Die Welt als Wille und Vorstellung, od. Frauenstaedt, Leipzig,
1877, Vol. I, p. ro.


108 IDENTITY AND REALITY


78. Kanr: Met. Anfangsgrinde, etc.

79. One may see the continuation of the passage from Six J. Tuomson
which we have already quoted, p. 80, that he feels very clearly that the
real source of the difficulty is to be found there, and it seems that Faraday
also felt this.

80. “And since many philosophers have judged that even in a natural
order, a body can act immediately at a distance upon several bodies all
removed from one another, they believe, rightly, that nothing can prevent
divine power from legislating that one body be present to several bodies
at once, there being no great distance from immediate action to presence,
and one, ee depending upon the other.”’ Leibniz: Théodicée, § 19,
ed. Erdmann, p

8:1. De apm Vues philosophiques. Berlin, 1761, pp. 212-237.

82. Maurice Boucner: Essat sur I"hyperespace. Paris, F. Alcan, 1903,
p. 158 and ff.

83. I. C. F. Zoertner: Principien einer elektrodynamischen Theorie der
Materie. Leipzig, 1876, p. 72 and ff.

84. Lotze: /.c., p. 26.

85. Hertz: Ueber die Bezichungen zwischen Licht und Elektrizitaet. Gesammelte
Werke, Vol. 1, p. 353.

86. W. Wan: Ueber die Moeglichkeit einer elektromagnetischen Begruendung
der Mechanik. Wiedemann’s Annalen, 1901, p. 501 and ff.

87. This point of view seems indeed to have since almost completely
triumphed amongst authoritative physicists. The conception of gravitation
which constitutes the basis of Einstein’s theory of generalized relativity
necessarily presupposes it.

88. F. Lance: History of Materialism, etc., trans. E. C. Thomas, 4th ed.
Boston, 1880, Vol. IT, p. 351.

89. Masitreau: Histoire de la philosophie atomistique. Paris, F. Alcan,
1896, p. 14.

90. 1b., pp. 28-33.

gt. 1b., p. 29. We have followed, in the text, Mabilleau’s indications
concerning Hindoo atomism. But it seems that more recent studies than
those used by the author of L’ Histoire de la philosophie atomtstique are of a
character to modify these data. Contemporary Hindoo philology seems less
and less given to moving back the date of sources. It states that we know
but little about India before the time of Alexander. Yet the most important
document we possess about the Jainas, dated from Asoka about 250 B.c.,
shows that they were already an important order (Gutrinot, Essai de

bibliographte Jaina. Paris, 1905, p. xxviii), and it is supposed that the funda-
mental features of the doctrine date from the time of the founder,
Mahavira, who must have lived at the beginning of the sixth century before
our era (ib., p. 5). But if, on the contrary, Hindoo atomism is considered
to be more recent in date than that of the Greeks, the relations between the
two will be simply reversed and the conclusions, whether an entire inde-
pendence of the two doctrines is supposed or whether an affiliation between
them is admitted, will remain as we developed them on page 88. Let us
state, also, that, according to certain texts (cf. especially H. Jaoont: Eine


MECHANISM 109


Jaina-Dogmatik, Zeitschrift der deutschen morgenlaendischen Gesellschaft, Bd. 60,

Heft a, ware 1906, p. 515 and ff.; Warnan, Les idées philosophiques et

religieuses des Jainas. Annales du Musée Guimet, X, 1887, p. 361), it seems at

least doubtful whether the Jainas conceived atoms as devoid of qualities.
g2. MABILLRBAU: l.¢., p. 214.


Ae lanes Fragmenta philosophorum graecorum. Paris, 1860, p. 357
and ff.

94. MABILLEAU: l.c., pp. 194~200, 272.

95. Cf. Lasswrrz: Geschichte der Atomistik. Hamburg and Leipzig, 1890,
pp. 214-218.

96. /6., p. 214.

97. J. Privippe: Lucréce dans la théologie chretienne. Paris, F. Alcan, 1895,
pp. 9, 18, 19.

98. 1b., p. 42 and fff.

99. Cf. Picavetr: Esquisse d’une histoire des philosophies médiécales, and ed.
Paris, F. Alcan, 1907, pp. 37, 163.

100. More Ben Maimoun: Le guide des égarés, trans. Munx. Paris,
1856-66, Vol. I, p. 377.

101. Dune: Etudes sur Léonard de Vinci, 2nd Series. Paris, 1909, p. 7
and ff.

to2z. Cf. Lasswirz: l.c., p. 257 and ff.

103. Let us note, however, that Cassirer, who is an eaccilent judge in
this matter, considers that Galileo was an atomist at bottom (Das Erkenntnis-
problem in der Philosophie und Wissenschaft der neueren eit. Berlin, 1906-7,
Vol. I, p. 298).

104. Not only the philosophers and historians of atomism, such as
Lange, Lasswitz, and Mabilleau, but even many physicists have the distinct
notion of this continuity. Cf., for instance, Larmor, Aether and Maiter.
Cambridge, 1q00, p. 25.

105. The opinion we express in the text has its opponents. Comte had
already undertaken the defence of the mediaeval centuries, “‘a memorable
period, unjustly qualified as dark by critical metaphysics of which the
foremost organ was protestantism.” (Cours, V, p. 317: cf. VI, p. 81.)
As Mitsaup very justly points out (Nourelles études sur Vhistowe de la pensde
scientifique. Paris, 1gt1, p. 18), the law of the three stages would necessarily
lead Comte to reduce the science of the Greeks to nothing or nearly nothing.
Moreover, Comte’s opinions, here as elsewhere, are explained by the fact
that he subordinated strictly scientific interests to those foreign to this
domain. Duhem, in works whose importance from the point of view of
the history and the philosophy of science cannot be too highly estimated,
tries to show that our science is attached, by direct affiliation, to that of the
Middle Ages and that the so-called renaissances ‘‘were only reactions
frequently unjust and sterile." We believe that all that can be thus proved
is that (as one might expect) the long centuries of the Middle Ages were
not entirely unproductive and that the rupture at the Renaissance was not
complete. It is none the less true that the acquired knowledge of those ten
centuries, in comparison with that of the Hellenic mind, is extremely small,
and that this very slow advance underwent a marvellous acceleration at


110 IDENTITY AND REALITY


the Renaissance to such a degree that modern science appears, in Milhaud’s
words (Etudes sur la pensée scientifique chez les Grecs et chez les modernes. Paris,
1906, p. 2), as “‘the natural sequence after centuries of rest of Greek science
itself.”> The Renaissance assuredly remains the most important fact in the
whole history of science.

106. STALLO: l.¢., p. 134.

107. Jb., p. 84.

108. Cf. p. 108, Note gr.

109. H. Porncarsé: Legons sur ba théorie mathématique de la lumiére. Paris,


1889, p. 151.
110. A. Erarp: Les nouvelles théories chimiques, 3rd ed. Paris, s.d., pp. 8,


39 35) 44-

111. E RutuerrorpD: Radio- Activity, and. ed. Cambridge, 1905, p. 1.

112. Larmor: Aether and Matter. Cambridge, 1900, p. 25. The advance
of science since Larmor formulated this opinion tends to confirm it. At the
present moment the atomic structure of electricity appears certainly to
the majority of physicists the indubitable basis of all the theoretical edifice
of that part of science. Cf. J. J. THomson, Electricity and Matter, Cambridge,
1905, p. 41 and ff., and Mapame Curr, Rerue Sctentifique, November 17,
1906, p. bog.

113. Larwor: /.c., p. 71.

114. Bulletin de la Société frangaise de philosophie, 6th year, 1906, p. 85.

115. Lucmn Pomcarsé: Revue annuelle de physique. Revue générale des sciences,
Vol. LX, 1898, p. 429.

116. Bulletin de la Sociélé frangaise de philosophic, 1oth year, p. 98 (meeting
of January 27, 1910).

117. OstwaLp: La déroute de ('atomisme contemporain. Revue générale des
Sciences, 1895, p. 953 and ff. Naturally the theory of electrons, at the time
of its appearance, was treated by the energists as ‘‘reactionary”’ (cf. Haver,
Kur gegenwaertigen Naturphilosophie. Berlin, 1go6, p. 112).

118. Cournot: Traité de [Penchainement des idées fondamentales dans la
science et dans I’histoire. Paris, 1861, p. 245.

119. Lemniz : Ed. Erdmann, p. 758. ‘‘When I was a young boy I indulged
also in the void and in atoms; but reason brought me back. The idea
was encouraging. Here research found its limit; meditation was steadied
as with a nail; one thought to have discovered the first elements, a non
plus ultra. We wished that Nature might go no farther, that it were final,
as our mind... .”

120. Huyoens: Traité de la lumiére. Leyden, 1690, Chap. I, p. 5.

121. E. Du Bon-Reyrmonp: Reden. Leipzig, 1886-87, pp. 105~106.

122, W. THomson: Notes of Lectures on Molecular Dynamics, etc. Baltimore,
1884, p. 192.

123. W. THomson : Conferences scientifiques et allocutions, trans. Lugol and
Brillouin. Paris, 1894.

124. MAxweE ct: Scientific Papers, 1890, Vol. II, p. 418. Cf. id., Theory of
Heat. London, 1875. ““When we have acquired the notion of matter in
motion, and know what is meant by the energy of that motion, we are
unable to conceive that any possible addition to our knowledge could


MECHANISM 111


explain the energy of motion, or give us a more perfect knowledge of it
than we have already.”

125. Armsroris: De Generatione et Corruptione, Book I, Chap. II, § 5.
The context would almost make us believe that this metaphor had been
borrowed from an atomist, although as we shall see later it also agrees
with peripatetic theories. It is also found in Lucretius, Book II, line 668
and ff.

126, Rosenpercer: Geschichte, Vol. 1, pp. 11-12.

127. HANNEQUIN was greatly impressed by the problem caused by this
difference, and tried to solve it (/.c., p. 92), without success, in our opinion.
He seemed to have the firm conviction that mechanism and the principles
of conservation are kindred ideas; but, in consequence of the preconceived
idea according to which discontinuity was introduced into physics by
mathematics, he deduced atomism from the concept of rectilinear and uni-
form motion—that is, from the principle of inertia (i.c., p. 74 and ff.). This is
evidently an anomaly from the historical point of view, for modern atomism
is then separated from that of the Greeks, of the Hindoos, of the Jews, and
of the Arabs. Spir, we think, was the first (among the moderns, naturally,
for the deduction would have appeared trite to a Greek after Aristotle’s
exposition) to deduce atomism, a little confusedly, it is true, from the
principle of identity in time (/.c., pp. 424-425). The first edition of Denken
und Wirklichkett appeared in 1873. Hannequin seems to have been unaware
of that deduction; the Essai Critique appeared in 1895, one year before the
French translation of Spir’s work. It is extremely curious to notice that
Auguste Comte, with the penetration of which he so often gives evidence
when his social preoccupations are not in question, compared the réle of
corpuscular hypothesis in physics to that of the principle of inertia in
mechanics (Politique positive, Vol. 1, pp. 520, 555).

128. As a proof of this idea, one may remark that the indivisible only
appears in mathematics even momentarily in regard to questions relative
to motion—that is, to time. It is because the assumed motion has nothing
real about it, because the image of it is climinated as soon as the curve is
traced, that the latter becoming again, as in synthetic geometry, a concept
formed outside of time, becomes continuous, at the same stroke. It seems
that Hannequin at a certain moment realized something of this relationship.

129. Cf. later on, Chap. XII, p. 387.

190. Ze.rer: Philosophie der Griechen, trans. Boutroux. Paris, 1877,
Vol. II, p. 292. It will perhaps not be useless in view of the particular
interest offered by this argument to give to the reader the texts themselves
of Aristotle. (De Generatione et Corruptione, Book 1, Chap. VIII, § 2. Trans.
J. H. Stocks, Oxford, 1922.) ‘‘The most systematic and consistent theory,
however, and one that applied to all bodies, was advanced by Leucippus
and Democritus: and in maintaining it they took as their starting-point
what naturally comes first. For some of the older philosophers thought that
‘what is’ must of necessity be ‘one’ and immovable. The void, they argue,
‘is not’: but unless there is a void with a separate being of its own, ‘what
is’ cannot be moved—nor again can it be ‘many,’ since there is nothing
to keep things apart.” § 5. Leucippus, however, thought he had theories


112 IDENTITY AND REALITY


which harmonized with sense-perception and would not abolish either
coming-to-be and passing-away or motion and the multiplicity of things.
He made these concessions to the facts of perception: on the other hand,
he conceded to the Monists that there could be no motion without a void.
The result is a theory which he states as follows: ‘The void is a ‘not being,’
and no part of ‘what is’ is a ‘not being’; for ‘what is’ in the strict sense of
the term is an absolute plenum. This plenum, however, is not ‘one’; on the
contrary, it is a ‘many’ infinite in number and invisible owing to the minute-
ness of their bulk.’’ For the sake of clearness we have thought it preferable
to summarize these passages in the text; we have put aside what had to do
with the question of the void and of the plenum, which, we know, particularly
interested Aristotle, but which might confuse the reader here (cf. for this
side of the Eleatic doctrine, pp. 234, 252). But otherwise we have tried
to use only expressions characteristic of Aristotle. In saying that Leucippus
tried to ‘‘save’’ the reality of the phenomena we borrowed an expression
(certainly conformable to the Stagirite’s thought) from Zeller’s analysis
(Le¢., p. 282). After Zeller, Hermann Cowen (Logik der reinen Erkenntnis,
Berlin, 1902, p. 29. Cf. ib., pp. 40, 187, 272) and Cassirner (Das Erkenntinis-
problem. Berlin, 1906, Vol. I, p. 31) have spoken of this affiliation of
Greek atomism.

191. Chemists especially are very prone to this illusion. Cf., for example,
SCHUTZENBERGER : Trailé de chime générale. Paris, 1880, Vol. I, p. vii.

132. Cf. p. 87. Hmn: Conséquences philosophiques et mélaphysiques de la
Thermodynamique. Paris, 1868, p. 209: ‘The existence of the material atom,
finite and indivisible, is to-day a fact as well proven as any of those which
the scientist accepts, as it were, as axioms.”

1393. ‘Each one of these sects, when it does no more than attack, triumphs,
ruins, lays low; but in its turn it is laid low and destroyed when it is on
the defensive.”” Bayite: Dictionnaire. Amsterdam, 1734, Vol. V, article
Keno, remark G., p. 599.

134. A very remarkable attempt of this kind is that of KozLowsx::
Psychologiczne zrodla, etc. Warsaw, 1899, pp. 51, 68; Szkice filozofizne.
Warsaw, 1900, p. 86; <asady przjrodoznawstua. Warsaw, 1903, pp. 95;
245, 264 and ff., 287.

135. Cf. later, p. 236 and ff.

136. J. J. THomson : Electricity and Matier. New York, 1904, p. 74 and ff.

137. Sm Ortver Lopce: Electrons. London, 1906, Chap. XV, § 5.

138. Jb., Chap. 1X.

199. J. J. Twomson: Ic., p. 114 and ff.

140. 1b., p. 87.

141. Cf. later, p. 179 and ff.

142. Lopog: /.c., p. 13.

143- H. Pomcart : Science ef méthode, Paris, 1908, p. 271.

144- Lopos: l.c., p. g.

145. Cf. later, p. 367 and ff.

146. Cf. Pomcans: La science ot U'hypothise. Paris, s.d., p. 127.

147. Kmcunorr: Vorlesungen weber mathematische Physik, ord od. Leipzig,
1883-91, Vol. I, preface.


CHAPTER III


THE PRINCIPLE OF INERTIA


Ir is sometimes asserted that this principle was known to
antiquity.(1) It is certain that in following the exposition of
a Greek atomic system, such as that of Democritus, through
the refutations of Aristotle, or that of Epicurus in De Rerum
Natura, a modern reader is almost without fail led to believe
that these philosophers implicitly postulated inertia. We do
not, however, believe that such was the case. Nowhere, either
in an atomistic philosopher or even in any ancient writer,
does there appear any allusion to a belief in an indefinite
motion in a straight line by virtue of an impetus received and
without the continued action of a force. It is probable that an
ancient atomist, if asked the reason for the continuous motion
of particles, would have replied that they fall or move in virtue
of a force inherent in them. This is plainly seen in Lucretius;
and Democritus seems to have been of the same opinion.(2)
At the most he would have referred to the example of some
known persistent motion, such as that of the top or of the
vibrating cord,(3) rather than the motion of a projectile which
would appear to him doubtless as a motion toward an object
and thus necessarily limited. Had it been otherwise, Aristotle,
in expounding his theory of the natural circular motion of
celestial bodies, would have been constrained to allude to it.
We well know that he takes great pains to refute the opinions
of the atomists. Now, his exposition seems to prove, on the
contrary, that he had no adverse opinion to combat on that
point.(4) It might be objected that this argument is not abso-
lutely convincing as regards terrestrial bodies: for Aristotle,
indeed, the two kinds of motion are very different, and, strictly
speaking, they might have been so also (although this is little
likely) for the atomusts. But another passage of the Physics
seems decisive in this respect. Aristotle uses the impossibility
of continuous motion in a straight line as a proof by reductio
ad absurdum; this impossibility seems so evident to him that he
does not even suppose that there can be a difference of opinion
on this point.(5) He certainly would have expressed himself
quite differently if the principle of inertia had been asserted
H


114 - IDENTITY AND REALITY


even implicitly, especially if it had been formulated by
Democritus.

In the same context of ideas a passage from Pappus, a
mathematician of the third century a.D., proves to what extent
the conception of an indefinite persistence of a rectilinear motion
was foreign to the ancients. Pappus supposes a moving body
of a given weight placed upon a horizontal plane and needing
a given force (Svvayus) in order to be moved; he asks that
the force necessary to move the weight if the plane is inclined
at a given angle be calculated. (6) This passage admits, it seems,
of but one interpretation. Pappus did not know that the force
necessary to displace a moving body upon a horizontal plane
has no relation to the force which is demanded by the displace-
ment of the same moving body on an inclined plane; he
believed that if a moving body on a horizontal plane is given
a certain velocity, this latter would diminish of itself in tame.
This opinion is evidently quite consistent with the data of
immediate experience: in nature one does see, in fact, recti-
linear motion prolonging itself for some time while diminishing
and then ceasing rapidly.

Some have believed to see the affirmation of inertia in a
passage of Plutarch’s Moralia. He there states that “the moon
has, for a help to preserve her from falling (on the earth),
her motion and the impetuosity of her revolution. For every
body is carried according to its natural motion, unless it be
diverted by some other intervening cause. Wherefore the moon
does not move according to the motion of her weight, her
inclination being stopped and hindered by the violence of a
circular revolution.”(7) Certainly to a modern reader these
sentences seem to imply that the author supposed a composition
of rectilinear motion impressed on the moon and the attraction
exerted by the earth. But in truth the idea that the moon
could have two motions at the same time was certainly unknown
to him. What he meant to say was that the naturally circular
motion of the moon, being stronger than the attraction of the
earth, prevented this attraction from manifesting itself; for to
illustrate his explanation he adds: “Thus projectiles placed
in a sling are retained by the circular motion which is given
to them.” It is, indeed, the circular motion itself, and not a
superimposed rectilinear motion, which manifests its influence.


THE PRINCIPLE OF INERTIA 115


About the persistence of the rectilinear motion, antiquity
seems to have been divided between two conceptions. One is
that of Aristotle, who supposes that a body can only be moved
by another which touches it continually, as if, for example,
it were “carried on a chariot.” Under ordinary conditions
this phenomenon is concealed from our cyes, because in
throwing a body we communicate at the same time a certain
motion to the air, and this latter continues afterwards to act
upon the thrown body: this is the “environmental reaction.”
But in the void the phenomenon would not take place.(8)

The other theory is attached to the name of Hipparchus. We
know it principally from a passage in Simplicius’s Commentary
on Aristotle’s De Caelo.(g) The thrown body receives an
impulse which remains with it even when the body which
communicated the motion to it has ceased to touch it. The
motion is rectilinear but not uniform; it diminishes of itself
as time advances, and finally disappears. We should say, in
modern language, that when the body is once thrown, a sort
of negative acceleration intervenes to stop it; but this would
not exactly translate the thought of the ancients: they were
far from thinking that the velocity could of itself be maintained,
and what did maintain this rectilinear and decreasing motion
appeared to them under the aspect of a force, duvayus; the
expression is the same as in Pappus, who seems equally to
have been guided by a theory of this kind. It is also found in
Themistius,(10) another commentator of Aristotle, who com-
pares this impulse to the heat which is communicated to a
body, and this is particularly important for the reason that
the concept of motion is thus allied to that of a state. But this
state, as we see from the context, was certainly conceived as
ceasing of itself, just as the heated body returns little by little to
its initial temperature. Themistius adds to duvajus the qualify-
ing évSv0eica; and this, it seems, is the origin of the expression
vis impressa or impetus umpressus which has played an important
réle in the genesis of the principle of inertia; we shall see that
the import of this term for the precursors of Galileo corresponds
entirely to Hipparchus’s conception.

We find, moreover, in ancient authors considerations which,
according to our knowledge, are closely allied to the principle
of inertia, and which we shall see have played a certain part


116 IDENTITY AND REALITY


in its genesis, but from which these authors did not draw
any of the consequences which they seem to us to entail. These
considerations are of two kinds. In the first place, ancient
physicists well knew the persistence of circular motion, and we
sometimes notice in the explanations concerning this motion
expressions which seem to have a certain resemblance to those
which we employ concerning inertial motion. Thus in the
Quaestiones mechanicae, attributed to Aristotle, it is said: ‘Some
affirm that the circular line is continually in motion as that
which persists because it offers resistance.” (11)
The considerations of the second kind have to do with the

conception which we now designate as that of the relativity of
motion. Sextus Empiricus imagines a boat moving at a certain
speed, while a man holding a pole moves upon this boat with
the same speed but in the opposite direction.(12) As a result
of this double displacement, it happens that the pole in relation
to the water and the air has not moved at all (Sextus's words
are: ‘‘It remains in the same perpendicular line of the air and
of the water’’).(13) Since, moreover, the motions spoken of
are evidently conceived as rectilinear and uniform, one would

be led to conclude that Sextus considered them, for that reason,

as relative, which is the very essence of the principle of inertia.

But as a matter of fact this idea was certainly unknown to him.
Nothing indicates that he had meant to establish a difference
between rectilinear displacement and other kinds of motion ; on
the contrary, this exposition is followed in his work by passages
where, with the help of considerations of a very different

order, he attempts to demonstrate the contradictory nature of
the concept of the motion of rotation. Indeed, the celebrated

sceptic tries to demolish the concept of displacement in general,

and the considerations about the boat only serve him to draw

this conclusion that a thing ‘“‘may move in being displaced,
while neither the thing as a whole nor its parts leave the place

where they are.’’(14) It is certain, on the other hand, that

this idea of relativity must have been in a certain sense

quite familiar to the ancients, and that precisely with respect
to curvilinear motions. This conception, as Wundt (15) has
justly remarked, is necessarily at the bottom of all astronomical
theories, especially the theory of epicycles.

Toward the end of the Middle Ages, when, very slowly at


THE PRINCIPLE OF INERTIA 117


first, scientific thought was reappearing in the West, we fre-
quently find traces of one order or the other of the thoughts
which we have just mentioned, sometimes incorporated in the
prevailing peripateticism, sometimes in manifest opposition to
it. This last position was especially that of the theorists of
the impetus impressus. They knew Hipparchus’s ideas not only
from the Commentary of Simplicius, translated into Latin in
the thirteenth century, but also from a passage of his contem-
porary, the Alexandrian Joannes Philoponus, a passage which
had been summarized by the Arabic astronomer, Al Bitragi
(Alpetragius), whose work was made accessible to Europeans
by the translation of Michael Scot at about the same time.
The merit of having developed Hipparchus’s ideas is due
especially, it seems, to Albert of Saxony, one of the most
renowned masters of the University of Paris in the fourteenth
century. This doctrine, characterized sometimes as “Parisian,”
was propagated in Germany by Marsilius of Inghen and
Sunczel, and in Italy (where at first it met with violent
opposition) by Gaetan de Tiene; in Paris itself it was con-
tinued toward 1500 by John Dullaert of Ghent.(16)

In the same way the conception of the relatiztty of motion
was not entircly forgotten. The argument from the man on
the boat, more or less modified, appears in high favour. It is
true that we know less about those who maintained these
opinions than about those who refuted them. But the very
energy which Albertus Magnus, Saint Thomas, Campanus of
Novara, and Albert of Saxony, employ to expound the argu-
ments of Ptolemy (17) proves that they were fighting a theory
which did not lack adherents.

In the first half of the fifteenth century the relativity of
motion is clearly affirmed by Nicolas of Cusa. The learned
cardinal, who, as we well know, was one of the precursors of
Copernicus, while trying to show that the earth can move
without our perceiving it, makes use also of the example of
the boat which, even though it is progressing rapidly, may seem
Motionless to us if we do not see the shores.(18)

But in Cusa himself we see that this conception of the relativity
of motion, although the principle of inertia seems to us to
be derived from it, was not sufficient to give birth to this notion.
It is, indeed, curious that Cusa should have affirmed indefinite


118 IDENTITY AND REALITY


motion in a straight line, but restricted to a particular case,
and basing it on entirely different considerations. His exposition
deserves a closer examination, as it seems to have exercised
a considerable influence on the progress of science and
notably on the genesis of the conception of inertia in
Galileo.(19)

Cusa in explaining a kind of game, where it was a question
apparently of projecting a ball upon a plane, states that if the
ball were absolutely round and the floor perfectly smooth the
first would touch the second at only one point (Cusa says:
in atomo). But the ball, projected upon the plane, rolls—that is,
it turns.(20) This turning motion, if it were natural, would
continue eternally, as docs that of the “ultimate sphere’ of
the heavens, “‘without violence, and without fatigue.” (This
is, indeed, Aristotle’s doctrine of the natural circular motion.)
For—and it is in this comparison that the boldness of Cusa’s
theory properly consists--the motion of the celestial sphere
and that of the perfect ball thrown by the hand of man upon
an absolutely smooth plane are strictly comparable. “*This
sphere is moved by God the creator or by the spirit of God,
just as the ball is moved by thee.”’ Indeed the perpetuity of the
rotation results solely from the perfection of the rotundity,
“the form of the rotundity is very fit for the perpetuity of the
motion.”” The rounder the thing, the more it moves with
facility. “That is why, if the roundness were at a maximum
such that it could not be greater, it would move as if by itself,
and would be at the same time mover and mobile.”’ Moreover,
that which moves could not cease to move unless it behaved
differently at a given moment from that of the preceding
moment. ‘‘Consequently the sphere upon a level and equal
surface, since it always behaves the same, once put into motion
will move perpetually.’ (21)

While preserving as faithfully as possible the expressions of
Cusa, we have somewhat inverted the order of the sentences;
but the progress of the deduction is such as we have indicated.
There are evidently in this exposition some ideas which approach
our concept of inertia—for example, in the sentence wherc it is a
question of the cessation of motion; in another sentence, which
we have omitted, Cusa says that the ball moves from the
impulse which exists in itself (impetum in ipsum faciendo:


THE PRINCIPLE OF INERTIA 119


durante moretur). But that treats only of rotation, and it is in
the last analysis solely by the persistence of the motion of
rotation, and not, as with us, by that of the motion of translation,
that Cusa succeeds in conceiving the perpetual motion of a ball
upon a plane.

The idea of relativity of motion was evidently indispensable
to the Copernican theory of the earth’s motion. However, we
see that Copernicus himself was far removed from supposing a
general principle of inertia. Indeed, he attributes to the celestial
bodies, just as Aristotle did, a naturally circular motion, while
clearly indicating that this motion could not give rise to the
appearance of a centrifugal force.(22) Such was also the
opinion of Telesius.(23) Kepler, on the contrary, believed that
the motions of the planets were due to an emanation of the
sun, and that each one of them would stop immediately at any
point whatsoever of its trajectory if the sun were to cease its
action ;(24) this was, if possible, still farther removed from the
conception of inertia than the natural circular motion of
Aristotle and of Copernicus.

In the seventeenth century, we find Carpentarius, who,
however, 1n many respects had freed himself from the influence
of scholastic philosophy, using an argument against Aristotle, in
order to establish the gravity of the air, wherein it is said that
the air, if it pushed upward, would not move toward any
centre ; the motion would then be infinite, which, of course, the
author considers as absurd.(25)

Yet in the sixteenth century the ideas of Hipparchus, taken
up again and developed by Albert of Saxony and the “Parisian
school”’ of the fourteenth century, find more and more adherents
in Italy. Cardanus, refuting Aristotle’s idea of the motion of
impulsion, says: “And when one supposes that all which is
moved is moved by something, this is very truc: but that which
moves is an acquired impetus, as heat in water.’’ (26)

It is this example, as we have seen, which Themistius used.
Yet Cardanus did not have the boldness to free himself entirely
from peripatetic ideas; he supposes that a projectile leaving
the apparatus which sends it forth continues for a while to
increase its velocity, and this because of the reaction of the
air, quite like Aristotle.

Benedetti, toward the end of the sixteenth century, states


120 IDENTITY AND REALITY


precisely the ideas of Cardanus.(27) Benedetti, moreover, had
the merit of attempting an explanation of the trajectory of a
projectile by the resolution of the motion. Benedetti explains
that a body thrown from a sling has the tendency to follow
a straight line, tangential to the circle described by the sling,
but since gravity happens to act upon it, the composition of the
two motions creates a curved trajectory.(28) This was a serious
innovation. The composition of a curved motion by the aid of
two motions in a straight line had been known from antiquity.
A deduction of this kind is found in Aristotle, who held that a
motion in a circle is the result of two motions in a straight line,
of which the one is constant and the other vanable, decreasing
continually.(29) We shall see presently that this deduction
must have particularly suited Benedetti. But where this latter
completely departs from perpateticism is when he supposes
that a violent motion, that which one communicates to a
body in throwing it, may be compounded in a continuous
manner with a natural motion, that of a falling body. Tartaglia
had expressly denied the possibility of such a composition,
and this conviction was so widely spread that in 1561 Santbeck
dared to affirm, contrary to the most manifest evidence, that the
trajectory of a ball was composed of two straight lines, the
first prolonging itself as long as the violent motion dominated,
and the second beginning as soon as the natural motion
prevailed.(30)

Of course, Benedetti supposes that the impulse communicated
to the body decreases continually with time,(31) and it is
exactly in connection with this decomposition of the motion of
projectiles that we see to what a point this conception was, so to
speak, necessary. Indeed, Benedetti, like his predecessors, had
no idea of a force whose effects accumulated, as we admit in
the case of gravitation. The effect of this latter must have
appeared to him as simply constant, and so, in order to explain
how it succeeded in prevailing with time, he had to resort to a
diminution of the other component.

Benedetti appears to have been the most direct inspirer of
Galileo. In the Sermones,(32) Galileo maintains a theory, which
is based, as in Benedetti, on the diminution of the ots impressa;
and yet at the epoch to which the most ancient part of this
treatise belongs (1590), Galileo had already discovered the law


THE PRINCIPLE OF INERTIA 121


of distances in falling. It was about 1610 that Galileo seems to
have conceived the idea of compounding the trajectory with
the aid of the horizontal motion and that of falling. (33) But
the diminution of the zs impressa is found again in the Dialogue
upon two Sciences (1638), as the opinion of one of his interlocutors,
without the other refuting it. It is true that the same work
contains also an affirmation of inertia in every direction;
but as Wohlwill has justly emphasized, far from being
proclaimed as a universal principle, it only occupies a little
“corner” of the treatise.(34) Galileo, moreover, never ceased
to consider the circular motion of celestial bodies as ‘“‘natural,”’
as did the ancients and Copernicus. As regards the genesis
of the concept of inertia in Galileo, it is particularly important
to notice that he began by affirming the perpetuity of motion
in a horizontal direction and that he had a predilection for the
use of this particular form of the principle.(35) He proved it
by the example of the ball rolling on a plane(36), and it seems
at least probable that this deduction 1s closely associated with
the conceptions of Cusa as expounded earlier.

It may be that Descartes discovered the principle of inertia
independently of Galileo; yet, at the epoch when he formulated
it for the first time (toward 1620), different works of Galileo,
which contained, at least implicitly, the principle in question,
had already been published, others were certainly disseminated
by different means, and it is more probable that Descartes
with his powerful logic only expanded the propositions which
he found in his predecessor. We know, moreover, that Descartes
did not often mention his predecessors, even when his borrow-
ings were very evident—a habit which was quite general at
that time.(37) At any rate, Descartes cannot be denied the
honour of having been the first to formulate a complete and
logical theory of the conservation of velocity in a straight
line and to proclaim the primordial importance of this principle
for the theory of motion in general. (38)

The principle of inertia is generally stated in a formula in a
certain sense bipartite, the first part applying to the body at
rest and the second to the body in motion. A formula of this
kind is found in Descartes.(3g) We shall cite here the formula
given by d’Alembert which appears the most often, with few
variations, in later authors. First law: “A body at rest will


122 IDENTITY AND REALITY


remain so unless a foreign cause forces it from it.” Second law:
“‘A body set in motion by whatsoever cause must always persist
in it uniformly and in a straight line, as long as a new cause,
different from that which has set it in motion, does not act
upon it; that is, unless a foreign cause and one different from
the impelling force acts upon it, it will move perpetually in a
straight line and will travel over equal spaces in equal
times.’ (40)

D’Alembert follows up the statement of this double law with
a very curious demonstration. After having formulated the
first part, he continues: “For a body cannot of itself determine
to move, since there is no reason why it should move to one
side rather than to another. Corollary: From this it follows that if
a body receives a motion for any cause whatever, it cannot of
itself accelerate nor retard this motion.”

The second part is demonstrated in these terms: “For,
either the indivisible and instantaneous action of the impelling
cause at the beginning of the motion is sufficient to make the
body cover a certain space, or the body needs, in order to
make it move, the continuous action of the impelling force.
In the first case it is clear that the space covered can only be a
straight line uniformly traced by the moved body. For (Aypo-
thests) the first instant passed, the action of the impelling cause
no longer exists, and yet the motion still exists: it will then
necessarily be uniform, since (corollary) 1t cannot accelerate
or retard its motion of itself. Moreover, there is no reason why
the body should deviate to the right rather than to the left.
Therefore, in this first case, where we suppose it to be capable
of moving of itself during a certain time, independently of the
impelling cause, it will move of itself during this time uniformly
and in a straight line. Now a body which can move of itself
uniformly and in a straight line, during a certain time must
continue to move perpetually in the same manner, if nothing
hinders it. For let us suppose the body leaving A and capable
of covering of itself the line AB; on this line let there be

taken any two points C, D, between A and B. The body being
at D is precisely in the same state as when it was at C, except
that it is in another place. Therefore, the same thing must
happen to this body as when it is at C. Now, being at C, it can
(&ypothesis) move of itself uniformly as far as B. Therefore, being


THE PRINCIPLE OF INERTIA 123


at D, it will be able to move of itself uniformly as far as the
point G, so that DG =CB, and so on. Therefore, if the first
and instantaneous action of the impelling cause is capable of
moving the body, it will be moved uniformly and in a straight
line, as long as no new cause hinders it. Jn the second case, since
it is supposed that no cause foreign to and different from the
impelling force acts upon the body, nothing, therefore, occa-
sions the impelling cause to augment or to diminish; from
which it follows that its continuous action will be uniform and
constant, and that thus, during the time that it acts, the body
will move in a straight line and uniformly. Now the same reason
which makes the impelling force act constantly and uniformly
during a certain time, continuing always unless something
opposes itself to this action, it is clear that this action must
remain continually the same and produce constantly the same
effect. Therefore,” etc.

D’Alembert’s ‘“‘second case’’ refers evidently to some
Aristotelian ideas of which one still found traces in France
at this epoch. It must be remarked that d’Alembert attempts no
refutation, but tries rather to give to the principle of inertia an
appearance of Aristotelianism.

But the demonstration of the “‘first case’’ merits our further
attention. It is found in later authors, notably in Lotze, who,
with less precision than d’Alembert, and transposing it from
mathematical to philosophic language, formulates it in about
these terms: If the motion were not to last indefinitely, it
would cease at the very instant when the impulse ceased; but
this latter lasts but an instant, an infinitesimal space of time.
Therefore, there would be no motion at all. Consequently,
inertia follows from the very concept of motion; it is an “‘in-
tegral part of this concept.”’(41)

It is certainly curious to compare this demonstration with
that found in the fourth book of Aristotle’s Physics. Aristotle
observes, just as d'Alembert and Lotze do, that if the motion
were to last beyond the impulse itself, 1t would no longer have
any reason for ever ceasing. This proposition appears to him
absurd, and so he proves that, in the void, no motion could
take place except by the action of a continuous cause, “‘such as
the burden which a chariot carries.” But, of course, for the
plenum—that is, for the real world (Aristotle denying, we know,


124 IDENTITY AND REALITY


the existence of the void)—impulse suffices, for the air and
other surrounding bodies help to maintain the motion. (42)

D’Alembert’s demonstration is pure deduction. It borrows
from experience only the very existence of motion. In this sense
the principle of motion would therefore be a priort. But what
exactly is the value of this demonstration?

Aristotle’s deduction just cited is certainly of a nature to
shake our confidence. Can it be, we ask ourselves, that the
Greek philosopher was able to use the same argument to arrive
at the opposite conclusion? A more minute analysis will confirm
this impression.

In admitting the possibility of arriving at the notion of inertia
by a purely deductive method, a difficulty is raised which was
clearly seen by Herbert Spencer. Spencer is a strong partisan
of the a2 priori point of view in all these questions; for to him
inertia, which he formulates, moreover, in a somewhat vague
manner (immediately allying to it the conservation of energy)
under the name of “continuity of motion,” is a directly axio-
matic truth, of which the contrary could not be mentally
realized. But how does it happen that it appears so late
in the history of science? ‘The axiomatic character of the
Truth that Motion is continuous is recognized only after the
discipline of exact science has given precision to the conception.
Aboriginal men, our uneducated population, even most of the
so-called educated, think in an extremely indefinite manner.
From careless observations they pass by careless reasoning to
conclusions of which they do not contemplate the implications
—conclusions which they never develop for the purpose of
seeing whether they are consistent. Accepting without criticism
the dicta of unaided perception to the effect that surrounding
bodies when put in motion soon return to rest, the great
majority tacitly assume that the motion is actually lost. They
do not consider whether the phenomenon can be otherwise
considered ; or whether the interpretation they put on it can
be mentally realized.’’(43) In other words, as Spencer says
concerning the conservation of matter, these people think that
they believe what they really could not believe. This is not in
itself inconceivable. Geometry is composed of deductions,
and yet its propositions have only become known little by
little. A man who has the notion of the rectangular triangle


THE PRINCIPLE OF INERTIA 125


will certainly believe, if he does not know the proposition of
Pythagoras, that it is possible to construct one in which the
square of the hypotenuse is not the sum of the squares of the
two sides.

Yes, but that implies ignorance of the deduction. Suppose
yourself opposite a man who is trying to construct the triangle
in question and show him the demonstration of Pythagoras.
What will you say if he persists in his first opinion and con-
tinues his search? You will think that he has not understood
your demonstration or that he is totally lacking in logic.
But certainly neither the one nor the other 1s the case with
Aristotle; one evidently cannot class him with the multitude of
aboriginal men, etc., about whom Spencer expresses himself so
severely. It is allowable to affirm, doubtless, that he might have
been able, by the analysis of the facts which he knew, to come
upon the knowledge of the principle of inertia; one may find
especially that his explanation of the motion of projectiles is
insufficient and that he ought to have perceived it. But in
itself the idea of a plenum, where nothing moves unless pushed
in consequence of a large motion of the initial mover, has
nothing that is contradictory or at least is not more so than
a great number of incomprehensible notions which we are
nevertheless obliged to accept. In weighing the pros and the
cons we come to assent to Paul Tannery’s opinion that the
system of Aristotle at that moment ‘‘conformed much more to
the immediate observation of facts than ours.”’(44) Such was
also the opinion of Duhem, who formulates in these terms the
fundamental propositions of this mechanics: I. A body subject
to a uniform power moves with a uniform velocity; II. A
body which is not subject to any power remains immobile.(45)
The hypothesis of the action of the medium or of the “environ-
mental reaction,” as Aristotle calls it, has since continued to
have partisans,(46) and who knows whether electric theories
are not going to bring us back to it?

But we can go still farther: Even where Aristotle and
d’Alembert seem to be in agreement, the demonstration is far
from having the import that both of them attribute to it.
We need only think of Hipparchus and Benedetti. Why would
it be absurd to suppose, as these latter did, and, we have just
seen, Galileo also at the outset, that impulse diminishes with


126 IDENTITY AND REALITY


time? This supposition would necessitate evidently the introduc-
tion of a constant, but we are quite willing to have one for the
action of gravitation. Doubtless, it is preferable to do without it
where it is possible, and from this point of view the subsequent
method of Galileo, the resolution of the trajectory into a
motion constant in time and another uniformly accelerated
motion, is certainly better. But, finally, this would be a demon-
stration based upon experiments, and even experiments difficult
to carry out because of frictions, the resistance of the air, etc.,
and not an a priort deduction. Otherwise, if we wish to maintain
this latter, we shall be obliged to reject Benedetti’s theory
because it supposed the variation of a phenomenon in time;
we will say that it is a variation ‘‘without reason.’”’ What does
that mean? We hardly need to explain it: it is an evident
application of the postulate of causality, of identity in ume,
and we see that this postulate forms the true basis of d’Alembert’s
demonstration, so rigorous in appearance.

The demonstration of the principle of inertia has been
attempted by another method still, although it, too, is by
deduction. This has been done by starting from what has
generally been called the “‘relativity’’ of motion or of space, a
very ancient conception, since it 1s found in Sextus Empiricus
and in Nicolas of Cusa.(47) The most complete demonstration
of this type is that expounded by Kant in his Metaphysische
Anfangsgriinde, etc. “Every motion,” he says, “in so far as it is
the object of a possible experience can be considered at will,
either as the motion of a body in a space at rest, or, on the
contrary, as the motion of space in the opposite direction and
with an equal velocity, the body being at rest.’’(48) This is
the consequence of the fact that an absolute motion—that is, a
motion which cannot be conceived in relation to material
bodies placed in space (Kant writes: “In reference to a
non-material space”)—is not capable of becoming an object of
experience, and, consequently, “‘is a nonentity for us,” absolute
space being “nothing in itself” and not being “‘an object.’’(49)
Now, matter is inert, ‘‘all change of matter has an external
cause.”’(50) And, Kant says, “‘this is the only law which ought
to bear the name of law of inertia.” Indeed, combined with what
precedes it amounts to d’Alembert’s formula; for, on the one
hand, matter is incapable of emerging from rest, except under


THE PRINCIPLE OF INERTIA 127


the action of a force, and, on the other hand, motion in a
straight line is assimilated to rest. Thus Kant was able to
continue the general statement just cited with this parenthesis :
“every body persists in its state of rest or of motion, in the
same direction and with the same velocity, unless it is forced
by an external cause to leave that state’”—showing that he
considered the two formulae as absolutely equivalent. It is the
demonstration of Sextus Empiricus, but reversed. The Greek
sceptic used the consequences of the principle of inertia to
show that motion in space could not exist in itself; Kant,
having arrived at this last idea by a different way, on the
contrary, bases his reasoning on it to establish inertia.

Maxwell (51) gave a demonstration combining that of
d’Alembert with that of Kant. Maxwell supposes that motion
could gradually cease. This would be in a way a negative
acceleration, and it would change into positive if we considered
motion in relation to a body to which we would lend an appro-
priate motion. This demonstration seems to unite the incon-
veniences of the two systems. Inasmuch as it resembles that of
d’Alembert, it rests, just as this latter does, on the principle of
causality, and, for what remains, it is evidently based upon
the notion of the relativity of motion, as that of Kant. With
many contemporary physicists this notion of the relativity of
motion or of space, stripped, however, of all metaphysical
trappings, appears as a sort of axiom (although contrary
Opinions are not wanting, as we shall see later on); and it is
certainly astonishing that, this conception being admitted, it
is not used to establish the principle of inertia.

But just what is the “relativity of space” ?(52)

To understand the true character of this notion it may
not be amiss to distinguish at the outset between the relativity
and the homogeneity of space. Homogeneity is the charac-
teristic resulting from the principle of free mobility, which we
have recognized as fundamental from the point of view of our
concept of space. Space seems to us therefore absolutely
identical in all places; from the fact alone that an object has
changed place, or has been displaced, no other modification
could result. But, and this is very essential, it does not follow
that the object in the act of displacement, the object in motion, is
identical with the object at rest. Our innermost feeling, fortified


128 IDENTITY AND REALITY


by a long experience, protests against such an affirmation.
To take an example: I know very well that this cannon-ball,
to whatever part of space I carry it, will present the same
essential properties. But when it has been fired from the cannon’s
mouth, and is in the act of travelling through space with a
velocity of several hundred metres a second, its essential
properties will be considerably modified, and I shall be careful
not to touch it as I do when it is at rest. Descartes, long after
he had proclaimed the principle of inertia and had recognized
its importance, still persisted in believing that a force must
act differently upon a body in motion and upon a body at
rest, and that its action must even depend on the velocity
with which the body was being displaced.(53)

But is it correct to say that motion, as Descartes puts it, “‘in
its proper signification is only related to the bodies which touch
that which is said to move’’?

We cannot doubt that Descartes sometimes applied this
principle to the motion of rotation as well as to that of transla-
tion. According to his theory the earth is surrounded by
“celestial matter,’’ and he proves that if the two had the same
rotary motion, the earth would have to be considered as
‘a body which has no motion,” and on which, consequently,
the effects of centrifugal force could not make themselves
felt. (54)

Let us suppose two bodies absolutely isolated in the universe
and endowed with a uniform motion in a straight line. Their
motions appear to us as relative, for we can indifferently
consider one of them as immobile while attributing to the
other an appropriate velocity. Let us suppose, now, that of
these two bodies one remains fixed and the other describes
a circle around the first; the result would be the same as if
the first had turned around its axis in the opposite direction.
But can we really replace the first motion by the second?
To affirm it is to state that the fixed stellar body would undergo,
if it were liquid, in consequence of the motion of the immobile
body, a flattening identical with that which would have been
produced by a rotation around its axis, and it is certain

that this inference seems hardly admissible. This problem was
admirably studied by Newton in the following passage of the
Principia: “If a vessel, hung by a long cord, is so often turned


THE PRINCIPLE OF INERTIA 129


about that the cord is strongly twisted, then filled with water,
and held at rest together with the water; after, by the sudden
action of another force, it is whirled about the contrary way,
and while the cord is untwisting itself, the vessel continues for
some time in this motion; the surface of the water will at
first be plain, as before the vessel began to move; but the vessel,
by gradually communicating its motion to the water, will
make it begin sensibly to revolve, and recede little by little
from the middle, and ascend to the sides of the vessel, forming
itself into a concave figure (as I have experienced), and the
swifter the motion becomes, the higher will the water rise,
till at last performing its revolutions in the same times with
the vessel, it becomes relatively at rest in it. This ascent of the
water shows its endeavour to recede from the axis of its motion ;
and the true and absolute circular motion of the water, which
is here directly contrary to the relative, discovers itself, and
may be measured by this endeavour. At first, when the relative
motion of the water in the vessel was greatest, it produced
no endeavour to recede from the axis; the water showed no
tendency to the circumference nor any ascent towards the
sides of the vessel, but remained of a plain surface, and therefore
its true circular motion had not yet begun. But afterwards,
when the relative motion of the water had decreased, the
ascent thereof towards the sides of the vessel proved its endeavour
to recede from the axis; and this endeavour showed the real
circular motion of the water perpetually increasing, till it had
acquired its greatest quantity when the water rested relatively
in the vesscl. And therefore this endeavour does not depend
upon any translation of the water in respect of the ambient
bodies, nor can true circular motion be defined by such transla-
tion.”(55) These are, according to Newton, “the effects by
which we distinguish absolute from relative motion,” and the
exposition which precedes serves as a support to this affirmation,
whose clearness leaves nothing to be desired: “Absolute space,
without regard to anything external, remains always similar
and immovable.’’(56) It is, we see, the exact counterpart of
the ideas held by Descartes and Kant.

But from the point of view of what now occupies our atten-
tion Newton’s exposition is really decisive, in the sense that it
enlightens us as to the motives of the hesitation which we have

I


130 IDENTITY AND REALITY


felt about the relativity of rotary motion; at the same time we
also see the true source of our certainty concerning the relativity
of rectilinear motion. We had hoped to deduce it from abstract
considerations about space, which we had artificially emptied of
all physical content, capable of determining points of reference.
In reality our memory had preserved the image of space such
as we see it—physical space, filled with bodies—and if
we declared without hesitation for rectilinear motion, 1t was
because in physical space that motion is really relative. The
extremely rapid motion with which the earth is displaced in
space remains absolutely without influence on the motion of
ponderable terrestrial masses; this is precisely the reason why
the first of these motions is so difficult to determine. But the
motion of daily rotation, infinitely slower, can be very easily
made perceivable by terrestrial phenomena, such as Foucault’s
pendulum. It is in no way relative to the solar system nor to
any other limited system which we can specify. It is relative to
the celestial vault—that is, to the totality of the bodies of the
universe in their spatial arrangements; that is to say again,
to absolute space, as Newton well said. It is clear, moreover,
that even rectilinear motion cannot always be considered as
relative. It is only truly so if it is uniform. If the earth, in its
motion of translation, were to undergo an acceleration, even
though this latter were infinitesimal compared to the velocity
which we generally attribute to the celestial bodies, we should
not fail to perceive it.

Let us remark, however, that in speaking of absolute space we
have thought of physical space—space filled with body. It is
important, indeed, to dissociate completely the considerations
we have just expounded from the metaphysical conceptions
about the existence or the non-existence of space. This is not
a useless precaution. We have seen that Sextus Empiricus
had already used the relativity of motion in a straight line to
establish (if we may express his ideas in modern language)
that space does not exist in itself. This argument is completely
destroyed by Newton’s demonstration. Must we conclude that
the opposite metaphysical thesis is henceforth established?
Newton himself probably thought s0,(57) and in any case
philosophers have often given this sense to his declarations.
And yet there is no logically necessary connection there.


THE PRINCIPLE OF INERTIA 131


We may even dispense with examining whether, supposing
that bodies which indicate the orientation of the system of
co-ordinates simply play the réle of points of reference, the
thesis of the existence of space could avail itself of Newton’s
argument. Nor is it necessary in speaking of absolute motion to
conceive of it from a philosophic point of view and to attribute
to the moving body, according to Bergson’s apt expression,
“a soul, and as it were a condition of mind.’’(58) This is
because we can attribute the essential qualities of space filled
with matter, not to space, but to body. This interpretation,
already found in Berkeley,(59) is the foundation of Mach’s
argument against Newton’s ideas. The fact that the rotary
motion of the water is relative to the substances of the celestial
vault and not to the wall of the vessel, this thinker tells us,
might very well be due to the fact that the walls possess only
the smallest mass compared to that of celestial bodies. ““No
one could say what the experiment might have proved if the
wall of the vessel had been made so thick and so massive that
it had a thickness of several miles.” (60) From the experimental
point of view one might object that no experiment permits
us to conclude as to the influence of the thickness of the walls
upon the rotary motion of the water in a vessel. Thus Mach’s
argument could in no way weaken Newton’s demonstration.
But in our opinion it clearly shows that this demonstration
may be completely dissociated from any metaphysical idea
about space. (61)

On the other hand, we see now that deductions of the kind
attempted earlier, proceeding from space emptied of bodies,
could not be of any help for the demonstration of the principle
of inertia. In space, stripped of points of reference, every motion
will obviously appear as relative. Whatever may be the tra-
jectories which the two bodies describe, we can always replace
them by a motion of one of them. But we know that if we
pass into physical space the motion of rotation will become
absolute. In two bodies which approach each other we can
attribute motion indifferently to one or to the other; but a
top which is turning upon a table will remain upright; it
would fall were we to try to keep it immobile by giving to
the table a motion of opposite rotation. This difference between
motion in a straight line and rotation is an integral part of


132 IDENTITY AND REALITY


the principle of inertia, and it is unexplainable by considerations
drawn from empty space. (62)

It is very curious that Newton’s conception, in spite of the
great authority of his name, never succeeded in completely
establishing itself in science. It is true that it was eventually
adopted by many scientists, such as Euler (who expounded it
vigorously in his Theoria motus),(63) Poinsot,(64) Neumann (65)
(to cite only a few illustrious names), and we find it sometimes
formulated by our contemporaries.(66) Yet the conception of
the relativity of space is much more widespread ;(67) it 1s, so
to speak, quite current in the exposition of the principles of
science. But it certainly is not easy to adhere to it strictly.
To be convinced of this it is sufficient to examine the formula
of the principle of inertia as we have quoted it from d’Alembert.
What is the body at rest of which it is a question in the first
part? All the bodies we know are in motion, including fixed
stars; the statement thus becomes inapplicable and hence
useless. The second part of the principle, guaranteeing the
continuation of uniform motion in a straight line—that is to
say, of apparent rest—should now render us the service which
we hoped for from the first, and it would be necessary to add to it
a formula concerning the composition of motions to replace the
present second part. The terms “rest”? and “‘motion”’ in the
present statement of the principle could therefore signify
nothing but apparent rest and motion, relative to neighbouring
bodies. But we find this relativistic formula in partisans of
absolute space, and even in Newton.(68) Moreover, side by
side with these terms, seemingly implying the relativity of
motion, the same statement of d’Alembert contains another
in a contrary sense. What is, indeed, the straight line in which
the body will move, according to d’Alembert’s expression?
How shall one set about to determine it, in relation to
what object or to what collection of objects? A motion which,
seen from the earth, would seem in a straight line, seen from
the sun would appear curvilinear, as Neumann has justly
remarked.(69) In fact, no one doubts that a motion made
in virtue of inertia is entirely independent of the motion of
the celestial body in whose vicinity it is produced, and that
this straight line is oriented by points of reference related
to the “celestial vault”; space seems to us in this respect


THE PRINCIPLE OF INERTIA 133


to be filled with an infinity of systems of absolutely rigid
co-ordinates. (70)

One can in a certain measure preserve the appearances of
relativity by stipulating that motion shall be rectilinear with
respect to another motion or to a system of motions which
should take place in virtue of inertia. Formulae of this kind
were proposed by Streintz(71) and Ludwig Lange,(72) and we
see from the Theorta motus of Euler that he also conceived
an analogous idea.(73) Streintz calls “fundamental body” any
body which can be considered as independent of the bodies
surrounding it and which is not in the act of executing a motion
of rotation. One can be assured of this last fact by direct
experiments, with the aid, for instance, of Foucault’s pendulum
or gyroscope,(74) instruments which, we know, indicate the
absolute velocity of the motion of rotation and not only, as is
the case when we consider rectilinear velocities, modifications
of velocity. The principle of inertia consists in this case in
affirming that in respect to such a fundamental body or to a
system of co-ordinates which are connected with it and which
Streintz designates as a “fundamental system of co-ordinates,”
any other body, if it is not subject to influences from without,
will move in a straight line and with a uniform velocity.
Ludwig Lange considers the motions of three ‘‘material points”’
upon three straight lines which meet in a point, and relates the
motions of all the other bodies to this ‘inertial system.’’ The
supposition that these three original points follow a uniform
motion in a straight line is a convention; if it is accepted, the
analogous statement for other bodies can be considered as a
truth proved by experiment. Streintz’s system has the great
advantage of being somewhat in conformity with the manner
in which we do actually proceed. To calculate motions on
the earth, we most often use co-ordinates attached to this
latter, without taking account of rotation, as we know from
experience that the motion of a point of the terrestrial surface
can be considered, in these cases, as inertial, because of the
small angular velocity. For astronomical measures we use
co-ordinates oriented by points of reference of the celestial
vault; this has the advantage of permitting a very rigorous
determination. But that is because we have the conviction,
confirmed by the experiment of Foucault. that it is these


134 IDENTITY AND REALITY


co-ordinates which regulate the planes of rotation. But let
us suppose a planet having a very rapid motion of rotation,
whose atmosphere is charged with vapour, so that the inhabi-
tants could not perceive the sky; the pendulum and the gyro-
scope could furnish them with systems of invariable co-ordinates.
Lange’s conception, on the other hand, seems somewhat
artificial: these three material points are entirely ideal.(75)
But neither of these two systems in any way invalidates New-
ton’s demonstration; the “fundamental body” of Streintz or
the ‘‘inertial system” of Lange are at bottom, as Mach
recognized,(76) only substitutions for the system of co-ordinates
connected with the fixed stars. If we affirm, as does Lange,
that for the first three points considered there is nothing but
convention, then either we refuse to take account of the fact
that the orientation of the system of co-ordinates remains
invariable in relation to certain points of the celestial vault,
which circumstance deprives it of this conventional character,
or else we are using the term “‘convention” in a particular
sense. Nothing prevents us, indeed, from conceiving that the
celestial vault—that is, the whole visible universe—performs
some kind of a motion in empty space except the fact that
such a supposition would be altogether trivial and that it would
be a transgression of the essential law of thought which 1s the
basis of the celebrated maxim by which Occam forbids ‘‘the
creation of entities without necessity.”” And without doubt
each time that we obey this fundamental principle and abstain
from introducing useless complications into our conceptions
it may be affirmed that we are creating a convention. But
this convention 1s then a general law of our thought, and it is
at the basis of all universal propositions. It is obviously implied,
but there is no need to emphasize its use in a case like this one.
A proposition very different from that of Streintz and Ludwig
Lange had been previously presented by Carl Neumann.(77)
Neumann admits the existence of a body which he calls Alpha
and which, situated somewhere in space, remains completely
immobile. Every motion having to do with this body becomes
by this fact really absolute, even if it is accomplished uniformly
and in a straight line. An analogous conception had been formu-
lated by Euler,(78) who called this body A, and still earlier
by Newton,(79) who had rejected it after examination. He


THE PRINCIPLE OF INERTIA 135


clearly indicated his reasons: Assuming that this immobile
body exists, such a body, since it is inaccessible to us, can
render us no service from the point of view of our determinations.
That is incontestable, and from the practical point of view a
system like that of Streintz is preferable. But Neumann’s
proposition renders tangible, so to speak, the statement that it
is indeed absolute space which 1s at the basis of our formulae
of motion. What tends to disguise this truth is that, because of
inertia, we can assign only a relative value to uniform and
rectilinear displacement. But it is clear, from the point of
view of pure logic, that if we are to conceive of space as
absolute in certain respects and relative in others, it is indeed
the first of these conceptions which must prevail over the
second. For it is impossible to construct the absolute by means of
the relative ; but the absolute may very well appear momentarily
as a relative, because of the insufficiency of our knowledge. It is
almost superfluous to show, moreover, that the notion of
absolute space 1s in no way repugnant to our imagination.
We have seen that it dominated science until the establish-
ment of the principle of inertia, and we certainly find it very
difficult to accustom ourselves to the idea that the state of rest
of terrestrial bodies is only apparent.

It is not impossible, moreover, that it is all a question of a
transitory stage of science. Electrical theories seem to show
that we must take account not only of motions of ponderable
bodies with respect to one another, but also of the motions of
these bodies in respect to the universal medium, ether. The
question is too complex, and the works of Lorentz and Michel-
son, to cite only these two celebrated names, are too well
known by physicists to call here for even a summary exposition.
It is sufficient to indicate that it is a question of determining
by certain phenomena the absolute displacement of the earth
relatively to the ether. As we have said before, one has suc-
ceeded so far in obtaining only contradictory results.(80) But
the fact alone that this datum could be looked for proves, as
Poincaré recognizes (although he holds strongly to the relativity
of space), that this research was not absurd ;(81) considerations
based upon Newton’s conceptions are, it seems, sufficient to
show it. Besides, there is no proof that research of this kind
must always remain sterile. Now what would happen if we


136 IDENTITY AND REALITY


really succeeded in determining our displacement with respect
to the ether? Doubtless we might consider that this is only a
relative datum, and that nothing prevents us from supposing
that the ether itself is displaced in space. But this would be to
sin against Occam’s maxim. It is therefore infinitely more
probable that eventually we should return to the logical con-
ception of absolute space and absolute motion, considering
the apparent relativity of rectilinear uniform motions as a
simple consequence of the principle of inertia.

Yet we must recognize that, to consider only the most
recent development of physics, this eventuality may appear
infinitely far removed. For from the contradictory results just
spoken of, as regards the measure of the absolute displacement
of the earth in the ether, an entirely new theory has emerged,
that of “local time,”’ the work of Einstein and the lamented
Minkowski. While referring the reader to Langevin’s splendid
article for an exposition of these conceptions—so strangely
disturbing, so difficult to understand to anyone not acquainted
with the experimental facts and mathematical considerations
which gave them birth—we must, however, show in this place
that the fundamental idea of this theory is that of relativity—
absolute relativity in a way, if one may couple these terms
seemingly so discordant. “If different groups of observers are
in uniform translation with respect to one another (such as
observers stationed on the earth in relation to the different
positions of the latter in its orbit), all mechanical and physical
phenomena will follow the same laws for all these groups of
observers. Not one of them, by experiments which are internal
to the material system to which he is bound, could obtain
evidence of the uniform translation of the whole of this
system.”(82) This relativity therefore involves very curious
and important consequences; it forces us to demolish entirely
our concept of time, which too becomes relative. To what a
point these conceptions deviate from all that we have been
accustomed to consider as the natural perception of the
phenomena of motion, may be seen by this example given
by the same competent scientist: “A first group of observers
sees a luminous wave propagated in a certain direction at a
velocity of three hundred thousand kilometres a second, and
sees another group of observers run after that wave at any


THE PRINCIPLE OF INERTIA 137


velocity whatsoever; and yet this second group will see the
luminous wave propagated at the same velocity as the first.” (83)
Thus relativity here ends in conceptions to which our intelli-
gence submits with great difficulty. And it seems clearly to
follow that this idea of relativity can under no circumstances
be treated as axiomatic or serve as a basis for an a priori
deduction.

Consequently the two a priort demonstrations of the principle
of inertia are both equally inadmissible. As a more minute
analysis of the principle itself will show us, far from being
an instinctive notion of our mind, which subsequent reasoning
has only to disengage (which is evidently the definition of the
a priori), inertia, on the contrary, is a conception which offends
our intelligence.

The principle of inertia stipulates the maintenance of
rectilinear velocity. Velocity is the space covered in the unit
of time, or, to express it more clearly, it 1s the quotient of the
space covered by the elapsed time, both being measured by
arbitrary units: V = T

These definitions are exact on condition always that we
remember that the terms tame and space are here taken in a
particular sense. Space means a path—that 1s, the length of a
line limited by two points, and tme, space of time—that 1s,
duration equally included between two precise limits. That is
the natural conception, alone conformable to our immediate
experience. And we see to what a degree it 1s paradoxical
to stipulate that velocity, a derived notion, abstract, deduced
with the help of that of limit, shall persist beyond every limit.
There is something there, doubtless, which shocks our under-
standing. Motion in its original sense means displacement; until
Galileo and Descartes it had always been understood in this
way. Aristotle assimilated it to change. In the most recent and
most advanced theories of dynamic chemistry, those connected
with the work of Gibbs, we may see that we are in the process
of returning partially to these doctrines. But change operates
between limits; also motion, when it takes place in a straight
line, has always been conceived as directed toward a goal.
“There is no change which is eternal,” says Aristotle, speaking
of motion, ‘“‘because naturally every change goes from a certain


138 IDENTITY AND REALITY


state to a certain state; and by a necessary consequence,
every change has for a limit the contraries between which it
occurs.”(84) “‘Impulsion is only motion proceeding from the
impeller itself, or from another, and going toward another.” (85)
This conception, assimilating displacement, change of posi-
tion, to change, is quite in conformity with our natural feeling.
Physicists combat it when it is a question of establishing the
notion of inertia. “It must not be imagined,” says Euler,
“that the conservation of the state of a body includes fixity
in the same place; this actually happens when the body is
at rest, but when it moves with the same velocity and in the
same direction, we say equally well that it remains in the
same state, although it changes place at every moment.’’(86)
But position and place certainly appear to us as things more
real than velocity and even than direction. It is advisable,
indeed, to note it: these two essential elements of the principle
of inertia are equivalent; we have seen that in a prior
demonstrations one is preoccupied with velocity, whereas the
maintenance of direction is considered as requiring no proof.
This feeling has sometimes been expressly stated by physicists.
Laplace (87) and Poisson (88) thought that the principle
of inertia should be considered a priori as regards direction
and a postertort as regards velocity. But it is quite impossible
to maintain that the idea of rectilinear direction is really an
integral part of our concept of motion. We know, on the
contrary, that Aristotle and all physicists before and including
Copernicus and Galileo tacitly accepted the idea that a body
in motion which commenced to change direction must con-
tinue to change it, the radius of curvature remaining constant ;
for, translated into modern language, this is apparently the
fundamental idea of the natural circular motion of celestial
bodies. Let us remember, moreover, how much we were shocked
to learn that a projectile, thrown by a sling, follows the tangent
of the circle which it describes; this is doubtless because we
had no previous feeling that the velocity of the projectile at
each moment is rectilinear and directed along the tangent.(8q)
The modern astronomer sees, so to speak, the moon in the
process of falling unceasingly toward the earth, and a body
revolving with uniform speed in a circle appears to the
physicist as undergoing an acceleration. But, as Duhamel remarks,


THE PRINCIPLE OF INERTIA 139°


this is to divert words from their natural meaning ;(90) we
should say that it does violence to our understanding. From
the point of view of immediate experience, even that of a
modern man, the idea of a body turning perpetually in a
circle without a permanent cause is less shocking than that of
a body which with uniform velocity goes off into space without
a goal and without an end, passing the limits of the conceivable
universe; and yet that is the formula of inertia. The modern
physicist, for whom inertia constitutes the very foundation of
his mechanical conception of the world, has, so to speak, lost the
faculty of being astonished by this paradox, but it sometimes
still attracts the attention of such philosophers as Duehring,(91)
and even Lotze, who, however, as we have seen, attempted
himself an a prior: deduction of the principle. In the passage to
which we allude this philosopher declares that it is strange
to suppose that a body leaves its position without seeking
another,(g2) which is the very point of view of the pre-Galilean
physics, conformable, moreover, to our immediate experience.
This analysis can be pushed still farther. Even the first
part of the principle—that which deals with the body at rest,
and whose a priort character has often been admitted by those,
who, like Duehring,(93) would consider the remainder as
empirical—is far from meriting this honour. We say: a body
cannot set itself in motion, and this statement appears evident
at first. But it is simply a truth of definition. In constituting
the concept of matter we have separated it from motion;
therefore it appears to us henceforth as immobile. This was
explained by Berkeley with admirable clearness: “Let exten-
sion, solidity, figure be taken away from the idea of body,
nothing will remain; but these qualities are indifferent to
motion nor have they anything in them which can be styled
the origin.’’(94) If, now, we wished to endow matter with
motion, we should experience the same difficulty, whether
this motion came from without or whether it had its principle
in matter itself. We have seen that no way exists to render
intelligible the impact of two bodies; and as to action at a dis-
tance, itis a mystery. If a body possesses this incomprehensible
faculty of acting upon another across space, why could it not
put itself in motion? “One of the most general characteristics
of matter is the power, under propitious circumstances, of


140 IDENTITY AND REALITY


%


putting itself in motion,” said a physiologist known for his
attachment to materialistic doctrines.(95) But we can confirm
the result at which we have arrived by abstract considerations
through a closer analysis of certain conceptions of modern
physics.

There is nothing immobile in nature. Not only are all bodies
in motion, but even their parts are in a state of continual
agitation. Here is a mass of water in a vessel; it seems to be at
rest. But it suffices that an opening be made below the level
of the surface to put everything in motion. If we wish to under-
stand anything about this phenomenon, we are obliged to
suppose that rest was only apparent, that in the interior of
the space filled by water motion already previously existed,
although it was invisible.

The agitation of the parts escapes us ordinarily ; sometimes
it is only evident to us under the form of an energy, such as
heat; but Gouy has taught us to render it directly sensible to
the eye under the form of Brownian movement. Moreover,
every body is a source of continual motion for everything that
surrounds it, since it unceasingly radiates heat. If we do not
perceive it, it is because it receives as much motion as it gives
out. Thus immobility, even if relative, is only apparent, and
inert matter is but an unrealizable abstraction. It is therefore
not at all contradictory that, at a given moment, it should
exhibit motion somewhat like a billiard ball which is capable
of transforming its spin 1n translation; and it is in somewhat
the same manner that we are forced to imagine the action of
explosives. ‘Thus our assent to the proposition which stipulates
inertia in a state of rest has its source in none of the motives
we are tempted to attribute to it, and from that fact there
can come no help for the a priors demonstration of the
principle.

It clearly follows from the examination just made that,
contrary to the opinion of d’Alembert and of Lotze, of Kant
and of Maxwell, the principle of inertia cannot be proved a
priori. Inertia is not “‘an integral part of the concept of motion”
(Lotze),(96) and in denying it one does not place himself
“in contradiction to the only system of consistent doctrine
about space and time which the human mind has been able
to form” (Maxwell).(97) On the contrary, as Mill clearly


THE PRINCIPLE OF INERTIA 14!


perceived, it is a paradoxical proposition to which “humanity
for a long time gave faith only with great difficulty.” (98)

On the other hand, it seems scarcely contestable that this
principle may be considered as an experimental truth. Assuredly
direct experience is impossible. All bodies we know obey the
law of gravitation, and we have no means of abstracting them
from the action of that force. Rectilinear and uniform motion
cannot therefore be realized. We may, it is true, resolve the
motions of the celestial bodies; it has been sometimes said that
they constitute the best demonstration of the principle of
inertia, and that is true in a certain sense. But considered
as an original fact, this resolution would lack demonstrative
force; the other component, gravitation, remains enveloped in
mystery. Hegel was doubtless wrong to protest, in a passage
which has often served as a theme for those who scorn meta-
physics, against the supposition that cclestial bodies were
pulled about in different directions, and to declare that they
traversed space “like free gods.’’(99) But, after all, he only
formulated the instinctive resistance which our reason opposes
at the outset to a resolution of this kind.

It is better, then, to begin with terrestrial objects. We
easily ascertain that bodies endowed with a rectilinear and
uniform motion in relation to the earth (as are, for instance,
those on board a vessel) act exactly as those which are at rest
with respect to the earth. Moreover, this rest is only apparent.
Consideration of the motions of celestial bodies forces us to
suppose that the earth is displaced in space with considerable
velocity, and all that is on our planet must, as a matter of fact,
describe very complicated curves in space. Yet the radii of
curvature of these lines are very great; for the motion of which
the radius of curvature is the smallest, the rotation of the earth,
we succeed in establishing perceptible effects ; but in establish-
ing them, we can climinate them. We may, then, without
risking an appreciable error, consider the paths described by
terrestrial objects as straight lines, and to the uniform motion
in a straight line belong consequently the properties which we
attribute to rest. This is the principle of inertia in a nutshell,
such as d’Alembert formulates it; for the composition of
motions proceeds directly from it.

But if the principle of inertia is capable of being considered


142 IDENTITY AND REALITY


as an experimental truth, is it really as such that it appears to
our reason, that it forces our assent? Is there not something
really strange in the fact that men as eminent as those whose
names we have cited were able to be deceived about it?

We can ascertain first of all that the demonstration here
presented was not possible at the time when the principle was
established, or at least it was then incomplete. One could not
turn to account the motion of celestial bodies which for us
contributes so much to confirm the apparently paradoxical
idea, that motion is something perpetual, when we see every
terrestrial motion rapidly disappear; one could not even rely
upon the fact that terrestrial objects ought to be considered
as in a state of uniform and rectilinear motion. Galileo was
doubtless Copernican, and Descartes, too, although he some-
times used ambiguous expressions. But that theory certainly
could not be treated as an indisputable truth, as it appears to
us to-day, and if a logical bond was established between
inertia (or the relativity of motion as in Cusa and Copernicus)
and the motion of the earth, it was for the sake of basing the
second of these conceptions on the first and not inversely.
After the results of Galileo and until the discoveries of Newton
there was even a source of contradiction therein, and if Galileo
maintained, as did Copernicus, the conception of the natural
circular motion of celestial bodies, it is certainly because he
saw no other means of explaining their orbits. No one before
Borelli attributed the motion of celestial bodies to the action
of inertia. (100)

Consequently, one may ask how in spite of these difficulties,
in spite of its profoundly paradoxical appearance, in spite of the
fact that only a scarcely convincing demonstration was possible
at that moment, the principle of inertia could have been so
rapidly accepted as the foundation of all mechanics. Let us see
in the first place in what way Galileo and Descartes presented it.

Galileo has sometimes been called a great experimenter ; but
that, says Tannery with much propriety, is to disregard com-
pletely historic truth.(101) Thus, in reference to inertia, he
often speaks of stones falling from the top of a mast upon a
moving ship,(102) and of animals walking on board a ship,
(103) and he seems really to have made these experiments.
But these are confirmations upon which he lays little stress.


THE PRINCIPLE OF INERTIA 143


Yet, in expounding the system, he seems to rely upon the
observed facts ; it is the experiment of the ball on a plane which
Cusa and Benedetti both used. Galileo uses the following
words in the exposition of it in the Sixth Day of The Dialogues
on the New Sciences: “And it seems to me that there happens
here what happens to a moving body that is heavy and per-
fectly round, which, if it is placed on a plane that is very
polished and somewhat inclined, will descend of itself naturally
while acquiring always greater velocity, but if, on the contrary,
one wished to push it from the lower to the higher part we
should have to confer upon it an impulse (impeto) which will
always diminish and will finally be annihilated; but if the
plane is not inclined but horizontal, such a solid sphere will do
what we wish—that is, if we place it at rest, it will remain at
rest, and if we give it an impulse in any direction, it will
move in this latter, conserving always the same velocity which
it will have received from our hand, not having the power
(azione) to increase or diminish it, it being given that there
exists on such a plane neither descent nor ascent.” (104)

We can easily see that if this were an experimental proof, it
would only apply to horizontal motion, and even within these
limits it would be singularly weak. We shall admit that the
moving body in remounting a plane, however little inclined it
may be, will diminish in velocity. We shall admit equally that
it will remain at rest on a horizontal plane. But it does not in
the least follow that it must always descend a plane, however
little inclined it may be, with a velocity constantly increasing.
Let us suppose with Aristotle that motion by impulse continues
only by the agitation of the medium, or with Benedetti that
the impulse dics out little by little; in both cases we shall have
what to-day would be called a “negative acceleration,” and
a certain positive acceleration would be necessary to re-establish
the equilibrium—that is, the motion would become uniform
at a certain inclination of the plane. This would be somewhat
like the idea of Pappus, and, moreover, it is known that direct
experience, given the unevenness of the plane and of the
moving object and the resistance of the air, would tend to
confirm a conception of this kind. But does not the very manner
in which Galileo presents the facts show clearly that it is a
question of experiments that are not real, but merely “imagined”’


414 IDENTITY AND REALITY


ones, what the Germans call “‘thought-experiments”’ (Gedanken-
experimente)? It was in his imagination that Galileo set up his
infinitely smooth plane, and there he inclines it less and less,
sometimes in one direction, sometimes in the other; this is
why he does not deem it necessary to give a single precise
datum, a single figure resulting from these experiments.
Moreover, Galileo himself takes care to warn us of this. The
passage from the Sixth Day, which we have just cited, is only
the development of another passage, probably of older
origin, which is in the Fourth Day. This begins with these
words: “‘Any moving body projected upon a horizontal plane
I conceive of by Thought (mente concipio) as isolated from every
hindrance. . . .’’(105)

What, then, is the real foundation of Galileo’s demonstra-
tion? It is, so to speak, implied, and Galileo himself only feebly
hints at it toward the end of the passage, but that is because
he had already clearly indicated it in the pages which precede.
It is, indeed, the Third Day that contains the real exposition
of the principle, applied this time to motion in any direction
and not only to horizontal motion. “‘But on the horizontal
plane,” says Galileo, after having spoken of the inclined
plane, “‘motion is uniform, for there exists no cause of accelera-
tion or of retardation. . . . It must, moreover, be remarked
that every degree of velocity which 1s found in a moving object
is, by its very nature, impressed upon it in an indelible fashion
when one removes the external causes of acceleration or of
retardation, as takes place in a horizontal plane alone. .

It follows equally that motion on a horizontal plane is
eternal.” (106)

Descartes always presents inertia as a pure deduction; in this
connection he scarcely mentions real circumstances, such as
the resistance of the air, which would be of a nature to distort the
observation. Descartes starts from a principle which he calls the
“First Law of Nature,” and which he thus formulates: ‘‘That
everything remains in the condition it is in as long as nothing
changes it.” That is the title of the XXXVIIth Chapter of the
Second Part of the Principia, and in the text this law is deduced
from the fact that ‘‘God is not subject to change and He acts
always in the same way.” It follows, ‘“‘when some part of this
matter is square, it always remains square, if nothing happens


THE PRINCIPLE OF INERTIA 145


which changes its figure; and that if it is at rest, it does not
begin to move of itself. But when it has once begun to move,
we have no reason to think that it must ever cease to move
with the same force as long as it encounters nothing which
retards or which stops this motion.” After having thus
established the perpetuity of motion, Descartes stipulates, in
a special formula, that it must continue in a straight line. This
is his second law, which he states as follows: ““That every body
which moves tends to continue its motion in a straight line,”
simply remarking in the text of the XXXIXth Chapter, of
which this formula constitutes the ttle, ‘“This rule, like the
preceding one, depends on the fact that God is immovable.”

This argument was sufficient to obtain the agreement of
contemporaries: the principle of inertia, almost immediately
dominated science, and this in spite of the fact that people had
been accustomed for so many centuries to the antagonistic
doctrines of Aristotle. Some have been astonished by this—
wrongly, we think. Descartes, in rendering precise what was
only obscurely hinted at by Galileo, clearly expounded what
constitutes the true foundation of inertia, that by which this
principle is impressed upon our minds.

We saw that originally the concept of velocity is only a
relation between two limited terms, and that motion appears
as a change, analogous to a change of colour. We no longer
believe this. Motion appears to us as a state, analogous conse-
quently not to a change of colour but to colour itself.

We see that this conception approaches that of Themistius
and Cardanus, for whom impulse communicated to a body
is something analogous to heat. It may be said that in this
case it would have been sufficient to consider heat as a sub-
stance or as a substantial accident (which was quite conformable
to the peripatetic doctrine) for the principle of inertia to have
been conceived.

This conclusion may seem paradoxical. As a matter of fact
we know of no principle of conservation of colour, and since
the overthrow of Black’s theory we no longer believe in the
conservation of heat. But we have seen that there is a profound
difference between the phenomena of motion and all others.
The former appear to us as simple and primary, the latter as
complicated and secondary, capable of being explained by the

K


146 IDENTITY AND REALITY


first, which must constitute the foundation of things. When
the solution of permanganate of potassium, which used to be
called a ‘“‘mineral chameleon,” successively changes colour,
we are convinced that these modifications must have a cause,
that they are the consequence of changes which are produced
in the colouring substance; but these modifications in them-
selves, or, in any case, the bond which attaches them to changes
of colour, may remain hidden provisionally. It is not so with a
phenomenon of motion; there is nothing “behind” it. Con-
sequently, if motion is a state, if it must maintain itself as
every other state, we can express it under an absolute form,
make of it a principle, without fear of the intervention of
any mysterious agent.

It is thus that motion, having become a state, transforms
itself into an entity, a substance—that is, in virtue of the
principle of causality, our mind shows the invincible tendency
to maintain its identity in time, to conserve it. The body
which is displaced is in a “‘state of motion.” What distinguishes
this state from others, what constitutes, to follow our metaphor,
its particular shade, is its velocity. When we have really grasped
this idea, we immediately admit that velocity is not a quotient,
that it has no need of limits, that it exists in each fraction of
time, no matter how small, and that it is a derivative. And it is
thus velocity whose conservation we are stating.

Here, it seems, is the true foundation of the principle. And
although the possibility of an experimental proof exists, it is
really this argument which produces our strong conviction, so
different from that with which we receive purely empirical
formulae. There is also that obscure feeling that there is, at the
basis of the principle, something other than pure empiricism,
which explains why a priort demonstrations have been so
obstinately searched for. Consequently, Descartes has disclosed
the essence of the principle in relating it to the “immutability
of God,”’ to the conviction that everything in nature persists.
His, therefore, is the merit not only of having been the first
loudly to proclaim the principle, but also to indicate its true
foundation. And it is clear that Kant’s formula, “Every
change in nature has an external cause,” is but a transforma-
tion of the First Law of Descartes, both being only forms of the
principle of identity in time, as we have defined it. Schopen-


THE PRINCIPLE OF INERTIA 147


hauer simply summarized this teaching in declaring that the
principle of inertia is a priort, because it is a consequence of.
the principle of causality;(107) and Spir follows the same
tradition in deducing it directly from the principle of
identity. (108)

We can now reply to the question we asked: Is the principle
of inertia a priort or a posteriori ? It is neither one nor the other,
because it is both at the same time. Doubtless in the present
state of our knowledge this principle admits of an empirical
demonstration that is perfectly valid, although indirect; but,
as a matter of fact, the principle was not thus established in the
beginning, and even now this demonstration does not constitute
the real foundation of our conviction. This latter rests upon the
fact that the principle is capable of assuming a form which
makes it appear as derived from the causal principle.

This latter principle certainly is a priori. But we have seen
that this is not a statement from which we can directly deduce
precise propositions ; it is that which renders nugatory all @ priort
demonstrations from Descartes to d’Alembert and Spir. For,
taken literally, the principle of identity in time would signify:
everything persists, an affirmation immediately denied by experi-
ence; we can accept it only with the aid of this subsidiary
proposition : everything 1s motion. Hence the statement becomes:
certain essential things persist. But this is an indefinite formula, for
it does not tell us what are the things which persist and which,
consequently, we ought to consider as essential. It is experience
alone which can teach us that. But in this matter experience
plays a peculiar réle, in the sense that it is not free, for it obeys
the principle of causality, which we may call more precisely
the causal tendency, because it manifests its action in command-
ing us to seek in the diversity of phenomena something which
persists. The formula constitutes thus, according to Boutroux’s
admirable expression, not a law but a “‘mould”’ of laws.

From what we have just contended for the principle of
inertia, we can draw this general conclusion: every proposition
stipulating identity in time appears to us as invested a priort
with a high degree of probability. It finds our minds pre-
pared, it seduces them, and is immediately adopted, unless
contradicted by very evident facts. Perhaps it would be wise to
apply to statements of this category, intermediary between


148 IDENTITY AND REALITY


the a priort and the a posteriori, a special term. We should
propose, for lack of a better one, the term plaustble. Therefore
every proposition stipulating identity in time, every law of
conservation, is plausible. (109)

And in the light of the results to which we have come, one
cannot indeed admire enough the force of this tendency. The
principle of inertia demands that we conceive of velocity as a
substance. Now this is a conception entirely paradoxical to
the immediate understanding, according to which velocity is
a simple relation, an idea which one must violate, so to
speak, in order to show that 1t may be conceived as a quality.
How does it happen, then, that our mind accepts so easily,
without experiencing any shock, this strange notion? The reply
does not seem doubtful to us; we accept it because it can serve
to satisfy the causal tendency. It suffices that we be able to
conceive of the conservation of velocity for the very nature of
this notion to undergo immediately a prodigious transformation.

We must add also that at least for the modern mind the con-
ception of motion as a state 1s fortified by the habits of thought
which the infinitesimal calculus gives us. They certainly con-
tribute in obliging us to accept the idea of velocity as a deriva-
tive. But we may ask whether without the principle of inertia
these mathematical conceptions could ever have been applied
to the science of motion, and though admitting that the funda-
mental ideas, upon which the methods of Newton and Leibniz
rest, existed in embryo anterior to the work of these thinkers, yet
one can hardly attribute to them an active rdle in the formation
of the concept of “‘motion as a state.”’ It is rather this last
conception, born in the manner we have just shown, which
seems to have helped in the growth of the notions which are the
foundation of the infinitesimal calculus.


NOTES


1. Such seems to be the opinion of Paul Tannery, Galilde et les principes de
la dynamique. Revue générale des science, Vol. XII, 1g01, p. 333. Cf. also
René Berthelot, Bilbioth¢que du Congrés de philosophie de 1900, Vol. IV,
Pp. 99-

2. Cf. Masiureau: 1.c., pp. 210-211. Mabilleau is certainly right in
supposing that the passage from Aristotle translated by him (Metaphys., XII,


THE PRINCIPLE OF INERTIA 149


6, 1071), and in which the natural motion of the atoms is in question, is a
quotation from Democritus. The following, ‘“‘there is properly neither
cause nor reason for that which exists eternally,” expresses an opinion of
the atomist against which Aristotle constantly protested. Cf. also De
generatione animalium, I, 6.

3. Diocenes Larerrius (The Lives, Opinions and Remarkable Sayings of
the Most Famous Ancient Philosophers, trans. London, 1688, Vol. II, p. 212),
expressly affirms that Democritus declared that atoms are carried across
space by a circular motion. For information about the motion of rotation
in the ancients, cf., p. 115.

4. AristoTLe: De Caelo. J. L. Stocks. Oxford, 1922, Book I, Chap. II,
§ 5. ‘Supposing, then, that there is such a thing as simple movement, and
that circular movement is an instance of it, and that both movement of a
simple body is simple and simple movement is of a simple body—then
there must necessarily be some simple body which revolves naturally and
in virtue of its own nature with a circular movement.” /b., Book II, Chap. I,
§2. ‘And this motion, being perfect, contains those imperfect motions
which have a limit and a goal, having itself no beginning or end, but unceas-
ing through the infinity of time.’”’ (Metaphysics. Smith and Ross. Oxford,
1918, Book XII, Chap. VI.) “And there is no continuous movement
except movement in place, and of this only that which is circular is
continuous.”

5. Cf., p. 123.

6. Pappus: ed. Hultsch. Berlin, 1876, Book VIII, prop. g (Vol. TIT,
p. 1055), Chap. X. A detailed exposition of the theory of Pappus will be
found in Duhem, Les origines de la statique. Paris, 1905, p. 189 and ff.

7. Prorarcnu: Moralia: Of the Face appearing within the Orb of the Moon.
Revised by Goodwin. Boston, 1871, p. 241.

8. Cf., p. 123.

g. Appendix II, p. 457.

10. Cf. Wourwitt: Die Entdeckung des Beharrungsgesetzes, Zeitschrift fuer
Voelkerpsychologie, XIV, p. 379.

11. Quaestiones mechanicae, ed. Vian Cappelie. Amsterdam, 1812, Chap. IX,
P- 433.

12. Sextus Empiricus: Adversus mathematicos. U adversus physicos, Section I,
De motu, § 55 and ff. Opera, ed. Fabricius. Leipzig, 1718, p. 643.

13. 1b., § 57.

14. 1b., ROSENBERGER (Geschichte der Physik. Braunschweig, 1884, Vol. I,
p. 47) believes that the absence of conceptions which from our point of view
result from the principle of inerula was one of the determining reasons for
the triumph of geocentric theories in the astronomy of the ancients. Only
philosophers were able to envisage the motion of the carth ; the Alexandrians,
accustomed to observe, were necessarily alienated from such a conception.
It cannot be said that this opinion is contradicted by the exposition of Sextus
Empiricus. It seems, indeed, that these theories only arose much later
and that they were considered as a kind of paradox, capable of casting
doubt on conceptions which common sense accepted as firmly established,
but which could not serve as a basis for any precise statement. Yet one


150 IDENTITY AND REALITY


should perhaps only make use of negative deductions of this kind with
prudence. If to-morrow we were to find the writings of Aristarchus of
Samos, who knows if we would not find arguments quite analogous to those
employed by Copernicus?

15. W. Wunpt: Die Prinzipien der mechanischen Naturlehre, and ed. Stutt-
gart, 1910, p. 36.

16. Dune: Etudes sur Léonard de Vinci. Paris, 1906—09, I, p. 111 and ff.;
II, p. 194 and ff.

17. 1b., Il, pp. 247-249.

18. Nic. Cusanus: Opera. Bale, 1565, Chaps. X-XIITI, p. 38 and ff.

19. Cf., pp. 121, 143.

20. We saw earlier that the theory of the impetus had, before Cusa,
been expounded by Albert of Saxony. It is to be noticed that this latter
had applied the concept also to rotating bodies, and especially to the
motion of a mill, and the passage from the Parisian master cited by Duhem
on this subject (Etudes sur Léonard de Vinci, and series, Paris, 1909, pp. 198-199)
seems evidently to be the source of Cusa’s opinions on the same subject.

21. Cusanvus: l.c., pp. 212-214.

22. Nic. Copernici: De revolutionibus orbium coelestium, Libri V1. Thorn,
1873, Book I, Chap. VIII, p. 23.

23. Bernardini Telesii Cosentini, De rerum natura, etc. Naples, 1570,
Book II, Chap. L, p. 85.

24. Cf. Appendix III, p. 460 and ff.

25. Carpentarius: Philosophia libera, 2nd ed., Oxford, 1622, p. 67.
Concerning the use of proof through the absurd, cf., p. 123.

26. Le livre de Hidrome Cardanus, médecin milanais, De la Subtilité. Trans.
Richard Le Blanc. Paris, 1556, f. 47. The term which Le Blanc translated
by impeluosité is impetus. Cf. Hier. Carpani. De Subtilitate. Nuremberg,
1550, p. 56.

27. According to Duhem’s curious proof (Etudes sur Léonard de Vinci, 1,
pp. rir and ff., 208 and ff.), it was Leonardo who, directly inspired by
Albert of Saxony, introduced these conceptions into Italy. It would appear
that he did not publish his studies on this question, and that his manu-
scripts were utilized by a certain number of people; Cardanus, and even
Benedetti, in regard to the vis tmpressa, did scarcely more than pillage them.

28. Io. Baptist: Bengpicri: Diversorum speculationum liber. Turin. 1585,
p. 160 and ff.

2g. Cf. Dunem: Les origines de la statique. Paris, 1905, pp. 108, 109.

30. Rosensercer: Geschichte der Physik, Vol. I, p. 122, The current
conception was less logical but for that very reason less contrary to evidence ;
the two straight lines were joined by the arc of a circle. The picture of the
trajectory thus conceived will be found in Carpanvs, trans. Le Blanc, § 49.
According to Duhem (/.c., I, pp. 112-113) this opinion originated in
Leonardo.


gt. Bangperti: l.c., Verum idem est impressum illum impetum paulatim
32. Gaiiz0: Sermones de motu gravium. Opere. Florence, 1842~56,
Vol. XI, p. 33.


THE PRINCIPLE OF INERTIA 151


33. Cf.E. Wonwitt: Die Entdeckung des Beharrungsgesetzes. <eitschrift fuer
Voelkerspsychologte, Vol. XV, 1884, p. 110.

34. 16., p. 124.

35. 1b., p. 103 and ff.

36. Cf, p. 143

37. Cf. Durem: Les origines de la statique, p. 332.

38. Concerning the history of the principle of inertia useful indications
will be found in Rosenberger (Geschichte der Physik. Brunswick, 1884), and
in Lasswitz (Geschichte der Atomistik. Hamburg, 1890, Vol. I, p. 19 and ff.).
In regard to Galileo and Descartes we have followed especially Wohlwill,
l.c., whose appreciation seems very just to us. Cf. also P. Tannery, Galilée
et les principes de la dynamique. Revue générale des sciences, Vol. XIII, 1g01,
P-. 333:

39. Descartes: Principes. Geuvres, Vol. UX. Paris, 1904, I1, Chap. XLITTI.
““[A body] when it is at rest has the force to remain in this rest and to
resist everything which could change it. In the same way, when it moves,
it has the force to continue to move, with the same velocity and in the same
direction.”

40. D’ALEMBERT: Dynamique, 2nd ed. Paris, 1757, p. 3.

41. Lorze: System der Philosophie. Leipzig, 1874-79, Metaphysik, p. 311 1.
Lotze appears, however, to have changed somewhat his opinion on this
point. Cf. id., Grundzuege der Naturphilosophie, 2nd ed. Leipzig, 18809,
p. 11.

42. ARISTOTLE: Physics, Book IV, Chap. XI, § 8. “One may observe that
projectiles continue to move when the object which threw them no longer
continues to touch them, either because of the surrounding reaction, as is
sometimes said, or because of the action of the air, which, having been
stirred, stirs in its turn, producing a more rapid motion than is the natural
tendency of the body toward the place proper to it. But in the void nothing
like that can occur and no body can have motion unless this body is
unceasingly sustained and carried like a load in a chariot.” §9. “It would
be still impossible to say why in the void a body once put into motion
could ever stop anywhere. Consequently, it will either necessarily remain
at rest, or if it has motion, this motion will necessarily be infinite if some
stronger obstacle does not happen to prevent it.”

43. Hersert Spencer: First Principles. London, 1863, p. 246.

44. Paut Tannery: Galilée, Revue générale des sciences, XII, 1901, p. 334-

45. P. Dunem: La théorie physique. Paris, 1906, p. 434.

46. Cf. Tannery, l.c., Colonel Hartmann (Bull. Soc. phil., 5th year, 1905,
p. 103 and ff.) developed a very remarkable theory of mechanical motion,
in entire abstraction from the principle of inertia as we formulate it to-day,
and based, on the contrary, upon the fact that the body and the medium
constitute an indivisible whole, the motion of the body being due to the
existence, in the surrounding space, of material elements ‘which, from the
moment that it is freed, at first cause and afterwards continue its displace-
ment.”

47. Cf. pp. 116, 117 f. It is well known that Descartes formulated it with
great care. Principes. Gewores, Vol. UX. Paris, 1904, and Part, Chap. XXVIII,


152 IDENTITY AND REALITY


title: ‘““That motion in its real meaning has relation only to the bodies
which touch that which is said to move.”

48. Kant: Aetaphysische Anfangsgriinde der Naturwissenshaft, Trans.
ANDLER ct CHAVANNES. Paris, 1891, p. 21.

49. 1b., p. 14. C£. ib., p. 87.

50. Ib., p. 76.

51. Maxwett: Matter and Motion. London, 1902, p. 36.

52. It goes without saying that the concept of the relativity of space,
which we are here discussing and which is that bearing on the classical
principle of inertia, is entirely different from those which Einstein employs
in the two theories of special relativity and general relativity. Cf. for the
first of these conceptions, p. 136. Cf. also what we say concerning the
relations between the concept of relativity of space which the Copernicans
used more or less implicitly with that of Einstein, La Déduction Relatiziste, § 35.

53. Descartes: Gurres, Vol. I. Paris, 1897, p. 216. Lettre d Mersenne,
1632.

54. Id., Principes. Ewes, Vol. UX. Paris, 1904, 4th Part, Chap. XXI-
XXII. Wundt (Die physikalischen Axiome, Erlangen, 1866, p. 37) has pointed
out that in general Descartes’ vortices constitute a manifest contradiction
of the principle of inertia.

55. Newton: Principia, New York, 1848, pp. 80-81.

56. Jb., p. 77.

57. Newton seems to have adopted in this question Henry More’s ideas
on the reality of empty space. Cf. on this subject Ludwig Lange. Die
geschichtliche Entwicklung des Bewegungsbegriffs, etc. Leipzig, 1886, p. 44.

58. Henri Bercson: Introduction d la metaphysique. Revue de métaphysique,
AI, 1903, p. 2.

59. Berxecey: De motu. Works, ed. Fraser. London, 1871, Vol. IIT, § 59.
Concipiantur porro duo globi et practerea nil corporeum existere. Concipiantur deinde
vires quomodocunque applicari; quicquid tandem per applicationem viriwm intelligamus,
motus circularis duorum globorum circa commune centrum nequit per imaginationem
conci~t. Supponamus deinde coelum fixarum creart: subito ex concepte appulsu
globorum ad diversos caeli istius partes motus concipietur. Cf. ib., § 64.

60. E. Macn: Die Mechanik, trans. Emile Bertrand. Paris, 1904, p. 225.
Mach, it is true, claims to be a partisan of the relativity of space, but in a
very particular sense. The idea rejected by him comes back to that which
we have qualified as absolute metaphysical space.

61. It goes without saying that instead of the totality of bodies one can
also introduce the ether, which is only, it is true, a hypostasis of space
(cf. p. 249 and ff.), but precisely of physical space. The essential point is
that one docs not attribute these properties to space properly so called,
but to that with which it is filled. It is known that Mach’s conception has
since been used as a general basis by Einstein.

62. One may affirm, if necessary, that the complete establishment of
the principle of inertia, in the sense which we give to it to-day, dates only
from Newton's exposition, Descartes, we have already seen, having con-
sidered the rotation of the earth as a relative motion.

63. L. Eutzr: Theoria motus. Rostock, 1765, Chap. II, § 78 and ff.


THE PRINCIPLE OF INERTIA 153


64. Pomnsot: Théorie nouvelle de la rotation des corps. Paris, 1852, p. 51.

65. Cart Neumann: Ueber dis Principien der Galilei-Newton’schen Theorie.
Leipzig, 1870.

66. Cf., for example, Lopce, in Nature, Vol. LVII, 1894; A. B. Basset, id. ;
Andrade, Les idées directrices de la mécanique. Revue philosophique, Vol. XLVI,
1898, p. 400; and especially Painlevé, Les axiomes de la mécanique et le principe
de causalité. Bulletin de la Société frangatse de philosophie, 5th year, 1905, p. 27
and ff. Cf. also Henri Bergson, Matiere et Mémoire. Paris, 1903, p. 214.

67. Doubtless, H. Poincaré formulated the general opinion of con-
temporary physicists in affirming that the fact that one can measure the
velocity of absolute rotation ‘‘shocks the philosopher,” but that the physicist
is forced to accept it (Des fondements de la géometrie. Revue de métaphysique,
Vol. VII, 1899, p. 269).

68. NewTon: l.c., p. 17.

69. Neumann: I.c., p. 14.

970. It indeed seems that at a given moment science recognized, or at
least understood, a principle which might be described as that of the
relativity of motion. We have tried to appreciate its importance (cf, Appen-
dix IIT), and it will be seen to be confused in no wise with our present
principle of inertia. As to the principle of relativity conceived of in the
sense of the contemporary electron theory, cf., p. 136.

71. Streintz: Die physikalischen Grundlagen der Mechanik. Leipzig, 1883,
Pp. 24-25.

72. Cf. p. 33.

73. Euxer: i.c., § too.

74. Inthe Revue générale des sciences, 1904, p. 881, will be found the descrip-
tion of a new apparatus, but also based upon the principle of the gyroscope.

75. This conception presents also the difficulty of making the measure of
time depend upon the principle of inertia (cf., p. 33 and ff.).

76. E. Macu: Die Afechamk, trans. Bertrand. Paris, 1g04. p. 2333
cf. also Kicinpeter, Arch. fuer systematische Philosophie, Vol. VI, 1g00, p. 469.

77. Neumann: /.c.

78. Eurer: f.c., § 99.

79. Newton: lc., p. 79. “‘And therefore, as it is possible that in the
remote regions of the fixed stars, or perhaps far beyond them, there may
be some body absolutely at rest, but impossible to know, from the position
of bodies relative to one another in our regions, whether any of these do
keep the same position relative to that remote body ; it follows that absolute
rest cannot be determined from the position of bodies in our regions.”

80. Cf. p. 65.

81. H. Poincaré: La science et l'hypothése, p. 201. In a more recent work
(Science et méthode. Paris, 1908, p. 2393) Poincaré estimates also that to
determine the absolute velocity of the earth (with respect to the ether)
““would be perhaps less shocking than it seems at first.”’

82. P. Lanogvin: L’dvolution de [espace et du temps. Scientia, July 1, 1911,


P. 35.
83. Id., L'évolution de Pespace et du temps. Revue de métaphysique, July 1911,
P. 458.


154 IDENTITY AND REALITY


84. ARISTOTLE: Physics, 1, VIII, Chap. H, § 2.

85. Id., De Caelo, trans. J. L. Stocks. Oxford, 1922, III, Chap. II, § 2.

86. L. Eucer: Letires d une princesse d’ Allemagne. Paris, 1812, Vol. I,
P- 332.

87. Laprace: Mécanique celeste. CEuvres. Paris, 1878, 1st Part, rst § 4.

88. Porson: Traild de mécanique, 2nd ed, Paris, 1833, p. 207.

89. It is known that astronomers for a long time searched for a force
which makes the planets move (cf. Appendix III, p. 458 and ff.). Borelli
in 1666 was the first to introduce the idea that they were displaced under
the action of inertia, combined with a centripetal force, directed toward
the sun. Cf. Rosenberger, J.c., Vol. Il, p. 166, and Duhem, La théorte

physique, pp. 407-408.

go. Dunamec: Cours de mécanique, 3rd ed. Paris, 1862, p. 19.

gt. Duenrinc: Aritische Geschichte der allgemeinen Prinzipien der Mechanik.
Berlin, 1862, p. 32.

g2. Lorze: Gnundzuege der Naturphilosophie, 2nd ed. Leipzig, 1889,
pp. 13-14. Cf. 15., p. 354: es ist eine ortsbestimmende Kraft.

93- Durnrinc: /.c.

94. Berxevey: Works, ed. Fraser. London, 1871, Vol. III, De motu, § 29.

g5- Morescuott: La circulation de la vie, trans. Cazecves. Paris, 1866,
p. 96. One may compare Moleschott’s affirmation with this proposition
of Maupertius, Cosmologie. Curres. Lyon, 1756, Vol. I, p. 93: ‘Although it
was absurd to say that a part of matter which cannot move itself could
move another.”’

96. Cf. earlier, p. 123.

97. MAXxwe.L: Matter and Motion. London, 1902, p. 36.

98. J. S. Mitv: A System of Logic. London, 1884, p. 160.

gg. Hecer.: Naturphilosophie, § 269, Werke. Berlin, 1842, Vol. VII.
Cf. P. G. Tart, Les progres récents de la physique. Paris, 1886, p. 15.

100. Cf. p. 154, n. 89.

101. P. Tannery: Galilée. Revue générale des sciences, Vol. XII, 1901,
PP- 335-337-

102. GauiLzo: Dialogo interno ai due massimi sistemi. Opere. Florence,
1842, Vol. I, p. 165 and ff. Lettre a Ingoli, ib., Vol. U1, p. 99 and ff.

103. Id., Massimi sistemi, p. 206.

104. Id., Discorst. Opere, Vol. XUII, p. 323.

105. 1b., p. 154.

106. 16., p. 200. Al in plano horizontali motus est acquabilis cum nulla 1bi sit
causa accelerationis aut retardationis. ... Atlendere insuper licet quod velocitatis
gradus quicungue in mobili reperiatur, est in illo suapte natura indibiliter impressus
dum externae causae accelerationis aut retardationis tollantur, quod in solo horizontalt
plano contingit. . . . Ex quo pariter sequitur motum in horizontali esse quoque
aclerrum.

107. Das a priori gesicherte, weil aus der Causalitact folgende Gesetz der Traegheit.
Scuopennauer. Die Welt als Wille und Vorstellung, ed. Frauenstaedt. Leipzig,

1877, Vol. I, p. 79.

‘108. Spm: Pensde et réalité, pp. 411, 419; cf. Preface by Penjon, p. ix.

109. The fact that certain scientific statements constitute only a particular


THE PRINCIPLE OF INERTIA 155


expression of the metaphysical principle of substance, and that one must
distinguish in this respect between the form and the content of statements
was perceived by Kant (cf. later, p. 400). Following considerations of an
entirely different order, Poinsot has formulated the very general proposition
which we have placed at the head of this book (cf. concerning the context
of this passage, p. 226). Whewell, in following the way traced by Kant,
succeeds in rectifying a very important point in Kant’s views (cf. p. 401).
In one of his first philosophical works (Die physikalischen Axtome und thre
Beziehung zum Causalprincip. Erlangen, 1866, re-edited, with some changes,
under the tide, Die Prinzipien der mechanischen Naturlehre. Scuttgart, 1910)
Wundt, while insisting on a very different aspect of these statements (in so
far as they are due to ‘“‘thought-experiments’’), shows that they derive
from a general formula which is that of the equivalence of cause and effect.
Our reason tends to impose it upon Experience, which resists it. Reason
is incapable of determining in advance the expression to which the formula
must be applied; but every statement containing a causal relation, even
though it be discovered by empirical means, may be reduced to a form
which lends logical evidence to it (2nd ed., pp. 12, 86, 110, 115, 146, 147).
A little later Spir (Denken und Wirklichkeatt. Leipzig, 1873. French trans.
of Penjon. Paris, 1895) discusses at great length the principle of identity.
He determines its double content, analytical and synthetical (cf. earlier,
p- 43), and shows the disagreement between this exigency of our thought
and the external world (cf. 41) and recognizes the true nature of scientific
explanation (Pensée et réalile, pp. 275, 493, 498). He also establishes the
relation between his principle of identity on the one hand and atomism
and the principles of conservation on the other (ib., pp. 411, 419-424
and ff.). These deductions, so important but a little obscure, and at times,
it seems, infected with some confusion (the principal source of which
must be sought, doubtless, in the fact that Spir did not recognize with
sufficient clearness the concept of lawfulness as distinct in itself, cf.
later, p. 439), seem to have exercised but little influence afterwards.
Kroman, probably, was unaware of them, when with more clearness but
less energy than his predecessor he presented very analogous deductions
(Unsere Naturerkenntnis, German trans. of Fischer Benzon. Copenhagen,
1833, especially p. 247 ff.). Kroman, moreover, tried to distinguish in a
certain measure the two concepts which we have designated as those of
lawfulness and of causality (cf. earlier, p. 18). With still greater precision,
although in quite an incidental manner, Paul Tannery explains (in
regard to the theories of certain pre-Socratic philosophers, especially of
Melissus) that at the basis of the principles of conservation there is a more
general formula, an exigency of our thought, which stipulates the permanency
of something throughout the variability of phenomena, and that that is
the true principle of causality or of scientific explanation (Pour servir
a l'histoire de la science helléne. Paris, 1887, p. 264 and ff.). The same year
Planck, in a book devoted to the principle of the conservation of energy
(Das Prinzip der Erhaltung der Energie, Leipzig, 1887, and ed. Leipzig, 1908),
marvels at the very small number of experiments upon which Mayer,
Colding, and Joule depended to establish the principle in question, and


156 IDENTITY AND REALITY


asks whether the rapid success of this conception was not due to the a
priori elements which it contained (p. 150), these elements coming necessarily
from the intimate relations of the principle with that of cause and effect
(p. 30); and the analogy, which we are establishing with the principle of
the conservation of matter (familiar for such a long time), helping to make
acceptable the proposition relative to energy (pp. 41, 116). And yet Planck
considers entirely negligible deductions such as those of Descartes and of
Colding, and, in a note added to the second edition of his book, declares
that the principle is “neither a tautology, nor a disguised definition, nor a
postulate, nor an a priori judgment, but, in fact, an experimental statement”
(pp. 151 and 116). Gaston Milhaud takes up the thought of Poinsot and of
Paul Tannery. He affirms that the law of constancy and uniformity, which
is the fundamental hypothesis of science, is not its consequence, but its
very “directing principle’ (Essai sur les conditions et les limites de la certitude
logique. Paris, F. Alcan, 1898, p. 131), and states precisely the réle of this
a priori statement in the genesis of the principle of inertia (La science ration-
nelle, Revue de métaphysique, Vol. IV, 1896, pp. 290-291). Yet Milhaud
follows at times a very different line of thought, assimilating the principles
of conservation to definitions and conventions; moreover, constancy
appears to him especially as a constancy of relations, and, as such, depending
on the very fact that the world is governed by laws (Essai sur les conditions
etc., p. 201, Sur philosophie, science et hypothése. Revue de métaphysique, X1,

1903, p. 786; cf. later, p. 423. Cf. also concerning the impossibility of an
experimental demonstration of inertia, Essai, etc., p. 91). Lalande points
out that pre-existence is the real foundation of all explanation (La Dissolution
opposée a [Evolution dans les sciences physiques et morales. Paris, F. Alcan,
1899, pp. 36, 45) and connects with it the principles of conservation of
matter and of energy (#b., p. 414). Yet the explicable, the intelligible,
is assimilated more often by this philosopher to that which is susceptible,
in general, of being determined—that is, according to our terminology,
to that which is simply conformable to law, and, just as in Milhaud, the
necessity of the constancy of certain terms is directly deduced from the
fact that nature is ordered (ib., pp. 33, 35, 179). Kozlowski’s views on this
question approach those of Milhaud’s and Lalande’s. Wilbois has also
insisted upon the close relation between the principles of conservation and
the law of substance (La méthode dans les sciences physiques. Revue de Méta-
physique et de Morale, Vol. VII, 1899, p. 598 and ff., Vol. VIII, 1909, p. 293).
Perhaps, in spite of the limitations stated, the exposition which precedes
will give to the reader the notion of a more continuous development than
there has been in reality. Let us repeat, therefore, that the greater number
of these thinkers (we believe that we have expressly mentioned contrary
cases) seemed to have been entirely ignorant of their predecessors and to
have arrived at their conclusions almost independently. The reader will find
a more complete outline of these conceptions in De l'explication dans les sciences,
Chap. XVII, pp. 314-342.


CHAPTER IV


THE CONSERVATION OF MATTER


We find this principle stated in many different ways. In the
first place, let us put aside the formula “‘Nothing is created,
nothing is lost,’’ which is still sometimes employed and which
evidently is much too broad, for it would apply just as well
to the conservation of velocity and to that of energy; this is
not surprising, since the formula, we have seen, is only one
of the expressions of the principle of causality. We must at
least say: Matter is neither created nor lost. But even this
formula lacks precision. Here is an ingot of silver: its colour,
its lustre, its hardness, its malleability, its conductivity for
electricity and heat, in a word, all the physical properties
which I know it to have, are certainly an integral part of my
conception of this matter. Does one mean to affirm that all
of this is indestructible? Assuredly not, since it suffices to
dissolve the metal in nitric acid for these properties to vanish.
The term matter is thercfore taken here in a narrower sense
than the one commonly assigned to it, and the statement of the
principle must be completed by a definition of this term.
In order to follow the evolution of matter through modifica-
tions, analogous to that undergone by the ingot of silver, the
chemist uses the balance. It was with the aid of the balance
that Lavoisier accomplished his “chemical revolution,” as
Berthelot calls it. It seems, then, that the term matter must be
defined as that which has weight. Let us remark, however, that
this weight, the indestructibility of which we apparently
affirmed, we see without surprise change with the place where
the experiment is performed; it will not be strictly the same
at the Pole and near the Equator, and we suppose that the same
ingot of silver, weighed, of course, on a spring balance, would
have an entirely different weight on the surface of the moon.
These variations, due to the variations of the constant of
gravitation in these different places, we shall eliminate in
dividing the weight by this constant. We thus come to the
concept of mass, related to that of weight by the equation
w= mg, and our principle finally crystallizes into that of
conservation of mass.


158 IDENTITY AND REALITY


In this chapter this definition is to be our basis. We shall see
later (p. 236 and following) that it does not really exhaust the
contents of the principle, this latter including a statement much
less easy to determine, but nevertheless very important.

The conservation of the weight of matter was formulated in
antiquity. No one can doubt this while attentively reading the
De Rerum Natura. Doubtless the nil posse creart de nthilo proves
nothing; the context, even, clearly shows that Lucretius under-
stood his formula in the most gencral sense—that is, that it
was really the principle of causality itself.(1) But he applied this
formula immediately to the atoms. They are eternal, uncreated,
indestructible.(2) They are also heavy. All matter has weight;
there exists no absolutely light body, having a tendency to
rise,(3) and weight is the true measure of the quantity of
matter.(4) It evidently follows that weight must remain
constant, and although this rule is not explicitly stated any-
where in the De Rerum Natura, one cannot doubt that it was
thus understood and taught in certain philosophical schools of
antiquity. A curious passage of a treatise attributed to Lucian is
evidence of it: “‘If you burn a thousand pounds of wood,
Demonax, how many pounds will there be of smoke?’ ‘Weigh
the ashes,’ says he, ‘and all the rest will be smoke.’’’(5) Demonax
was a Cynic philosopher of the second century of our era. He
appears to have been exclusively preoccupied with ethics,
theology, and politics.(6) Nothing indicates that he professed
atomistic opinions, nor that he had studied scientific questions.
The quotation is all the more significant, because it proves that
this reasoning, analogous to ours in principle, had become
current in philosophic schools. It is certain, moreover, that
Lucretius only repeated the teachings of his master Epicurus,
and it is at least very probable that this part of the doctrine
had already been formulated by Democritus and perhaps even
by Leucippus.(7)

One can say that in a certain sense the ancient atomists
must have conceived of the constancy of weight at the same
time as that of mass—indeed, it seems that they completely
confused these two concepts. It is not easy to imagine how
Democritus and Epicurus represented to themselves the motion
of atoms in space, since the principle of inertia and the whole
order of ideas attached to it was entirely foreign to them. One


THE CONSERVATION OF MATTER 159


can almost imagine, by the way in which Aristotle expounds his
theory of motion in the plenum, that there must have been a
gap in the conceptions of his adversaries—a gap over which
the Stagirite exults with some complacency. However that
may be, there is no doubt that in the poem of Lucretius, the
atoms act in virtue of their weight; this last concept, already an
inseparable attribute of matter, becomes therefore, at the same
time, the direct measure of its principle of action, so that,
instead of saying w = mg, we formulate w = m. It must be
noticed also that this confusion is conformable to our immediate
sensation ; we are continually inclined to be guilty of it; from
our first lessons in mechanics we have had to make an effort
to separate the two notions. (8)

The conceptions of the atomists, however widespread we
may suppose them, did not govern the minds of antiquity
without rivals. Aristotle’s doctrine, destined to such a brilliant
fortune in the following centuries, consciously contradicted,
on almost every point, the doctrine of Leucippus and Demo-
critus. Aristotle, just as did the atomists, confuses mass and
weight as principles of mechanical action. But, on the other
hand, he completely dissociates the two concepts of matter
and weight. Weight is an accidental quality of matter. It is
the result of two opposed principles, heaviness and lightness.
“There are things whose constant nature it Is to move away
from the centre, while others move constantly toward the
centre. . . . By absolutely light, then, we mean that which
moves upward or to the outer extremity, and by absolutely
heavy, that which moves downward or to the centre.”(g)
This is the case of two out of the four elements which Anistotle’s
theory admits: “‘Fire is always light and moves upward, while
earth and all earthy things move downward or toward the
centre.’’(10) As to water and air, they have gravity as well as
lightness, the former prevailing in water, the latter in air. We
can see to what a degree what we call weight is in this theory
a derived concept. It is also, evidently, an accidental property.
Plato had already shown that elements unceasingly change into
one another.(11) Moreover, it is a daily experience that air and
fire intervene in the transformation of matter : water boils, wood
burns. Aristotle and his followers therefore placed gravity on
the same level with colour and heat.


160 IDENTITY AND REALITY


It is well known to what extent these doctrines prevailed
during the Middle Ages.(12) In the writings of alchemists there
are doubtless to be found some considerations based upon
weight. It may be that this was, in part, a heritage dating from
the origins of that science—that is, from an epoch anterior to
the domination of the philosophy of substantial forms. One may
also suppose that atomic theories, whose reflection, we have
seen, was found in certain widely dispersed writings, exercised
some influence. But it must also be said that these arguments
were not in direct contradiction with the reigning philosophy.
It is doubtless very difficult to arrive at the numerical concept
of weight by substantial forms; but supposing this concept
taken for granted—common sense and daily experience
sufficiently perform this task—there is nothing unnatural in
attributing a certain importance to observations relative to
weight, just as importance is accorded to observations concern-
ing the colour or the heat of bodies. But what distinguishes
these opinions from ours is that for us considerations based
upon weight override all others without exception. This pre-
dilection was completely forcign to the science of the Middle
Ages. It is not unusual to find, in the writings of that epoch,
passages where the constancy of weight is more or less directly
denied, the author being seemingly unconscious of having
expressed a hazardous proposition. Thus alchemists, speaking
of transmutation, sometimes mention the modification of the
weight of the metal. “By our artifice,’’ says Geber, “we casily
form silver from lead; in the transformation this latter does
not preserve its own weight, but is changed into a new weight.”
In the same way, pewter ‘“‘acquires weight in magistery.’’(13)
The moderns, in the presence of these affirmations, are always
inclined to believe either that the author supposed only a
modification of the specific weight, or else that he admitted the
addition of a matter coming from air or fire; but, in truth,
this addition appeared in no way indispensable ; and as to the
specific weight, it was most often confused with absolute
weight. This confusion is still very frequent at a later date;
not only Scaliger in the seventeenth century, but, on the very
eve of the great revolution wrought by Lavoisier, Kunckel and
Juncker make the same confusion. (14) This error, if the question
is considered attentively, is quite natural. If weight is.,


THE CONSERVATION OF MATTER 161


essential property, but an accidental quality of matter, is it
not natural to suppose that at the instant when this quality is
manifestly modified—that is, when the specific weight changes
—the total weight must change also?(15) Francis Bacon, who
professed on the qualities of matter opinions approaching those
of the alchemists, affirmed the existence of absolutely light
bodies (16) and change of weight through modification of their
state,(17) although in another place he solemnly proclaimed
the constancy of weight, probably borrowing this idea from
the ancient atomists.(18)

Amongst the scientists of that time we sometimes find argu-
ments implying the principle of conservation of weight. Such is
the experiment of Cusa, who, to show that the plant draws
its matter especially from watcr, weighed a quantity of earth in
a pot, placed seeds in it which he watered, reweighed the earth
after the grown plant had been taken out and stated that the
weight remained almost the same.(19) But it is certain that
only a very secondary importance was attributed to considera-
tions of this kind. Wislicenus, summing up the beliefs of the
alchemists, affirms that they were convinced that with the
help of small quantties of magistery, pounds of lead or of
mercury could be transformed into hundredweights of the
purest gold.(20) It would probably be difficult to confirm
directly this affirmation by means of a text drawn from an
author of that epoch; but it is certain that a proposition of
this kind would not have seemed to suggest anything miraculous,
such as we see in it. If we rarely find among alchemists affirma-
tions concerning the change of weight, it 1s not because they
considered it as a rare phenomenon, but because they attached
to it no importance; the least change of quality appeared to
them much more remarkable. These affirmations are more
frequent in later epochs where opinions on this question
approach ours, precisely because of this last circumstance.
Accounts like those of the experiments of Reussing, Dierbach,
and Stahl in the eighteenth century, in which the weight of
the mass originally employed is seen to increase and even
almost to double,(21) would have astonished no one in the
Middle Ages; the alchemist would have passed over this
detail in silence, considering it too insignificant to strike the

ation of the reader.


162 IDENTITY AND REALITY


If they did not believe in constancy of weight, did they
believe in that of mass? They were certainly convinced that
something essential in matter, its “‘substance,” persisted through-
out modifications, But since they had—rightly, moreover—
disengaged the concept of matter from the phenomenon of
gravity, it became infinitely more difficult to give a quantitative
substratum to materiality. It would be more than useless to
inquire whether in logically developing Aristotle’s doctrine one
might not have come upon a conception of mass permitting
the determination of a numerical coefficient. The truth is
that concern about relations of quantity was absolutely foreign
to all who adhered to the philosophy of substantial forms.
Everywhere in the Middle Ages, where one finds, as in Albert
of Saxony, the germ of the idea of mass, this conception is
developed in manifest opposition to Aristotelian ideas, and is
related rather to the theory of impetus.(22) Toward the middle
of the fifteenth century Gaetan de Tiene speaks in this con-
nection of acctdenial gravity,(23) and this expression is also
found in Leonardo.(24) Kepler, who grasped the essential
contents of the concept of mass, compares it likewise to that
of weight, without, of course, confusing it with the latter.(25)
Still more distinctly does the idea of mass appear in Descartes.
It is true that on every occasion (for instance, when he is
explaining the laws of impact) Descartes is fond of speaking
of the size of bodies ;(26) and this expression appears trouble-
some when we recall his theory of matter. We know that
Descartes, quite like the scholastics—the greatest revolutionists
are always the most conservative on some point—was a partisan
of the plenum. Extension was for him the only essential attribute
of matter, gravitation being a secondary phenomenon which
needed to be explained and which he explained indeed by
the motions of one of its elementary substances. Weight, as for
the scholastics, is an accident. The real quantity of matter
is indicated by the volume: ‘“‘When a vessel, for instance, is full
of gold or lead it does not on that account contain more matter
than when we think of it as empty.”’(27) Yet, in fact, Descartes
distinguishes perfectly mass from volume, in supposing that,
for mechanical motions, the quantity of its third element
alone counted.(28) One might believe that he conceived the
proportionality of mass (thus understood) and weight; but


THE CONSERVATION OF MATTER 163


this idea was far from his thought, although in practice he
often made use of weight in this sense. Indeed, weight being
the consequence of a more or less complicated motion, strict
proportionality would have been the effect of chance, and
of chance difficult to explain. He, moreover, expounded his
ideas on this subject in the Fourth Part of his Principia. The
title of the XXVth Chapter is: “That their gravity does not
always have the same relation to their matter.’’ That is not,
as one might suppose, a simple repetition of the sentence which
we cited farther back; it must, in fact, be noticed that the
matter spoken of in this chapter is éerrestrial matter. This is
confirmed by the text of the chapter in question; it is there
stated that ‘‘gravity alone is not enough to make known how
much terrestrial matter there 1s in each body.” Thus ‘a mass
of gold twenty times heavier than a quantity of water of the
same size” might well contain not twenty times more matter,
but only four or five times as much, “‘because as much must be
subtracted from the water as from the gold on account of the
air in which they are weighed; and then also for the reason
that the terrestrial parts of the water, and in general of all
liquids, as has been said of those of the air, have a certain
motion which, in accord with those of subtile matter, prevents
them from being as heavy as those of hard bodies.”

It is indeed because one has to do with “terrestrial matter”
and not with matter in general, that there could no longer be
a question of identifying its quantity with the volume. It
should be noticed that at the tme when Descartes was writing,
the gravity of air was already almost universally recognized.
Gorlaeus,(29) Carpentarius (30) and Galileo,(31) had taken it
for granted, and Descartes himself seems to be convinced of
it. But we have just seen that this was not enough to make him
conceive of the idea that gravity is an essential, immutable
attribute of matter, for there still remains fire, and that
element, Descartes, like the scholastics, believed to be without
weight. “Let us take away the weight,” he says, while trying
to determine what “constitutes the nature of the body,”
‘because we see that fire, even though it is very light, does not
cease to be a body.” (32)

Descartes’ conception had a great theoretical advantage over
that of the ancient atomists in completely dissociating the two


164 IDENTITY AND REALITY


concepts of mass and weight. But, of course, the constancy
of weight became difficult to admit. Descartes would probably
have admitted even variations of mass, since, on the whole,
his different elements are composed of the same matter.

Before the publication of the Principia, but at a moment
when Descartes’ authority was already beginning to be recog-
nized, the Essays of Jean Rey appeared. Was Rey influenced
by the ancient atomists? It may be so, for Lucretius was read
a great deal at that time, and, we have seen, a certain tradition
of atomistic theories was perpetuated among physicians. This
fact would in no way diminish Rey’s merit, because what in
Lucretius was only inferred and secondary appears here for the
first time as the “immovable foundation,” the great principle
which regulates modifications in nature. Moreover, Rey does
not relate this statement to any particular theory of matter.
He is attempting a kind of a priort demonstration of the principle.
It is contained in a few lines: “Let there be taken a piece of
earth, which has in it the least weight possible and beyond
which nothing smaller can exist; let that carth be converted
into water by means known and practised by nature. It is
evident that this water will have weight, since all water must
have it; then it will be either larger than that which was in
the earth, or smaller, or equal. They will not say that it is
greater (for they profess the contrary), nor do I wish to; smaller
it cannot be, because I took the smallest that could be; it
therefore remains that it is equal to it, which I undertook to
prove.”’(33) Evidently the deduction 1s singularly weak; it
rests especially upon the fact that it considers in great part as
self-evident what is to be proved.(34) One is led to imagine
that Rey himself did not attach too much importance to this
proof. On the other hand, he makes a great effort to establish
that air has weight and that it may be thickened by different
operations. It is this thickened air which, mixing with lime
of pewter (Rey seems to have conceived of the addition of the
air and the formation of lime as of two distinct operations) ,(35)
increases its weight, assuming that every other cause must be
excluded, as Rey proves with much exactness, relying on the
experiments of others and also upon his own.(36) Finally,
from the point of view of the principle of conservation of
weight, Rey establishes that, in two particular cases where it


THE CONSERVATION OF MATTER 165


might be believed to fail, the anomaly might be explained
by supposing the intervention of the air; and, as the remainder
of the title indicates, it is the explanation of this particular
phenomenon rather than the principle itself which forms the
true object of this little work, so justly celebrated in the opinion
of posterity, but which remained completely unknown to his
contemporaries.

It is not very difficult, it seems, to understand why the clear
exposition of the physician of Bazas had so little success.
Doubtless Rey was an unknown man, lost in a little country
place; in that century when communication by letter was
particularly lively amongst scientists, he does not seem to
have been in correspondence with anyone except Mersenne.
Father Mersenne certainly knew everyone. Yet the causes
must be looked for in the doctrine itself. Chemistry was only
just coming out of the semi-mystic fog of alchemic formulae;
it was entirely dominated by the conception of the element of
quality; we shall recognize later the vitality of that theory
and what a defence it was still able to furnish against the
vigorous attacks of Lavoisier and of his disciples a century
and a half later, when the domain of known facts had been
immensely extendcd. It is easy to understand that, under these
conditions, Rey’s theory, in which no account was taken of
quality, should be immediately set aside by chemists. As to the
physicists, they must have found themselves repelled by the
fact that Rey, although formulating no theory of matter,
placed himself in flagrant opposition to the two theories which
divided the prevailing opinion at that time concerning a
question on which these theories remained in accord: Aristotle
as well as Descartes considered weight as an accidental quality
of matter, whereas Rey returned to the ideas of the ancient
atomists. Aristotle and Descartes were right from a logical
point of view, and in a certain sense Rey’s conceptions were
a real regression.

Descartes’ ideas triumphed finally in science as well as in
philosophy. “All other accidents besides magnitude or exten-
sion (of bodies) may be generated and destroyed,” declares
Hobbes (37), and we see that in this theory there is no place
for the conservation of weight. Leibniz sometimes reasons in an
analogous manner. Water contains in equal volume as much


166 IDENTITY AND REALITY


matter as mercury, only to the particular matter of water is
added, ‘‘a foreign matter, without weight, which passes through
its pores,” for, he concludes, “‘it is a strange fiction to make all
matter heavy.’’(38) Yet Leibniz saw with much clearness what
we now designate by the term mass ;(39) it would perhaps be
exaggerated to affirm that he had “invented”’(40) it; but it is
certain that he disengaged it from the fogs in which it was
still partly enveloped in Descartes.

Huygens affirms clearly that it is weight which measures the
quantity of matter.(41) Newton, by precise experiments, (42)
ascertains that weight is proportional to mass, as had already
been deduced from Galileo’s experiments.(43) Newton did not
admit imponderable matter, but soon after him this concept
was firmly established in science—a circumstance which did
not favour the success of the principle of conservation of
weight. It 1s, in general, rather difficult to discover the true
opinion of the physicists of the seventeenth and eighteenth
centuries about what we call chemical phenomena. It was a
domain but little known, we might almost say of ill-repute, made
up of a formidable array of half mysterious facts. Physicists ven-
tured into it unwillingly, or, if they spoke of it, they treated it
in an entirely general manner without pre-occupying themselves
either with the statements of chemists or with their theories.(44)
The methods of both were also totally different. Physicists
followed the mathematical method, whereas chemists were
interested in quality only. Robert Boyle is the only man of that
time forming an exception. Eminent at once as a physicist and
a chemist, he tried to unite the advantages of the two methods.
It is very remarkable that Boyle, though he nowhere formulates
the principle, reasons constantly as if he admitted the con-
servation of weight.(45) But Boyle founded no school; after
him, the separation between physicists and chemists continued
as before. This fact makes it difficult to say whether physicists
of that time did or did not admit the possibility of a change
of weight during the course of a chemical operation. In
considering everything we arrive at the conclusion that at
least those who assumed the existence of imponderable forms
of matter saw nothing shocking in the hypothesis of their
intervention in chemical reactions and of consequent modifica-
tions of weights,


THE CONSERVATION OF MATTER 167


Such was, indeed, the general opinion of chemists. The
imponderable, of which they most often made use, was none
other than “elementary fire,” Aristotle’s fourth element; the
“sulphur’’ of Paracelsus was derived directly from it, and also,
later on, the phlogiston of Becher and of Stahl. Through all
these modifications it had the privilege, so to speak, of escaping
considerations of weight. Even on the eve of Lavoisier’s chemical
revolution, the idea that phlogiston was an absolutely light
substance, endowed with negative weight, did not appear
shocking. This is clearly seen in the manner with which this
supposition is treated in the notes accompanying the transla-
tion of Kirwan’s Essay on Phlogiston—a collective work of the
new and triumphant school of which it forms a kind of
breviary. (46)

Yet in the seventeenth century the gravity of fire had already
been affirmed at about the same time as that of air. Carpen-
tarius (47) and Galileo (48) took it for granted as Robert
Boyle did later.(49) If, contrary to what happened with regard
to air, this conception was not so generally accepted, it is due
doubtless to the fact that the hypothetical matter described
under the name “elementary fire’? appeared to be of a parti-
cular nature. Yet little by little this conception spread. In the
eighteenth century, Duclos and Homberg (50) were partisans
of it; and it is a remarkable fact that those who profess this
opinion reason instinctively (as did Boyle) as if they presup-
posed the principle of conservation of matter. “In the analysis
of inflammable bodies,’’ says Berkeley, after having commented
on Homberg’s experiments, “‘the fire or sulphur is lost and the
diminution of weight showeth the loss. But the fire or oznculum
disappears, . . . but is not destroyed.”’(51) Nothing is more
correct from this point of view than the reasoning of Musschen-
broek.(52) He, like Jean Rey, is looking for the cause of the
increase of weight that certain metals undergo when they are
heated. He rejects the hypothesis according to which this
augmentation might come from the “‘saline acid or oily parts
of the fire.”” Indeed, the augmentation was ascertained for
antimony heated with the aid of a concave mirror, the rays
of the sun forming the purest fire. Therefore it is the elementary
fire itself which must be heavy. It is true, it might be objected,
that the increase of weight is too considerable, but “we do


168 IDENTITY AND REALITY


not know the weight of a sun-ray.” These opinions were
rather widely circulated in the second half of the eighteenth
century. Thus Diderot says that “the fire of our furnaces
considerably increases the weight of certain forms of matter,
such as calcined lead.”’(53) However, care must be taken not
to exaggerate the importance of these arguments; those who
use them do not consider them nearly as conclusive as they
appear to us, and it 1s certain that considerations based upon
quality seem to predominate greatly over considcrations of
quantity. Kopp notes that the greater number of the chemists
of the eighteenth century do not even take the trouble to explain
the change of weight, so devoid of interest does this pheno-
menon appear to them.(54) Stahl is satisfied to state that the
weight of metals which are calcined increascs, ‘“‘although”
(quamvis) the phlogiston disappears.(55) Moreover, Stahl adopts
Lémery’s opinion, according to which the metal calcined and
reduced afterwards weighs less than originally.(56) Macquer,
in 1778, considers this fact as beyond doubt, without supposing
in the least, any more than did his predecessors, that this
statement allows the inference of a loss of matter of the metal.(57)
He apparently considers weight as a purely accidental property,
capable of being modified. Nothing is more characteristic from
the point of view of this state of mind than the declaration of
Macquer, considered at that time as the most authoritative of
the French chemists, at the news that Lavoisier was going to
attack the theory of phlogiston. Macquer admitted that he had
been worried for a moment, but that he was quite untroubled
about the fate of that theory, having learned that Lavoisier
had drawn his objections solely from considerations of
quantity. (58)

As is well known, certain of Lavoisier’s adversaries, and
amongst them his most illustrious contemporaries, Priestley
and Cavendish, remained obdurate to the very end. Cavendish
—and this is quite remarkable—who in his experiments used
the balance with great care, manifestly did not believe in the
conservation of matter.(59) But the difference between these
conceptions and ours, the little importance attributed to
considerations of weight, the facility with which the interven-
tion of “‘imponderable”’ substances are accepted, are nowhere
perhaps so clearly evident as in the work of the man who,


THE CONSERVATION OF MATTER 169


although a mediocre theorist, was probably the most prodigious
‘discoverer of facts’’ of that marvellous time. Scheele believes
that heat is a composite of phlogiston and air of fire (oxygen).
He believes both components to have weight; but he none the
less takes for granted that they can give rise to an imponderable
substance. Heat “united to a very little phlogiston’”’ is trans-
formed into light; but surcharged with a greater quantity
of the same phlogiston, it becomes inflammable air—that is,
hydrogen.(60) One can still perceive, in Lavoisier himself,
traces of analogous conceptions. Thus he regards gas, and
especially oxygen, as resulting from a combination of a pon-
derable matter with an imponderable fluid, caloric. And this
is not simply an image. Berthelot properly observed that
Lavoisier really considered heat as a material element, con-
stitutive of gases, and that the conception he had of these
latter was confused in his mind, by a series of hypothetical
intermediaries, with that of imponderable fluids.(61) Thus in
the enumeration of simple substances light and caloric are
cited side by side with oxygen and nitrogen,(62) so that
combustion appears as a real substitution of caloric.(63)

The definite re-establishment of the principle of conservation
of matter may be dated from Lavoisier’s memoir on Changement
de [eau en terre, which appeared in the AMémoirs de [ Académie
of 1770, really published only in 1773.(64) To be sure, the
principle is nowhere stated. But Lavoisier applies it implicitly,
searching in the first place for the relation of weights, using as
unanswerable arguments the considerations which he draws
from them. Lavoisier proposes to verify the affirmation of
several chemists of the eighteenth century, according to which
water in boiling changes to earth; they gave as a proof that
watcr boiled for a long time in a glass vessel left in evaporation
a residuum of carth. For one hundred days Lavoisier had
water boiled in an apparatus called a pelican, where the product
of distillation returned into the vessel. He procured an extremely
precise balance, the limit of whose errors he had carefully
noted; he surrounded his experiment with various precautions
of a nature to guarantee the exclusion of all foreign matter.
He weighed the empty vessel, and reweighed it filled with
water; he also reweighed the whole after the experiment, and
he stated that the weight was almost exactly the same; from


170 IDENTITY AND REALITY


which there was a first conclusion—to wit, that in this case there
was no question of the fire passing through the glass and com-
bining with the water.(65) He emptied the apparatus and
noted the diminution of weight. He collected the residuum,
which the water had deposited during the operation, and joined
to it what he obtained by the evaporation of the water: the
two together were just about equal to the loss of weight of the
pelican. But the divergence this time was much greater than the
limit of the errors of his balance. Indeed, the pelican had only
lost 17:4 grains, whereas the two residua together weighed
20:4. Lavoisier, very justly, attributed the error to the fact
that the water had attacked not only the matter of the pelican,
but also that of the other receptacles with which it was in
contact, and he concluded that the earthy deposits came
really from these vessels. Because of the slender quantity of the
deposit he could not submit it to many experiments. Yet he
performed one which did not fail to trouble him. The earth
obtained was not fusible, as was the glass at that temperature.
“I admit that this last circumstance would form a rather
strong objection to what I have reported in this memoir, if it
were possible to argue against facts.”’

Gnmaux notes as a curious coincidence that Scheele, pre-
occupied with the same problem, arrived at the same result by
an entirely different way: analysing the earthy residuum, he
found in it silica, potassium, and lime—substances which enter
into the composition of glass—and from this he concluded that
these substances came from the vessel.(66) There 1s no doubt
that to their contemporaries Scheele’s demonstration was much
more convincing than that of Lavoisier. Schecle used methods
really belonging to chemistry, whereas those of Lavoisier
seemed borrowed from a foreign domain.

In the Opuscules physiques et chimiques, which appeared in
1774,(67) Lavoisier, still employing the balance, decided
between the two rival theories of Black and Meyer. According
to the former, limestone, in being transformed into lime, lost a
component (which to-day we call carbonic acid) ; according to
the latter, on the contrary, it acquired an element designated as
acidum pingue, which came from the fire. Lavoisier showed that
calcareous earth loses in calcination a part of its weight, which
it recovers if it is again transformed into ordinary lime.(68)


THE CONSERVATION OF MATTER 171


The same work contains the beginning of his immortal studies
on combustion. Lavoisier, who at that time did not know of the
existence of oxygen, discovered later by Priestley, remarked
that in calcining pewter and lead in a closed vessel by means
of a lens these metals increased in weight; that was an ancient
experiment, as we know. But Lavoisier discovered that it was
the same thing for sulphur and phosphorus, and, what is more
important, he proved that the volume of air underwent a
diminution of about a fifth, and that the weight of the vanished
air was about identical to the increase of that of the burned
substance. Moreover, since he weighed the vessel before and
after the operation, and found the weight almost identical
(except for a very slight increase which he justly attributed to
the deposit which the fire had left on the outside), the hypothesis
of the intervention of elementary fire was eliminated and the
increase of the weight could have only come from the air.

His contemporaries felt, indeed, that there was something
new in these considerations of quantity. The commissioners
from the Academy (Trudaine, Macquer, Leroy, and Cadet)
said in their report: “We see that M. Lavoisier has submitted
all the results to measurement, to calculation, and to the
balance, a rigorous mcthod which happily for the advancement
of chemistry is becoming indispensable in the practice of
that science.’’ (69)

The new conceptions triumphed but slowly. Resistance did
not cease even after the composition of water had become
known and Lavoisier had been able to establish a theory em-
bracing all the phenomena which we now include under the
name of “phenomena of oxidation.’”’ Neither Scheele, nor
Priestley, nor Cavendish ever adhered to the new ideas. In
studying these polemics one finds that there is, so to speak, no
question of the principle of conservation of matter. But it 1s
certain that this principle was at stake. Some emphasized the
arguments of quantity, implicitly affirming that all other con-
siderations should give way before them; others put in the first
rank arguments based upon quality, which was to deny to the
principle its dominant position, and, consequently, to deny its
very essence. The final triumph of Lavoisier’s theory was, at
the same time, the victory of the principle of conservation
of matter.


172 IDENTITY AND REALITY


Is this principle of empirical origin? This has often been
affirmed, and J. S. Mill especially formulated this thesis with
much clearness. According to him, the conservation of matter
is suggested to us from the very beginning, so to speak, of our
observations by a great number of concordant phenomena,
whereas others, on the contrary, seem to contradict it. The
hypothesis was formulated that this principle was, not partially,
but entirely, true, and as such it was verified afterwards. The
verification having succeeded, the principle was established,
exactly as any other experimental law.(70)

Littré has expressed himself in an analogous manner. ‘The
essential axiom of materialism is the eternity of matter—to wit,
that it has had no origin and that it will have no end. We know
that this has not always been the opinion of philosophers,
and that formerly the creation and destruction of substances
was believed in. And, indeed, how did we come to this axiom
which now has an irresistible authority over our minds? By
experience, @ postertort.”’ (71)

The history of the principle, as we have just sketched it,
suffices, it seems, to establish that this theory is far removed
from reality. What are the experiments upon which the ancient
atomists relied in stating the principle? It would be mast
embarrassing to say. They were satisfied to affirm that all
matter was necessarily heavy, but that was a thesis which of
itself needed experimental proof. That proof was impossible
to furnish at that time, and nothing certainly indicated at the
moment when the De Rerum Natura was written that the Aristo-
telian theory of the absolute lightness of certain bodies was
inexact. Can Jean Rey’s two very imperfect experiments be
taken as proofs? It is sufficient to peruse the Essays to convince
oneself that nothing was farther from the author’s thought
than to present them as such. The principle seemed to him
established prior to any experiment, and he used it afterwards
to explain particular phenomena; at no moment did he indicate
that the success of this operation could be considered as a
confirmation of the principle, which evidently, in his opinion,
had no need of it. Lavoisier, we have seen, at first applied
the principle without formulating it. In his later writings
we find it sometimes stated with much clearness—indeed, as is
everything which comes from that admirable mind, perfect in


THE CONSERVATION OF MATTER 173


lucidity and precision. Thus, in the Tratté élémentaire de chimie,
he remarks in passing that “no substance in an experiment
can furnish anything beyond the totality of its weight,’ and
that “the determination of the weight of substances and
products before or after experiments’”’ is “‘the basis of all that is
most useful and exact in chemistry.’”’ Sometimes he puts it
more emphatically by declaring that “nothing is created in
the operations of art or in those of nature,” and that ‘“‘one
can lay down as a principle that in every operation there is
an equal quantity of matter before and after the operation.’ (72)
But at no moment does he indicate that that statement need
be proved. Does this mean that at that epoch the demonstration
had become useless, since it resulted implicitly from a quantity
of known facts? Such was assuredly not the opinion of con-
temporarics, even the most illustrious, as exemplified in the
case of Scheele. One might still suppose that Lavoisier made
use of the principle as a sort of provisional hypothesis, “a
working hypothesis,’’ waiting to confirm or to refute that
supposition in the course of his experiments. But it is enough
to peruse his works to be convinced that this is not so; that, like
the ancients and like Jean Rey, he applied it in all certainty,
not doubting for a single moment that experience would
confirm it; that every anomaly must only be apparent and
must find its explanation. Sometimes he happens, in the course
of a series of experiments, to weigh directly a substance whose
weight he had already determined by an indirect method.
He counts this verification useful, for “it is never permissible
in physics to assume what can be determined by direct experi-
ments.’ But he indicates at the same time that the conclusion,
according to which the weight of the body in question must be
equal to the sum of the weights of its components, appears to
him as “evident and was easy to foresee a prort.”(73) One
cannot even affirm that the definite triumph of the principle
was due to very searching experiments. Let us take a later
work of Lavoisier, one of the most justly celebrated, which
bears the title Experiences sur la respiration des animaux, etc.(74)
During twelve days he heated 4 ounces of mercury in a
vessel containing 50 cubic inches of ordinary air. At the end
of the time he noticed that about a sixth of the air had dis-
appeared, whereas there had formed 45 grains of mercury


174 IDENTITY AND REALITY


precipitate per se, or calx of mercury. Having carefully collected
them, he put them into a little glass retort of which the curved
neck penetrated into a receiver filled with water, and proceeded
to the reduction. He stated that he found in this operation
“about the same quantity of air which had been absorbed
during the calcination—that is, about 8 to 9 cubic inches” —and
that in adding this air (which was what he later called oxygen
—he qualified it as ‘“‘eminently respirable” air) to that which
had been “‘vitiated by the calcination of the mercury,” he
re-established the latter ‘“‘almost exactly in the state where it
was before the calcination—that is, in the state of ordinary
air.” He concluded that this is “the most complete kind of
proof at which one can arrive in chemistry, the decomposition
of air and its recomposition.”’ It is evident, however, by his very
expressions (nearly, almost exactly), that he only sought, from a
quantitative point of view, for an entirely approximative
agreement. There is no doubt that had he noticed a slight
departure from the principle of the conservation of weights, he
would not have hesitated to formulate auxiliary hypotheses, like
those of the action on accessory vessels or of the deposit formed
by the carbon fire of his previous studies. The basis of his
thought is, like that of Jean Rey’s, that if we admit the principle
the experiments in question do not expressly contradict it.
What is the situation to-day in regard to this question?
Since the time of Lavoisier the balance has become the chosen
instrument of the chemist; it may be said—this, for example, is
Ostwald’s opinion (75)—that in a certain sense every quantita-
tive analysis accomplished by a chemist constitutes a verification
of the conservation of matter. Yet we must not try to prove too
much. Generally these analyses agree but grosso modo; it is
rare in a somewhat complicated series of operations not to
observe deviations too great to be attributed to measuring
instruments, as Ostwald is obliged to admit.(76) The causes of
error are numerous and difficult to avoid. One notices it if one
examines the studies of the highest scientific order, which
have helped to determine the atomic weights of the elements.
We know what a truly stupendous amount of effort Stas
spent to obtain knowledge of the equivalent of silver, the basis
of all later determinations; but it has since been recognized
that the results of Stas were marred by error, and it would


THE CONSERVATION OF MATTER 175


be temerity to affirm that that rectification must be the last.
For other elements, even the widest and best known, the
determinations are still often quite uncertain, as one can easily
be convinced by the studies of the commissions recently formed
for the precise purpose of mastering these data and of reaching
an agreement.(77) Nor must it be forgotten that quantitative
analysis rests in the last instance on these constants insuffi-
ciently known as yet. The chemist only very rarely isolates
the constituents of a combination; he directs them into other
combinations and determines their weight indirectly by calcu-
lations of which atomic weights are the basis. The precision
of his results in the most favourable case cannot surpass that
of these fundamental data.

Where an effort has been made to verify directly and with
precision the conservation of weight in chemical phenomena,
it has not always been successful in obtaining results absolutely
confirming this principle. It is well known that anomalies have
been noticed quite recently by Landolt.(78) The results of
the German chemist, although sometimes questioned,(79) seem
to have been received in general with but little scepticism
by the scientific world. (80)

It follows from the data which we have just briefly sum-
marized that even at the present moment the certainty with
which the principle of the conservation of matter appears
invested exceeds the certainty permitted by the experiments
which are supposed to serve as its basis. Thus the theory of
John Stuart Mill and of Littré is adaptable neither to the genesis
of the principle in history nor to its real place in contemporary
science. The principle of the conservation of matter, as
Maxwell saw, must “rest on some deeper foundation than the
experiments which suggested it to our minds.’’(81)

Is this principle then a priori? This seems to be the most
widely diffused opinion in our time among scientists and
philosophers, an opinion sometimes clearly stated, sometimes
implicitly affirmed. Moreover, contrary to what happened in
the case of inertia, we shall not have to search long for the
basis of this opinion; all those who have endeavoured to
demonstrate by an a priort method the conservation of matter
have brought directly into play the principle of causality to
such a point that, as we have seen at the beginning of the


176 IDENTITY AND REALITY


chapter, the very expressions of the two principles are some-
times confused. Yet this difference in the way of treating
inertia and constancy of matter is comprehensible. Velocity is
a derived and very abstract concept, whereas matter is a
common-sense notion which is found at the basis of all
experience.

Kant concerned himself with this question repeatedly. It is
even incidently mentioned in The Critique of Pure Reason. In
elucidating the concept of substance, Kant, in a rather curious
fashion, cites almost textually (but without indicating its source)
the passage from the Demonax of Lucian, thus summarily
attaching weight to substance.(82) He explained himself more
in detail in the Metaphysische Anfangsgriinde der Naturwissenschaft.
There he formulates ‘‘his first theorem of mechanics” in these
terms: ““Through all the modifications of material nature the
quantity of matter remains in total the same, without increase
and without diminution.”’ In the ‘‘demonstration”’ of this
theorem, Kant makes use of the principle which he borrows
from “general metaphysics,’ which states that in all the modifi-
cations of nature substance is neither created nor lost. He
establishes, then, that, for matter, substance is the quantity,
matter being also defined as “‘that which is mobile in space”
(das Bewegliche 1m Raume).{83) In the treatise Vom Uebergange
von den metaphysischen Anfangsgriinden der Naturwissenschaft zur
Phystk we see how Kant means to pass from that notion
to that of weight. The transition is made with the help of
the intermediary concept of ‘‘matter, in so far as it is endowed
with motive power” ;(84) this is the physicists’ concept of
mass at least under its active aspect. Kant immediately joins
to it that of weight and affirms that an ‘“‘absolutely imponder-
able matter would be an immaterial matter—that is, a self-
contradictory concept.”’(85) This sudden transition is explained
by the fact that, for Kant, attraction in the inverse proportion
to the square of the distance, and consequently gravitation in
its most general conception, is an integral part of the concept
of matter.(86) On the whole, we see that it is a completely
a priort demonstration. It is just to observe that Kant seems to
have felt some scruples in that which concerns the transition
between mass and weight. In the Metaphysische Anfangsgriinde
he only deduces the law of attraction with certain reservations,


THE CONSERVATION OF MATTER 177


as “‘a construction perhaps possible.’’(87) But the passages of
his later work which we have just cited prove that his con-
victions had grown stronger at a later time.(88)

Schopenhauer, often cited on this question,(89) merely
follows Kant; he too deduces the conservation of matter from
the persistence of substance, but with less clearness than his
predecessor, being content to affirm that substance is only a
synonym for matter.(go) He recognizes, however, that gravity
is an “‘occult quality,’ but, according to him, such also are
all the fundamental forces which constitute matter and the
persistency of which is guaranteed by causality.(g1) Whewell
also believes that he can directly deduce the conservation of
weight from the principle of causality—indeed, he confuses
mass and weight, and this last concept for him is an integral
part of that of substance. (g2)

Herbert Spencer has expressed himself with much force in
the same sense: ‘‘Our inability to conceive Matter becoming
non-existent is immediately consequent on the very nature of
thought. . . . The annihilation of Matter is unthinkable for
the same reason that the creation of Matter is unthinkable,
and its indestructibility thus becomes an a priort cognition of
the highest order, not one that results from a long-continued
registry of experiences gradually organized into an irrever-
sible mode of thought, but one that 1s given in the form of
all experiences whatever.” Evidently Spencer, in writing
these lines, was thinking not of mass and weight but of
causality and substance; yet the context clearly indicates that
he intended to establish thus the principle of conservation of
matter in the sense attributed to it by modern science. He was
thus behind Kant, who had indicated the necessity of a double
transition between substance, mass, and weight. On the other
hand, it is curious to notice that Spencer, who wrote at a time
much farther removed from that at which the principle was
definitely established (Kant’s Metaphystsche Anfangsgriinde ap-
peared at a moment when the polemics about the theories of
Lavoisier were not yet completely stilled), saw more clearly the
difficulty which that assumption involved from the historical
point of view. ‘“‘Doubtless it will be considered strange that a
truth only in modern times accepted as unquestionable, and
then only by men of science, should be classed as an a priori

M


178 IDENTITY AND REALITY


truth, not only of equal certainty with those commonly so
classed, but of even higher certainty. To set down as a proposi-
tion which cannot be thought, one which mankind once
universally professed to think, and which the great majority
profess to think even now, seems absurd. The explanation is,
that in this, as in countless other cases, men have supposed
themselves to think what they did not think.”’(93)

We have already indicated in regard to inertia the objections
which every assumption of this kind encounters. Indeed, the
conservation of matter has never been called absurd, as the per-
sistence of rectilinear motion was by Aristotle. But generations
of scientists and philosophers have advanced opinions clearly
implying the negation of the principle. Can one say that the
idea had never been suggested to them? It is in itself of great
simplicity and is so directly deducible from the principle of
causality that it occurs, so to speak, immediately to our minds.
We have seen, moreover, that at least at two different times it
appeared in the history of science to disappear afterwards.
The De Rerum Natura was much read after the Renaissance,
and it would be strange if no one had noticed in it the concep-
tion of the conservation of matter; and it is just as strange
that Jean Rey’s book had made so little impression if we assume
that the idea which constitutes its basis was really @ priori.

The enigma disappears if we consider what really is the a
priort demonstration of the principle. It is entirely based on
causality. Now what we call causality is only a tendency,
the tendency to maintain the identity of certain things in
time. At most one may say that the causal tendency generates
in us the hope that these things are such that we can without
too great violence consider them essential. But, as we have
secn, this inclination is sufficiently strong to conquer if need
be all the resistance which our mind could offer in this regard,
to the point of transforming into something immutable, into
substance, a derived and abstract concept.

At the basis of the principle of conservation of matter there
are three distinct notions: matter, weight, mass. Matter is a
common-sense notion, a complex one, which synthetizes an
infinite number of properties. It is manifestly contrary even
to the most superficial experience to suppose the conservation
of all these properties. Therefore, in affirming the conserva-


THE CONSERVATION OF MATTER 179


tion of matter, one only postulates the persistence of certain
properties; hence this affirmation cannot interest science as
long as one does not state at the same time precisely what must
be conserved. In our history of the principle we thought it
necessary to pass over in silence statements of this kind, such
as that of Locke.(94)

Yet we saw that, among phenomena of matter, those of a
certain class appeared to us, because of the causal tendency,
to enjoy a sort of privilege: these are the phenomena of
displacement which we conceive of as being simple and
fundamental. Of all the properties of matter the most important
will therefore be the property of being the cause of displacement
of some other matter: this will be the true criterion of materi-
ality. Thus, Lucretius, in order to show that air is real matter,
celebrates in verses of imperishable beauty the destructive
action of the tempest.(95) This action which substances exert
upon one another is capable of being measured ; we call mass
the coefficient resulting from these measurements, which we
can reduce to an arbitrary unit. These coefficients, moreover,
can be added to one another; mass is, as one says, an additive
property; it seems quite natural to us that mass exercises an
action which is the sum of those which would have been
exercised by its parts, and experience confirms this manner of
thinking. Mass appears to us then as measuring the quantity
of matter; it is under this name that Descartes introduced it in
the first place, and since then this notion has been currently
used. We find it in Newton, in Laplace, in Poisson. To be sure, as
A. Gautier (96) has set forth, matter can be measured according
to still other properties, for example, by its thermal or electric
capacity, and the measures resulting from them would be very
different. But if Mach, relying on analogous motives, means
to reject the term quantity of matter as a synonym of mass,(97)
it is because in virtue of his theory he disregards the theoretical
superiority of mechanical considerations. It seems clear, on the
contrary, that mass, which is the mechanical expression of
matter, appears to be not only its measure, but one of its
fundamental properties, perhaps its true substratum.

Thus this tendency of which we have spoken, and which
makes us wish that persistent things were essential, here
finds full satisfaction, and, doubtless, persistence on its side


180 IDENTITY AND REALITY


makes the notion of mass appear to our eyes as still more
essential.

Let us observe, however, that this concept of mass, which
now seems so important to us, was not grasped instinctively
and immediately by our mind; it appeared to us rather as
surrounded by a certain obscurity. We need only recall our
memories of school to be convinced that it is so; in the manuals
of elementary physics one generally takes account of this state
of things, taking great care to let the distinction between
mass and weight penetrate into the mind of the reader. An
attentive and competent observer has remarked that the mind
of his students was refractory, so to speak, to the notion of
mass, to such a degree that he believed that he must choose
a method of exposition in which this concept would not be
treated as fundamental.(98) This explains why this concept
was disengaged only very late and why the confusion between
mass and weight, which was the very basis of the theory of the
ancient atomists, could still be reproduced in the nineteenth
century, not only in a metaphysician like Schopenhauer, but
even in a thinker as informed about scientific things as Whewell.
A curious proof of the facility with which these two notions
are confused is furnished by the fact that legislation in different
countries, intending evidently to define mass (since the constant
of gravitation did not present any interest from this point of
view), has most often defined weight.(99)

We can, we think, perceive the profound source of this
difficulty. The action by which one kind of matter displaces
another and which appears to us as fundamental remains at
the same time irremediably obscure. We have seen that we
cannot really comprehend the “why” either of action at a
distance or of impact. In books on mechanics, mass is generally
defined by making action at a distance intervene in a more or
less direct manner.(100) It is certainly preferable to define it by
impact, as Andrade (101) and Wulf (102) have done. Yet this
definition has something difficult about it; we cannot predict
exactly what will happen afterwards, because that will depend
upon the elasticity of the bodies. Doubtless, it is better to leave
indeterminate the nature of the action which the masses
exercise upon one another and to be content to stipulate, as
Mach has done, that if there is action, if bodies inter-com-


THE CONSERVATION OF MATTER 181


municate velocities or accelerations, this communication occurs
in conformity with immutable coefficients called masses :(103)
the indetermination here is neither accidental nor provisional ;
it is the manifestation of something profound and essential.

Contrary to what we have just stated for mass, weight is an
immediate notion of common sense; but it is a purely empirical
notion. All matter, of course, must act; but can it be affirmed
that all matter must gravitate toward all other matter? In
this respect it is enough to remember with what astonishment
humanity learned through Newton’s discoveries that a force
analogous or identical to that which we call gravity on the
earth acts among the celestial bodies. Even at the present hour
gravitation seems to us an enigma for which we are seeking an
explanation. Now, in view of this explanation, the equation
w == m g, far from being necessary, assumes, on the contrary, all
the appearances of a paradox. The proportionality of mass and
weight constitutes, as de Freycinet says, “‘a surprise.’’(104)
The weight really ought to depend upon the position of the
bodies with respect to one another.(105) It is surprising that
ten cubes, which balance a given weight, when laid on the
pan of a balance, exert the same effect when we pile them on
top of each other, and they form a screen for each other with
respect to the earth, and it is very difficult to understand
that the entire mass of the earth is absolutely permeable to
the attraction of the sun, as the theory of tides demands.
Gravitation seems, so to speak, to ignore the intermediary
space and the obstacles which are there accumulated: here
again we meet this antispatial aspect of the concept which has
already struck us (p. 82).

The association of weight and mass appears to physicists as
purely fortuitous and accidental.(106) So much so that Bous-
sinesq (107), by a curious theory, which counts Ostwald
amongst its partisans,(108) has tried to explain this association
by a sort of evolution of our universe, an evolution which would
have had as a consequence to remove all matter where that
association was not present.

In imagining ether, physicists have been obliged to endow it
with mass; it was indeed created to act, and ma‘s is the
principle of mechanical action; but ether has no weight, it is
imponderable by definition: moreover, we have seen that in


182 IDENTITY AND REALITY


the past also there had been recourse to fluids, imponderable
yet acting—that is, endowed with mass. In speculating on the
constitution of matter, physicists have often taken care not to
separate ether and ponderable matter by an insuperable
abyss. That, we shall see later, is a tendency inherent in the
human mind, a tendency whose manifestations may be easily
followed from the time of Descartes, whose different elements
have the same origin, until Tait and Thomson, who constitute
their atoms with the aid of ether rings. It cannot, therefore, be
said that the idea according to which ponderable matter could
resolve itself into something imponderable has ever really
appeared inadmissible, and, from this point of view, the new
theories, which are connected with the discovery of radioactive
substances, have found the ground already prepared for them.
It is doubtless because they confused mass and weight that
the ancient atomists had succeeded in conceiving of the con-
servation of weight of matter; and inversely, we have seen,
the dissociation of the two concepts, wrought by Descartes,
has certainly contributed in a great measure to prevent the
contemporaries of Jean Rey from adhering to his doctrine.
At the present moment, mass and weight are again associated ;
but this linkage is not logical, and any attempt to deduce
a priort the principle of the conservation of weight would
certainly be sterile.(109) The contrary illusion can only have
its source in the causal tendency; and it 1s this same tendency,
which in ancient atomists, in Jean Rey, probably in Lavoisier
himself, and surely in his contemporaries, has contributed to the
growth of the principle, permitting its formulation, without
proof, as a self-evident truth, and assuring its domination.
Like everything else we desire mass to be constant; but we
desire it more strongly because it is capable of appearing as
the essence of matter. This explains why, in the electric
theory of matter, where the concept of mass no longer
occupies the same dominant position, its conservation has
been disregarded. Indeed, according to Lorentz, mechanical
masses are not constant but vary according to the same laws
as the electro-dynamic masses, and these variations become
perceptible if the bodies are endowed with velocities comparable
to that of light.(110) The fact alone that a theory of this kind
could arise and triumph would suffice, it seems, to show, in


THE CONSERVATION OF MATTER 183


the absence of other proofs, that the conservation of mass
cannot be considered as an @ priori verity; and the aggregate
of the considerations which we have brought out tends, we
believe, to establish clearly that we have here to do with a
plausible proposition, just like the principle of inertia.


NOTES


. Lucretius: De rerum natura, Book I, line 150 and ff.
. 1b., Book I, lines 486-487, 500.
. Jb., Book II, lines 185~-186.

4. 1b., Book I, lines 361-363.

5. Luctanus Samosatensis: The Works of Lucian, trans. Thomas Francklin.
London, 1781, Vol. II, p. 70.

6. Cf. J. Bernays: Lucian und die Kyniker. Berlin, 1876, pp. 27, 43, 57; 95-
Bernays doubts whether the treatise on Demonax is Lucian’s, but attributes
it to a contemporary of Demonax.

7. Cf. for example Aristotte: De Caelo, Book I, Chap. VII, where it
seems to be pointed out that the atomists clearly affirmed the universal
weight of bodies. In what concerns atoms direct evidence from antiquity
is somewhat contradictory. Yet after having discussed them, Mabilleau (U.c.,
p. 213) comes to the conclusion that Democritus really attributes weight
to them.

8. Cf., p. 179.

g. AristoTLe: De Caelo, trans. J. L. Stock. Oxford, 1922, Book IV,
Chap. I.

10. 1b., Book IV, Chap. II, § 7.

11. Prato: Timaeus. The Dialogues of Plato, trans. Jowett. New York, 1892,
§ 33. Arisror.e: De Caelo, Book 11], Chap. IIT, § 1. Cf. the exposition of the
peripatetic doctrine in Galileo. Massimi sistemi, giorn. I.

12. According to certain more recent works, the domination of peripatetic
philosophy in the Middle Ages was much less absolute than has been
supposed until now. Picavet, especially, has attempted to prove in his
Esquisse d’une histoire générale et comparée des philosophies médiévales (2nd ed.,
Paris, F. Alcan, 1907) that the real master of the philosophy of the Middle
Ages was not Aristotle but Plotinus. This thesis, based upon a profound
study of the texts has, however, had numerous critics (ib., p. 110 and ff,
note). Its adoption would not materially modify our exposition. Picavet
points out all that Plotinus owes to Aristotle; Porphyry had already stated
that, ‘the Metaphysics of Aristotle were entirely contained” in the work of
the Neoplatonist (ib., 49); in a word, it was Aristotle who gave him his
logic and his science of the perceptible world (i., pp. 88, 119). Therefore,
although Aristotle was more cited than read or studied during a great part
of the Middle Ages (id., p. 143), it was from him, directly or indirectly,
that the philosophy of that period was derived, at least in what concerns
the study of the perceptible world (id., pp. 89-91, 177). But he is only
imperfectly known especially through neoplatonic commentators; not


Ww Hom


184 IDENTITY AND REALITY


always being understood, he is often interpreted and enlarged upon too
freely (%b., p. 93). We shall find, in the course of our study, certain facts
which lend their support to this view (cf. especially p. 325 and ff.).

13. Kopp: Geschichte der Chemie. Brunswick, 1845, Vol. III, p. 119.
Kopp thinks it is a question of the augmentation of weight which lead and
pewter undergo during oxidation. It would then be the same phenomenon
which finally contributed so much to establish the conservation of weight,
which would have served originally to demonstrate the contrary, because of
the preconceived opinion that by oxidation the body lost something.

14. Id., fc., pp. 120, 126, 128. It is curious that Kopp himself has
yielded to temptation and has explained in the modern sense (adding to
the word weight the adjective specific) a passage from Albertus (Die Alchemie
in aelterer und neuerer Keit. Heidelberg, 1886, I, p. 17). It is enough to examine
without prejudice the passage cited by him to be convinced that Albertus
really meant to affirm an augmentation of weight.

15. JEAN Rey, wishing to establish the principle of the conservation of
weight, declares that he is going ‘‘from now on to give the lic to the erroneous
maxim, which has existed since the birth of Philosophy, that elements
changing mutually from one to the other lose or gain weight, in so far as in
this change they become rarefied or condensed.”’ (Essays, New Impression.
Paris, 1896, p. 48.)

16. Bacon: Works. London, 1837, Vol. I, p. 173 (Sylva sylvarum, § 789).

17. Ib., Vol. I, p. 961 (De augmentis scientiarum, Book V, Chap. IIT).

18. Id., Novum organon, trans. Buchon. Paris, 1838, Book II, § 40;
cf. Historia densi et rari. Works, Vol. II, p. 538.

19. Cf. RosenBERGER : Geschichte der Physik, Vol. 1, p. 107. This is evidently
the experiment which is generally credited to the honour of Van Helmont
and by which the latter meant to prove the transformation of water into carth.

20. Wrsticenus: Die Chemie und das Problem der Materie, Rectoratswechsel.
Leipzig, October 31, 1893, p. 24.

a1. Cf. concerning these transmutations, Kopp, Geschichte, Vol. HI,
pp. 176-177. Stahl is not the celebrated chemist but a homonym.

a2. Cf. Dune: Léonard, I, p. 8; II, p. 203.
23. 1b., II, p. 204.

24. Ib., p. 233.

25. Cf. on this subject Appendix ITT.

26. Descartes: Principia, 2nd Part, Chap. XLVI and ff.

27. Id., Le Monde. CEuvres, Paris, 1909, Vol. XI, p. at.

28. Id., Principia, 3rd Part, Chap. CXXI.

2g. Goriagus: Exercitationes philosophicae, etc. Leyden, 1620, pp. 154, 332-

30. Carpentarius: Philosophia libera. Oxford, 1622, p. 66.

31. Gate: Alcuni scritti ineditti, etc., ed. Favaro, Bulletino di bibliografia,
etc., Vol. XVI. Rome, 1885, pp. 28, 53, 95.

32. Descartes: Principia, 2nd Part, Chap. XI.

33. Jean Rey: Essays sur la recherche de la cause pour laquelle U'estain et le
floms augmentent de poids quand on les calcine. Bazas. 1630; New Impression,
Paris, 1896, p. 49.

34. It is to be noted that Rey understood well enough that not only the


THE CONSERVATION OF MATTER 185


dimunition but also the increase of the weight following a chemical operation
was generally admitted (cf. earlier, p. 184, note 15).

35. Cf. our article on Jean Rey. Revue Scientifique, VII, 1884, p. 302.

36. Essays, pp. 100-129.

37. Honaes: Elements of Philosophy, ed. Molesworth. London, 18935, p. 116.

38. Lerpniz: Opera, ed. Erdmann, p. 767.

39. Cf. Appendix I, pp. 449 and ff., and III, p. 465.

40. Cf. L. Coururat: Sur le systéme de Leibniz d’aprés M. Casstrer. Revue
de métaphysique, Vol. XI, 1903, p. 89.

41. Huvyoens: Discours de la cause de la pesanteur, Leyden, 1690, p. 140:
“T shall prove ... that... the weight of bodies follows precisely the
proportion of matter, which composes them.”

42. Newron: Principia, trans. Motte, New York, 1848, Book IIT,
Prop. VI, p. 394.

43. Cf. Brirrouin: Recherches récentes sur diverses questions d’hydrodynamique.
Paris, 1891, p. 37.

44. Cf. Kopp: Geschichte, Vol. I, p. 281.

45. Borie: Works. London, 1744, Vol. III], Mew Experiments to make Fire
and Flame Ponderable, etc., pp. 318, 342-352.

46. Essai sur le phlogistique et sur la constitution des acides, traduit de anglais
de M. Kirwan; avec des notes de MM. pe Morveau, LAVOISTER, DE LA PLACE,
Monce, BERTHOLLET ET DE Fourcroy. Paris, 1788, p. 3.

47. Carpentarius: /.c., p. 73-74-

48. Gaurzo: lc. The writing published by Favaro belongs to Galileo's
youth and seems to refiect opinions which at that moment were current in
certain schools of Italy. One may see from the De Motu of Galileo (Opere,
ed. Favaro, Florence, 1890, and ff, Vol. I, p. 252), which is also a scholastic
treatise, that this affirmation of the universal weight of bodies is directly
connected with the reaction against peripateticism.

49. Boyze: ic., Vol. IIE, p. 717.

50. There will be found a good summary of the question as it appeared
in the middle of the eighteenth century, in Musschenbroek, Cours de Physique

expérimentale, trans. Sigaux de la Fond. Paris, 1769, Vol. I], p. 371.

51. Berxevey: Works, ed. Fraser. Oxford, 1901, Vol. HI. Siris, § 192;
Siris appeared in 1744.

52. MusscHENBROEK: l.c.

53. Diweror: Pensdes sur [interpretation de la nature. CEurres. Paris, 1875,
Vol. II, p. 28.

54. Kopp: l.c., Vol. III, p. 124.

§5. 1b., p. 127.

56. Jb., p. 141.

57. 1b., p. 141.

58. /6., Vol. I, p. 223.

59. Cf. Bartue.ot: Lavoisier, 2nd ed., Paris, 1902, pp. 41 and 122.

6o. Id., l.¢., pp. 88 and 96.

61. 1b., pp. 43, 97.

62. Dictionnaire de chimie de l’encyclopddie méthodique (by Guyton ps Mor-
veav), Vol. I, p. 638. Also in Lavormrr’s tables in the Traité dlémentaire da


186 IDENTITY AND REALITY


chimie (CEuures, Vol. 1, pp. 149, 152, 155, 157, etc.), heat appears amongst the
elements, followed by oxygen, hydrogen, etc. Light is not cited, but in the
text of the same treatise (p .141) the question is raised of its “great affinity
with oxygen” and ‘“‘of the fact that it combines with certain parts of plants
and that to this combination is due the green colour and the diversity of
the colours of flowers.”

63. Lavomter: /.c., p. 52. ‘*This experiment proves, in an evident manner,
that at a certain degree of temperature, oxygen has a greater affinity for
phosphorus than for heat; that consequently phosphorus decomposes
oxygen gas, that it takes possession of its basis and then heat becomes free.””
Cf. ib., pp. 65, 78, 141.

64. Id., Premier mémoire sur la nature de (eau, etc. Mem. Acad., 1770,
p. 73, Gurres, Vol. U, p. 1.

65. We have seen (p. 167) that such was at that time the most general
explanation which chemists gave of the augmentation of the weight of
calcinated metals, Lavoisier himself seems to adopt it in the memoir in
question. “Physicists know, indeed, that the matter of the fire augments
the weight of the bodies in which it is combined” (i.c., p. 16). But it may
be that the results of his experiments on water inspired him with doubts
as to the value of this theory, and that is why this work belongs to the series
of his great studies on oxidation.

66. Growacx: Lavoisier. Paris, F. Alcan, 1899, p. 99.

67. Lavorier: Cures, Vol. 1, p. 439.

68. It is to be noted that the loss of weight by calcination of lime,
established by Black, did not prevent the development of Meyer's theory.
Cf. later, p. 332.

69. Lavoisier: f.c., p. 663.

70. J. S. Miz: A System of Logic, etc., London, 1884, p. 163.

91. Lrrrrt: La science au point de vue philosophique, 3rd ed. Paris, 1873,
Pp. 322.

972. Lavorster: i.c., Vol. I, pp. 76, tor, 251.

73. Id., lc., pp. 52-53.

74. 1b., Vol. II, p. 175 and ff.

75. Osrwatp: Lehrbuch der allgemeinen Chemie, 2nd ed., Leipzig,


1891-93, p- 2.
. Lb


977. Cf. in F. W. Crarxz: Chemical News, 86, 1902, the comparative
table of atomic weights adopted by the German commission and the
international commission. The variations of atomic weights stated by
chemists have been more recently explained by the theory of isotopes.
But there results from the existence of these latter that one cannot, as a
matter of fact, make use of the ordinary reactions of the laboratory as a
confirmation of the principle of the conservation of matter.

78. Cf. Hevpweitrer: Wisdemann’s Annalen, V, 1901, p. 394 and ff.
Laxpocr has more recently published a series of very minute observations
which seem to confirm his previous results (Sitzungsberichte der Kgl. preuss.
Akademie der Wissenschaflen, 1906, VIII). The discussion of the results of
other observers will be found here (p. 3 and £f.).


THE CONSERVATION OF MATTER 187


79. Cf. Lo Surno: Ji Nuovo Cimiento, July 1904, p. 45.

80. Cf. Ostwarp: Vorlesungen ueber Naturphilosophie. Leipzig, 1902,
p. 283.

81. Maxwett: Whewell's Writing and Correspondence. Scientific Papers,
Cambridge, 1890, Vol. II, p. 153.

82. Kant: Arittk der reinen Vernunft, ed. Rosenkranz und Schubert,
Leipzig, 1838, pp. 156-159.

8g. Id., Metaphysische Anfangsgriinde der Naturwissenschaft, Leipzig, 1838,
p. 404. Cf. Premiers principes, trans. ANDLER and CHAVANNES, p. 74.

84. Id., Vom Uebergange von den metaphysischen Anfangsgriinden der Natur-
wissenschaft zur Physik, ed. A. Krause. Frankfort, 1888, p. 9.

85. /b., p. 6; cf. 1b., p. 159.

86. Kant: Premiers principes, etc., p. 153. “That which is mobile
in space is given a priori as attraction and repulsion, for otherwise no
space could ohe filled.”” From this Kant deduces that ponderability
“belongs just as much to the metaphysics of nature as to physics, and
consequently to the transition from the first to the second.”’ Cf. ib., p. 15,
where this attraction is defined as being exerted in the inverse proportion
of the square of the distance.

87. 1b., p. 52. He affirms, however, the principle of attraction as a priort
(pp. 41, 50).

88. Kant, in general, is less of a “dynamist” in the Uebergang than in
the Maetaphysische Anfangsgriinde; thus he no longer attributes cohesion to
the action of a force of attraction, but to that of the medium. Yet we feel
that Rosenberger (Geschichte, Vol. III, pp. 41-42) is wrong in believing
that he had succeeded in deducing the action of gravitation in the same
way. On the contrary, from this point of view, his conviction seems to
have become rather more absolute.

89. Cf., for example, Ostwaup: Vorlesungen ueber Naturphilosophie. Leipzig,
1902, p. 283.

go. SCHOPENHAUER: Ueber die vierfache Waurzel des Satzes tom zureichenden
Grunde. Werke, ed. Frauenstaedt. Leipzig, 1877, Vol. I, pp. 43-44.

gt. 1b., Vol. II, p. 95.

gz. WHEWELL: The Philosophy of the Inductive Sciences. London, 1840, p. 30.
Cf. Maxwe Lt, Scientific Papers, Vol. IT, p. 531.

93. SpeNcEeR: First Principles, London, 1863, p. 241.

94. Cf. Rem: On the Human Mind. Works, ed. Hamilton. Edinburgh,
1846, p. 136.

95. Lucrgtius: De rerum natura, Book I, lines 278-298.

g6. A. Gautier: Les manifestations de la vie. Revue générale des sciences,
Vol. VIII, 1897, p. 291.

g7. E. Macu: Die Principien der Waermelehre. Leipzig, 1896, p. 425.

98. CrementircH pe ENGceLMAYEeR: Sur lorigine sensorielle des notions
mécaniques. Revue philosophique, 39, sea - 517

gg. Cf. L. Pomoart: La physique moderne. Paris, .d., pp. 93-394. Lorp
Kervin: Sur le Mouvement, etc. Congris international de physique de 1900,
Vol. II, p. ar.

100. It is known that Newton defined mass by density. This definition is


188 IDENTITY AND REALITY


certainly inadmissible, as Thomson and Tait have shown. Cf. H. Poincaré:
La science et Phypothése, p. 120. Cf. also later, p. 388.

101. ANDRADE: Les idédes directrices de la mécanique. Revue philosophique,
Vol. XLVI, 1898, p. 402.

102. WuLr: Zur Mach'schen Massendefinition. Wiedem, Annalen, Spl., 1899.

103. This also seems to be H. Poincaré’s opinion. (La science et [’hypothése,
p. 127.) Duhem’s definition (L’évolution de la mécamique, p. 227), which makes
use of the notion of work, without stating clearly how it is to be applied to
body, belongs, from this point of view, to the same order of ideas.

104. De Freycinet: Sur les principes de la mécanique rationnelle. Paris,
1902, p. 26.

105. Cf. MaxweLi: Whewell’s Writings and Correspondence. Scientific Papers,
Vol. H, p. 532.

106. According to the electric theory of matter, a variation of weight,
following a chemical reaction, would not be in the least surprising. Cf.
Rutherford, i.c., p. 474. It is to be noticed that Sir J. Thomson believed that
it was necessary to establish by experiment the proportionality of weight
and mass for certain radio-active bodies.

107. C. E. Guitraume: Revue géncrale des sciences, Vol. VIII, 1897, p. 56.

108. Ostwap: Vorlesungen ueber Naturphilosophie. Leipzig, 1g02, pp. 180,
192.
109. Weight and mass are again associated in Einstcin’s theory of general
relativity. But in examining this conception one may be convinced how
considerable has been the effort necessary to effect this association and how
little these arguments resemble those by the aid of which, to this day, one
has attempted to deduce a prior: the conservation of weight.

110. Cf. H. Pomcareé: L’état actuel et Vavenir de la physique mathématique.
Revue des idées, 1, 1904, pp. 811-812; id., La valeur de la science, p. 196.


CHAPTER V


THE CONSERVATION OF ENERGY


THE most general formula for this principle can be stated in
these terms: in every modification of an isolated system the
total energy of the system conserves an invariable value.(1)
If no account is taken of the condition of isolation, whose
importance we shall see later, this formula resembles that of
the conservation of matter. There is this difference that the
concept of matter, which originates from common sense, is
vast and without precision whereas that of energy, created
ad hoc by science, scems to present all the desired precision.
We shall see, however, in a later chapter that this is not
absolutely so.

Energy is ordinarily defined as the capacity of producing an
effect or of accomplishing work, to use Duhem’s terms, from
whom we have borrowed the formula of the principle. We shall
stop provisionally at this definition, which is really applicable
only to a particular form of energy (pp. 209, 218), but has cer-
tain advantages, amongst others the advantage of having great
historical value, since it 1s in conformity with the conception of
Leibniz, whose influence on the development of this chapter of
physics was decisive. ““Absolute force’’(we know that this term
for a long time designated what we call energy), says Leibniz in
his Essay de Dynamique, ‘“‘must be estimated according to the
violent effect which it can produce.’’(2) A projectile moving
with a certain velocity can, if it strikes an obstacle, produce
a determined effect: we say that it possesses a certain energy.
But this same cannon-ball, placed at a certain height above
the earth, will be able, in falling, to act in an analogous way.
We have the right therefore, from the point of view of conse-
quences, to assimilate these two very different concepts,
motion and position, and to form the concept of energy of
position, as we have just formed the concept of energy of motion
or kinetic energy. The energy of position is more commonly
qualified as potential: we shall have occasion to return to the
signification of this term. The sum of the two energies, compos-
ing the total energy of the system, must remain constant by
virtue of the principle just formulated


190 IDENTITY AND REALITY


The conservation of energy is the most recent of the three
great principles mentioned by us, it was only definitely
established about the middle of the nineteenth century. Yet
its origin is more ancient. There can be no question of it
in antiquity, since inertia itself, as we have seen, was then
unknown. Only a few more or less obscure indications, relative
to the movement of the arms of a lever and the effect of falling
bodies, which we encounter in Aristotle,(3) can be reported
here. But in Leonardo we already find important beginnings.
He recognizes that in all machines the work of resistance
equals that of power, and that what one gains in power one
loses in time. The force exerted in bending the bow is as much
as the accidental weight communicated to the arrow.(4) These
views are more completely developed by Galileo; he seems to
be more or less indirectly influenced by the notes of Leonardo
which have remained in manuscript form. The great physicist
clearly explains that one cannot, with the aid of machines,
create work. On the other hand, according to Poincaré,(5)
he does not say that work cannot be destroyed ; it cannot there-
fore be pretended that he affirmed the conservation of energy
for the machines in question. Yet in a particular case—to wit,
in that which concerns the falling of heavy bodies, Galileo
gave a formula which leads directly to this principle.

Descartes was the first to announce that something definite, a
determined quantity, must be conserved throughout the modi-
fications which the motion of bodies undergoes. This is the
principle of the conservation of motion. It 1s well known that
Descartes was completely deceived as to the expression of the
quantity itself which remains constant; he supposed that it was
equal to the product of mass by velocity, instead of the square
of velocity as we now hold. This is what Leibniz called, rightly
moreover, his “memorable error.’’(6) The merit of Descartes
in this matter is none the less very great. It was in following
ideas indicated by him that Huygens and Leibniz succeeded
in establishing the principle of the conservation of vis viva.

This discovery is generally attributed to the latter of these
great thinkers. But it seems that Huygens had stated it before
him. Only he formulated it as if it were a proposition of pure
geometry, and without recognizing its great importance. It
was Leibniz who proclaimed it as a fundamental principle of


THE CONSERVATION OF ENERGY 19!


mechanics. At least it is thus that Jean Bernoulli related the
story, and he was almost a contemporary and in a favourable
position to judge things.(7)

It should be noticed that Descartes as well as Leibniz held
that the principles formulated by them applied to the totality
of the phenomena of the universe. ‘‘God,’’ said Descartes,
‘never changes his fashion of acting, and conserves the world
in the same action with which he has created it. . . . And in
order that he may still maintain them with the same action
and the same laws which he made them observe in their
creation, he must conserve now in them all the motion which
he had given them from the beginning, with the property
which he had given to this motion of not always remaining
attached to the same parts of matter and of passing from one
to the other, according to their different encounters.” (8)
Leibniz expressed himself with great clearness in the same
sense. Let us add the following passage to those cited above,
when speaking of the principle of causality (p. 29) : “‘I had main-
tained that vires vivae are conserved in the world. It is objected
that two soft or non-clastic bodies colliding with each other lose
their force. I reply that it is not so. It is true that the ‘wholes’
lose it in relation to their total motion, but the parts receive it,
being agitated internally by the force of the collision. Thus this
loss is only apparent. The forces are not destroyed but dissipated
amongst the small parts. This is not losing them, but it is
doing what those do who change large pieces of money into
smaller ones.”(g) Jean Bernoulli expounded the same ideas.
Having formulated the law of the ‘‘conservation of the quantity
of vires vivae,” he adds: ‘““To try to demonstrate this law would be
to obscure it. Indeed, everyone regards this as an incontestable
axiom, that an efficient cause cannot perish, either as a whole
or in part, without producing an effect equal to its loss. The
idea that we have of the vis viva, in so far as it exists In a moving
body, is of something absolute, independent, and so positive
that it would remain in the body even though the rest of the
universe should have been annihilated. It is clear, therefore,
that the vis viva of a body diminishing or increasing on en-
countering another body, the vis viva of that other body must in
exchange be augmented or diminished by the same quantity ;
the augmentation of the one being the immediate effect of


192 IDENTITY AND REALITY


the diminution of the other; and this necessarily implies the
conservation of the whole quantity of vires vivae; therefore this
quantity is absolutely unalterable by the impact of bodies.”’(10)
Just like Leibniz, moreover, Jean Bernoulli affirmed that the
loss of vis viva by the impact of imperfectly elastic bodies could
only be apparent.(11)

These declarations were clearly understood in their general
sense, as can be ascertained by the manner of thinking
in the eighteenth century on the part of men who were not
physicists by profession, such as de Haller (12) or Voltaire.(13)

It seems paradoxical at first, that these statements in which
only mechanical expressions are involved and from which,
furthermore, the concept of potential energy is absent can be as
general in appearance as our formula for the conservation of
energy. But, for Descartes, there existed in the world no other
phenomena than mechanical phenomena; and Leibniz was
well known to be a pure Cartesian on this point. Moreover,
for Descartes as for Leibniz everything was mass and motion,
there existed no action at a distance and consequently no
potential energy; therefore the conservation of the energy
of motion alone sufficed. And although he naturally supposed
that heat was motion, Leibniz, in speaking of the dissipation
of forces, certainly did not think of the transformation of
mechanical energy into heat, but of purely mechanical, although
indiscernible, motions of particles.

During the eighteenth century the concept of “‘heat-matter”
prevailed little by little over that of ‘‘heat-motion.”” This was
the result of Newtonian physics: the concept of heat-motion,
as Duhem remarks,(14) was a survival of Cartesian physics.
Especially afier the work of Deluc, of Black, and of Wilke,(15)
the triumph of the first of these theories seemed complete.
Thereafter heat is treated as a real substance passing from
one body to another without its quantity (which they had
learned to measure) undergoing any modification, which if it
ceases to manifest itself to our sensation, and if the thermometer
does not disclose it, continues none the less to exist in a par-
ticular state. Black had called it the “latent” state, and this
concept of latent heat—that is, heat not manifesting itself,
but capable of manifesting itself under certain conditions—
belongs evidently to the same family as that of potential energy


THE CONSERVATION OF ENERGY 193


employed by modern physics. Indeed, energy which has been
motion and which is capable of becoming motion again no
longer manifests itself as motion so long as it remains potential;
just as in the case of latent heat we are obliged to attribute
to it a particular state. We shall see later on that Lazare
Carnot designated as force vive latente what we call potential
energy.(16)

The invention and rapid popularity of the steam engine in
no way changed this situation: neither Watt nor his suc-
cessors considered these phenomena from the point of view
of the transformation of heat into mechanical motion.

Yet the ideas of Leibniz continued to bear fruit, and by a sort
of slow and powerful undercurrent all the conceptions con-
stituting our principle of conservation of energy were gradually
developed.

Toward the end of the eighteenth century Lavoisier and
Laplace,(17) completing the work of Leibniz, related the
production of heat by friction to the conception of heat-motion,
and defined heat as the sum of the products of the mass of
each molecule by the square of its velocity—that is, the “‘force
which results from insensible motions of the molecules of
a body.”’

In the beginning of the nineteenth century Rumford, and a
little later, Humphry Davy,(18) with the aid of direct experi-
ments which received great publicity, demonstrated the trans-
formation of motion into heat. Fresnel, in a popular work,
clearly affirms that “the quantity of vires vivae which disappears
as light is reproduced in heat.’’(19)

On the other hand, Lazare Carnot formulates the concept
of latent vis viva, which Poncelet renders precise by calling
it available work,(21) a concept identical with that which we
designate at present as potential energy.

And now the birth of the principle is entirely prepared for.
In 1839 an engineer, Séguin, in a work on the construction of
railroads, formulates, one might almost say in passing, ideas
which are very near to it.(22)

Before Séguin the powerful mind of Sadi Carnot had clearly
conceived the principle in all its extent; he calculated a number
for the mechanical equivalent of heat. But these discoveries,
because of the premature death of the great theorist, remained

N ,


194 IDENTITY AND REALITY


buried in his manuscript notes, which were only published
in 1871.(23)

In spite of everything, the theory of heat-matter remained
dominant. Sadi Carnot, in his celebrated work which appeared
in 1824, had based his researches on that conception. “The
production of motive power in steam machines is due, not to a
real consumption of caloric, but to its transfer from a hot body
to a cold body.’ (24)

The study of J. R. Mayer,(25) published in 1842, is the first
publication on the principle of the conservation of energy in
its present sense. The studies of Colding are almost contem-
porary with those of Mayer, but they were published a little
later.(26) The attention of the scientific world was attracted
only by the experimental researches of Joule, whose first
publication dates from 1843.(27) The work of Helmholtz,(28)
published in 1847, which gave a complete mechanical inter-
pretation of the principle, contributed toward assuring its
triumph.

Is the conservation of energy an empirical law? Physicists
have sometimes found it convenient to treat it as such; but
H. Poincaré, while doing this, took care to warn the reader
that this conception is not in conformity with historic truth.(29)
In fact, it is then necessary, neglecting completely the develop-
ment which we have just attempted to trace, to take Joule’s
experiments as a point of departure, considering them not as a
verification of the principle (which, in fact, they were), but
as an experimental demonstration. But Joule’s (30) results
lend themselves far less to a process of this kind than do those
of Lavoisier for the conservation of matter. The numbers of
the English physicist vary within extraordinarily large limits ;
the average at which he armrives is 838 foot-pounds (for the
quantity of heat capable of increasing the temperature of
a pound of water by 1° F, which is about equivalent to
460 kilogrammeters to 1° C.); but the different experiments
from which this average is drawn furnish results varying
from 742 to 1,040 foot-pounds (or from 407 to 561 kilo-
grammeters)—that is, by more than a third of the lowest

value—and he even notes an experiment which gives 587 Ib.


(322 er apessnapts without secing in it any source of
’ grave experimental errors. It is only in the post-


THE CONSERVATION OF ENERGY | 195


script of this work that Joule tells of a series of experiments
yielding as a result 770 foot-pounds (423 kilogrammeters),
which approximates our present estimations. Moreover, if one
considers that at this same moment Sadi Carnot (31) and J. R.
Mayer (32) had already, each one for himself, calculated the
equivalent of heat and had arrived at the figures of 370 and
of 365 kilogrammeters (which is more than an eighth lower
than Joulc’s value), it becomes really difficult to suppose that
a conscientious scientist, relying solely on experimental data,
could have been able to arrive at the conclusion that the
equivalent must constitute, under all conditions, an invariable
datum.

Since the time of Mayer and Joule a considerable number
of careful researches have been made on this important question.
The results have not always been in agreement, as Lippmann
remarks.(33) To be sure, physicists are able to calculate an
average value, and the deviations are sufficiently reduced so that
they can be charged to experimental errors. It is nevertheless
true that this explanation is necessary; which means that the
immediate results of research do not lead directly to the
establishment of the invariability of the equivalent.

It should be noted that all the data just mentioned are
derived from researches especially undertaken for the sake
of determining the relation in question and carried out under
certain very special conditions, considered most favourable
from the point of view of the technique of these experiments,
such as, for example, average temperatures, etc. We cannot
invoke the results of daily experiences, as we did for the con-
servation of matter. Hirn tried to deduce the equivalent with
the aid of a great number of observations on steam machines ;
he succeeded in obtaining figures varying between 300 and
400,(34) and these results have been generally considered
remarkable, in view of the difficulties of the problem.

These difficulties arise from a fundamental physical fact;
energy much more than matter tends to dissipate itself, and
it is extremely difficult to prevent this dispersion. Matter, since
we have learned to confine gases, is always and everywhere
easily retained. It is not the same with heat. We know of no
substance which is completely impermeable to its action,
and even empty space is but an imperfect isolator.


196 IDENTITY AND REALITY


explains why in the formula of the principle of the conservation
of energy we are obliged to specify the isolation of the system.
We tacitly make the same reservation for the conservation
of matter; we do not state it very often, because it is readily
understood.(35) We know, however, since the work of Bunsen
and Berthelot, that solids are not entirely impermeable to
gases ;(36) and we have learned from Warburg and
Guillaume (37) that under certain conditions glass can be
traversed by sodium or lithium. We have only to imagine this
permeability considerably increased to be obliged to formulate
analogous reservations. (38)

What really would be a valid experimental demonstration
of the conservation of energy? We should need a considerable
series of experiments showing that through all kinds of change,
under the most varied conditions, different forms of energy
transform themselves into one another according to equivalents
remaining constant within the limits of error of measuring
instruments. It seems to be a demonstration of this kind that
Helmholtz was thinking of in 1847 when, after having furnished
the double deduction, which we shall mention later on, he
ended by declaring that “the complete confirmation of the
law must be considered as one of the principal tasks which
physics will have to accomplish in the years to come.”’(39)

Even to-day the task thus understood cannot be accom-
plished. It is not even very certain that if we were able to
measure very exactly all the energy known to us, as present
in any phenomenon, we should find it really constant, and this
for the quite simple reason that we are in no way sure of
knowing all the forms of energy. To affirm the contrary it
would be necessary to establish between the known forms a
relation which would make it evident that they were the only
forms. But we do not know of any relation of this kind, or rather
those which we do know seem to indicate that there must be
great gaps in our knowledge. Here is a pencil of solar rays—that
is, of all kinds of energy which come to us from the sun through
space or the semi-material medium whose existence we are
forced to suppose. We make these rays pass through a prism;
they are dispersed and form the visible spectrum. But this
pencil, we know, also contains vibrations of greater and less


frequency than that of the luminous rays. On this side of the


THE CONSERVATION OF ENERGY 197


red rays there are heat rays; and on the other side of the
violet rays, the ultra-violet, whose presence is indicated by
chemical action, phosphorescent substances, etc. Can we
affirm that there are no vibrations in the solar rays beyond
those which we have just indicated? This is hardly even prob-
able. In studying the explored parts of the spectrum, as ar-
ranged, for instance, by W. E. Guillaume,(40) one finds that
these parts are arbitrarily distributed. One arrives at an analo-
gous conclusion in studying the relations between electricity
and the rays of the spectrum. Between the most rapid electric
oscillations and the longest waves of the spectrum, there
remains an interval equal to that which separates the most
distant ultra-violet and infra-red rays.(41).

Even supposing these intervals entirely filled, who would
dare to affirm that there can be no manifestations of energy
beyond these limits? We are entirely ignorant of the nature
of the fundamental phenomenon which at present we suppose to
be electric, and which we assimilate to an undulation. One
cannot, therefore, maintain a priort that ether is incapable of
developing energy under an entirely different form.

As a matter of fact, our knowledge of forms of energy 1s
due to purely accidental causes, to the circumstance that we
possess organs of sense for the perception of certain amongst
them, and that for others we have discovered, more or less
fortuitously, phenomena which make them apparent, such as
the action of the ultra-violet rays upon certain chemical sub-
stances. Thus, as Le Bon has stated, for twenty-five years one
uscd Crookes’s tubes and was in ignorance of the Rontgen
rays. We should still be ignorant of them were it not for photo-
graphic plates and phosphorescence.(42) It must be recalled
how very recent is the discovery of electricity. It certainly
appears to us to-day as one of the fundamental forms of energy,
even the fundamental form. But it dates from the works of
Gilbert, scarcely three centuries ago. The only electric experi-
ment known to antiquity and the Middle Ages, rubbing amber,
scemed to be a mere amusement; to connect it with the spec-
tacular phenomenon of lightning would have seemed the
strangest of paradoxes. Would it not be temerity to affirm that
the future reserves no surprises of this kind for us? The latest
discoveries in this domain, the Hertzian waves, the Réntgen


198 IDENTITY AND REALITY


rays, and the most celebrated of all, the discovery of the radio-
active substances, date only from yesterday. We can thus
legitimately ask whether in many transformations there do not
arise forms of energy which have remained unsuspected to this
day; it is certain that even in supposing the constancy of E,
experimental results obtained thus far, which, we have seen,
vary between relatively extensive limits, do not permit the
affirmation that some of the transformations which we believe
that we thoroughly know will not give us material for dis-
coveries of this nature in the future.

Thus, just as in the case of the principle of the conservation
of matter, so here, but in a far superior degree, our conviction
grows that the certainty with which the principle of the
conservation of energy appears invested far exceeds what the
experimental data would seem to admit. This “privileged
position” of the principle has very justly impressed H.
Poincaré.(43) Another master of contemporary physics, Lipp-
mann, summarizing the researches upon the mechanical
equivalent of heat, expresses himself in these terms: “‘The
deviations between the different values obtained for E are
always small enough to be laid to the account of experimental
errors. An important consequence flows, nevertheless, from the
totality of determinations made of E—that is, its invariability ;
some uncertainty may remain in the mind about the true value
of this number, but no doubt is possible about the absolute
exactitude of the principle of equivalence.’’(44) It is evident
that if experiments cannot satisfy us about thc true value of
the number, they can still less prove to us that it is really
invariable. Therefore the conviction of the absolute exactitude
of the principle must come from another source; we saw that
its history concurs in this demonstration.

Just as in the case of the conservation of matter, the a priori
character of the conservation of energy was proclaimed by
philosophers almost the day after the discovery of this principle.
Herbert Spencer, under the rather hazy form of “the persistence
of force,” combined with “continuity of motion,” assigns to it
an axiomatic character, just as in the case of inertia and
conservation of matter.(45) Stallo states also that conserva-
tion of energy, “though but recently formulated as a distinct
scientific principle, is now universally regarded as of equal


THE CONSERVATION OF ENERGY 199


evidence and axiomatic dignity’”’ to that of the indestructibility
of matter. Stallo seems to attach this opinion to mechanical
theories ; but since he does not refute it later, contrary to what
he does for these theories in general, one is led to conclude
that he approves of it.(46) Lasswitz believes that he is able to
deduce a priori, by a rather indirect method, either conservation
of energy itself,(47) or at least that of some function of
motion.(48) Spir attempts to deduce directly conservation of
energy from the necessity of a transmission of motion.(49)

Of course, it is causal identity which we shall find at the
bottom of all these deductions. If Spencer declares it incon-
ceivable that motion and force can be created or destroyed,
it is because, in his imagination, he has transformed them into
entities, or substances. It is for the same reason, doubtless,
that Stallo believes that the constancy of mass and that of
energy will be able to preserve their “‘axiomatic dignity,”’
whereas mechanism, upon which these principles seem to rest,
will be invalidated. Lasswitz’s demonstration 1s also tantamount
to affirming a prior: that something must persist in the trans-
formation of motion, which is, we have seen, the most exact
form of the causal principle.

If from this point of view we examine more closely the
principal writings already enumerated in connection with the
history of the principle, we shall be assured in the same way
that everywhere causality constitutes the real motive power.
Descartes, we saw, deduced his principle of conservation of
motion directly from “‘the immutability of God’’—that 1s, from
the identity of the universe in time; and it is in regard to the
conservation of vires vivae that Leibniz gives precisely to the
principle of causality the rigorous formula which we made use
of in our first chapter. Indeed, one could not find a clearer or
more striking example of the use of the notion of identity in time.
With his marvellous vigour of intellect and penetration, Leibniz
clearly saw what he was doing and went straight to the goal.
Cause and effect must be identical, interchangeable. But that
is only possible if the product of the mass by the square of the
velocity remains constant. Therefore it is this very expression
which is maintained throughout the changing phenomena and
which is the true measure of the force.

J. R. Mayer expresses himself thus at the very beginning of


200 IDENTITY AND REALITY


his celebrated work of 1842: ‘Forces are causes, and conse-
quently it is reasonable to apply to them in full the principle:
causa aequat effectum.’’(50) He deduces from this that forces
are “indestructible objects, changing (wandelbar), imponder-
able,”(51) and he again repeats: ‘“‘We end our theses which
are necessarily deduced from the principle causa aequat
effectum.”’ (52) After which, with the aid of a single calculation,
he tries to determine the equivalent; that 1s a proof that he
was sincere in his deduction, for this calculation would have
had no sense if Mayer had not reached, by another method,
the conviction that E must be a true constant. We see that
this argument applies also to Sadi Carnot, who appears
equally to have sought to determine E with the aid of a single
calculation, probably the same as that of Mayer.

Colding reasons as does Bernoulli: “Since forces are spiritual
and immaterial beings, since they are entities which are only
known to us by their empire over nature, these entities must
be doubtless very superior to any other existing material
thing ; and since it is evident that it is by forces only that that
wisdom expresses itself which we perceive and which we admire
in nature, these powers must be in relation with that very
spiritual, immaterial, and intellectual power which guides
the progress of nature ; but, if this be so, it is absolutely impossible
to conceive that these forces should be anything mortal or
perishable. Without any doubt, consequently, they must be
regarded as imperishable.”’(53) Thus Colding estimates that it
is enough to establish the great importance of the notion of
force, to exalt, so to speak, the rank of this notion in order to
deduce from it that force must be a substance, that it must be
conserved. The somewhat theological form of the reasoning
recalls that of Descartes’ analogous deduction concerning
inertia (p. 144).

At first sight Joule seems to proceed by induction. ‘‘Having
proved that heat is generated by the magneto-clectric machine

. . it becomes an object of great interest to inquire whether a
constant ratio exists between this heat and the mechanical
power gained or lost.’’(54) Nothing, it seems, is more correct
from the point of view of the principles of a posteriori reasoning
than to state the problem in this manner. Only, when once these
experiments were instituted—since their results were, we saw,


THE CONSERVATION OF ENERGY 201


very divergent—Joule, instead of concluding that this relation
was not constant but variable, made an average from all,
and proclaimed it the real value of the aforesaid relation,
thus proving that he was convinced in advance of its constancy.

Moreover, Joule took great care to indicate the sources of
this conviction. In an article published a little later he says:
“We might reason a priort that such absolute destruction of


living force (=) cannot possibly take place, because it is
2


manifestly absurd to suppose that the powers with which
God has endowed matter can be destroyed any more than
that they can be created by man’s agency; but we are not
left with this argument alonc, decisive as it must be to every
unprejudiced mind.”’(55) Mach remarks amusingly concerning
this passage that Joule would doubtless not have consented
to submit his affirmation concerning God to a religious
synod.(56) But this is evidently only a sally (as Mach himself
suggests) ; the God of whom Joule is speaking has nothing in
common with theology: He is, like the God of Descartes and
of Leibniz in many analogous passages, hike the God of Colding
in the extract just cited, a symbol of the general order of
nature, and, in this particular case, of the essential 1mmuta-
bility of things—that is, of the causal principle.

Helmholtz, in his study of 1847, invokes, as did his prede-
cessors, the causal principle ;(57} and ten years later, Faraday,
In expounding his ideas on the conservation of energy, does not
think for a single moment of treating it as an experimental
law, but bases his conviction upon the equality of cause and
effect. (58)

Besides these purely causal deductions which incontestably
predominate, others are found where causality seems less
directly called into play. They belong to two principal types:
demonstration by central forces and demonstration drawn
from the impossibility of perpetual motion. Both are found
formulated in the work of Helmholtz in 1847. The first consists
in supposing that all phenomena of motion are exclusively
regulated by forces radiating from centres, whose action is
produced along straight lines which join these centres two by
two according to a law which only depends on the distance;
conservation of energy can then be deduced by mathematical


202 IDENTITY AND REALITY


methods. We have discussed earlier (p. 75 f.) the legitimacy of
this hypothesis; we saw that it did not agree with the reality
of things. But for the moment let us set aside these objections.
What is the assumption of bodies or of discrete particles exerting
immutable forces in time? It is, we saw, a form of the mechanical
hypothesis —that is, a purely causal conception, an image of
the world created by our intellect, solely with the view of
satisfying our tendency to conserve identity in time. At the
basis of this demonstration there is therefore nothing more than
identity between the antecedent and consequent, the cause and
the effect, just as in Leibniz and Mayer.

The impossibility of perpetual motion was affirmed very
early. Leonardo da Vinci makes use of this principle,(59) and
so does Cardanus.(60) Galileo asserts that one cannot create
such a motion with the aid of simple machines (p. 190).
Yet he does not believe it to be an independent principle;
he deduces it from the conditions of the functioning of these
machines. A little later Stevinus, on the contrary, uses this
impossibility, which he considers self-evident, to deduce
rules for machines. Stevinus supposes an endless chain placed
upon a triangle of unequal sides whose base is horizontal.
The two parts of the chain, placed upon the inclined sides, must
necessarily balance, for the part which hangs downward, being
symmetrical, cannot exert any influence; and if one of the
parts of the chain had the power of drawing the system to its
side, since, after this motion the samc situation would be
reproduced, “‘this motion would have no end, which is
absurd.”’(61) Leibniz employs the impossibility of perpetual
motion to demonstrate the conservation of cts civa,(62) and
Huygens, too, uses it.(63) Sadi Carnot also places it at the
basis of the demonstration of his principle.(64) In 1839 Séguin,
while formulating his anticipation of the principle of the
conservation of energy, took the same impossibility as his
point of departure.(63) Finally the complete demonstration
was furnished by Helmholtz in 1847.

In order that the demonstration be valid, it is important, of
course, to know exactly what attitude to take toward the
statement which forms the basis of it. Is it an a@ priori truth
or an empirical rule? For Leibniz it is a simple corollary from
the causal principle: if perpetual motion were possible, the


THE CONSERVATION OF ENERGY 203


effect would be greater than the cause.(66) Huygens expresses
himself with great caution; the impossibility for purely
mechancial systems seems to him to be established, but he
admits that for others “pAysico-mechanice, as in the employment
of the magnet, there may be some hope.”’(67) Carnot also
considers that perpetual motion is “proved impossible by
mechanical actions alone.” But, he adds, ‘‘can one conceive
of the phenomena of heat and of electricity as duc to anything
but certain motions of bodies, and, as such, must they not be
subject to the general laws of mechanics?’’(68) For Helmholtz
it is an experimental truth; the impossibility has been shown
by the absolute fruitlessness of innumerable researches, and
solemnly proclaimed at a certain time by the Academy of
Science at Paris.(69) Helmholtz’s opinion is evidently paradoxi-
cal. It is doubtless not entirely inconceivable that by experi-
ment alone we may arrive at a proposition purely negative
and very general. Such, more or less, is the case with Carnot’s
principle, to which we are certainly inclined to attribute a
negative formula. But this principle, without need of interpre-
tation, flows immediately from experiments which we are
constantly making. There 1s nothing like this for perpetual
motion; daily observation in no way gives us the conviction
of its impossibility, as witness the very multitude of seekers. (70)
One might suppose, also, that a very vast experiment, under-
taken according to a rigorous plan, in order to include
phenomena within very vast limits, would lead us to a
proposition of this kind. But can one really compare such
an experiment with the often very extravagant researches of
these inventors? No one has ever given himself the trouble
to classify methodically their work—the task would be as
arduous as sterile. But no series of experiments, undertaken
without success, could suffice to prove the insolubility of a
problem, otherwise many of the great discoveries, on the eve of
their realization, might have been proved impossible. Humanity
has probably been looking for artificial flight during a longer
time than it has looked for perpetual motion, as witness
many of the legends which are in the folk-lore of a great
number of nations. These researches have been fruitless up to
the present,(71) and yet no one thinks of setting up this sterility
as a principle. It is true that a certain discredit is to-day attached


204 IDENTITY AND REALITY


to the search for perpetual motion; but everything is wanting
in order that a consensus omnium (a true Catholic sentiment)
be established on this subject. Perpetual motion still continues
to be invented, even by purely mechanical means, and these
attempts scmetimes have as their authors ingenious minds, not
entirely devoid of technical culture, as, for instance, the inven-
tion which The Times recently reported.(72) Let us observe that
the contributor to this English journal, in order to emphasize the
sterility of this attempt, did not lay stress upon negative results
in the past, but upon the conservation of energy. This incon-
testably is the gencral feeling; the impossibility of perpetual
motion is based upon this latter principle and not inversely.
Moreover, this fecling is in conformity with the opinion of the
great minds whose names we have cited before. There can be
no doubt about it in the case of Leibniz; but Huygens and
Carnot, in affirming the impossibility for purely mechanical
actions, were doubtless thinking of the principle of vs viva;
perhaps Carnot was thinking besides of a deduction of the
conservation of energy on the hypothesis of central forces,
and most certainly the impossibility of perpetual motion did
not appear to them as an experimental fact. The famous decision
of the Academy of Science invoked by Helmholtz could not
serve his thesis--quite the contrary. It was taken in 1775.
The Academy proclaimed that in the future it would no longer
examine “‘any solution of the problems of the duplication of the
cube, of the trisection of the angle, or the quadrature of the
circle, nor any machine announced as perpetual motion.”
In these terms the [Histoire de [ Académie renders account of the
motives of this last decision: ‘““The construction of a perpetual
motion is absolutely impossible. Even if friction, the resistance
of the medium, would not in the long run destroy the resistance
of the moving force, this force can only produce an effect
equal to its cause. If, then, one wishes that the effect of a finite
force last for ever, this effect must be infinitely small in a
finite time. Setting aside friction and resistance, a body to
which one has once given a motion would conserve it always;
but it is by not acting upon other bodies, and the only per-
petual motion possible on this hypothesis (which, however,
cannot occur in nature) would be absolutely useless for the
object proposed by the constructors of perpetual motion.”’(73)


THE CONSERVATION OF ENERGY 205


This, we see, is again the demonstration by conservation of
vis viva, based, as in Leibniz, upon the equality of effect and
cause. Doubtless, according to its authors, this resolution only
applied directly to pure mechanics; some of them were prob-
ably of the opinion, as was Huygens, that, except in the case of
the latter, the impossibility had not been proved. At any rate,
it was thus that this resolution was understood by the scientific
world. Perpetual motion continued to be sought for, and the
seekers, as Duhem has justly remarked,(74) were not all fools.
In the same way Volta’s ideas on contact electricity were
accepted with great docility, although they involved the possi-
bility of finding a system capable of furnishing indefinitely
electric energy without being used up and without being
directed, a possibility which the great Italian physicist expressly
affirmed.(75) Again, in 1833 a notable physicist, Muncke,
maintained, entirely in the sense of Huygens, that physical
perpetual motion was possible, citing in support of this view
the planetary system, the rotation of the earth, rivers, the
barometer, and the magnetic needle.(76) And if at present
the contrary conviction has become general, this, without
doubt, is due to the fact that everyone believes in the conserva-
tion of energy.(77)

However, there still remains Stevinus’s demonstration.
Duhem (78) thinks that Stevinus placed faith in Cardanus—that
is, in the considerations on the power necessary to maintain
a machine in motion. That may be so, but it does not follow
from his deduction, which 1s direct and incontestably of a great
demonstrative force, although some contemporaries, amongst
others Mersenne, have expressed doubts on this subject.(79)

There are certainly motions which we instinctively feel
impossible, and whenever one can, in a demonstration, simplify
the phenomena enough to reduce the demonstration, for
example, to the type of “‘the stone which goes up by its own
weight,” our conviction will be established. But this clarity,
seemingly perfect as long as it is a question of simple phenomena,
becomes attenuated in the face of more complicated ones. This
is so because we are here not dealing with rational truth. The
law of gravity itself is purely empirical. Since we continually see
bodies tend toward the carth, we conceive the idea that this is
a general rule, a law. But this does not lead us to understand


206 IDENTITY AND REALITY


what gravity is; we do not succeed in according it a logical
necessity, and our reason refuses to commit itself as soon as we
hear of circumstances fundamentally different from those we
know. At bottom, the fact that a little weight may raise a big one
is entirely contrary to our Immediate sensation, and we have all
been astounded to learn that this result might be obtained with
the help of an appropriate lever. This explains why there are
so many people always searching for perpetual motion, even
by purely mechanical means. (80)

Thus the conservation of energy, like inertia, like the con-
servation of matter, is neither empirical nor a priort; it is
plausible.

This truth can be established, 1f not more completely,
at least more directly, for energy than for velocity or mass.

In the first place, from the historical point of view, we have
seen that conservation is postulated even before the concept
is precisely stated. We want something to be conserved. Descartes
and his contemporaries affirm it, though completely deceived
as to the nature of what is conserved. It may be that the error
is of experimental origin,(81) but it is certain that Mersenne’s
experiment, which furnished the point of departure, supposing
even that it was exact, was far from countenancing such a
vast generalization. It is certainly remarkable that during all
the discussions which took placc in the seventeenth and
eighteenth centuries on the question of the measure of force,
measure and conservation should have been absolutely con-
fused. If a force (we say, an energy) is able to bring about a
certain effect, the force which can exercise an identical effect
must be counted equal to the first ; but it does not follow that the
force must equal its effect. Now, it is this second formula, as we
can easily perceive, which 1s at the bottom of the discussions
under consideration. Finally, it is clear that the discovery of
Mayer and of Joule only substituted one concept of constancy
for others, already pre-existing, which it destroyed by that very
fact. Leibniz supposed mechanical energy to be indestructible
and, on the other hand, Deluc, Black, and Wilke admitted the
indestructibility of heat-matter. What we call the principle of
the conservation of energy consists in the opposite proof,
namely, that heat as well as mechanical energy, taken separately,
can be created and destroyed, the disappearance of mechanical


THE CONSERVATION OF ENERGY 207


energy being accompanied by the appearance of a certain
quantity of heat energy and vice versa.

We come to analogous conclusions through a close examina-
tion of the concept of energy, such as we find it in science of
to-day. The concept of mass is only the expression of the rela-
tion following which bodies act upon each other. This action,
really, is strictly determined: it is mechanical action; the
relation would be entirely different were we to take for a
basis electric or thermal action. Yet, because of the pre-
ference which we accord to phenomena of displacement over
all others, the concept of mass certainly appears to us as
invested with particular importance (p. 179 f.). Moreover, in
virtue of the principle of inertia, stipulating that the state
of motion of the body is indifferent, provided only the motion
be rectilinear and uniform, we have the possibility of deter-
mining the relation in question by starting from an initial
state which appears to us as identical: relative rest. Finally,
continual experiments disclose to us the relations between the
bodies surrounding us and a unique body, always the same—
that is, the earth. This is why mass no longer appears to us as a
relation between two bodies, but as a coefficient becoming
attached to each particular body, as a property of the body,
which causality 1s then charged with transforming into a
substance. But it is not the same with energy; it remains a
relation, and if one wishes to conceive of it as a property, it
will be the property of a system and not that of a body. To
be sure, we sometimes find, especially in popular books,
expressions which would make us suppose the contrary. It is
said, for instance, that such a body constitutes a “‘reservoir of
energy”; but this is because one takes for granted a host
of conditions. Thus a mass of coal in burning is capable of
liberating a known number of calories. But if our atmosphere
were composed of gaseous chlorine this relation would be
quite different. Two celestial bodies, falling one upon the
other, would liberate a quantity of heat energy which we can
calculate; but if afterwards chemical reactions were produced
between the components of these masses, this heat would be
increased by an unknown amount. But even remaining in the
purely mechanical domain we do not succeed in attaching
energy, as a property, to bodies. To be convinced of this it is


208 IDENTITY AND REALITY


sufficient to consider the mathematical formula of kinetic
energy. It contains the square of velocity; but we only know
relative velocities. All terrestrial masses which surround us,
seen from the sun, are displaced with considerable velocity,
drawn along by the motion of the carth; they therefore possess
an enormous kinetic energy. But we take no account of this;
we treat it as if it did not exist—rightly, moreover, since, unless
we encounter an aerolite, it can in no way interfere with what
passes on the earth. With sull greater reason the conception of
potential energy is inseparable from the consideration of a
system. This mass which I am holding in my hand may fall
upon the floor of my room, into the street, or into a well which I
can imagine as deep as I wish. I can also imagine that it
falls upon the sun, which, incontestably, attracts it, and the sum
of energy which each one of these phenomena liberates will be
very different. It is impossible to gauge in advance, considering
only a body and not a system, the sum of energy susceptible
of being disengaged ; this latter is strictly infinite even in the
interior of each body, for we have only to suppose the substances
composed of centres of forces in order to obtain infinite work
by causing two of these centres to coincide.(82) Lord Kelvin
introduced the term (otal wntrinstc energy, and many physicists
have used it since. But it must be remembered that this quantity
is defined in relation to a standard state; it is therefore capable
of having a negative value.(83) Hertz pointed out that this
assumption would be absurd for a real substance, which, of
course, is incapable of being conceived except as a positive
quantity, and that under these conditions potential energy
resists any definition attributing to it the properties of a
substance.(84) For our imagination, matter is something real
and energy is only an integral.

There are other difficulties quite as serious. Until now we
have supposed that energy was composed of two quantities,
namely, energy of motion or kinetic, T, and energy of position or
potential energy, U. We therefore have T + U == constant.
But as a matter of fact this decomposition only applies to
purely mechanical phenomena. If, on the contrary, we have to
take into account, at the same time, thermal, chemical, or
electric energy, we must introduce a third term Q, to represent
this internal energy, and the equation will have to be written:


THE CONSERVATION OF ENERGY 209


T + U + Q= constant. To make the equation clear the
three terms must be absolutely distinct-—that is, T will have
to depend solely on the square of the velocity, whereas U will
only depend on positions and will be independent of these
velocitics and of the state of the bodies, and finally Q will be
independent of the velocities and the positions of the bodies
and will depend exclusively on their tnternal state. But these
are assumptions which experience does not confirm. Electro-
static energy, due to the mutual action of electrified bodies,
does not depend only on their charge —that is, on their state;
it depends also on their position and their velocities. Under
these conditions we can no longer make the selection of the
terms T, U, and Q—that is, separate the three forms of energy.
Now if T + U + Q remains constant it will be the same with
any function ¢ (T + U + Q). If the terms T, U, and Q were
entirely distinct one from the other there would be amongst
all of these functions one alone having a particular form, and
that one we should call energy. But if these terms depend
on the conditions just indicated, this particular form does not
exist. Therefore, says Poincaré, from whom we have borrowed
almost textually the preceding development, “‘we no longer
have anything which can guide us in our choice. Nothing
more remains but a statement for the principle of the conserva-
tion of energy : there is something which remains constant.” (85)

This is evidently the most general formula—the typical
formula —-for the principle of conservation ; 1t clearly shows that
it is a question of a tendency prior to experience: this something
we do not know, we cannot indicate its nature in advance,
but we hope that it will remain constant in time; we demand
it. The fact that a mind as eminent as Poincaré’s, without
theoretical preconception, and animated by a simple desire
to render precise the tenor of the principle, should have arrived
at a formula of this kind, singularly fortifies the conclusions
to which our analysis has brought us.


NOTES


1. Dunem: L’évolution de la mécanique. Paris, 1903, p. 227.
2. Lureniz: Mathematische Schriften, ed. Gerhardt, Vol. VI, p. 218.
3. Cf. RosenperoEn: Geschichte der Physik, Vol. I, p. 19.

: 6


210 IDENTITY AND REALITY


4. Dunem: Léonard, I, p. 246; I], p. 293 and ff. What Leonardo here
qualifies as acctdental weight is the same concept which in other places he
calls sometimes forza and sometimes impeto.

5. H. Powrcark: Thermodynamique. Paris, 1892, p. 2 and ff.

6. Lermniz: Opera, ed. Erdmann, p. 117. Brevis demonstratio erroris

7. J. Bernoutui: Discours sur les lois de la communication des mouvemenis.
(CEuvres. Lausanne, 1772, Vol. II, p. 58. Lersniz sometimes seems to affirm
that he is the sole author of the discovery and that Huygens knew of it
through him. Cf. Lettres a PHépital. Mathematische Schrifien, Vol. 1, p. 320.

8. Descartes: Principia, 2nd Part, Chap. XLII.

g. Lerniz: Opera, ed. Erdmann, p. 775.

10. J. Bernounu: l.c., p. 56. The Discours was printed in Paris in 1727.

11. Id., De vera ratione virtum vivarwm, etc., § IX; 1b., p. 243.

12. A. DE Haier: Elementa Physiologiae corporis humant. Lausanne, 1762,
Vol. IV, p. 557: ‘“Cartestus et Lethnitius et plerique mathematici negant aut ort:
im rerum natura motum novum aul disperire: per circulum autem corpora impelli
et se impellere, ut tantum de motu in aligua parte universi dematur, quantum in alta
videtur accedere.”’

13. VoLtTamgE: (CEuores, ed. Beuchot. Paris. 1830, Vol. XXXVIII,
p. 500.

14. Dunem: Le Mixte. Paris, 1902, p. 61.

15. Cf. RosenBerGER: Geschichte der Physik, Vol. 11, pp. 345-348.

16. “*Potentielle Energie ist also ein dem aprioristisch feststehenden ersten Hauptsatz
zu Lube ersonnener Ausfuellbegriff”’ Driesch. Naturbegriffe und Natururthetle.
Leipzig, 1904, p. 58. It is known, moreover, that at the moment when the word
was introduced into science by Rankine, about 1857, Faraday protested,
claiming that for it should be substituted a physical substratum—that is, a
modification of the medium. Cf. Planck, Das Prinzip der Erhaltunge der
Energie, and ed. Leipzig, 1908, p. 98.

17. Lavoister and Laptace: Mémotres sur la chaleur. Lavoisier, Gsucres.
Paris, 1862, Vol. II, pp. 285~286. Yet the authors formulate these supposi-
tions only with a certain reserve, presenting them, at most, as equivalents
of the theory of heat-fluid. It is known, morcover, that Lavoisier clearly
leaned toward this last hypothesis. (Cf. earlier, p. 173.)

18. Ruwrorp: An Inquiry concerning the Source of the Heat which is excited by
Friction. Transactions of the Roy. Soc., London, 1798 (January 25). H. Davy,
An Essay on Heat, etc. (1799), Works. Vol. 11. London, 1836, p. 11. According
to H. Poincaré ( Thermodynamique, p. 28), Rumford’s experiment was not
absolutely conclusive. One can see, moreover, in Biot (Précis dlénentaire de
physique expérimentale, 2nd ed. Paris, 1820-21, Vol. II, p. 683) how con-
temporary science adjusted itself to this experiment.

19. We quote from Boun: Notice sur la théorie mécanique de la chaleur.
Annales de Chimie et de Physique, 4th series, Vol. 1V, 1865, p. 280. We have
not succeeded in finding Fresnel’s treatise, Sur la chaleur, which has not been
included in the edition of his works (Paris, 1866-70).

20. Lazare Carnot: Principes fondamentaux de I'dquilibre et du mouvement.
Paris, an XI, 1803, p. 37.


THE CONSERVATION OF ENERGY aul


21. Poncerst: Introduction a la mécanique industrielle physique ou expéri-
mentale, and ed. Metz, 1841, § 138: “‘Water enclosed in the reservoir of a
mill represents a certain force ready for action, which is changed into
kinetic energy when the sluice-gate is opened ; in its turn the kinetic energy
acquired by this water, in virtue of its fall from the reservoir, is changed into
a certain quantity of work as it acts upon the mill-wheel, and this latter
transmits its work to the mill-stones, . . . which finish the task.’’

aa. Séoum v’ainé: De influence des chemins de fer et de Vart de les tracer
et de les consirmre: Paris, 1839, p. 382. “Since the theory actually adopted
would nevertheless lead to this result (i.e. to perpetual motion), it seems
more natural to me to suppose that a certain quantity of calories disappear
in the very act of the production of the force or mechanical power, and
conversely; and that the two phenomena are bound together by conditions
which assign to them invariable relations.”

23. Cf. Pomncaré: l.c., p. 51. These notes have been reproduced in the
and ed. of Réflextons. Paris, 1878.

24. Savi Carnot: Reéflexions sur la puissance motrice du feu. New Impression.
Paris, 1903, p. 10. In the last pages of this work Carnot expresses doubts on
the legitimacy of this conception (cf.,fp. 203).4,These reservations have
not been noticed.

25. J. R. Mayer: Bemerkungen ueber die Kraefte der unbeleblen Natur.
Liebig’s Annalen, Vol. XLII, 1842.

26. Cf. later, p. 212, note 53.

27. J. P. Joure: On the Calorific Effect of Magneto-Electrictty and on the
Mechanical Value of Heat. Philosophical Magazine, Vol. XXIII. London,
1843.

28. Hermyortz: Ueber die Erhaltung der Kraft, 1847; reproduced in
Wissenschaflliche Abhandlungen, Vol. 1, p. 12 and ff.

29. H. Potncargé: J.c., p. 65.

go. Jouve: 1.c., pp. 437-439.

31. Cf. H. Porncaré: l.c., p. 51.

gz. J. R. Maver: /.c., p. 240.

33. Lippmann: Coss de thermodynamique. Paris, 1889, p. 11 and ff. There
will be found in the report presented to the Congress of Physics of 1900 by
Ames on L'équivalent mécanique de la chaleur (Vol. 1) a thorough discussion
of the most remarkable investigations on this matter. Of the twenty-one
physicists recently engaged upon this, Ames rejects the results of fifteen as
marred by too great errors, and calculates his averages from the results of
the other six. The maximum and minimum limits which he determines still
present a difference of more than } per cent.

34. Lippmann: i.c,, p. 95.

35. M. J. Perrin: Traité de chimie physique (Paris, 1903, p. 16) expressly
formulates, nevertheless, this condition.

g6. R. W. Bunsen: Ueber die Verdichtung der Kohlensaeure an blanken
Glasflaechen. Poggendorf*s Annalen, Vol. XX, 1883, p. 558. M. Bertuecor,
Comptes rendus de l’ Académie des sciences, Vol. CXL, 1905, p. 817, 1253.

37 Cf. W. Sprino: Propridtés des solides, etc. Congrés de physique de 1900,
Vol. I, p. 4a1, and Dastre, La vie et la mort, p. 264.


212 IDENTITY AND REALITY


g8. Let us remark, in order to avoid all misunderstanding, that the
conservation of energy and that of mass would not become on this account
strictly analogous, energy not being able to be conceived of as a property
of a body (cf., p. 207). Our observation has only to do with the condition
of isolation.

g9. Hetmnortz: Wissenschafiliche Abhandlungen. Leipzig, 1882, I, p. 67.

40. Cu.-E. Gurtraumm: L’dehelle du spectre. Revue générale des sciences,
X, 1899, p. 7 and ff.

41. This gap is almost filled at the present moment, but the rest of the
argument remains true.

42. G. te Bon: L’évolution de la matiére. Paris, 1905, p. 120.

43. H. Pomcaré: /c., p. vii. One can place in the same category the
following declaration of Helm’s, Die Lehre von der Energie, historisch-
kritisch entwickelt, Leipzig, 1887, p. 2: ‘‘Mancher hat daher wohl das Gefuehl,
als sei die Unterlage eine unsichere, auf der das moderne Energiegesetz ruht und als
habe seine Entwicklung leichtfertige Schritte gemacht.’” The admission is all the
more significant because it emanates from a man whose doctrine exalts
the importance of the principle.

44. Lippmann: /.c., p. 13.

45- SPENCER: /.c., p. 251 and ff.

46. Stato: La matiére, p. 27 and ff.

47. Lasswitz: Geschichte der Atomistik. Hamburg, 1890, Vol. II, p. 377.

48. Id., Zur Rechtfertigung der kinetischen Altomistik. Vierteljahrsschrift: fuer
wissenschaftliche Philosophie, 1X, 1885, p. 154.

49. Spm: Pensde et réalité, p. 424.

50. J. R. Maver: l.c., p. 233.

51. Ib., p. 234.

52. 1b., p. 239.

53. A. Corpinc: Lettre aux rédacieurs du Philosophical Magazine sur U’histowre
du principe de la conservation de I'énergie. Trans. Verdet. Annales de Chimie et
de Physique, 4th series, Vol. I, 1864, p. 467. The original article of Colding,
inserted in the minutes of the Academy of Copenhagen, 1843, does not
appear ever to have been translated into a more accessible language.

54. Joure: lc., p. 435.

55. Id., Scientific Papers. London, 1884-87, p. 268.

56. Macu: Die Principien der Waermelehre. Leipzig, 1896, p. 261.

57- Hermnortz: Wissenschaftliche Abhandlangen, p. 13: Wir werden genocthigt
und berechtigt . . . durch den Grundsatz, dass jede Veraenderung in der Natur
eine zureichends Ursache haben muesse.”’ Later Helmholtz, adding notes to his
study, declared that he had been too much influenced by Kant and that
the principle of causality was only the hypothesis of the reign of law in
all phenomena (cf. earlier, p. 18). It is the confusion which we know well,
and it is quite easy to discover that the principle, of which Helmholtz
made use in affirming that phenomena must be reduced to immutable
forces in time, is really that of causality. It is also seen from the sequel to
the passage (ib., p. 68) that what had caused him to go astray was the
confusion between the laws and the properties of bodies: Des Gesetz als
objektive Macht anerkannt, nennen wir Kraft. (Cf. earlier, p. 39 and ff.)


THE CONSERVATION OF ENERGY arg


58. Farapay: On the Conservation of Force. Phil. Mag., (4), XIII, 1827,
p. 239; cf. id., Experimental Researches on Electricty. London, 1839-55, Vol. I,
§§ 2069, 2073. It is curious to notice that Tait’s violent attacks upon J. R.
Mayer and Séguin, accusing them of being “speculating philosophers”
and ‘“‘metaphysicians” (cf., for example, Tait, Conferences. Paris, 1856,
pp. 18, 73, 77), rebounded against Faraday, and even, we have seen,
against Joule.

59. Cf. Dunem: Les origines de la statique, p. 21.

60. /6., p. 58.

61. Srevinus: Giuores mathématiques, trans. Gerarp. Leyden, 1634, p. 448.
Cf, Dunem, f.c., p. 266 and ff,

62. Cf. especially Lerpniz: De legibus naturae et vera aestimatione virium
motricium. Mathem. Schriften, Vol. VI, p. 204 and ff.

63. Cf. Lettre de Huygens, ib., Vol. I, p. 140.

64. Sapt Carnot: Reflexions sur la faussance motrice du feu. New Impression.
Paris, 1903, p. 21.

65. Cf. earlier, p. 211, note 22.

66. Lerpniz: f.c., p. 204: ‘Docu ex contraria essentia sequi inaequalitatem
causae et effectus, ima motum perpetuum, quae absurda videantur.”’ Ub.; ‘‘nascitur
motus perpetuus seu effectus potior causa.”’ P. 206: ‘‘Saltem negabunt widow motum
perpetuum seu effectum causa potiorem esse possibilem.”” Cf. Coururat, Revue de
métaphysique, X1, 1903, p. 89.

67. Lersniz: Mathem. Schriften, Vol. 1, p. 149.

68. S. Carnot: /.c., p. 21, note.

69. Hermnortz: Wissenschaftliche Abhandlungen, p. 73. ‘‘Uebrigens ist dieses
Gesetz, wie alle Kenntniss von Vorgaengen der wirklichen Welt, auf inductivem
Wege gewonnen worden. Dass man kein Perpetuum mobile bauen, das heisst Triebkraft
ohne Ende micht ohne entsprechenden Verbrauch gewinnen koenne, war eine durch
viele vergebliche Versuche, es zu letsten, allmaehlig gewonnene Induction.

Schon laengst hatte die franzoesische Akademie das Perpetuum mobile in dieselbe
Kategorie wie die Quadratur des Zirkels gestellt und beschlossen, keine angeblichen
Loesungen dieses Problems mehr anzunehmen. Das muss doch als der Ausdruck einer
unter den Sachwerstaendigen weit verbreiteten Lieberzuegung angesehen werden.”

90. “That the doctrine of the conservation of energy is not self-evident
is shown by the repeated attempts to discover a perpetual motive power.”
Maxwell, Theory of Heat, Chap. VII, p. 144.

71. These lines were written in 1907.

72. The Times. Engineering Supplement, April 19, 1905, p. 64.

73. Histoire de l’ Académie Royale des sciences, année 1775. Pans, 1777,
pp. 61, 65.

74. Dunem: Les origines de la Statique, p. 279.

95. Cf. M. ce Brane: Les idées nouvelles sur la théorie des piles. Revue générale
des science, X, 1899, p. 725.

76. Muncxe: Perpetuum mobile in Geuuer’s Physikalisches Woerterbuch.
Leipzig, 1833, Vol. VII, p. 408.

77. J. Perrin: Traité de chimie physique (Paris, 1903, p. 77) deduces the
impossibility of perpetual motion from the principle a the conservation


of energy.


214 IDENTITY AND REALITY


98. Dune: 1.¢., p. 279.

79. 1b., p. 298.

80. Heim, although he clearly perceives that the affirmation of the
impossibility of perpetual motion is not a purely empirical statement
(Die Lehre von der Energie. Leipzig, 1887, p. 92), believes that he is able
none the less to use it as a basis for an inductive demonstration of the
principle of the conservation of cnergy (ib., p. 41). In our opinion the
a priori conceptions (aprioristische Vorstellungen), of which Helm admits the
intervention apropos of perpetual motion, have to do with the conservation
of energy; the first of these principles is based upon the second and not
inversely.

8:1. Cf. Rosenpercer: Geschichte, Vol. 11, p. 95.

82. It is known, morcover, as a result of recent discoveries, and especially
that of radio-active bodies, that the consideration of intra-atomic energy
has left the purely speculative domain and has entered that of experimental
physics. The figures at which one arrives are really enormous, compared
to those furnished us by the usual sources of energy (cf. later, p. 273f.),
without being able, of course, to affirm that they really exhaust all the
latent energy which the body contains.

83. Cf. on this subject Helm, /.c., p. 35.

84. Hertz: Gesammelte Werke. Leipzig, 1895, Vol. II], pp. 25-27. Hews,
Lc., p. 16, expresses an analogous opinion.

85. H. Pomcart: Thermodynamique, p. 9. Id., La science et Uhypothdse


Pp. 152-153, 158, 195.


CHAPTER Vi


THE ELIMINATION OF TIME


WE have seen, in what precedes, the postulate of the identity
of things in time intervening powerfully in science. It is that
which constitutes completely, so to speak, atomic theories, and,
again, it is this postulate which impels us to hope that determi-
nate objects of thought, capable of being considered as sub-
stances, are conserved amongst phenomena eternally changing ;
it is this causal tendency which prepares the way for the principles
of conservation, suggests them, and once stated, lends to them
an authority which “‘brings them close to those truths of which
the contrary is inconceivable,” and which makes them “offer
almost a character of universality and metaphysical neces-
sity.’(1) It is powerful enough to create in us illusions that
are contrary to evidence; it makes us accept as substance
what in the beginning is but a relation between two limited
terms, such as velocity, or a concept impossible to define
clearly in its entirety, such as energy.(2) It is this strange
prestige of the principles of conservation which explains why
we arc inclined to exaggerate immoderately their importance
to the extent of making their formulation coincide with the
causal postulate itself: Nothing 1s created, nothing 1s lost.
And to this same reason is also duc the obstinacy with which
we try to maintain these rules, and to ignore or to explain some-
how the facts which afterwards are revealed and which seem to
contradict them. Poincaré has observed this tendency of which
the theories devised to explain the action of radio-active bodies
furnish an excellent example, since it is especially a question of
the constancy of energy, a conception whose experimental
basis, we have scen, is not very firmly established. (3)

But the action of the postulate is not confined to mechanism
and principles of conservation; it is easy to perceive that its
intervention in science is not only powerful but incessant;
that it manifests itself everywhere ; that science 1s, so to speak,
impregnated with it. We shall see this clearly in examining the
most rational of the physical sciences, “rational mechanics.”
It well merits its name, for it is the science which is the most


216 IDENTITY AND REALITY


adequate to our reason, and, we shall see, the farthest removed
from reality.

The perfect identity between cause and effect, as the causal
tendency postulates it, would imply from all evidence their
equivalence—that is, the possibility of reversing the phenome-
non, of arriving at the antecedent by starting from the
consequent. On the other hand, this “reversibility,’’ as we
say in physics, does not imply identity. I can exchange a ten-
franc gold piece for two five-franc silver pieces, or vice versa,
from which it follows that these things have the same valuc,
are equivalent, but not identical.

The postulate of reversibility was clearly formulated by
Leibniz. Let us recall here the most trenchant of the sentences
quoted before upon the relations between causes and effects:
“‘The integral effect may reproduce the entire cause or its
equal.”

Is this really so? We have only to consult our inner con-
sciousness to reply to this question. We notice that we have
the absolute feeling that nature follows an immutable course
in time. We know that to-day is not like yesterday, that between
the two something irreparable has happened: fugit irreparabtle
tempus. We feel ourselves growing old. We cannot invert the
course of time. An able novelist has recently tned to render
tangible the contrary supposition; his stories are instructive
precisely because of the strange effect which emanates from
them. And yet Wells, in supplying his hero with a machine
which permits him to displace himself in time as we displace
ourselves in space, takes the precaution to have him travel
chiefly in the future,(4) which appears to us necessarily as
undetermined because of our ignorance. But let us suppose
a displacement in the past. Wells’s hero, on the eve of the
Battle of Hastings, will warn Harold of the subterfuge meditated
by William, and the Normans will be beaten. Thus the entire
course of history will be modified ; but it will be altered, in fact,
without these bold suppositions, for any individual who 1s
added necessarily modifies the state of the universe at a given
moment, and from that very fact it becomes impossible that
the result should be what it has been. To re-ascend to the past
is to modify the past, and that seems contradictory to us.

We feel, moreover, that not only the entire universe, but


THE ELIMINATION OF TIME 217


also each particular phenomenon which we observe, follows
a determined course in time, has a beginning and an end,
and that it is impossible for us to represent it in reverse order.
We have only to think of events in organic nature: the birth
of beings, their maturation, their decline and death. Who can
imagine fruits preceding flowers, the fowl being transformed
into an egg? But it is the same also in phenomena where the
fact of evolution seems less marked to us; everything unfolds
in a certain direction, and if, by chance, we saw something
produced in the opposite direction we should be immediately
struck by it as by somcthing contrary to the course of nature.
We need not, as a matter of fact, have here recourse to imagina-
tions such as those of Wells; we can see this reversed world.
To do this we have only to provide ourselves with a cinemato-
graph, to insert within it a reel of pictures representing moving
phenomena-~such as the jumping or the falling of a horse,
a drop of water dripping into a pond, the descent of a mass of
stones or of sand—and to turn the crank in the opposite direction.
It is impossible to describe the strangeness of the impression
which comes from the aspect of these pictures. It is not sorcery ;
but is something more or less like it: it is a world manifestly
absurd, which presents no analogy with the one we know.
Doubtless if we look in this way at a machine the impression
will not be the same: a locomotive will simply have the air
of “‘going backward,” and the phenomenon thus reversed in
no way shocks our sensation of reality. But if we observe the
fireplace we shall see that the smoke, instead of leaving it
and of being dissipated, is formed in the distance, approaches,
thickens, and finally rushes into the fireplace, a phenomenon
which certainly will appear impossible to us. We can, moreover,
explain that even the resemblance between one part of the
reversed phenomenon and the going backward is only apparent
and is due mainly to the imperfection of our senses. The
different parts of the machine, however well oiled they may be,
rub against each other just as the wheels rub against the rails,
all of which become heated, and the heat is dissipated in the air.
Everyone knows, moreover, that the friction of the moving
wheels on the rail constitutes one of the essential conditions of
the phenomenon, the locomotive sktds when this friction is
insufficient. But could we see these waves as we see the smoke,


218 IDENTITY AND REALITY


the reversed picture of the moving locomotive would shock us
as much as what occurs in the fireplace.

It is clear that the observation just formulated is quite
general. The stellar movements seem to be an exception; we
are, indeed, forced to suppose that the medium in which they
act offers no resistance; therefore it seems that all could turn
backward and that, endowed with equal velocity and an
opposite direction, the planets would pass again in the reverse
direction through the same series of perihelions and eclipses. But
this is probably only an appearance; where we can study the
phenomenon more closely the illusion of reversibility is dissi-
pated. Thus, in respect to the earth, the flow of the tides plays,
as we know, the réle of a brake; it tends to oppose itself to its
rotation and converts a part of the kinetic energy of this motion
into heat which is dissipated afterwards. On the earth, at any
rate, there can be no mechanism absolutely deprived of fric-
tion, and therefore there exists none that is really reversible. (5)

It is quite different in rational mechanics: there all motions
are reversible. At the outset, with the help of a postulate
tacitly assumed, the very essence of the concept of time is
completely altered. Mechanical time no longer always flows
uniformly in the same direction; on the contrary, one can
move in it freely in the desired direction, as we do in space.
It is doubtless this which Lagrange felt in affirming that time
could be considered as a fourth dimension of space. This is
a strikingly strange statement; we havc, indeed, the immediate
sensation that it is not so, and this sensation, we have seen,
is justified, because there is no real parallelism between our
concepts of time and space. But in rational mechanics time is
indeed something analogous to space. There the effect may
really “‘reproduce the cause or its like,” according to the
postulate of Leibniz.

H. Poincaré puts forth the ingenious supposition that the
form of our mechanics is due to the influence of celestial
mechanics, a science which was completed before it, and
which impressed minds by its beautiful orderliness. The motions
of celestial bodies appearing to us, we have just seen, as
reversible, one might explain why rational mechanics was
based on the same hypothesis. Without denying this influence


THE ELIMINATION OF TIME 219


(for it has certainly strengthened conviction and has favoured
the ignoring of real conditions), we believe, however, that the
cause has been more profound. We see in it an evident mani-
festation of the principle of causality, of the general tendency
which is in us and which leads us to postulate the equality
between antecedent and consequent.

Having at the outset transformed the intimate nature of
time with the help of an audacious postulate, rational mechanics
next uses all of its efforts to eliminate it altogether from its
statements. At the beginning of the development one is often
obliged to regard modifications as functions of the time, but
the permanent, although often unconscious, concern of the
scientist is to eliminate that variable later, to reduce what is
variable in time to what is constant. We have seen, from the
passage which we quoted in the first chapter (p. 37), that
Cournot perfectly understood that science imposes this reduc-
tion. Hertz was of the same opinion. “We consider,” he said,
‘the task of mechanics to be to deduce, starting out with
properties of material systems independent of the time,
phenomena produced by these latter and taking place ia time,
as well as the properties of these systems dependent on the
time.”’(6) Where the great physicist was mistaken is when he
believed that the simple search for empirical rules, for laws,
was cnough to impel us to these deductions. This conviction
of his was the logical consequence of his system. Hertz, we
know, wished to put aside completely the notion of force, by
reducing mechanics to mass and motion. The masses are
joined to cach other and particularly to hidden masses by
rigid connecuons (starre Verbindungen). Hertz conceived the
existence of these connections as a law, and laws not varying
in time, the connections must also be independent of it.(7)
But these same connections appeared to him also as properties,
from which he concludes, as we have just seen, that the search
for the law leads to that of properties independent of the time.
This is evidently a simple consequence of the error whose
origins we have explained in the first chapter (p. 39). Ostwald,
who starts from principles entirely opposed to those of Hertz,
denying the possibility of any reduction of natural phenomena
to mechanism, yet affirms that the search for laws is reduced
to that for an “invariant—that is, to a quantity which remains


220 IDENTITY AND REALITY


invariable when all others vary between possible limits,” and
one sees from the context, where Ostwald cites as examples of
these invariants mass and weight, that he is thinking of con-
ceptual elements remaining immutable in time and capable of
appearing to us as beings, as substances.(8) But this demands
a more profound analysis.

We have seen (Chapter I, p. 35) that science concerned
purely with laws does not treat things and laws in the same
way in relation to time. Laws are supposed to be immutable;
things may vary. This same science having prevision as its
end, variation of the object in time is what it must study in
the first place, and the most natural form of the law is that
which indicates the evolution of the phenomenon as a function
of the time as independent variable. In the first chapter we
have cited examples of laws of this kind. Let us take up again
that of radio-active bodies. This 1s particularly instructive
because the phenomenon appears fundamental and because
its variation in time seems entirely independent of every other
circumstance. Thus, in formulating the statement that in
3:70 days the radio-activity of the emanation of radium is
reduced by one-half, we stipulate a change in ume and as a
function of the time. We affirm that if we happen to observe
somewhere that body called the emanation of radium, it
cannot remain the same during two consecutive moments,
but must be modified from one to the other in a determined
manner. Throughout this change of the body, does something
remain constant? Assuredly. What remains constant 1s _ the
law according to which this change is produced, or, if you
prefer, the relation between this change and time. There 1s
no contradiction between this constancy and the continual
change which we have stipulated for the bedy, or rather the
very constancy of the relation includes the change, on the
assumption that the second term of the relation is time, and
that time in its essence flows always and uniformly in the
same direction.

Let us pass now to a phenomenon of apparent motion,
as the fall of a body in the void. We can begin by measuring
the spaces traversed by a body starting from rest, and we
shal] be able to formulate the rule that these spaces are in
proportion to the squares of the times which have elapsed since


THE ELIMINATION OF TIME 221


the beginning of the motion.(g) Under this form the law is
strictly analogous to that which has been stated for the emana-
tion of radium; it stipulates the maintenance of a relation
whose second term is time, which consequently includes the
concept of change.

But we can present this law under still another form. Instead
of searching for the spaces traversed, we shall have recourse
to a concept a little more abstract, and we shall determine
the velocity which the body will have acquired at the precise
moment of its fall. Again, we shall be able to state that arelation
remains constant (since it is the very essence of the law), and
in retaining time as the second term of the relation we shall
say that the velocity increases in proportion to the time
elapsed.

Let us observe, moreover, that time being the independent
variable, its increase is constant. We express this fact in popular
language by saying that to know the velocity in question we
measure the time—that 1s, we divide it into equal intervals,
into seconds for instance. Therefore, in virtue of the formula
we have just stated, the velocity of the body will increase in
the same manner—that 1s, 1f we create a special term for the
increase of velocity, calling it acceleration, we shall be able to
state the formula by saying that the acceleration ts a constant.

In making these transformations, purely verbal in part,
we scem only to have served the interest of rendering the
formula briefer and easier to retain. Let us notice, however,
what this term acceleration becomes. It is evidently a simple
relation, and a very abstract relation, since it is the difference
of two velocities; it is something comparable to the relation
between the quotient of the space and that of the squares of
the time in our first formula. Moreover, from the very fact
that the concept of acceleration (as its etymology indicates) is
derived from that of velocity, like this latter, it is based on the
concept of time, and consequently it contains virtually that of
change in time, being a function of the time. And yet, since we
can stipulate the constancy of this term in time itself, we trans-
form it into an attribute which we call force and which is no
longer a simple relation, but a thing, a reality—a reality, let us
carefully remark, which we know only by this one manifestation,
since force, by definition, is only the cause of acceleration.


222 IDENTITY AND REALITY


Let us observe also that this new thing created by us is dis-
tinguished from all the things of common sense in that it does
not evolve in time, that it is constant. Therefore, what really
guided us in the transformations which we have made is not
solely the desire for simplification; it is also the tendency to
transform a relation into a thing in order to see conserved, not
only the law, but also the object, and this, we know, is the true
sense of the causal tendency. It is because we obey this tendency
that we prefer to give to our laws such a form that the change
does not appear to depend directly on the flow of time—in
other words, that we seek to climinate time from our formule.

This is why the form of the law as a function of the time,
although the most natural with a view to prediction, is rarely
found in science, all the more rarely as the science 1s more
“rational”; in observing, in experimenting, and, especially in
reasoning about our observations and experiences, we arc
dominated by the constant and powerful concern for the
cause— that is, for the conservation of objects in time.

Nowhere, perhaps, docs this tendency manifest itsclf so
clearly as in the development of chemistry. Here is a substance
which was called in the eighteenth century calx of mercury, or
mercury precipitate per se. We heat it and we perceive that drops of
a liquid and metallic substance are formed in the neck of the
vessel. Chemists tell us that the phlogiston uniting with the
calx has formed a matter which we call metallic mercury and
which is the calx of mercury phlogisticated. The fact that the
reaction is found to be accompanied by the appearance of a
gas does not essentially modify the explanation; the “‘phlogis-
ticians,’’ and amongst them the discoverers of the gas, Priestley
and Scheele, considered this phenomenon as secondary, and
formulated on this subject auxiliary hypotheses.

In what did the “explanation” in question consist? You
wished to know, we were told, why this red and powdery
substance becomes metallic. It is because the phlogiston which
has been added to it has the power of giving to the substance
these very metallic qualities. Doubtless the phlogiston does
not always manifest these qualities; that is because it is some-
times in a peculiar condition, but as soon as it is united to
certain substances these qualitics appear. The phlogiston
which pre-existed has simply changed place in going from the


THE ELIMINATION OF TIME 223


fire to the calx of mercury. We can sum up this explanation by
presenting it in the form of an equation :—


Calx of mercury + phlogiston = metallic mercury.


To be sure, the phlogistician did not state this equation,
the use of chemical equations coming a little later. But it
none the less translates their thought, and modern chemists
have often had recourse to this translation in trying to under-
stand and to state precisely the conceptions of their prede-
cessors. The general sense of the explanation was thus really
the following: by the reaction nothing was created, nothing
was lost; the red mercury and the phlogiston which existed
before subsist in the metallic mercury, and this profound
change was really only a displacement.

To overthrow these conceptions Lavoisier remarks that
weight is a permanent property of the substance, a property
which is never obliterated; we shall, therefore, be able to
recognize by an infallible sign whether something has really
been added to it. Lavoisier states, making use of the balance,
that the calx of mercury weighed more than the metallic
mercury obtained after the operation, and that the difference
is jut about equal to the weight of the gas produced. Hence
the logical conclusion that we must reverse the terms of the
relation established by the theory of phlogiston, that it is the
metallic mercury which is the simple substance, the element,
and that the calx of mercury is a compound of metallic mercury
and of the gas which Lavoisier called oxygen. This inter-
pretation is thus written in the equation :—


HgO a Hg ~- O


which has in comparison with the preceding one the inestimable
advantage of taking into account weights, of being quantitative,
as we say. Indeed, following a formal convention the symbols
which we have just used indicate not only the substances, but
also the definite weights of these substances, and the equation
signifies that 216 grammes of oxide of mercury yield 200
grammes of metallic mercury and 16 grammes of oxygen.
Thus the identity between the antecedent and the consequent
is still more precise; not only the metallic mercury and the
oxygen pre-existed in the oxide, since they are the ‘“‘com-


224 IDENTITY AND REALITY


ponents” of it, but they even existed in determined quan-
tities, equal to those we have just obtained after the separation.

Later it was perceived that the decomposition of oxide of
mercury is accompanied by another phenomenon—to wit, the
absorption of a certain quantity of heat. It was observed that
it was an almost general phenomenon, that, save for certain
quite explainable exceptions, the substances in combining
liberated heat and that, on the contrary, in dissociating they
absorbed it. This quantity of heat (expressed, as we know,
in calories) was successfully measured and it was seen that it
really constituted a characteristic of the reaction.(10) We can,
therefore, thus complete the above equation :—-


HgO + X cal. == He + O.


We have written out three different equations, yet they re-
present one and the same phenomenon. Doubtless we might
completely set aside the first, declaring it to be false, since we
no longer believe in the existence of phlogiston. But this would
be wrong, for the theory in question furnished, we have seen,
a very acceptable interpretation of the phenomenon as it was
observed at the ume. It has even been noticed, and rightly,
that there is a certain analogy between the most recent con-
ceptions and those of the chemists of phlogiston. These latter
had a feeling that a “principle” must be added to the calx of
mercury to produce metallic mercury, and that this was a
general condition; the fact that, in replacing the term phlo-
giston by that of energy, we obtain, in many cases, statements
which are nearly true, is not a pure coincidence.(11)

These three equations close up on the phenomenon more
and more. But all three are cquations—that is, they tend to
establish a relation of equality between terms representing
prior and subsequent states of the phenomenon. As the explana-
tion advances, the identification becomes more and more
perfect. In the beginning it treats only of the qualitative side
of the fact, and is lacking in numerical precision; then come
the considerations of quantity, and finally the thermal energy
changes are “explained”’ in their turn—that is, they enter into
the equation between the antecedent and the consequent.

Can it be affirmed that here the equality is directly suggested
by the experiment? Is it not, on the contrary, paradoxical to


THE ELIMINATION OF TIME 225,


state that a metallic liquid and a colourless gas are together
the same thing as a red powder? This is, indeed, Ostwald’s
opinion. He affirms that it is not a question of a true equality,
but only of bodies, which in certain operations can be mutually
substituted, the one for the other, without the result being
thereby modified.(12) It would perhaps be rather embarrassing
to indicate the operation where mercury and oxygen on one
side and oxide of mercury on the other might replace each
other under the same conditions, unless one wishes previously
to resort to the operation which is precisely the object of the
equation. But is it exact to say that in formulating this equation
the substitution in question was thought of ? Let us go back
to the time when this mode of expression originated and
developed, and Ict us completely disregard the more recent
theories on chemical equilibrium and that which could contain
in germ the conceptions of Berthollet, which, we know, have
from this point of view remained almost without influence on
the progress of science. Let us write :—.


BaCl, + Na,SO, =: BaSO, +- 2NaCl.


It is incontestable that a reaction of this kind, a reaction
which seems to take place rapidly and completely as soon as the
substance whose symbols are written to the left of the sign of
equality are in the presence of one another under the right con-
ditions, represented, so to speak, the typical reaction; there was
no question that the sulphate of barium and chloride of sodium
might give in their turn sulphate of sodium and chloride of
barium ; this supposition, on the contrary, would have seemed
paradoxical to every chemist. Everywhere and always it was
understood that the left side indicated the point of departure
and the right side the point of arrival. The equation, then,
really expresses the dynamic progress of a phenomenon, and
not, contrary to appearances, a relation of equivalence between
two static states. This is so true that in his studies on the state
of equilibrium van’t Hoff replaced the sign = by that of
<== in order to indicate clearly that the reaction might
operate in the two directions, the sign of equality in chemical
equations having irremediably acquired the sense of an action
in a determined direction, from left to right.(13)

This being understood how does it happen that people believed


226 IDENTITY AND REALITY


that they could use the sign in question? Evidently one
arrow — would have much better expressed the sense of the
relation. And how explain that we are not shocked by this term
eguatton, so unsuitable for the occasion? It is because beyond
and beneath the produced phenomenon, the apparent pheno-
menon, we believe that we sce something elsc; we believe, we
at least wish to believe, that the totality of the antecedents,
if we were able to embrace them at a glance and recognize
their intimate nature, would be recognized as equal to the
totality of the consequents and identical with it. Morcover, in
support of this opinion we may cite the authority of the man
from whom is derived this whole manner of thinking in modern
chemistry. Lavoisier, in his Tratté élementaire de chime, wrote
what may be called the first true chemical equation, and with
his usual clearness explained the sense which he attributed to
this formula.

After having affirmed that “nothing is created, either in the
operations of art, or in those of nature,” and that “it may be
stated as a principle that in every operation there is an equal
quanuty of matter before and after the operation,” he adds:
‘It is upon this principle that is based the entire art of making
experiments in chemistry. We are obliged to as:ume in all
experiments a true equality or equation between the principles
of the substance which we are examining and those which
we take from it by analysis. Thus, since grape-must yields
carbonic acid gas and alcohol, I can say that grape-must
== carbonic acid + alcohol.’ (14)

Therefore, to Lavoisier the equation is really the expression
of complete equality, of identity between the antecedent and
the consequent in a chemical reaction.

Poinsot says: “In perfect knowledge we know but one law—
that of constancy and uniformity. To this simple idea we
try to reduce all others, and it is only in this reduction that
we believe science to consist.”’(15) No truer or more pene-
trating word; the purely empirical law secms external at
once to things and to our mind, impenctrable, opaque. Only
the laws which affirm identity, which flow from it or lead to it,
appear to us as adequate either to the essence of things and
to our understanding ; these, alone, we know “‘in perfect know-
ledge.” And we see also that science thus defined by the great


THE ELIMINATION OF TIME 227


mathematician is quite other than a group of empirical rules.
It is the effort of the mind toward comprehension, of the
intellect toward the rationalization of things, an effort which
is the normal function of the intellect and which cannot be
accomplished except with the aid of the principle of identity
in time.

Thus these chemical equations are the expression of the
tendency to identify things in time; one can also say ‘‘to
eliminate” time. Let us suppose that the process of identifica-
tion continues and that we really succeed in expressing the
entire phenomenon in an equation, in identifying completely
the antecedent and the consequent; everything has been
preserved, everything has remained as 1t was—that ts, time has
exercised no influence. To be sure, we know in advance that
that complete identification is impossible. But, in part, we
can verify with the aid of our equations that it is really so.
Elementary matter which existed before the phenomenon has
subsisted afterwards; from that point of view there has been
no change. Weight has also remained the same; there, too,
nothing has been modified. Finally, energy also has been
conserved. On the whole, as far as our explanation reaches,
nothing has happened. And since phenomenon is only change,
it is clear that according as we have explained it we have
made it disappear. Every explained part of a phenomenon is
a part denied; to explain is to explain away.

It is true that there remain the phenomena of displacement.
They are, we have seen, privileged by their very nature in
that we can, according as it suits us, consider them sometimes as
implying a change and sometimes as conserving identity.
It is upon this particularity that all possibility of causal :denti-
fication rests, and in our equations we likewise have done
nothing else than use this means, in assuming that elementary
masses and energy displace themselves even while remaining
self-identical. Moreover, the nature of this displacement has
remained undetermined; an indetermination which evidently
is quite provisional, for if we wished to penetrate more
deeply into the explanation of the phenomenon, to scrutinize
its mechanism, we should be obliged to determine exactly
the molecular motions—that is, to commit ourselves upon
the mode of displacement, We have avoided it. by the simple


228 IDENTITY AND REALITY


fact that the explanation of chemical phenomena is still too
little extended; chemistry is not yet advanced enough to
admit of true mechanical explanations. But we cannot doubt
that universal mechanism demands explanations of this kind.
Yet this provisional indetermination has served us in our
demonstration, in this sense that it has permitted us to set forth
better the identity between antecedent and consequent.

It seems, indeed, more difficult if we turn to the science of
motion itself, mechanics. Here we have the fundamental
phenomenon, that to which explicative science tends to reduce
all others. Shall we say that science tends to disavow it?

And yet if the analysis we have just made is correct, if
explanation by mechanism is not an end, but a means, and
if the explicative value of mechanical theories rests upon the
fact that they satisfy our causal tendency, it is evident that
our manner of treating bodies in motion must feel the effects
of it. And we can foresee from the double aspect of motion,
which is at once conservation and change, that rational science
will apply itself to emphasizing the first.

Let us come back to the three principles of conserva-
tion. That of mass has nothing to do, strictly speaking, with
mechanics, since it is understood by definition that the pheno-
mena with which that science is concerned exclude any trans-
formation whatevcr of matter. But the principle of conservation
of energy is, in part, mechanical, and that of inertia is entirely
so. [These two propositions completely dominate that part of
science, and it is especially under this aspect that we are
prone to deal with these phenomena. A stone was attached to
something. It has become detached and is in the act of falling—
that is, because its energy, which was originally potential,
has become kinetic; but the energy was there, and still is there.
I threw a stone into the air; it moved at first with a certain
velocity, constantly diminishing until it stopped completely.
The stone began to come down again, falling faster and faster ;
but, I am told that during all of the time when this remarkably
changing phenomenon was taking place, something supposed
to represent its most essential aspect, energy, has, on the
contrary, remained immutable, for at every moment the sum
of the kinetic and potential energies has remained the same.
A cannon-ball passes, hurled with great velocity. Here, it


THE ELIMINATION OF TIME 229


seems, 1s continual change, clearly characterized ; doubtless so,
science assures me, if we consider this motion as change of
position with respect to surrounding bodies. But if I imagine
a being placed upon this cannon-ball, he will believe himself
to be at rest just as we have the same sensation on the earth;
for him this motion, provided it be uniform and rectilinear,
will not exist. It is generally said that the principle of inertia
makes the notion of rest disappear, and we ourselves have
considered it especially from this point of view; but the truth
is that between motion and rest there is a reciprocal assimila-
tion, and we can affirm with as much reason that the motion
is suppressed, since immediately, and one might say almost
instinctively, we henceforth apply to rectilinear motion all the
norms our mind establishes for rest. “‘Inertia,”’ says Hermann
Cohen justly, “does not include motion; it is rather even
supposed to exclude it in a certain sense.’’(16)

That motion, considered in itself, should, like every other
change, in reality be inconceivable, is clearly shown by the
reasonings or, if you will, the paradoxes of the Eleatics, and
more particularly the paradoxes designated under the name of
Achilles and the Arrow. It is incomprehensible that Achilles
should ever overtake the tortoise, and likewise that the arrow
occupying at a given moment a determined spot should leave it.
It is generally affirmed that the origin of these paradoxes lies
in the fact that we cannot conceive of the actual infinite, and
consequently of the continuous, that our reason can only grasp
the discrete. Without wishing to probe this question, which is
a digression from our subject, let us observe that our under-
standing does not secm to revolt against the concept of the
continuous, so long as the consideration of motion is not in
question. In synthetic geometry the body appears to us as
really continuous, and also the surface in so far as it is the
limit of the body, the line in so far as it is the limit of the
surface. The difficulties of the continuous appear only with
motion. It may, however, be that these difficulties are not so
great for us as they were for the Greeks; thus we need to
make a certain effort to grasp the sense of the argument about
the arrow which seems, at the very moment when it is at a
certain spot, to have nevertheless conserved velocity. Our
habit of mind has been created in us by the concept of inertia


230 IDENTITY AND REALITY


(Cf. p. 148) and is doubtless strengthened by the infinitesimal
calculus. It has been said that the infinitesimal calculus is an
effort to grasp the concept of continuity with the help of the
discrete. This observation is quite correct, but it must be added
that in this calculus continuity always appears in the act of
being generated by motion. It is this motion that we try to
grasp by making it discontinuous, by decomposing it into
small indivisible phases which are so many small rests. ‘There
is, therefore, an analogy between the methods of the mathema-
tician and those of the physicist, in the sense that both reduce
motion to immobility.(17)

In a word, science in its effort to become ‘‘rational”’ tends
more and more to suppress variation in time. And it is clearly
seen that empiricism has nothing to do with it. Indeed, the
instinct of preservation demands prevision; it 1s, therefore,
evolution in time which especially interests us, and it seems
that the essential form of the law, of the empirical rule, must
be that expressing a modification as a function of the ume.
But it is in no wise so. If many statements expressing functions
of the time are found in the sciences of organic nature it is
because they are still in the beginning of their evolution,
But these statements are the more rare as the science becomes
more rational.

Let us suppose for a moment that science can really make
the causal postulate prevail; antecedent and consequent,
cause and effect, are confused and become indiscernible,
simultaneous. And time itself, whose course no longer implies
change, is indiscernible, unimaginable, non-existent. It is the
confusion of past, present, and future—a universe eternally
immutable. ‘The progress of the world is stopped. And, of
course, simultaneously, or rather previously, the cause has
vanished. For as soon as cause is confused with effect, when
there is identity between antecedent and consequent, when
nothing happens, there is no more cause. The principle of
causality, as Renouvier (18) has justly remarked, is the elimi-
nation of the cause.

In appearance it is a paradoxical result. At a glance, however,
we can take in the ground covered, and verify the fact that
we have not lost ourselves on the way, that the terminus had
really been demanded by the starting-point. We have searched


THE ELIMINATION OF TIME 231


for the causes of phenomena and we have searched for them
with the help of a principle which, we know, is only the
principle of identity applied to the existence of objects in time.
The ultimate source of all causes can thus only be identical
to itself. It is the universe immutable in space and time, the
sphere of Parmenides, imperishable and without change.

In contemplating in thought this sublime image of the
great Eleatic we cannot but observe its strange resemblance
to a quite modern conception, that of the nebula, which,
according to Laplace, is the origin of our solar system. On that
account is it proper to see in Parmenides a precursor of the
French astronomer? Not at all. The sphere was a purely
metaphysical conception, an eternal symbol of the universe;
the nebula is a scientific hypothesis, based upon particular
facts, designed to indicate the physical state of a limited part
of the universe at a determined moment. And yet it is more
than a simple coincidence. Both sphere and nebula are, indeed,
causal conceptions. Only the sphere, being the entire universe,
cannot change in its relation to space; 1t must, therefore, remain
immutable, whereas the nebula, being only the solar system,
can revolve in absolute space. This movement, playing the
réle of the diversifying principle, which the Eleatics designated
under the name of war or discord, allows the nebula to be
differentiated subsequently in order to procreate, by mere
evolution, by the development of what must have been therein
potentially contained, the entire series of worlds. As Wilbois
says: ‘““The theory of the nebula ends by affirming that evolution
is only an appearance which covers a true fixity.”’(19)

The nebula, the last link in a causal chain, which through
a singular privilege we can represent to ourselves as almost
isolated from the rest of the universe, is, like the sphere of Par-
menides, a translation into the concrete of the principle of the
immutability of being.

However, in closely scrutinizing Parmenides’ conception we
perccive that all the characteristic features of this symbol
cannot be deduced solely from the application of the principle
of identity in time. An essential feature remains unexplained.
This we shall examine in the next chapter.


232 IDENTITY AND REALITY


NOTES


1. H. Fourtite: L’avenir de la métaphysique. Paris, F. Alcan, 1889, p. 18.
Hertz (i.c., p. 11) has expressed analogous ideas. Moreover, both Fouillée
and Hertz saw that the increase of prestige of the principles of conservation
must come from the fact that a priori elements were implicitly contained
therein.

2. We shall see in a later chapter (p. 280) that this impossibility has
extended still farther than we have been able to show (p. 209), and that
even where the modern concept of energy seems most familiar, in thermal
phenomena, for which it had been created, it no longer admits of a true
verbal definition other than that resulting from the very fact of conservation,
conforming to Poincaré’s formula.

3. ARRHENIUS (L’Evolution des mondes, trans. Seyrig. Paris, 1gto,
pp. 75-76), happening to speak of the theory according to which heat
radiating from the sun had its origin in radio-active bodies, esteems this
idea ‘‘singular’’ assuming ‘“‘that one must admit that heat is created from
nothing.” He adds: ‘Before we can lend ourselves to the scientific discussion
of such an explanation, we must be told what is the origin of this radiation
and where its reserve, its provision of energy, is found.’’ Evidently, energy is
here a real substance ; its conservation is considered as an irrefutable truth,
superior to direct experience, such as that of the radiation of radio-active
bodies.

4. H. G. Weis: The Time Machine. Leipzig, 1898.

5. Hertz (lc., Vol. U1, p. 284), distinguishing between “‘conservative”’
and ‘‘dissipative’’ systems, is very careful to make known that the first
constitute an exception. But one sees from his very exposition that the
number of hidden masses and their degrees of freedom being infinite with
respect to the visible masses and their co-ordinates, these exceptions must
be infinitely rare—that is, cannot be encountered in reality.

6. Id., le¢., p. 162.

7. 1b., pp. go, 161, 199, 202.

8. Ostwa.p: La déroute de l’atomisme contemporain. Revue générale des sciences,
Vol. VI, p. 954.

g. One can see, moreover, in the work of Wohlwill (/.c., XIV, p. 402),
that it is indeed under this form of a simple variation in time that Galileo
first conceived the law of falling bodies.

10. The reader’s indulgence is asked for what is schematic and, therefore,
inexact in this exposition. Lavoisier began his calorimetric studies upon
chemical reactions at the same time that he was engaged in his other
works. Yet it is really only much later that general ideas were formu-
lated on the réle played by heat in chemical combinations. It goes without
saying that one must, in order to separate mercury from oxygen, add the
heat of vaporization of this gas.

11. Cf. G. Heim: Die Lehre von der Energie. Leipzig, 1887, p. 7.

12, W. Ostwarp:]gVorlesungen ueber Naturphilosophis, and ed. Leipzig,
1902, pp. 114, 225-226.


THE ELIMINATION OF TIME 233


13, JEAN PERRIN shows, justly, that irreversibility seemed to be an integral
part of the concept of chemical phenomena, and that as soon as there was
reversibility the phenomenon was considered to be physical (Tratté de
chimie physique. Paris, 1903, p. 10 and ff.).

14. Lavorser: Guvres, Vol. I, p. ror.

15, L. Pormvsor: Eléments de statique suivis de quatre mémoires, etc., 1oth ed.
Paris, 1861, p. 239. The sequel weakens the significance of this passage.
In it Poinsot limits research to that of the constancy of the relation. The
tenor of the sentences quoted in the text seems to show however that
from the very first he saw the real importance of his statement, but that
in trying to render it more precise his thought deviated from it, probably
because of a confusion analogous to that which we pointed out in Helmholtz
and in Hertz (cf. pp. 41, 302).

16. Hermann Conen: Logik der reinen Erkenntnis. Berlin, 1902, p. 206.

17. Cf. p. 94, where we examined this question from a slightly different
point of view.

18. Renouvier: La méthode phénoméniste. Année philosophique, 1890, p. 26.
Cf. 1b., p. 89.

1g. Wiisors: L’esprit positif. Revue de metaphysique, Vol. X, 1902, p. 334.


CHAPTER VII


THE UNITY OF MATTER


PARMENIDES imagined the universe as a material sphere,
apparently composed throughout of a single and identical
matter. In other words, he affirmed at once the immutable
essence and the unity of material being.(1)

This conception is to be found again in most of the atomistic
systems. Kanada, it seems, had conceived of his atoms as
diverse, but, according to the Jainas, they are constituted of
a single and identical matter.(2) Leucippus and Democritus
have expressed themselves with great clearness on this subject.
“They are distinguished, we are told, from one another by
their figures,” says Aristotle, speaking of atoms as they were
conceived by these two philosophers, “‘but their nature is one,
like many pieces of gold separated from one another.’’(3)
The Greek atomists of the subsequent period constantly main-
tained the teaching of the masters. We know from a passage of
Galenus, himself an adversary of atomistic theories, that the
unity of matter was considered in his time as an Integral part
of these doctrines.(4) In the Middle Ages, when Aristotelianism
reigned supreme, belief in the unity of matter was almost
general ; it was the basis of the alchemists’ theories and of their
attempts at transmutation.(5) It 1s possible that we have here,
as has been said, an influence exercised by a sort of under-
current of atomistic doctrines,(6) which really existed, drawing
its source from certain medical writings; but we shall see later
that there is no need to have recourse to this hypothesis and
that Aristotle’s theories themselves are sufficient to explain
this tendency. Since the renascence of mechanical theories
the unity of matter 1s affirmed and encounters, so to speak,
no opposition. For Descartes it is a fundamental and self-
evident truth: “There is but one and the same matter in the
whole universe.’’(7) After him, everyone seems agreed upon
this point. In the ardent polemics raised by the question of
Newtonian attraction there will not be found the slightest
mention of this objection which appears so readily to the
modern mind; how attribute one and the same property to
material fundamentally diverse? Without doubt partisans and


THE UNITY OF MATTER 235


adversaries of action at a distance were to an equal degree
convinced of the unity of matter. Chemists were of the same
opinion, and Boyle, a firm adherent of the corpuscular theories,
openly affirms the unity of matter, which seems to him to be
inseparable from these theories.(8) In the eighteenth century
a crisis begins, a crisis which becomes more and more accentu-
ated, almost until our time; and this is all the more interesting
to observe as it 1s to a certain extent latent and unacknowledged.
It is, indeed, very remarkable, from an historical point of
view, that the evolution of which we are speaking takes place
without attracting the attention of anyone. Nothing, it seems,
is more essential in chemistry than the concept of the element,
and it is precisely this concept which is in the act of being
completely transformed. And yet the historians of chemistry
have never taken this transformation as the point of departure
of a new epoch. ‘This 1s because it 1s so slow, imperceptible, and,
as it werc, spontaneous ; there is found there a kind of extremely
powerful undercurrent of which even the protagonists of
chemistry are not conscious, which carries them along, so to
speak, in spite of themselves.(g) At the beginning of the chemistry
of phlogiston, Becher was firmly convinced of the possibility
of transmutation (10), and even believed that he had found
a process of bringing it about within certain limits.(11) There-
fore not only these metals, but also the metallic calces (which
we call oxides) did not appear to him as the true elements.
Indeed, he believed that these latter were only three in number
—at bottom they were the same as those of Paracelsus, although
Becher invests them with different names.(12) Even Stahl,
who was the first to use the term p/logiston, did not doubt in
the least, at any rate during the first part of his career, the
existence of a substance called Elixir or Tincture,(13) whose
principal property consisted in transmuting metals ; he expressly
affirmed the possibility of a transmutation of lead.(14) Later
he changed his opinion and became the adversary of the alche-
mists ;(15) however, we do not find that he has ever declared
that he considered metallic calces veritable elements.(16) Yet
little by little this last opinion (prepared in the seventeenth
century by the writings of Boyle,(17) who, however, we have
already said, believed, himself, in the unity of matter) tends
to prevail amongst his successors. It is certainly found already


236 IDENTITY AND REALITY


solidly established on the eve of Lavoisier’s (18) discoveries,
and from this point of view, at least, the ‘chemical revolution,”
of which he was the author, found the way prepared. Without
doubt the remembrance of Aristotle’s elements and those of
Becher had not entirely vanished, and especially in manuals
it was sometimes still referred to. Lavoisier, in the preface to
the Tratté élémentatre de chimie, shows, with his habitual clear-
ness, the inconsistencies of these ancient conceptions. ‘This
tendency to desire that all the bodies of nature be composed
of only three or four elements comes from a prejudice which
arose originally in the Greek philosophers.” On the contrary,
the chemical element is a notion resulting from expcrience.
‘The last term at which analysis arrives, all the substances
which we have been unable as yet to decompose by any
means, are elements as far as we are concerned.” (19) But we
feel from the brevity of his declarations that he has no con-
troversy to fear in this matter. Indeed, his most competent
contemporaries were in agreement with him.(20) Kopp
remarks that Lavoisier never took the trouble of proclaiming
the inanity of transmutations.

Since the definite triumph of Lavoisier’s theory nothing
seems more assured from the empirical point of view than the
existence of “‘elements”—that is, of substances differing from
one another as regards their fundamental qualities, substances
which appear to us as indestructible, capable of uniting
amongst themselves to form combinations, but incapable of
transformation within themselves. Helmholtz designates the
chemical principle of which we are speaking as that of the
“unalterability of substances” (Unveraenderlichkett der Stoffe)
or of the “‘constancy of elements,’ and considers it to be funda-
mental.(21) Armand Gautier also remarks that it is one of
the bases of our chemistry and very justly attributes to it the
first place in the enumeration of these fundamental notions. (22)
Etard is of the same opinion.(23) It is, moreover, easy to
understand why this notion is in a way an integral part of the
principle of the conservation of matter. It is precisely this
undetermined but extremely important part of the principle
of which we have already spoken (p. 158).

I burn a piece of sulphur with the aid of oxygen and I
collect the sulphurous anhydride thus produced. On the other


THE UNITY OF MATTER 237


hand, I make water by combining oxygen with hydrogen and
by dissolving potassium in this water, a solution of potash;
finally, I make this solution absorb the sulphurous acid.
In this way I obtain bisulphite of potash. Evidently in this
whole series of operations the same weight has been preserved—
that is, if I add, on the one hand, the weights of the constituents,
which I put into these several combinations—sulphur, oxygen,
hydrogen, and potassium—and, on the other hand, the weights
of the products, sulphite of potash and the accessory products,
such as hydrogen, which was regenerated by the dissolution of
the potassium, etc., the two sums will be exactly the same.
This is the principle of the conservation of matter; but is this
the whole principle? Can nothing more be said about this
conservation? On the contrary, I can affirm that not only
the weights, but the constituents themselves will be preserved,
that the sulphur will remain sulphur, the oxygen oxygen, and
so on. The proof of this is that I do not hesitate to designate
my final product by the symbol KHSO,. Doubtless, if neces-
sary, it may be affirmed that this formula signifies, not that
the elementary substances are actually found contained in
the bisulphite, but only that they can be released under certain
conditions. This is Henri Sainte-Claire Deville’s (24) opinion,
and Ostwald (25) seems to agree to it. On this hypothesis the
elements would disappear in the combinations. This in itself
is not paradoxical. Problems of this kind have often been
stated in chemistry without always receiving identical solutions.
Thus it may be asked whether the water, which we see 1s
casily added under certain conditions to the molecules of the
substances, remains there afterwards as such. Chemists generally
believe this to be so as regards water of crystallization. But in
regard to the water of the acids hypotheses have varied.
Formerly it was supposed that sulphuric acid, for instance,
was a compound of what we now call anhydride (which at
that time was considered as the true acid) and water; this
latter was, therefore, preserved as such in the compound
molecule. In our present formulae, on the contrary, the molecule
of water which is added to the anhydride is divided, the
hydroxyl and the hydrogen settling in two different parts of
the atomic chain.

Having thus stated the conditions of the problem it is


238 IDENTITY AND REALITY


sufficient to examine the theories of chemistry to see that the
doctrine generally accepted is the opposite of Sainte-Claire
Deville’s. Let us re-read the passage from Lavoisier, quoted
in the preceding chapter, weighing carefully these words:
‘We are obliged to suppose in all these [experiments] a true
equality or equation between the principles of the substance
which we are examining and those which we take from it by
analysis.”

If we had any doubts about the import of this passage we
should only have to refer to what precedes; in a sentence
which we omitted from our citation, Lavoisier declares that
before or after the operation “the quality and the quantity of
the principles are the same, and there are only changes and
modifications.”” So what Lavoisier 1s affirming is that the
‘‘principles” (it is a question of the kind of substances which he
knew to be compounds, but this applies evidently a _fortiort
to the elements) pre-exist as such previously to their isolation.

We may, moreover, easily convince ourselves that chemistry,
on this point, has remained faithful to the idea of the most
illustrious of its votaries. It is affirmed that the substances not
only have been composed, but that they are really composed
of their clements, that these latter are really therein contained,
that they persist in their combinations. We are even searching
for the way in which their ultimate parts may have been
grouped. All theories from Berzelius to van’t Hoff about these
formulae, now called structural formulae, in which the progress
of chemistry is summed up, would lose their meaning if we
doubted for a single moment this persistency.

To be sure, no one affirms that the elements in entering these
combinations preserve all their properties; it secms at first
sight that there could be no relation in this respect between
the potassium metal, the hydrogen gas, etc., on the one hand,
and the bisulphite, on the other. It is well known, however,
that such relations have been discovered. The most important
of these, formerly called the law of equivalents, was established
by Gay-Lussac and transformed by Avogadro, who added to
it some considerations on the molecular weights of the gases.
Since then chemists have found others; patiently they continue
to search, convinced in advance that these relations exist,
that it is only a question of disengaging them; what we call


THE UNITY OF MATTER 239


physical or general chemistry is indeed only the study of the
influence exercised on the properties of substances by their
chemical composition, i.e. by the totality of the properties of
their elements and their manner of grouping.

It is difficult, it seems, to doubt under these circumstances
that the heterogeneity of the fundamental elements really
constitutes the basis of chemistry. If, however, we ask for the
opinion of chemists themselves on this question, and especially
of the theorists of chemistry, we encounter manifest doubts
and even sometimes the clear affirmation of the unity of
matter. This is of long standing. Lavoisier already hesitated
to place in the same rank all the elements whose existence he
had established. Oxygen, nitrogen, hydrogen, seemed to him
more simple than the other substances, which, consequently,
would only have been compounds. (26) In 1815 Prout formulated
his well-known theory according to which hydrogen was a
fundamental element of which all the others were compounds ;
this conception had an extraordinary vogue and counted
amongst its adherents many well-known chemists, among
others J. B. Dumas, who, it is true, modified it slightly in
starting from a submultiple of the atomic weight of hydro-
gen.(27) Later research has not confirmed this conception,
but it flourished for a long time and 1s far from having definitely
disappeared.(28) Still more considerable was the success of
the conceptions based upon the periodicity of atomic weights,
conceptions initiated by Chancourtois,(29) but to which
Mendeleef gave their final form. The theories of this Russian
chemist have been the starting-point for a great number of
scientific investigations, and although the polemics aroused
by them are far from being extinct, it is certainly not going
too far to affirm that at present they are an integral part of
theoretical chemistry. (30)

Assuming that the surrender of the immutability of elements
would profoundly derange, as we have seen, the entire edifice
of chemistry, one would be inclined to believe that every
assumption with that tendency would be received with extreme
distrust and that extremely convincing experimental proofs
would be necessary to enlist science in that task. Now, neither
in Prout’s time nor in that of Mendeleef was there evidence of
the shadow of a fact which could inspire doubt as to the fixity


240 IDENTITY AND REALITY


of chemical elements. And what is more, the experimental
bases of the two theories were always extremely slight and at
the moment of their appearance an extreme good will was
necessary to admit of such lofty constructions erected upon
foundations of so little solidity. (31)

These considerations clearly show, it seems, that chemists,
in spite of the experimental results and the exigencies of the
theory which they ostensibly profess, have only accepted against
their will the fact of the existence of some sixty elements.
Berthelot assures us that chemists have always cherished the
hope of going beyond what they considered as a provisional
limit.(32) It is significant also that Gibbs, whose celebrated
theoretical works seem to necessitate the orientation of all
science in a new and fruitful direction, has not hesitated to
base one of the fundamental postulates of his doctrine on the
possibility of transmutation ;(33) and that Friedel, after having
declared that “the notion of a single elementary matter is a
philosophical conception rather than anything else,” has
asked, three pages farther on, for ‘‘a mechanical explanation of
the general fact to which the name of atomicity or valence of
atoms has been given.’’(34) Atomicity or valence is an expres-
sion of affinity, the most intimate property of chemical atoms,
that by which, finally, the others must be able to be explained.
If it, in its turn, demands an explanation, it is because it is
acknowledged to be an occult quality—that is, that everything
is supposed to be reducible to a single matter stripped of
qualities.

We can also cite the testimony of philosophers such as
Spencer, Lotze, Wundt, and Hannequin. For Herbert Spencer
the properties of different chemical elements ‘‘result from
differences of arrangement arising by the compounding and
recompounding of ultimate homogencous units.”(35) Wundt,
after having stated that ‘“‘chemistry still attributes the diverse
qualities of matter to an original qualitative difference between
atoms,” immediately adds, “but the general tendency of
atomism in physics is to derive al) the qualitative properties of
matter from the forms of atomic motion. Thus atoms themselves
remain as clements entirely devoid of qualities. **(g6) In the
same way Hannequin declares that the unity of matter is
“the secret postulate of all atomism.’’(37) But it is perhaps


THE UNITY OF MATTER 241


still more significant that this tendency should be emphasized
by Lotze,(38) for this metaphysician is the adversary of the
concept of the unity of matter, and these tendencies of chemists
and physicists surprise him.

Evidently, a tendency so general and powerful must have
a profound cause. But we cannot directly invoke causality
as we have defined it according to Leibniz—that is, as the
identity between cause and effect, antecedent and consequent.
This principle postulates conditions for the existence of things
in time; but, from this point of view, in supposing that sulphur
remains sulphur and oxygen oxygen, it is indifferent whether
the sulphur be, as has been supposed, a simple polymer of
oxygen(39) or else a radically distinct kind of matter. Rather,
from the point of view of the import and the facility of the
deductions, it is preferable, on the contrary, to start with as
large a number as possible of elements having very different
properties. Indeed, for the moment we are far from knowing
how to explain completely the properties of the compounds
by those of the elements ; but conceivably that would be easier,
there would be less ground to cover, in order to arrive
at qualitatively different kinds of matter, than if all had
to be reduced to a single matter: the properties of sulphites
could certainly be explained with less difficulty by those of
sulphur, etc., than if, for instance, all had to be reduced to
hydrogen. Thus, far from being able in this way to deduce
the unity of matter from the causal principle, we observe that
this latter impels us in the opposite direction.

Yet if, abandoning the position of chemistry and the problem
of the explanation of the properties of material substances,
we consider the phenomenon as a “becoming,’’ the deduction
for which we are searching may seem to be possible. Indeed,
we can give the following form to the reasoning by which we
have tried to establish the fundamental principles of mechanism.
The phenomenon is change—that is, modification in time;
but there is only one modification which is intelligible: it is
displacement.(40) What is displaced we call matter, and
nothing but matter exists in the physical world. Therefore
matter cannot be displaced (the modern physicist will formulate
it rather: cannot modify its inertial motion—but this variation
leaves the basis of the reasoning intact, since inertial motion

2


242 IDENTITY AND REALITY


is assimilated to rest, and it is, moreover, manifestly insufficient
as a means of explanation) except under the action of other
matter. It is this action (collision, attraction) which consti-
tutes the fundamental phenomenon, the only phenomenon of all
reality, and, consequently, matter has need only of this single
property and hence is one, everywhere the same.

But it suffices to press the argument farther to perceive that
its rigour is only apparent. Doubtless, the phenomenon is
modification in time, but it is modification of an existing
diversity; at no moment do we find reality anything but
diverse—infinitely diverse. This diversity is manifestly qualita-
tive, since it is the diversity of our sensation. It becomes
modified, and it is this modification which we must explain:
the substance was cold; it has become warm. Let us admit
that there was displacement of something, that that which was
displaced consisted of discrete particles, very small because
invisible, and that they began to move by the action of other
particles. Why are not these displaced particles simply warm?
Whence comes to me the strange idea that heat does not exist
outside of my sensation—that it is only a sort of motion?

It is true that this conception scems to correspond to a
distinction which, since the time of Locke, has become quite
commonplace—that is, the distinction between the primary and
secondary qualities of matter; we count amongst the former,
considered as inseparable from the concept of matter itself,
impenetrability, which we have seen is only action trans-
formed into a property (p. 72). But whence comes this dis-
tinction? Is it true that, mentally, we can strip the concept
of matter of certain properties and not of others? Matter, the
object of our sensations, has diverse qualities ; it is hot, coloured,
electrified, magnetic, etc. Can we eliminate the first of these
qualities and suppose a matter which would have no tempera-
ture? That is literally inconceivable, our imagination balks
at a substance which to the touch would not give either
the sensation of cold or that of heat—that is, of which
the temperature would approach that of our blood; indeed,
this same substance would give us a heat sensation under other
circumstances, if, for instance, we had previously dipped our
hand in cold water. The same is true for colour, which alone
permits us to see matter. ‘All vision is colour vision,” said


THE UNITY OF MATTER 243


Maxwell,(41) after Berkeley had already said it.(42) Doubtless
for electric and magnetic conditions we cannot follow the same
analysis, since an organ for the immediate sensation corre-
sponding to it is lacking; but it is clear that the situation is
the same and that matter devoid of these properties could not
exist. As object of our sensations, as a common-sense notion,
matter is consequently a complex concept which must be
defined by the totality of the properties enumerated above;
we are obliged to consider them all as primary qualities.
It is also known that ideas on this subject have varied; the
peripatetics considered as primary qualities, cold and heat,
dryness and humidity. If, on the contrary, we were to look for
properties conceivable a@ priort, impenetrability would certainly
not be of the number;. we have seen that no one has suc-
ceeded in placing it in the atom, in respect to which it indeed
appears as a true occult quality. Therefore, from this point
of view, impenetrability enjoys no privilege compared with
other properties of matter.

In view, therefore, of the causal explanation we ought to
endow the particle, the atom, with a principle in virtue of
which it will be able to act upon others. But since it must, in
the last analysis, act upon us in order to give rise to sensations,
it would be manifestly convenient to locate in it the
principles creative of these sensations also. In other words, we
should arrive not at a purely mechanical atomism, such as that
of Democritus, but at a qualitative atomism, even at a theory
like that of Anaxagoras, who, we know, supposed the existence
of an infinite number of elements or of principles differing
from one another in quality. Indeed, we have clearly seen,
precisely from the example of chemical substances, that
explanation is the less difficult as the elements to be trans-
formed are more diverse, and consequently the infinite
diversity of the fundamental elements appears as a direct
consequence of the infinite diversity of the phenomena. But
we shall perhaps render the argument clearer by limiting its
range. All matter, of course, must react mechanically upon
other matter. But must this action always be the saame—could
there not be diverse types of matter, endowed with different
mechanical properties? Why, for example—and nothing, in
this line of thought, is so good as a precise example drawn


244 IDENTITY AND REALITY


from genuine science and from its real history—did not
Democritus assume a series of kinds of matter of different
hardness? Instead of all atoms being like pieces of gold, why
did he not admit of an entire scale going from iron to wax?
Why did Friedel ask for the explanation of chemical valence?
Why should not such or such an atom possess the power of
attracting, of grouping, which would be lacking in some other
atom, and for what reason does it seem immediately indis-
pensable to us to explain this diversity, which evidently can only
be done by the diversified grouping in the clement itself of one
and the same matter? Is it not manifest that in both cases we
deprive ourselves of important means of explanation, that we
complicate, so to speak, wantonly a task which is already
sufficiently arduous? We end, therefore, after all with this
conclusion: in holding rigorously to the principle of identity
in time, we cannot succeed in explaining this important feature
of mechanical theories, namely, the unity of matter. Must we,
therefore, have recourse to obscure and general principles,
such as a tendency toward unity or simplicity? Must we
infer with Lotze that our motives are of an xsthetic order?(43)
Is it really possible to attribute to a cause of this kind a tendency
which, in spite of immense obstacles which it seems to ignore
at will, manifests itself with such singular vigour, a tendency
which a very cautious and well-informed metaphysician has
recently qualified as “‘irresistible’’?(44) Seemingly, there must
be a more profound cause.

Let us start from the image of the universe as it is presented
to us by current atomic theory; that corpuscular masses
have, besides the faculty of displacing themselves, the power
to cause mutually their displacement, but are destitute of
every other quality. In order to fix our ideas, let us try to
confer upon them that one quality, which is called in chemistry
atomicity or valence—that is, let us try to give to a certain
number amongst these atoms the power of attaching to them-
selves in some way a determined number of other atoms.
If we try to represent to ourselves, to realize, this new image,
our understanding, or, if you prefer, our “imagination,” will
resist. How shall we relate this quality to the image of the
atom which we have already formed? Where shall we place it?
This seems mysterious to us; atomicity, as the adversarics


THE UNITY OF MATTER 245


this concept have many times shown, appears inexplicable.
“Every genuine force of nature is essentially gualitas occulta,”
says Schopenhauer. (45)

Let us pause at this last term. Until now we have only
spoken of explanation as regards the relations of phenomena
in time. But, manifestly, there is no question of this relation
here; these atoms, as well as the quality with which we claim
to endow them, must be eternal, immutable, independent of
time. This reality does not become; it 1s. It is, therefore, no
longer an explanation of becoming for which we are asking,
but an explanation of being.

The question has been treated by Aristotle in the VIIIth
book of his Physics. He was there concerned precisely, as in the
case which has just occupied us, with a quality of the atoms.
Democritus, in order to explain their agitation, affirmed, we
know, that it had existed through all time. Aristotle finds this
explanation insufficient. He says: ‘To admit in general that
it 1s a principle and a sufficient cause of a fact to say that this
fact 1s always of such or such a manner does not at all satisfy
reason.”’ And he adds: *‘Yet it is to that that Democritus reduces
all the causes in nature by pretending that things are actually
of such a kind, and that they were so previously. But as to the
cause of this cternal state, he does not believe that he must
look for it.’’(46)

Aristotle, we see, employs the term “cause,” although it 1s
a question of an “‘eternal state’; we must have here a relation
quite cognate to that of causality proper.

Let us go back to the statement of the principle of determin-
ing reason given by Leibniz: ‘‘Nothing ever happens without
there being a cause or, at least, a determining reason—that 1s,
something which can explain a priort why this is existing thus
rather than in any other way.’(47) The first part of the
formula, ‘‘Nothing ever happens,’’ appears to have bearing
on becoming alone, but in the second part, Leibniz, by a kind
of mental leap, evidently goes farther, since he demands a
reason for that which “‘is existing.”

Another passage which we borrow from a work recently
brought out by Couturat is, perhaps, still more clear. “This is
why,” says Leibniz, “‘we must explain even eternal things;
if we suppose that the world has existed since eternity and


246 IDENTITY AND REALITY


that there are in it nothing but globules, we must explain
why they are globules rather than cubes.’ (48)

There is no doubt that he intended by the extension of the
principle to protest against the indiscriminate attribution of
certain qualities to substances. He says: “Thus in the order
of nature (miracles set aside) it is not optional with God to
give indifferently such or such qualities to substances; and he
will never give to them any but those which will be natural—
that is, which can be derived from their nature as explicable
modifications.’’(49) Wolf has, therefore, really summed up
the teachings of his master when he formulates: Nthil est sine
ratione cur potius sit quam non sit, and this formula, which, we
have seen, has been adopted literally by Schopenhauer, (50)
clearly indicates that it is here a question of the reason for
being and not only for that of becoming.

Earlier we asked: Why have things changed? And causality
replied : They have not changed ; they have remained the same.
Now we ask: Why, supposing they are such from all eternity,
are they thus and not otherwise? Evidently the two questions
correspond to one and the same current of thought. The
external world is for us a verity of fact, a fortuitous verity ;
we would like to explain it, to conceive of it as a verity of
reason, a necessary verity. How shall we go about it?

Let us come back to our concept of the mechanical atom.
Is it really devoid of quality? No, for it possesses at least one
faculty, that of being the cause of motion for other atoms.
But in discussing this faculty we have shown, it seems, that
it could not be attributed to the atom, that it is incompatible
with our image of it; it is, therefore, still an “‘occult quality.”
To understand how we succeeded in recognizing it as such
we have only to consider what this image of the atom 1s with
which the faculty in question cannot agrec. What remains
of the corpuscular atom if we take from it action at a distance
and impenetrability? There evidently remains but a bit of
space. Lasswitz says, in the passage which we have already
used in establishing the fundamental concept of the corpuscular
atom: “I conceive as atom a mobile portion of space whose
geometrical parts are at rest in relation to each other.” (51)
Therefore we really tried to conciliate impenctrability with
the properties of space, and we have at last established that 1


THE UNITY OF MATTER 247


cannot be deduced from these properties; thus it is that we
have been able to treat it as an “occult quality.” This term,
indeed, should be defined thus: that which is not a part of the
concept (Leibniz, in the passage just cited, said, “which can
be derived from their nature’’). Whether such or such a quality is
or is not “‘occult”’ will, therefore, depend on the manner in which
we form the concept of matter—that is to say, on its definition.
Here we have confused matter with space, and, of course, the
latter being absolutely inert, its concept excluding both activity
and passivity, therefore impenetrability and with still greater
reason action at a distance have become “occult qualities.”

To be convinced of this it is enough to consider the state-
ments of Descartes and of Locke on the subject of primary
qualities. Descartes affirms that “the nature of matter or of
body, taken in general, does not consist in the fact that it 1s
something hard or heavy or coloured or which touches our
senses in some other fashion, but only in the fact that it is a
substance extended in length, in width, and in depth.” (52)
Locke declares as follows: ‘These I call original or primary
qualities of the body which, I think, we may observe to produce
simple ideas in us, viz. solidity, extension, figure, motion or rest,
and number.’’(53) With the exception of the first, these are
purely spatial qualities. Locke, besides, does not try any more
than Leibniz, in his discussions with the Cartesians, to establish
that solidity (Leibniz employs impenetrability or anittypy and
power) can really be lodged in the spatial image. He assumes it
by postulate, declaring that body can only act by impulsion. (54)

Therefore, from a logical point of view, Descartes is right
and Locke is wrong. It has frequently been said that Descartes
annihilates space in favour of matter, and it is true, for with
him there is no space outside of that which matter fills. But
it is really a bilateral assimilation, for if matter absorbs space,
matter, in turn, is nothing by hypostatized space, since, we
have just seen, it has no other property than spatial magni-
tude. With the prodigious vigour of his intellect, Descartes, in
this question as in many others, has gone at one bound to the
limits of human thought; there is no other “explanation’”’ of
matter and of being in general (intellectual and moral reality,
of course, put aside) than by space, and it is really in view
of this ulterior explanation, as tending toward it, just as


248 IDENTITY AND REALITY


we saw in the case of time, that we are trying to eliminate
from matter every “‘occult quality”—that is, every specific
property in general.(55)

Moreover, on this point Descartes simply makes more
precise the ideas of the ancient atomists. Leucippus and
Democritus, Aristotle tells us, knew only three differences,
causes of all phenomena: figure, order, position.(56) There is
no doubt that the term jigure is employed here in its spatial
sense; hence these are purely spatial relations.

If our supposition is correct there must be manifested in
modern science, parallel to the tendency to unify matter,
another tendency toward the reduction of matter to space.
And this, indeed, 1s what has happened.

Let us note, in the first place, to strengthen our affirmation,
certain explicit statements of careful observers. H. Poincaré
protests against the unreasonableness of certain partisans of
extreme mechanical theories, who wish to reduce everything to
a matter, “having nothing but purely geometrical quali-
ties.”(57) But this matter apparently is in reality nothing
but space. Duhem states, concerning very different theories,
that they tend equally to reduce matter to space.(58) The fact
that these two competent authorities consider these tendencies
as reprehensible adds still more, if possible, to the weight of
their evidence.(59)

But there is still more to be said; it seems possible to show
that it is in no wise a question of some monstrous excrescence
of science, but of its natural products. Everyone, indeed, will
agree in noting in science a current manifestly directed toward
the explanation of matter by a universal medium filling space.
“For a long time the more or less avowed ambition of the
greater part of physicists has been to construct all the possible
forms of corporeal existence out of particles of cther,’”’ says
Lucien Poincaré.(60) This began immediately after Descartes,
who, we have seen, had explicitly assimilated matter to space ;
as soon as they are differentiated, by necessity the tendency
to identify them becomes manifest. Leibniz, in his Theoria
motus concreti,(61) states that space is filled everywhere by a
homogeneous matter, fluid and incompressible; this matter 1s
capable of whirling motions, and it is to these latter alone


are due all the phenomena of the sensible world. Male-


THE UNITY OF MATTER 249


branche expounds views that are entirely analogous.(62) It is
almost useless to insist on the analogy between these theories
and those of certain modern physicists, notably Thomson
and Tait and Helmholtz, about vortex atoms. But it is not
a lack of respect for these great scientific names to state that
the experimental basis of these conceptions was entirely out
of proportion to the edifice they pretended to erect upon it,
and that the number of facts or of relations which they were
capable of explaining was quite insignificant; it is surprising
that these theories have had such considerable success, and,
still more astonishing, that their authors have been able to
be deceived about their value; this fact alone would make us
suspect the presence of some secret propensity of the human
mind. At a more recent period the current seemed to have
gained still greater force. That ether should, as Hertz said,
explain in the last analysis everything, even ‘‘the essence of
the old matter itself and its most intimate qualities of gravita-
tion and inertia,’ and that this explanation should be the
“‘ultimate end of physics,’’(63) seemed to the scholars of
the nineteenth century the Icast contested of principles. In
the electrical theories of matter, in so far as they conserve the
notion of ether, the new atom, the electron, appears only as
a ‘‘singular point in the ether.” (64)

Now what really is ether? We have seen that physicists have
formulated about its properties the most diverse and often
the most contradictory and least acceptable of assumptions.
But there is one characteristic which dominates all these
hypotheses; it is that ether fills space; that is its essential
function, that for which it was created. This genesis was
very clearly explained by H. Poincaré.(65) The light which
comes to us from distant stars takes, we know, considerable
time to reach us. Where is it during this lapse of time? We
cannot suppose that it does not exist, for then the light reaching
the earth would no longer be the consequence of an immediately
preceding fact, but would be directly and without continuity the
consequence of a fact separated by an interval of time, and
this is inadmissible. Therefore, it must be somewhere, and it
can only be in the intermediary space, a space which in other
respects appears to us as empty. The properties which we
attribute to ether are, therefore, in reality those of vacuum,


250 IDENTITY AND REALITY


as Maxwell(66) said, and ether itself, as Helmholtz declared,
is nothing but space hypostatized. Kant, moreover, had
already applied precisely the same term to the “caloric
fluid” (Waermestof{), which played, in the physics of his time,
a réle analogous to that of our ether. (67)

Thus, reduction to ether 1s really only an attempt at reduc-
tion to space; and this reduction really constitutes the process
by which we try to explain material existence, to determine
its sufficient reason.

Let us state at the same time that if the leading thought
from which this tendency emanates is analogous to that which
engenders the principle of causality proper, the process, too,
is strictly similar. When we wanted to know the “why” of
becoming—that is, the reason for the modifications which are
produced in time—science replied that they were only apparent
modifications, that under this appearance was hidden a real
identity. We want to know now the “why” of being —that is,
the reason for diversity in space. Just as we asked a little while
ago: Why does that which appears to me at this moment differ
from that which appeared to me at the preceding moment?
We now ask: Why does that which appears to me in such
a place differ from that which appears to me in such another
place? Consequently the only “rational!” reply is : This difference
does not exist; it is only apparent, superimposed on a real
identity. Everywhere where space appears empty, or where it
seems to be, on the contrary, filled with bodies, there is but
one and the same being, ether,(68) ‘“‘a continuous fluid,
incompressible, not viscous, of uniform and constant tempera-
ture’’;(69) thus the physicists imagine it in order to deduce
their theories from it ; the ideal is to define it by purely negative
attributes, as E. Du Bois-Reymond explicitly claimed to
do (70) in conformity with the hypostatization of space. It goes
without saying that being conceived in this fashion it is not
capable of any real change. In a medium endowed with purely
negative qualities the parts cannot be different. How, then,
could motion be possible in it—how conceive of the rings of
Thomson and of Helmholtz or the singular points of Larmor?
How can the ether in either of these cases be distinguished
from the surrounding ether? Leibniz said that: “If one grants
the plenum and the unity of matter, adding to it only motion,


THE UNITY OF MATTER 251


equivalent things constantly being substituted for each other,
the state of one moment cannot be distinguished from the
state of another, not even by an angel, and consequently there
can exist no variety in phenomena” ;(71) and this is also the
same idea that Russell expresses when he declares that, “For
so long as we leave matter out of account, one position is
perfectly indistinguishable from another and a science of
relations is impossible. In order that spatial rclations may
appear, the homogeneity of empty space must be destroyed,
and itis matter which must destroy it.”’(72) These conceptions
are so contradictory that they could only have arisen, just
like those of the corpuscular atom, at the command of an
a priori tendency. This is so because, as we saw previously in
the case of motion, we wish differentiation and identity to be
present at the same time, and that wish is the creator of
illusions. That is why ether, so to speak, is double-faced. On
the one hand, we expect it to explain phenomena, and, conse-
quently, we attribute to it the properties susceptible of
engendering the diversity which we are forced to suppose in
empty space because of the propagation of light and electricity,
etc., and, on the other hand, we remove from it every quality
in order to assimilate it to space. And that is one of those
deceits (as the unity of the atom or the state of “‘power’’)
which we are in the habit of committing unconsciously when
it is a question of satisfying our causal tendency.

The profound analogy between the two tendencies, or rather
the absolute continuity of the main idea from which they both
spring, will be still better revealed if we follow the evolution
which the concepts of time and space undergo because of the
successive explanations of “‘becoming”’ and “bcing.”’ We began
by considering both time and space as homogeneous with
respect to laws; we have stated at the same time the identity
of bodies during their motion through space. These three
conditions characterize the empirical part of science, the
science of laws. Then, postulating the identity of bodies during
their motion through time, we arrived at the notion of cause,
and we saw arise the rational part of science, the science of
hypotheses. But having succeeded in this, the analogy between
time and space, which we had thought established by this
operation, shows itself, on the contrary, as again inadequate.


252 IDENTITY AND REALITY


Substances identical through time are also immobile in time,
whereas though identical throughout space they could still
move within it. Because of the fact that time has but one single
dimension along which everything moves with a uniform
motion in the same direction, the postulate of identity of
bodies throughout time, which constitutes causality, empties
thereby with one sweep, so to speak, time of its content. Suc-
cessive instants have become identical; but in space the
parts are still distinguishable by the bodies which fill them.
In this case identification is, therefore, more complete for
time than for space. And so the “explanation” continues its
work and definitely reduces space to the condition of time in
identifying all its parts.(73)

It is to this last identification that mechanical hypotheses
owe the unity of matter which characterizes them, this unity
being, moreover, but a step toward the reduction of matter to
space. And the two tendencies have again this feature in
common that, the end envisaged by our understanding
appearing exceedingly distant, our understanding is quite
ready to be contented with partial satisfactions, however small
and even imaginary they may be. All progress, even purely
apparent, in one or the other of these directions, appears to us
always as an explanation, and we readily see why Aristotle at
a given moment could confuse them and designate by the term
““cause’’ that which manifestly had no relation to identity in time.

Obeying these two tendencies, from theory to theory and
from identification to identification, we have made the real
world completely disappear. We have explained, or rather
denied change, identifying antecedent and consequent, and the
process of the world was stopped. There then remained a space
filled with bodies. We have formed bodies of space, reduced
bodies to space, and bodies vanished in their turn. It is empti-
ness, “nothing at all,’ as Maxwell says, non-existence. For
tume and space have been dissolved. Time whose course no
longer implies change is indiscernible, non-existing; and
space emptied of bodies, being no longer determined by
anything, also disappears.

It could not be otherwise. We have searched for the “why”
of the real world, and we did it with the help of the principle
of identity. The ultimate source of all reality can, therefore,


THE UNITY OF MATTER 253


only be eternally identical to itself and with indiscernible parts;
this is, indeed, the sphere of Parmenides. But, on the other
hand, how would this thing in itself, having no diversity, enter
into relation with this diverse world? As Renouvier wisely
says: ‘It 1s too clear that uniform matter, homogeneous and
immobile, is neither the cause nor the reason for anything in
the world. (74) Not being the cause of anything, not acting,
it is as if it were not, and consequently it vanishes.

In still another way we can render evident the logic of this
result. Causal reasoning because of its very essence tends to
go back to an ultimate cause, since each cause discovered
becomes immediately, by that very fact, a consequence whose
Cause In turn must be sought for. Now what can be this ultimate
cause? To speak with Spinoza (who, moreover, only reproduced
an expression of Saint Anselm), it can only be something which
is the cause of itself, causa sutz—that is, that of which the essence
involves its existence.(75) Therefore, to arrive at non-existence
is simply to state that it is impossible to find this cause of itself.

Is this, then, the ultimate result of science, and is there
Icft to us, as to the hierophant of Sais, only regret that with
daring hands we have torn from truth its veil? In order that
this should be so, this statement would have really to be at
the very end of science. Now this is not so. Mechanism 1s not
the fruit of science, for mechanism and science were both born
at the same time. From the beginning of science, we find it
established, fixed, and including this latter term, the unity
of matter. Men have pretended to brush aside the analogy
between the atoms of the ancients and ours, by afhrming that
the first were chimerical, whereas the existence of the second
could be shown experimentally; we know that, from this
point of view, there exists only a difference of degree between
them. The origin of mechanism is not experience; its roots
are deeply immersed in what is the basis of science itself, in
those initial metaphysical notions which condition our entire
knowledge. Spinoza clearly perceived it, when, in opposition
to Boyle, he affirmed that mechanism is proved by “reason and
calculation,”’ and not by chemical experiments ;(76) Leibniz,
on this point as well as many others, is in entire accord with
him, and for once has clearly and explicitly recognized it:
‘Spinoza (whom I do not hesitate to cite when he says some¢-


254 IDENTITY AND REALITY


thing good), in one of his letters to the late Oldenburg, Sec-
retary of the Royal Society of England, printed amongst the
posthumous works of that subtle Jew, makes a similar reflection
on a work of Boyle,(77) who insists a little too much, to tell
the truth, on drawing from many beautiful experiments only
the conclusion which he could take as a principle—to wit, that
all is done mechanically in nature—a principle which may be
rendered certain by reason alone and never by experiments,
no matter how great their number.’’(78)

Mechanism and its ultimate end, the reduction of reality
to nonentity, are an integral part of science, because the latter
cannot escape from the dominion of the principle of identity,
which is the essential form of our thought. But far from passively
yielding to its dictation, science resists it vigorously, as we
shall soon sce.


NOTES


1. Cf. Zevzer: A History of Greck Philosophy, trans. S. F. Alleyne. London,
1881, p. ooo.

2. Cf., however, on this subject, p. 108, note gt.

g. Arnisrorite: De Caelo, trans. J. L. Stocks. Oxford, 1922, Book I,
Chap. VII, § 18; cf. i. Book IV, Chap. IT, § 14. For the filiation by which
the doctrine of the Greek atomists is allied to that of Parmenides, cf. earlier,
Pp. 95 and ff.

4- GaALenus: Opera, ed. Kuehn. Leipzig, 1821 ; De elementis, I, pp. 416-417,
cf. Lasswitz, Geschichte der Atomistik, Vol. I, p. 231 and ff.

5. Cf. Bertueot: Les origines de l'alchimie. Paris, 1885, p. 282 and ff.

6. Cf. Masitieau: /.c., p. 389 and ff.

7. Descartes: Principes, Book II, Chap. XXIII.

8. Borie: Works, London, 1772, Vol. III, p. 15: “I agree with the
generality of philosophers so far as to allow that there is one catholick or
universal matter common to all bodies.”’

g- One can see in Kopp, Geschichte der Chemie, Vol. 1V, passim, with what
slowness the concept of the specificity of the greater number of chemical
substances was elaborated, especially of metals. Cf. also 1., Vol. I,
pp. 121-214, 219, 258.

10. There is found in Kopp, Die Alchemie in aelterer und neverer Seit.
Heidelberg, 1886, Vol. I, p. 67, the titles of two writings of Becher, where
he defends alchemy against its adversaries. Jb., p. 241, a passage from
Becher in which he affirms that the “‘spagyrists” may casily make gold with
the help of different ingredients (such as silver, mercury, sulphur, etc.),
since nature itself proceeds in this way. Cf. ib., p. 104, and id., Geschichte,
Vol, I, p. 178,


THE UNITY OF MATTER 255


11, Cf in Kopp: Alchemie, Vol. 1, pp. 144, 147, details on the proceedings
and negotiations with the States of Holland.

12. 1b., pp. 67, 71: cf. Geschichte, Vol. I, p. 133; Vol. II, p. 277.

13. Kopp: Alchemie, I, p. 69.

14. 16., I, p. 71.

15. 1b., 1, p. 72.

16. One may see in Kopp, Geschichte, Vol. 11, p. 278, what a curious
mixture his opinions presented in this matter.

17. Cf. Durem: Le mixte. Paris, pp. 16, 17, 48, and Kopp, Geschichte,
Vol. II, p. 275.

18. Id., Alchemie, Vol., II, p. 164; Geschichte, Vol. II, pp. 279-280.

19. Lavorter: Cuvres. Paris, 1864, Vol. 1, pp. 5-7.

20. Dunem, however, justly points out that the creation of a new
nomenclature contributed largely in stabilizing the notion of a chemically
simple body. Le mixte, p. 47.

21. Heemsortz: Populaere wissenschaftliche Vortraege, p. 192.

a2. A. Gautier: Les problémes de la chimie moderne. Rerue générale des
sciences, 1890, p. 225.

23. Erarp: Revue générale des sciences, Vol. XIV, p. 540, while enumerating
laws special to chemistry, gives the first place to the statement: ‘““There
exist specific indestructible elements.”

24. Cf. Dunem: Le mixte, p. 164.

25. Osrwa cp: Vorlesungen ueber Naturphilosophte. Leipzig, 1902, p. 287.

26. Cf. Bovasse: Introduction d étude des théories de la mécanique. Paris,
1895, p. 166.

27. 1b., p. 169.

28. Cf. E. Bootn: Prout’s Hypotheses, etc. Wiedemann’s Annalen, 1902,
Spl.—R. J. Serutt, Ueber die Tendenz, etc.; 1b. C. Halluis, Atomgeunchtsgrund-
zahlen, 1b., 1903; Hinrichs, The Elements of Atom Mechanics, Vol. 1 (quoted in
the Revue générale des sciences, Vol. V1, 1895, p. 756).—Since the really surpris-
ing change in the evolution of chemical conceptions, Prout’s hypothesis
which for a long time seemed so adventuresome, is, at the present moment,
almost universally accepted by chemists. (Cf. on this subject, La Déduction
Relativiste, § 202.)

ag. A. E. Becuver pe CuHancourtoss: Vis tellurique. Paris, 1863.

go. Cf. on this subject, ScHUTZENBERGER: Trasté de chimie générale, Paris,
1880, Vol. I, p. VIII, where it is clearly seen that what especially attracts
the chemists in these conceptions is that they appear as an approach to the
unity of matter. This supposition has been plainly confirmed by the recent
developments of chemical theories. Cf. La Déduction Relativiste, § 202 and ff.

g:. In A. Erarp, Les nouvelles thdories chimiques, 3rd ed., Paris, s.d., p. 51,
and Revue générale des sciences, Vol. VI, 1895, p. 782, will be found certain
indications concerning the objections which Mendeleef’s theory encounters.
The fundamental contradiction between the generally adopted concept of
the chemical element and the postulate of the unity of matter has been
clearly brought out by Kozlowski (Sur la notion, etc. Congrés de philosophie
de 1900, Vol. Ill, p. 536 and ff.; Zasady przyrodoznawstua. Warsaw, 1903,
p. 272 and ff.). Let us note, however, that according to Kozlowski, the


256 IDENTITY AND REALITY


postulate in question has its source in the unity of tactile sensation (Zasady,
p. 264).

32. M. Bsrruevor: Les origines de l’alchimie. Paris, 1883, p. 289.

33. Cf. Le Cuareuer: La loi des phases. Revue générale des sciences, 10,
1899, p. 760.

94. Cu. Frigpe. (Preface to J. B. Stallo): La matiére et la physique moderne,
grd ed. Paris, 1899, pp. g and 12.

35. H. Spencer: Mr. Martineau on Evolution. Contemporary Review, June
1872, Vol. XCX, p. 143.

36. Wunpt: Die Theorie der Materie. Deutsche Rundschau, December 1875,
p. 387.

37. HanneQuIn: /.c., p. 166.

38. Lorze: System der Philosophie. Leipzig, 1879, Vol. II, p. 376.

39. M. BerTHELot: Les origines de l’alchimie. Paris, 1885, p. 297.

40. Cf. p. 292, Descartes’ deduction.

41. MAXWELL: Scientific Papers. Cambridge, 1890, Vol. II, p. 267.

42. BERKELEY: Works, ed. Fraser, Vol. 1, An Essay towards a New Theory
of Vision, § 130, 158.

43. Lotrze: Lc., p. 382.

44. A. Batrour: Réflexions sur la théorie nouvelle de la matiére. Revue scien-
tifigue, July 1, 1905, p. 15.

45. SCHOPENHAUER: Leber die vierfache Wurzel, etc. Leipzig, 1877, p. 46.

46. ArTotLe: Physics, Book VIII, cap. 1, § 27. One can compare with
this passage his definition of science in Posterior Analytics, Book I, Chap. HY,
§ 7, trans. Ross, Aristotle Selections, New York, 1927. ““We suppose ourselves
to possess unqualified scientific knowledge of a thing, as opposed to knowing
it in the accidental way in which the sophist knows, when we think that we
know the cause on which the fact depends, as the cause of that fact and of
no other, and, further, that the fact could not be other than it is.”

47. Cf. earlier, p. 28. One might also quote on this subject certain
passages from Descartes, where he seems to ask equally for the explanation
of being, as, for instance: ‘‘As to physics, I should think I knew nothing about
it, if I only could say how things may be, without showing that they cannot
be otherwise, for having reduced it to the laws of mathematics this is a
possible thing.” (Lettre a Mersenne. CEuvres, Vol. III. Paris, 1899, p. 39.)
One will see, moreover, later on, to what a degree this way of stating a
problem was conformable to the fundamental principle of Descartes.

48. Couturat: Sur la métaphysique de Leibniz. Revue de mélaphysique,
Vol. X, 1902, p. 3.

49. Lemniz: Opera, ed. Erdmann. Nouveaux Essais, p. 203.

50. Cf. earlier, p. 29.

51. Cf. earlier, p. 71.

52. Descartes: Principes, 2nd Part, Chap. IV.

53. Locke: An Essay concerning Human Understanding. London, Book II,
Chap. VIII, § 9.

54. Jb., Chap. VIII, § 11.

55- One can see in Cassirer (Erkenninisproblem, Vol. 1, p. 390 and ff.)
that this conception dominates not only Descartes’ physics, but also his


THE UNITY OF MATTER 257


mathematics. Everything being reducible to spatial modifications, it is the
study of these latter related to a system of co-ordinates which becomes the
central problem of science. Hence the importance of analytical geometry
in Descartes.

56. AristoTLe: Metaphysics, Book 1, Chap. IV, § 13.

57. H. Pomcarsé: Electricitd et optique. Paris, 1go1, p. 3.

58. Dunem: L’évolution de la mécanique. Paris, 1902, pp. 177-178.

59. Relativistic conceptions culminate clearly in the dissolving of matter
into space, or, which amounts to the same thing, in its transformation into
a purely spatial construction. Cf. La Déduction Relativiste, Chap. XI.

60. Luctmn Porncaré: La physique moderne, p. 278.

61. Leiniz: Theoria motus concreti seu hypothesis nova. Mayence, 1671.
Mathematische Schriften, ed. Gerhardt, Vol. VI, p. 17 and ff. Leibniz, however
conceived the necessity of a principle of differentiation (p. 250).

62. MALEBRANCHE: Réflextons sur la lumiére et les couleurs. Histoire de l’ Acadé-
mie Royale des sciences, année 1699. Mémoires, p. 22.

63. Hertz: Ueber die Beziehungen zwischen Licht und Elektricttaet. Gesammelte
Werke. Leipzig, 1895, Vol. I, p. 352.

64. H. Pomcareé: l.c., pp. 298, 301. Larmor: Aether and Matter. Cam-
bridge, 1900, p. 171.

65. H. Porncaré: La science et hypothése, p. 199.

66. MAXWELL: Scientific Papers, p. 323. ‘““These are some of the already
discovered properties of that which has often been called vacuum or nothing
at all.”

67. Kant: Vom Uebergange, etc. Frankfort, 1888, pp. 111, 119, 121.
In Lacanpe’s Lectures sur la philosophie des sciences, pp. 249, 250, will be found
a passage from the Physique of Abbé Nollet, who expounds the current
opinions of the middle of the eighteenth century concerning caloric fluid.
Cf. also, Rosenberger, Geschichte, Vol. IIT, p. 38.

68. Henri Bercson (AMMatiére et Mémoire, 3rd ed., p. 223) has admirably
understood that the essential character of the explanations of matter by
ether will put to flight “the discontinuity which our perception has
established on the surface.”

69. Dunem: L’évolution de la mécanique. Paris, 1903, p. 171.

yo. E. Du Bois-Rgeymonp: Reden. Leipzig, 1886-87, p. 109.

71. Leimniz: Philosophische Schriften, ed. Gerhardt, Vol. II, p. 295;
Lettre d Des Bosses, February 2, 1706.

72. Russe.i: An Essay on the Foundation of Geometry. Cambridge, 1897,
p. 77. This passage may be compared with that of Berkeley, cited p. 131;
assuming that unified matter merges with space, the arguments against
absolute space, emptied of all material content, are applicable here.

73. The obscure but powerful tendency which incites rational science to
establish, with the aid of successive assimilations, an identity between the
concepts of time and of space, is manifested also in recent theories of “local”
time. Minkowski’s formula (cf. p. 59, note 54) is very remarkable in this
respect, and one may see in Langevin’s admirable exposition that the
creators of these theories considered it a great advantage to have made
the asymmetry between the two concepts disappear, in the sense that the

R


258 IDENTITY AND REALITY


interval in time, as distance in space, varies with the system of reference,
and with the motion of the observer. (L’¢oolution de Vespace ef du temps. Revue
de mélaphysique, July 1911, p. 461.)

74. Renouvier: Critique philosophique, Vol. X1, 1, p. 188.

75. Spinoza: Opera. The Hague, 1887. Ethica, I, 39. The fact that
Spinoza’s system culminates in acosmism was very clearly seen by Hegel.
Cf. on this subject, Cassirer: Erkenntnisproblem. Berlin, 1906-7, Vol. II,
Pp. 42.

76. Spmoza: Opera, Vol. Il, Ep. VI (to Oldenburg).

77. It is probably a question of the treatise entitled The Origin of Forms
and Qualities according to Corpuscular Philosophy, which appeared in 1666.

78. Lereniz: (CEuvres philosophigues, ed. Raspe. Amsterdam, 1765.
Nouveaux Essats, Book IV, § 13.


CHAPTER VIII


CARNOT’S PRINCIPLE


Tue principle bearing the name of Sadi Carnot dates from the
publication of the invaluable monograph which appeared in
1824 and was entitled Réflextons sur la puissance motrice du feu,
a publication constituting the only scientific title of that man
of genius, so prematurely cut off, whose work, according to
Lord Kelvin and Lippmann,(1) was unsurpassed by any
other during the nineteenth century. Carnot states his principle
without any pretension, almost in passing; he seems to value
it only because it permits him to formulate rules for the func-
tioning of heat engines, the establishment of which is ostensibly
the only end of his effort; in scrutinizing it more closely, we
perceive, however, that he had conceived the principle in all
its generality, and that from this point of view posterity has
been able to add but little to it.

It is possible that, in spite of the marvellous clearness and
simplicity of the monograph, the manner in which Carnot
expounded his ideas was responsible for the scanty com-
prehension of which his contemporaries gave evidence and
for the strange oblivion to which these ideas were doomed for
nearly thirty ycars. The way in which Clapeyron stated the
teachings of his master was doubtless an additional cause, as has
been already remarked. Finally, from the time of the researches
of Mayer and of Joule, the fact that Carnot believed that he
ought to limit himself to the conservation of heat (although at
that time he had already conceived of heat as motion) (2)
contributed equally to this neglect. But we shall see later that
this lack of recognition can also be explained, perhaps, by the
action of a more profound cause.

Clausius, who at the beginning of his work was unacquainted
with that of his illustrious predecessor, discovered the principle
anew ; he had, besides, the great merit of proving that it could
be brought into agreement with that of the conservation of
energy ;(3) finally, he stated it more precisely, as especially
applicable to the phenomena of thermodynamics, in order
to guard it against certain objections. Clausius, moreover, was
himself led later on to modify his first statement, and other


260 - IDENTITY AND REALITY


modifications have been proposed since. It was with the work
of Clausius that the principle definitely entered the domain of
science, where its enormous importance and its great fertility
were soon recognized. That is why it is sometimes designated
by the name of the principle of Clausius or yet again by that
of the principle of Carnot-Clausius, although Clausius himself,
recognizing the incontestable rights of his predecessor, assigned
to it only the name of Carnot.

The principle is formulated by Duhem in these words: ““The
transformation value of a modification is equal to the diminu-
tion that a certain magnitude, connected with all the properties
which fix the state of the system, but independent of its motion,
undergoes through this modification.” (4) This magnitude is
what is called the entropy of the system, and its conception for
heat phenomena is closely related to that of temperature, and
this results in investing this property with a very particular and
essential réle. Poincaré formulates several statements of the
principle of which this 1s the briefest. “It is impossible to make
a heat engine function with only one source of heat.’’(5)
The term “‘source’’ here generally indicates a body or a group
of bodies capable of yielding heat, or of causing other bodies to
yield it, and in order that a heat engine may function, it must
have two sources, one hot and the other cold. From this
statement it 1s seen even more directly perhaps than from that
of Duhem that this principle rests upon what Poincaré calls
“the axiom of Clausius’’: ““Heat cannot be made to pass from
a cold body to a hot one.” Under this form Clausius has stated
in the first place what we designate as Carnot’s principle.
We might also call it Carnot’s axiom, for if Carnot did not
formulate it in these terms, it was doubtless because he con-
sidered it as sufficiently self-evident, but it cannot be contested
that this is the true foundation of his work, as is apparent
notably in the comparison which he establishes between the
height of a water-fall and the difference of temperature between
two bodies. (6)

This comparison will enable us to recognize the nature of
the “axiom.” Is it what Leibniz called a truth ‘“‘of reason” (de


We saw that the gravitation of bodies, their tendency to
approach the earth, is in no way deducible from considerations


CARNOT’S PRINCIPLE 261


of mass and motion ; this is true also of our proposition. Physi-
cists, conscious of the important réle which kinetic theories
have played in the domain of thermodynamics, have often,
very justly moreover, emphasized the fact that Carnot’s
principle is completely independent of these theories and that
assumptions about the mechanical nature of heat have in no
way contributed to its discovery.(7) We shall even see later on
that, as in the case of gravitation, considerable difficulties are
encountered if one tries to make this principle agree with
mechanism.

Can it be said that the axiom is implicitly contained in
our concept of heat itself? Doubtless, for this concept, like that
of matter, is complex and embraces a collection of properties
of which the most essential is evidently a tendency to be
communicated. But originally heat is a sensation which we
transform into a quality. It may be objected that we feel heat
only because the hot body tends to communicate it to us;
but the fact that when I touch a hot object its temperature
diminishes and that of my skin increases is an observation,
and as such has nothing to do with my immediate sensation,
according to which heat is something like redness or round-
ness: I say a hot body, a cold body, in the same way that
I say a red body or a round body. When I imagine a hot
body touching a cold body there is no more ‘“‘reason’’ for
the heat passing from one to the other than there is for the
redness of a body passing to one that is green or the roundness
to that which is rectangular. The fact that heat has an invincible
tendency to “‘fade,’’ as we should say if it were a question of
the colour of an object, is pure observation, exactly similar
to the fact that bodies tend to fall. To push the analogy farther,
one may convince oneself that the concept of a heavy body in
no way includes, contrary to what is sometimes affirmed, that of
motion. In forming this concept we think of our effort which
is, to be sure, an immediate sensation: but this sensation 1s
totally different from that of motion; it is independent of it
and cannot be deduced from it.

Morcover, for gravity, as for heat, the evidence is only
established as long as it is a question of simple phenomena;
our conviction is shaken as soon as they become complicated.
That a body must tend to fall constantly and cannot rise by


262 IDENTITY AND REALITY


its own weight seems incontestable to us ; yet our understanding
does not succeed, without the help of the principle of causality,
in conceiving perpetual motion as impossible a priori, even
purely mechanical motion, provided it be realized by com-
plicated means (p. 205). In the same way we are quite sure that
heat could not pass directly from a cold body to a hot one.
But Clausius himself saw very well that this conviction only
holds in “‘ordinary circumstances.’’ Even now in radiation, he
says, it may well be asked whether, by an artificial concentra-
tion of heat rays with the aid of mirrors or of lenses, it would
not be possible to engender a temperature higher than that
of the body which emits these rays, thus making heat pass
into a warmer body.(8) It is known also that there has been
much subsequent discussion on the question whether Carnot’s
principle held good under all circumstances; and we shall
see later on that an eminent scientist, one of the founders of
our modern thermodynamics, has formulated propositions
which imply the direct negation of Clausius’s axiom. If we
reflect upon it we shall find that to our immediate sensation
the fact that a body can receive considerable quantities of
heat without its temperature being modified by it, as, for
instance, in melting snow, is just as surprising as would be the
passage of heat from a cold body to a warm one.

The axiom, therefore, reveals to us a factual truth, a mode of
existence peculiar to hot bodies. This truth seems to us entirely
general, and essential in the sense that it conditions all the
phenomena of heat. In manuals it is now habitual to treat
phenomena of this order only after fairly complicated con-
siderations on thermodynamics; but in fact, as Aries (9)
and Mouret (10) have well shown, this method of exposition,
Justified from an historical point of view, is not justified from
the logical standpoint. Moreover, it is easy to understand why
our axiom is explicitly postulated at the very beginning of
the physics of heat. How can temperature be defined? “By
definition,” says Poincaré, “two bodies are at equal tempera-
tures or in temperature equilibrium when, placed adjacent,
they undergo no variation of volume.’’(11) This evidently
supposes that bodies, placed adjacent, always tend to establish
between themselves an equal temperature or an equilibrium of


temperature ; this, indeed, is ‘‘the axiom of Clausius.”


CARNOT’S PRINCIPLE 263


This behaviour of hot bodies appears to us at the same
time as very peculiar. If we consider a round or a red body,
its quality no doubt gives us the effect of something which can
change, without the substance of the body being modified ;
according to scholastic terminology, these are accidents. But
these accidents in themselves have no tendency to change.
It is not so with heat ; when two bodies of different temperature
are placed adjacent, instead of each one conserving its own
quality, they react immediately one upon the other, each
tending to modify its own quality and that of the other. There
is, therefore, a tendency toward modification of that which
exists, in the sense of a future state not realized, and which
we designate by the term equilibrium. That Carnot recog-
nized (better perhaps than Clausius and many of his successors)
the generality and the precise nature of the principle from this
point of view was clearly established by Mouret.({12) More
recently Helm has formulated a principle apparently more
general than that of Carnot ;(13) scientists such as Ostwald (14)
and philosophers such as Lasswitz (15) seemed to attribute
great importance to it. Without wishing to deny to it a tenta-
tive interest from the point of view of the precision and the
parallelism of certain nomenclature, the principle, nevertheless,
does not seem to add much to the establishment or the re-
establishment of equilibrium in Carnot’s sense.

On the other hand, generalizations of this kind are not
exempt from danger. This is because heat holds a very special
position, not only in so far as quality is concerned, but also
considered as a form of energy. Temperature is compared to
a level; the comparison is fair in a certain sense, and we have
already seen (p. 260) that Carnot himself made use of it. But it
must not be forgotten that the analogy is only partial, and that
if pushed too far it ends in errors. Water tends to descend from
an elevated level and, in two communicating vessels, to establish
a state of equilibrium, which is indicated by the equality
of the levels. At first sight heat may seem to act in an entirely
identical manner. But water, in descending, will have acquired
vis viva or kinetic energy, which (disregarding the resistance of
course) will be the exact equivalent of the potential energy it
will have lost (it was to mark this equivalence that the two
terms kinetic energy and potential energy were created).


264 IDENTITY AND REALITY


It will manifest this capacity externally by rising again under
the proper conditions to the level which it has left. Similarly
a pendulum displaced from a vertical position will have a
tendency to return to it, but it will immediately go beyond it,
ascending on the other side to the height it has just left. Thus
equilibrium is not directly established ; what we first observe
in the case of the pendulum are the oscillations. Moreover, it is
easy so to arrange the experiment of the falling of water that
the oscillations will be made equally visible in this case. Newton
had already studied the oscillation of a column of water in a
curved tube according to the laws of the pendulum.(16)

Nothing like this happens in the case of heat. Adopting for
the moment (as Carnot did) the point of view of the hypothesis
of heat-fluid, we may say that it is a substance which manifests
no inertia, unlike all the material substances; by the fact
of its displacement it acquires no vis viva tending to make it
go beyond the position of equilibrium. This is established not
by oscillations, but as the result of an asymptotic approach,
indefinitely, but directly increasing.

It is evident, moreover, that if equilibrium is attained
finally in the case of the pendulum, it is due only in the end
to friction; if this did not intervene the oscillations would last
indefinitely. The case is the same for the column of water
oscillating in Newton’s tube, and also for water falling into
a basin and of which the ois viva, on account of friction, has
been transformed into heat, which 1s later dissipated. Thus
there intervenes the propensity possessed by the other forms
of energy to degrade themselves into heat, correlative to the
tendency of heat to become dissipated; and equilibrium is
finally established in virtue of Carnot’s very principle and
its direct consequences; but not by the action required of a
principle, which would be analogous and applicable to the
phenomenon of gravitation. The purely mechanical phenomena
are those of rational mechanics; we have seen that they all
appear to us as entirely reversible.(17)

Because of its external form Carnot’s principle is clearly
distinguishable from the usual statements of science. Principles
or laws are generally formulated as equalities; now it is
impossible to reduce Carnot’s principle to this form. Physicists
who have noted it have sometimes shown a certain embarrass~


CARNOT’S PRINCIPLE 265,


ment and have tried to attenuate what appeared almost as a
shocking anomaly, by calling attention to the fact that the
precision of laws is always limited by errors of observation.
But Poincaré understood perfectly that there was a more
profound reason for this anomaly, inherent in the very nature
of the principle.(:8) We believe that this reason readily follows
from what precedes. We saw that not only the principles of
conservation, but also scientific statements in general, are con-
ceived with the constant,though perhaps latent, prepossession of
causality and of identity in time. Hence the tendency to give
to the rule which determines the modalities of change a form
which emphasizes that which endures throughout the change,
a tendency which manifests itself externally by the equation,
in which this change is, so to speak, suppressed and conjured
away. On the contrary, Carnot’s principle is clearly a statement,
not of conservation, but of change. It affirms not even an
apparent identity, but a diversity. Given a state, this principle
establishes that it ought to modify itself, and in what direction.
It is a principle of becoming, des Geschehens, as Ostwald has
remarked concerning Helm’s principle. In this lies its originality
and this is what explains its great fruitfulness for science.

In opposition to the illusions of identity to which mechanical
theories, the principles of conservation, and even the form of
laws in general give rise, Carnot’s principle stipulates that the
whole universe is modifying itself in time in a constant direction.
Clausius formulated this with great clearness: ‘We frequently
hear that cverything in the world has a circular course.
Whereas some transformations take place in one direction,
in a determined place and at a certain time, other transforma-
tions are accomplished in an inverse direction, in another
place and at another time, so that the same conditions are
generally reproduced and the state of the world remains
invariable, when we consider things broadly and in a general
manner. The world, therefore, may continue to exist eternally
in the same fashion. When the first fundamental principle of
the mechanical theory of heat was announced, it might
perhaps have been considered as a striking confirmation of
the aforesaid opinion. . . . The second fundamental principle
of the mechanical theory of heat contradicts this opinion in the
most explicit manner. From this it results that the state of the


266 IDENTITY AND REALITY


universe must change more and more in a determined direc-
tion.”(19) The world (unless we interject the notion of its
infinity) seems to us to be moving toward an end, although
this end may seem to us infinitely far off.

We have seen that the principles of conservation share the
characteristic of being anticipated to some extent by our
understanding and always easily accepted by it. We shall not
be surprised to note that Carnot’s principle, running counter
to the principles of conservation, In no way participates in this
“plausibility.” Science has certainly accepted it with much
difficulty. It is really strange to notice how tardily this principle
appeared. Doubtless the conservation of matter 1s in itself a
very simple statement. But it affirms something which at first
sight seems contrary to a great number of phenomena which
we observe unceasingly, such as boiling or combustion. Inertia
is a paradoxical conception in no way confirmed by direct
experience. But if we bear in mind that these two principles
were formulated before that of Carnot, it is, at first, very
difficult to understand the priority of the principle of the
conservation of energy, a complicated proposition, really
admitting of no verbal formula as soon as we go beyond
purely mechanical phenomena.(20) The basis of Carnot’s
principle, Clausius’s axiom, ‘‘Heat passes of itself from a
warm body to a cold one and not in an inverse dircetion,”
constitutes, on the contrary, a simple statement which sums up
an immense number of observations we make at every moment.
Its real place, we have seen, is at the very beginning of the
physics of heat. Yet the conservation of energy, anticipated to
a certain extent by Descartes, was announced, although under
a very hypothetical form, at the end of the seventeenth century
by Huygens and Leibniz. It was more than a century later that
Sadi Carnot formulated his principle, and thirty years more
were necessary before its importance began to be recognized.

Nowhere before Carnot do we find a true anticipation of
his principle; at most, far removed analogies might be cited.
The passages where Heraclitus proclaims the mdvta pei, the
eternal flux of things, are the best known and the most important
in this line of thought. “Heraclitus says that everything passes
and that nothing endures, and, comparing things to the
flowing of a river, he maintains that one cannot enter twice


CARNOT’S PRINCIPLE 267


into the same river.” “‘All that exists is in motion and nothing
remains.’’ Yet Heraclitus was convinced that this flux was
circular, that the current came back to its original point.
This is perhaps the part of his doctrine we know best and
which is preserved in the least obscure fragments. He had
given to this doctrine of eternal recurrence a striking expression
by imagining “‘the great year,” at the end of which all events
must begin again.(21) There is thus a fundamental difference
between his ideas and those which are the result of Carnot’s
principle, the latter making us envisage a continual change
from which all supposition of return is excluded. We can also
cite Aristotle on this subject, when he speaks of being “tending
to its own end,” so that ‘‘from a man one does not become a
child,” (22) which seems to imply that Aristotle had a clear
fecling that the course of phenomena has a determined direc-
tion, involving something irreversible. In the same line of
thought also are the conceptions of Leonardo da Vinci and of
Cardanus, cited by Duhem, about the force which desires repose,
conceptions which come, moreover, from scholastic physics
through the same Aristotelian channel.(23) In rather a different
order of ideas, and as if related to the mechanical representation
of Garnot’s principle rather than to the principle itself, one
can cite the hypothesis of Anaxagoras on uniformity by the
mixture of heterogeneous clements,(24) and a passage from
Descartes, where he asserts that motion must pass more often
from larger bodies to smaller ones rather than inversely.(25)
However curious certain of these statements may be, it is
evident that they are only very indirectly connected with
what we call Carnot’s principle.

Equally remarkable is the long oblivion into which Carnot’s
ideas fell until the time when they were exhumed by Clausius.
Carnot, unlike J. Rey or J. R. Mayer, was not a man criticized
as not belonging to “‘the profession’’; on the contrary, no one
contested his competency. His monograph did not pass un-
noticed, and the practical applications which he made of his
principle were retained by science.(26) Clapeyron, of course,
misrepresented the teachings of his master; but there can be
no doubt that he and his contemporaries showed a strange
lack of understanding in regard to them.

The impression obtained from this bit of history is confirmed


268 IDENTITY AND REALITY


if we look at contemporary science. Earlier we spoke of the
place which the principle occupies in textbooks. Evidently
from the beginning the irreversibility of the transfer of heat
is implicity affirmed. But it might be said that this truth
was purposely left in the shade as long as possible. We saw,
in examining the principles of conservation, with what specious
demonstrations people are accustomed to be satisfied concerning
them, and how they never hesitate to have recourse to the
vastest extrapolations. With these hasty generalizations let us
compare the manner with which we believe we should proceed
in respect to Carnot’s principle. The demonstration, admirable
in its strictness and prudence, given by Poincaré in his Thermo-
dynamique, is a true model of the kind. The contrast is, perhaps,
still more marked if, abandoning science proper, we turn to
popular summaries. As long as it is a question of the principles
of conservation, no generalization seems too vast, no metaphor
too bold. Let energy (the word force is also used, since this
term seems to cover more), let matter (as vague a term as one
could hope for) persist, this really seems a guarantee that
what has been, is, and will continue to be, that “nothing is
born nor perishes,” that there is ‘‘nothing new under the sun.”
As to Carnot’s principle and to the demonstration of the
irreversibility which is its basis, these are generally either
passed over in silence or “‘explained”’ in a manner to re-establish
identity. We shall readily understand why, under these con-
ditions, philosophers are excusable for having too often followed
these examples, and have been content to accept results such
as science appeared to show, quite happy in their apparent
“philosophical” generality.

In the same line of thought we notice that as soon as Carnot’s
principle was solidly established in science by Clausius, attempts
were made to escape from the consequences which it entails.
Not that one could deny the fundamental phenomenon, nor
even the propositions that are deduced from it with absolute
rigour. But a sort of secret repugnance was felt to the idea
of a continual change of the universe in the same direction.
Helm very clearly observed this mental attitude of the con-
temporaries of Clausius and saw that it had its source in the
concepts of conservation.(27) But we can follow the manifesta-
tions of the same current of thought at a much later date and


CARNOT’S PRINCIPLE 269


even in our times. A very characteristic example is found in
Haeckel: “If this theory of entropy were truc, we should have
a ‘beginning ’corresponding to this assumed ‘end’ of the world.
Both ideas are quite untenable in the light of our monistic and
consistent theory of the eternal cosmogenetic process; both
contradict the law of substance. . . . The second thesis of
the mechanical theory of heat contradicts the first and so
must be rejected.’’ Carnot’s principle can only be applied
“to distinct processes,”” but ‘‘in the world at large quite other
conditions obtain.’’(28) Declarations of the same kind are found
in Arrhenius. This scientist considers that it 1s indispensable
to free ourselves from the difficulties of the theory of Clausius.
“If the ideas of Clausius were truc, this thermal death ought
to have been realized in the infinite time of the existence of
the world.” Moreover, we cannot suppose that there was a
beginning, since energy cannot be created. Consequently,
‘“this is totally incomprehensible to us.”(29) It is clearly seen
that it is a question both with Haeckel and Arrhenius of
an a priort tendency, anterior and supcrior to all experience.
What shocks them is that on Carnot’s principle we must
suppose ourselves to be at a precise moment of a continuous
development. Lack of identity between the antecedent and the
consequent necessitates the admission of a datum which must
necessarily appear to us as inexplicable, like the diversity
which matter cngenders in space and from which we are
trying to free ourselves by assimilating matter to ether and
to space itself.

It is evidently this profound tendency which has given rise
to all sorts of hypotheses about the transformation and the
reconcentration of heat lost by radiation from the sun.(30) Let us
summarize the theory formulated by Macquorn Rankine, all
the more remarkable because it comes from a most eminent
physicist, one of the creators of thermodynamics.(31) The
object sought for by Rankine is clearly indicated in the ttle
of his work, On the Reconcentration of the Mechanical Energy of the
Universe.(32) After having stated that “in the present state of
the known world” the tendency to the conversion of all forms
of energy into heat and to the diffusion of this same heat
dominates nature, the author asks whether one cannot imagine
that this energy could be again concentrated. The interstellar


270 IDENTITY AND REALITY


space must be filled with a perfectly transparent and diathermal
medium that is incapable of transforming light or radiant
heat into anything else. Let us suppose, now, that this medium
possesses, in every direction about the visible world, fixed
limits beyond which there would be nothing but empty space.
Consequently, in reaching these limits, the radiant heat emanat-
ing from the visible world would be reflected, and in that case
concentrated in foci. In each one of these the heat would be
such that if a celestial body, which in this period of its evolution
no longer consisted of anything but a completely extinguished
mass, were to attain it, it would immediately become volatilized
and dissolve into its elements, thus producing an accumulation
of chemical energy. Rankine ends by asking whether some of
the luminous points which we perceive in far-off space might
not be, not real stars, but precisely foci of this kind in the
interstellar ether.

It is hardly necessary to note that this curious hypothesis
gives risc to a host of objections. To indicate only the most
apparent: we are obliged to endow the cther with an enormous
force of clasticity. Then how admit that it abruptly ends
somewhere? A diamond wall would be necessary. But what
is most curious is that Rankine, in unconscious fashion, sins
manifestly against the very foundations of Carnot’s principle,
since he assumes that heat is capable of passing by radiation
directly from colder bodies (the bodies of the visible world)
to warmer bodies (the foci of interstellar space). It was Clausius
who drew attention to this anomaly.(33) It may be that
Rankine himself had a vague suspicion of it, for in one part of
the work in question he seems prudently to propose to accept
the dissipation of energy for the present period and to reserve
its “‘reconcentration” for a period “infinitely removed.”

In this way one escapes the pressure of the law of change
by admitting that change will operate in an inverse direction
at a future time, apparently only to react again in the same
direction once this new time is at an end. In other words,
strict identity is not maintained, but we return to it indirectly
by the notion of periodicity. This is the same conception
which Herbert Spencer amply developed in his well-known
theory of “half periods of organization and of disorganization.”
Spencer, perhaps (and certainly Rankine), was not conscious of


CARNOT’S PRINCIPLE 271


employing a very old subterfuge. But the questions to which
we are now alluding are related to the eternal foundations of
the human mind; here especially “nothing new under the
sun” has a chance of being at least partially applicable; one
must not be surprised, therefore, to see the periods somewhat
confused. To be sure, the ancients had never heard of Carnot’s
principle. But if this statement has the immense advantage of
giving a scientific form to the fact of the irreversibility of
phenomena, it 1s incontestable that humanity has been at all
times, more or less obscurely, conscious of this fact. That
phenomena take place in a determined direction, that they
have a beginning and an end, that to-day is not absolutely
like yesterday, that time progresses—of this we all have an
immediate sensation. Yet in the eternal flux of things certain
of them, if they do not remain absolutely identical, appear to
undergo cyclic changes which bring them back to their point
of departure. Day and night, the moons, the seasons follow
each other in a determined order, and the evolution of the
organized being, if it cannot be reversed at will, is renewed,
however, automatically reproducing at certain intervals
identical or very similar situations. And thus, quite naturally,
arises the supposition that the universe, if it is not immutable,
as strict causality would demand, might, however, only move
along a closed curve, returning after a determined lapse of
time to a former condition. This is the serpent (ouroboros)
which bites its tail. Hypotheses of this kind are found in
Hindoo beliefs. With the Greeks they are expressed in the
conception of Heraclitus’s “‘great year,’’ which became later
the cycles of Empedocles and was afterward developed by the
Stoics with scientific exactness. (34) It is to this same conception
that the verses of Virgil refer when he foresees that past events
will be reproduced and that “‘the great Achilles will again be
sent to Troy.”(35) These conceptions are very near kin to
that of Rankine and Spencer. The only difference is that in
our science, having a much greater compass than that of the
Hindoos and Greeks, since geology seems to indicate a con-
tinuous development during thousands of centuries (figures
which astronomical hypotheses compel us to multiply still
more), we need millions or billions of years where antiquity
was satisfied with thousands. Indeed, Herbert Spencer supposes


272 IDENTITY AND REALITY


that even in returning after two half periods to the primitive
nebulous state, the system in its second evolution would not
pass through the same phases which it traversed the first time.
But, as Renouvier (36) has very justly remarked, that is a self-
contradiction, and the Stoics were more logical in supposing
that the world, in virtue of its immanent law of spontaneous
origin and development, would reproduce exactly the same
nature, with the same beings and the same accidents, the
same empires and the same republics, the same men and their
same acts, as many times as the ether accomplished its destiny
and travelled through its career of universal becoming.(37)

This hypothesis of “eternal return’’ under its strictest form
has also had its representatives in modern philosophy. The
most celebrated, doubtless, is Nietzsche, who has greatly insisted
on this conception and has made of it one of the bases of his
system. (38)

But if these conceptions resemble each other, we have no
longer the same attitude toward them as the contemporaries
of Virgil. Carnot’s principle has given us an infinitely clearer
consciousness of the irreversibility of phenomena. Though an
experimental truth, the degradation of energy appears to us,
nevertheless, as the most general of laws, as that which governs
all that happens, all that becomes. Can we admit that it can
be violated, as it would necessarily be during Rankine’s periods
of “‘reconcentration” ? Can we admit, to be more precise, that
heat instead of passing from a warm body to a cold one may
take the opposite path? Hindoos and Greeks might believe that
the universe, in continuing its evolution in time, would repro-
duce the same phenomena; we are forced to suppose, on the
contrary, that it would reverse its course. This will, then, truly
be the inverted world of the cinematograph moved in the
opposite direction, the world in which heat vibrations will be
concentrated on the wheels and axles of the locomotive, in
which the smoke, formed in the distance, will re-enter the
chimney with the gas of combustion to be remade into coal,
or the living being will be born old to grow younger with time
and to enter into the egg, or to walk backward and digest
before he has eaten. How imagine the end of a period of
“dissipation” and the beginning of a period of “reconcentra-

tion’? A ball thrown at right angles against a wall bounces


CARNOT’S PRINCIPLE 273


back in the opposite direction; but that is because it has
encountered an obstacle. Where would be the wall against
which the history of the universe, or even that of a planetary
system, would rebound? We feel that the universe is indefinitely
approaching a future state, the state of equilibrium; but this
state, supposing that it can be attained, appears to us to be
infinitely and indefinitely stable. Wherever energy is on the
same level throughout, our imagination refuses to believe that
new “descents” can be created, or, what comes to the same
thing, this creation secms infinitely improbable to it.

And so the most recent development of physics tends rather,
for the phenomena supposedly possessing great stability in
time (such as solar radiation), to give predominance to explana-
tions very different from those of which we have Just spoken.
Since we know that there is no equivalence between the
phenomena of dissipation and those of concentration, and
since the reversal of the present advance of the world, even
in distant space or time, appears to be inadmissible, we are
secking for the energy which dissipates, a source, if not infinite
(this is impossible), at least so abundant that it may be adequate,
without appreciable diminution of nature’s enormous prodi-
gality. This source is believed to have been found in intra-
atomic energy. It is supposedly of a magnitude far superior
to all those we are accustomed to see manifested. About a half
century ago, Weber and Kohlrausch were surprised at the
quantity of energy liberated by chemical reactions. “If all
the particles of hydrogen in one milligram of water con-
tained in a column of the length of one millimetre were
attached to a string, the particles of oxygen being attached to
another string, each string would have to be under a tension,
in a direction opposite to that of the other, of 2,956 cwt.
(147,830 kilograms) in order to effect a decomposition of
the water with a velocity of one milligram per second.’’(39)
But what is this energy, the greatest that we are able to produce,
compared to that harboured by atoms? The emanation of
radium, which we must consider as a very unstable gas, emits,
in transforming itself into a non-volatile matter, three million
times more energy than the explosion of the same volume of
hydrogen and oxygen.(40)

Evidently a source of such power can maintain almost

3


274 IDENTITY AND REALITY


without effort the radiation of the earth and even that of the
sun into space.(41) Consequently the world’s process may be
conceived of as being irreversibly fed by reserves whose abun-
dance surpasses the limits of observation.

In the same category of explanation by the concept of the
immense may be placed certain curious speculations by means
of which Boltzmann has tried to reconcile identity in time
with Carnot’s principle. Boltzmann conceives a world in which
the eras we are accustomed to qualify as eternal (Zonen) have
a comparatively insignificant duration. Thermal equilibrium
prevails throughout, except in relatively insignificant domains
of the dimension of our stellar world. ‘For the whole universe
the two directions of time are, therefore, indistinguishable, just
as in space, there is neither upper nor lower.” But a human
being living in a determined phase of time in such an individual
world will designate one state as beginning and the other as
ending. For the same domain one would necessarily have
“at the beginning of time an improbable state.”” There can
exist, therefore, “‘in the totality of all the individual worlds,
phenomena succeeding cach other in the inverse order.”
The beings who observe them perhaps count time in a manner
opposite to ours, but “‘they are separated from us in time by
eternal eras, and in space by 10 1°” times the distance of Sirius,
and, above all, their language has no relation to ours.”’(42)

At first sight we might be tempted to connect Boltzmann’s
conception with that of Rankine and of Spencer, but it differs
in that it does not result in the “‘eternal return.’’ When, in one
of Boltzmann’s individual worlds, equilibrium is re-established,
it is the death of the world, a definite death, since an awakening
is only produced at infinite distances in time and space. This
awakening, moreover, is purely accidental, and becomes
possible precisely because it is a relatively small accident.
It is, therefore, as we have said, an explanation by the notion
of the smmense. It shows us clearly how rigorously this conception
of advance without return is imposed by Carnot’s principle,
and, moreover, how much, on the other hand, it is repugnant
to our understanding which seeks by every means to re-
establish identity.

But is it impossible to bring about an indirect agreement
between the principle of causality and Carnot’s principle by


CARNOT’S PRINCIPLE 275


mechanical theories? We saw that this is the real object of these
conceptions which, profiting by the ambiguous character of
displacement, succeed in confusing, so to speak, change and
identity. Given the strength with which the causal tendency
shows itself in us, we notice without surprise the numerous
attempts in this direction. Poincaré classes them in two groups.
First, the theories which are related to an hypothesis due to
Helmholtz. It is supposed that the motions of visible masses
are connected with the motions of hidden masses. It results
from this that the first, which alone are known to us, become
irreversible. But this theory, Poincaré remarks, cannot com-
pletely explain the constant increase of entropy. It adapts
itself, in general, rather badly to reality; accordingly it entails
this consequence, that if two bodies of equal temperature are
put in contact with each other, there would be a passage of
heat from one to the other, which evidently is contrary to the
basis of Carnot’s principle. The evasion of this difficulty by an
auxiliary hypothesis has not proved very satisfactory. (43)

The conceptions of the other group were developed by
Maxwell, and after him by Gibbs and Boltzmann; they start
from the principle that, the number of elementary particles
being necessarily very large, it is possible to produce apparent
changes by modifying the order in which they are arranged.
Thus let us suppose two containers filled with the same gas
at different temperatures ; according to the kinetic theory, the
average of the velocities of the particles in each container will
be different. Put them into communication; the particles will
tend to mix, and at the end of a certain time we shall have
everywhere the same average velocity which necessarily will be
comprised within the limits of the average velocities of the
original gascous masses: the temperature is equalized and 1s
found to be an average between the respective temperatures of
the two containers. It is, we see, a model causal explanation,
since under the appearance of change, and by the single artifice
of displacement, we are made to see a real identity. Irreversi-
bility in this hypothesis would cease to be a general rule if
our means of action were less insufficient—that is, if we were
able to act directly on the elementary particles. Let us suppose
a being sufficiently endowed to do this (Maxwell’s famous
‘‘demon’’); after the temperature had become equal in the


276 IDENTITY AND REALITY


two containers, by limiting communication between them at
the orifice which he would open and close at will, he might
allow the particles having a greater velocity to pass from the
first to the second container, and in the opposite direction
those having a lesser velocity. At the end of a certain time he
will have thus re-established the two original gaseous masses
at different temperatures. Moreover, the equality of temperature
which is finally established between the masses which inter-
communicate, being, as we say, only a “‘statistical” fact, it is
not impossible, absolutely speaking, that differences are
produced by the hazards of distribution; this is only infinitely
little likely and this probability is the less as the number of
particles is greater. It is the same if we consider the final state
of the entire universe; this is no longer death, it is a kind of
sleep, but it is infinitely unlikely that there can ever be an
awakening.

Is Maxwell’s hypothesis, which constitutes, according to
Poincaré’s judgment, “‘the most serious attempt at conciliation
between mechanism and experience’ (44) really sufficient?
Poincaré seems definitely to have come to the opposite con-
viction,(45) and Duhem,(46) Lippmann,(47) and Mach (48)
are of the same opinion; but perhaps the last word has not
been said about this theory. At any rate, it must be noted that
the conception which forms the basis of Maxwell’s theory and
which consists in supposing that Carnot’s principle only rules
the phenomena of perceptible bodies, but is not applicable to
their elementary particles, has received a curious and unexpected
confirmation from a recent discovery. We are referring, of
course, to Gouy’s phenomenon or the Brownian movement.
Brown was the first to observe, about 1825, that sufficiently
small particles of matter, seen through a microscope, show a
continual agitation. This fact, confirmed daily by numerous
scientists using this instrument, had attracted but little
attention until Gouy decided to study it more closely. He
proved by elimination that not one of the causes to which it
might be attributed could be invoked for this particular case ;
it could not be a question either of imperceptible movements
of the earth, or of differences of temperature, or of the action
of light. He recognized, morcover, in studying bubbles of
liquid contained in the cavities of crystal quartz, that the


CARNOT’S PRINCIPLE 277


phenomenon must be considered as permanent, for apparently
it has existed since the far-off geological epochs when those
crystals were formed. It is, therefore, a movement which does
not cease or which is continually re-born without borrowing
energy from the outside, and this is manifestly contrary to
Carnot’s principle. Gouy did not hesitate under these con-
ditions to relate this phenomenon to the kinetic theory of
matter.(49) The particles of a liquid must be in constant
agitation; their numbcr is very great, their velocity doubtless
considerable, but their masses are very small. If the solid
substance immersed in the liquid is not itself of a size comparable
to the size of the particular elements, the impacts which it
receives from all sides bring about an equilibrium of sufficient
exactitude to prevent any movement. Below a certain limit
this equilibrium is no longer produced, and the immersed
body consequently begins to move; it ought to move more
rapidly as it 1s smaller—experience confirms this. But we have
no hope of indefinitely increasing the penetrating power of
our microscopes—the nature of light 1s against it—and the
smallest bodies that we are capable of observing are still very
large in comparison with the elementary particles of the liquid ;
that is why the movements of the former are very slow com-
pared to the movements which we must suppose the latter
to possess.

Gouy’s theory has becn almost universally accepted, and
it seems to follow, as Poincaré has said, that “in order to
sce the world turn backward we no longer need the infinitely
subtle eye of Maxwell’s demon, the microscope being quite
sufficient.’ (50)

It may be predicted that even if Maxwell’s theory, or one
analogous to it, could adapt itself exactly to the facts, it would
not entirely satisfy the mind; concerning explanations of this
kind we would always feel a certain discomfort. Poincaré has
well expressed it by stating that he mistrusts reasoning “‘where
reversibility is found in the premises and irreversibility in the
conclusions.”(51) This is the crux of the question. The
phcnomena of nature seem to us to have a determined direction
in time, to be irreversible ; to explain them, to determine their
causes, is to establish identity in time and consequently reversi-
bility. As Boltzmann has said, it is then absolutely necessary


278 IDENTITY AND REALITY


“to use as the symbol of the universe a system whose variations
in time are given by equations in which the positive and the
negative direction of duration play the same réle, and which,
nevertheless, permit the explanation by a special hypothesis
of the appearance of irreversibility observed during long
intervals of time.’’(52) This is why, as we have seen in a
preceding chapter, rational mechanics is founded entirely on
the postulate of reversibility. In stating how profound is the
divergence between this mode of representation and reality,
we had anticipated Carnot’s principle. The reason for the
existence of this principle is to give precision to irreversibility,
to make it tangible; it is, therefore, natural that we should
experience great difficulties in finding for it a mechanical
explanation—that is, In reducing it, in its turn, to identity.
And in supposing this reduction possible, it would always be,
in a certain measure, repugnant to our ideas, for the two
antagonistic concepts of identity in time and of irreversibility
are here found face to face with each other in a manner far
too precise to be easily reconciled to our understanding.

But whatever we may think and whether it appears adequate
or not to our minds, Carnot’s principle is a fact, and by far the
most important fact, of all science. Indeed, it is enough to
regard reality without prejudice to be convinced that that
which is permanent is but little compared with what is changing.
It is solely the causal illusion which impels us to exaggerate
the importance of the first at the expense of the second; what
has remained is the essential, the ‘substance,’ whereas what
1s modified is only the ‘“‘accident.”” Now inertia, we have seen,
is a purely ideal conception; no onc has ever seen a uniform
motion in a straight line, and still less could ever have verified
that it was indefinitely maintained. Again, is velocity really
something more essential than place, and direction than
velocity in a curved line? When I see a red and pulverized
body give rise to a liquid metal and a colourless gas, can I
affirm, because I noticed that the weight has remained the
same, that what has changed is of little importance compared
with what has remained? Yet doubtless it is our conception of
the phenomena of energy which, owing to Carnot’s principle,
has been the most profoundly modified. This modification,
indeed, affects the very concept of energy.


CARNOT’S PRINCIPLE 279


We have seen that Leibniz defined this concept as the
capacity of producing ‘‘a violent effect” and that this definition
has been perpetuated by tradition to this day. Now it is easy
to understand that it is in contradiction with the immediate
consequences of Carnot’s principle. Leibniz was convinced that
the conservation of ‘‘absolute force’? guaranteed the inde-
structibility of motion: ‘“Those who imagine that active forces
diminish of themselves in the world do not understand rightly
the principal laws of nature and the beauty of God’s works.”’ (53)
The universe which Leibniz thus conceived was, like that of
our rational mechanics, composed of entirely reversible
phenomena. All bodies having to be absolutely elastic, and,
of course, every idea of a transformation of motion into heat
being absent, there must, indeed, be produced a kind of
endless rebound which necessitates that any fall can only be
apparent, and is compensated for by an clevation somewhere
else. To a modern physicist, on the contrary, the passage in
Leibniz is quite equivocal. The proposition remains correct if
by the term motion we understand also the interior agitation
of the parts—that is, if we include in it all the forms of energy.
But if we wish to speak of motion, properly so called, as the
displacement of bodies in relation to one another, the proposi-
tion becomes certainly erroneous. This motion, as Carnot’s
principle demonstrates, tends continually to transform itself
into heat, and afterward to become dispersed—that is, to be
extinguished. In order to be convinced that there is a real
contradiction betwecn the two conceptions, it suffices to think
of the final state toward which, according to Clausius’s con-
ception, the universe is irresistibly and indefinitely approaching.
Let us suppose this state reached. It is clear that there will
nowhere be any fall of temperature nor lack of equilibrium of
any sort; therefore, all capacity of producing an effect, of
operating a transformation, will have disappeared.

Must one, therefore, infer that there is incompatibility
between the principle of the conservation of energy 1n its
modern sense and that of Carnot? Evidently not, since, as we
have just seen, the modern physicist can maintain Leibniz’s
thesis by modifying its sense. For him the universe, in arriving
at the final state of which we were speaking, will have “con-
served”’ its energy.


280 IDENTITY AND REALITY


The conclusion is obvious: the definition of energy is not
such as we had formulated it; what the modern physicist
understands by this term is no longer the capacity of producing
an effect. This definition can only be applied to a world of
purely mechanical phenomena. As soon as we introduce the
consideration of thermal phenomena (or, if you wish, con-
siderations of statistics), it falls to pieces. One can, therefore,
say that the transformation began with the establishment of
the principle of conservation of energy—that is, with J. R. Mayer
(although he was evidently unconscious of it, since he stated
the causa aequat effectum without any restriction). It was com-
pleted the day when Clausius showed how this principle could
agree with Carnot’s, an agreement which is only possible by
modifying the meaning of the word energy.

We may ask how it happens that the old definition of energy,
so obviously untenable, should, nevertheless, have remained in
use. One reason is very evident—to wit, that it is impossible
to find a verbal definition really in conformity with the concept
which the modern physicist employs. It is quite easy to see
that this is not a temporary difficulty. Energy really is only
an integral (p. 208); now, what we want to have is a sub-
stantial definition, like that of Leibniz, and this demand 1s
justifiable to a certain degrec, since our very conviction of the
conservation of energy rests in great part on this foundation.
But when this conviction is once acquired, the physicist has
no longer need of the verbal definition. Indeed, what he needs
for the study of thermal phenomena is the mathematical
definition, the knowledge of the expression which, because of
the principle, must remain constant. That definition he
possesses, and knowing also its mechanical equivalent, he can
follow the phenomena of the two orders in their mutual relations.
And so the manuals on physics contain really two discordant
definitions of energy, the first which is verbal, intelligible,
capable of cstablishing our conviction, but false; and the
second which is mathematical, exact, but lacking verbal
expression. To begin with, the professor gives the first definition,
foresecing with unconscious but accurate psychology that the
student in his work will really only make use of the second.
This situation in general causes no inconvenience to the
scientist as long as he remains in the field of the calculus; but


CARNOT’S PRINCIPLE 281


when he lends himself to theoretical generalizations, the
memory of the verbal definition of energy may intervene to
trouble him (as has been the case, we believe, in certain
‘‘energetic’’ speculations). And very certainly to the popularizer,
inclined, as is natural, to make use of the verbal definition, this
divergence is in some ways a permanent source of error—as
was certainly the case in the affirmation of the incompatibility
between the conservation of energy and Carnot’s principle
which we have noted in Hacckel.

The reader will pardon the digression: these lines really
should have been placed in the chapter on the conservation of
cnergy; we could not insert them there because these con-
siderations demand devclopments based upon Carnot’s prin-
ciple. But in this way we shall at least have had the advantage
of showing by a typical example to what point this principle
is an integral part of our conception of reality. It is also obvious,
moreover, that understood in its true form, which 1s the
mathematical one, the principle of the conservation of energy
may guarantee the identity of the universe in time still less,
possibly, than the other two. I have used the water from a
high reservoir to turn a mill, much of the energy was dissipated
on the way by friction, ctc., what was left was used to trans-
form the wheat into flour ; and yet the energy was “conserved,”
it remained “‘constant.”’ Thus, when it 1s said that the principles
of conservation regulate the world, more precision is necessary.
They do regulate it in the sense that they limit the change,
that they teach us that certain relations cannot be modified
whatever happens. But these principles do not show us what
is the change which is to take place, nor even whether a change
will take place. “In every case where the principle of the
conservation of cnergy has contributed toward the extension
of our knowledge about elementary processes still other laws
have entered into play—laws which imply the concept of
‘tendency,’”’ Helm has very justly remarked,(54) and he cites
as examples of these concepts of tendency, force, pressure,
temperature.

As far as heat itself is concerned, the consideration of entropy,
of heat convertible or not into motion, is evidently from every
point of view much more important for a system than that
of its energy. Everywhere, always, contrary to what the causal


282 IDENTITY AND REALITY


illusion would have us believe, the flux of things is more essential
in itself and more important for us to know than their con-
servation.

Now we can understand better than we did in one of the
preceding chapters how illusory is the sign of equality applied
to the representation of phenomena. If we pass from that
representation to reality the illusion of identity immediately
disappears. I break a plate, 1 put together its pieces, none is
lacking, so I shall not hesitate to express this fact by an equation:
calling the plate A and the pieces B, C, and D, I shall write,
A= B+ C-+ D. This equation seems to affirm that therc is
equality between the two conditions of the plate; yet I know
very well that if I were to try to use it now I would have a
mishap. Four and three are surcly equal to seven; but if the
first number represents a beam of 4 metres and the second
one of 3 metres an architect will doubtless not be able to use
them when he needs a beam of 7 metres. These things do
not shock us; we have not for a moment forgotten that at
bottom it is here a question of a diversity, and not of an equality.
Science, however, often goes far in this line of thought. Thus an
expression such as “‘quantity of motion” is rather badly chosen
in that it may produce the illusion, if only superficially,
that motion is a real quantity susceptible of addition or sub-
traction. Now even if I have two moving objects impelled by
the same velocity in the same direction, by no artifice can
I transform them into one object endowed with a double
velocity; both conditions being, moreover, as we know, very
different from the point of view of energy. What one means in
this case by quantity is not motion itself, but its projection upon
an axis, which evidently has only distant relations with reality.

Can one pretend that the equation, if it does not affirm
equality between two terms, affirms their equivalence? We
have already seen that that is not the real object of chemical
equations; the real object is to express not static relations but
a becoming. Moreover, in expressing it, they deny it, since
they re-unite the antecedent and the consequent by the sign
of equality. The equation Hg + O = HgO, taken literally,
seems to signify that nothing at all has happened, since all
that was in the antecedent is found in the consequent. What
really happened in the course of this phenomenon was de-


CARNOT’S PRINCIPLE 283


scribed by Lavoisier, who, we saw, made use of this reaction
in order to establish his theory: ‘“‘I enclosed in a suitable
vessel, of which it will be difficult to give an idea without
recourse to drawings, 50 cubic inches of ordinary air. I then
put into this apparatus 4 ounces of very pure mercury, which
I proceeded to calcinate by keeping it for twelve days at a
degree of heat almost equal to that which is necessary to
make it boil.’(55) At the end of this difficult operation he
saw one part of the metal transformed into oxide. But of all
this, which constitutes the phenomenon, the equation says
nothing at all, or, what is worse, it juggles it away by affirming
that things have remained after the operation what they were
before. A chemist in his laboratory trying to perform over
again a slightly complicated operation in organic chemistry
knows what irony 1s often hidden in this sign of equality.

But is it not really obvious that phenomenon and change
are one? How, then, could there be identity between the ante-
cedent and the consequent? I let a ray of light enter through
a hole made in the shutter and this ray has formed a white
spot on the opposite wall. I interpose a prism and I see a
spectrum. You prove to me very learnedly that the white hght
refracted by the prism has produced the many-coloured
spectrum. I am willing to beheve you on condition that you
do not try to persuade me that there is identity, and that the
white light plus the interposed prism is equal to the spectrum.
That I shall never believe; nor will I believe that nothing
happened at the moment of the oxidation of mercury. I know
very well that there is not identity, that something has hap-
pened ; had something not happened you would not have gone
to the trouble of an explanation. As Boutroux said: “‘How
conceive that the immediate cause or condition really contains
all that is necessary to explain the effect? It will never contain
that which distinguishes the effect from it, that appearance of
a new element, which is the indispensable condition of an
effect of causality. If the effect is in every point identical with
the cause, they are but one and there is no true effect.’ (56)

Even admitting for a moment that it is a question, not of
the representation of a phenomenon, but of a static relation
between two terms, we can now prove that there cannot be
equivalence. This expression is borrowed from the language


284 IDENTITY AND REALITY


of economics. When I affirm that such a thing is worth such
a price, this means that I can buy it or sell it at that price,
convert it into a sum of money or convert a sum of money
into this thing. If, for example, French stocks are at par
I shall be able to buy a 3-franc bond for 100 francs and
resell for the same amount. Phenomena seem to act in a like
manner. We are told that the pendulum will have acquired,
at the lowest point of its path, a velocity sufficient to rise to
the height from which it started; and if we have formed oxide
of mercury by the union of mercury and oxygen, we can find
these substances by decomposing it. But we now know that
this is only an appearance. As a matter of fact, no phenomenon
is possible without a flux of energy, and this flux always takes
place in the same direction. And the energy which we find
again at the end is always degraded; it never is worth what
it was worth in the beginning—never can the consequent be
the equivalent of the antecedent. If we still want to use the
imagery of buying or selling, we must think not of negotiations
on the Exchange, not of what has a current price, but of what
we buy in a store; if, our purchase being made, we should wish
to convert it back again into money, we would inevitably
lose by it.

Identity is the eternal framework of our mind. We can only
find it again, therefore, in all that it creates, and we have,
in fact, noted that science is penetrated by it. But this
does not make up the totality of science. On the contrary,
Carnot’s principle is an integral part of science. It is not
quite fair to state, as Hannequin does, that ‘‘science penctrates
no part of the real Becoming,’’(57) or else we must give to
the verb penetrate the meaning of render intelligible, rational.
Indeed, this proposition is only correct for explicative science.
On the contrary, the task of empirical science is to penctrate
the becoming; change in time is its proper domain. And that
is why science—which includes both one and the other—is
more and more dominated by Carnot’s principle.

Science itself, therefore, reinstates reality in its rights. It
proves that, contrary to what causality postulated, it is not
possible to eliminate time, since this elimination would have
reversibility as its preliminary condition, and reversibility does
not exist in nature. The reversible phenomenon is purcly ideal.


CARNOT’S PRINCIPLE 285


It is only a limiting case of real phenomena, all irreversible at
bottom. Antecedent and consequent are not “interchangeable,”
as we say in speaking of the pieces of a machine; they cannot
be equivalents. The effect is not equal to the cause, contrary
to what the scholastics affirm, because it cannot “reproduce
the entire cause or its like,’”’ as Leibniz postulated.

We said a little while ago that Carnot’s principle must be
placed at the beginning of the physics of heat. But, if we
grasp it in all its generality, it is clear that it constantly is
taken for granted in all physics. Indeed, what it formulates
is a tendency of things to be modified in time. It is this tendency
and its uniformity which, we have already seen (p. 33), serve
as a basis for the measure of time; and it is in consequence of
the existence of this uniformity that we can conceive of the uni-
formity of the flow of time, whereas, on the other hand, the
uniform advance of phenomena ts directly stipulated by the
principle of law itself—that ts, it is an integral part of all science
and of all prevision. In a word, Carnot’s principle is at one
with the concept of time and gives precision to this concept;
this precision consists amongst other things in assuring us
of the impossibility of a long-dated cyclic return which our
immediate feeling does not exclude. That is why if we look
for a quite general expression for this principle, covering the
totality of phenomena, we shall find statements lke those of
Perrin: ‘“‘An isolated system never passes twice through the
same state,’ and ‘‘The universe never assumes the same
aspect twice.’’(58) These statements approach in meaning
proverbs existing in every tongue, such as fugtt trreparabile tempus,
tempt passali, etc.—proverbs formulated or adopted by the
wisdom of nations and simply expressing the conviction of the
irrevocableness of the past, an integral part of our concept of
time. And this idea that as time advances the world does not
remain identical to itself, but is unceasingly modified—in other
words, that something is happentng—is the foundation of our
concept of time. If we suppose that nothing happens, this
concept thereupon vanishes away.

Thus we see the real reason why Carl Neumann’s notion of
the measure of time is inferior to that of d’Alembert and of
Poisson (p. 33f.). Our consciousness of the flow of time rests
upon the difference between antecedent and consequent— that


286 IDENTITY AND REALITY


is, upon the irreversibility of phenomena—and from this point
of view the phenomena of motion not only enjoy no privilege
but their consideration introduces, as it were, a disturbing
clement into these notions.

We, indeed, here postulate change. But the aspect of motion
seen from this angle is twofold ; motion ts and is not a change.
The principle of inertia, from the very fact that it is a principle
of conservation, depends upon the second of these two aspects
in assimilating rectilinear and uniform motion to rest (p. 228).
The principle of inertia and the reduction of phenomena to
motion, to displacement, belong as it were to a different line
of thought, to a different conception of the world—the causal
conception, which is derived from the postulate of the persis-
tence of objects, and tends consequently in the last analysis
to the elimination of time. On the other hand, the definition
of the measure of time according to d’Alembert 1s really allied
to the very essence of the concept.

According to Bergson’s profound formula great discoveries
have frequently been made by “soundings cast into pure
duration.’’(59) The master sounding—the final discovery—is
Carnot’s principle, because it renders precise what 1s the very
foundation of our concept of the sensible world which we,
however, only feel obscurely: notions of time, of change, and
of irreversibility. (60)

We now clearly see how wrong we would have been to
attribute to science the progressive elimination of reality, which
is the consequence of successive identifications. We carry this
idealistic theory with us before we constitute science, since it
is with its aid that we have constituted science. ‘‘Human
intelligence,” says Bacon, ‘Is given to abstraction by its very
nature; and it pretends to find constant those things which
are in flux.”’(61) It is we who try to establish identity in nature,
who bestow it upon her, who “suppose”’ it hers, if we may give
to this word the meaning it has in the expression “supposititious”’
child. And that is what we call understanding and explaining
nature. It yields itself to a certain extent, but it also resists.
Reality rebels and does not allow us to deny it. Carnot’s
principle is the expression of the resistance which nature
opposes to the constraint which our understanding, through
the principle of causality, attempts to exercise over it.


CARNOT’S PRINCIPLE 287


NOTES


1. Lippmann: Cours de Thermodynamique. Paris, 1886, p. 3.

2. Cf. earlier, p. 203.

3. The works of Clausius were published in the Poggendorf’s Annalen
from 1848 to 1862. The principal article, Ueber die bewegende Kraft der
Waerme, etc., was in 1850. In the beginning Clausius, just like Carnot,
considered heat as an indestructible substance (i6., Vol. LXXXVI, 1849,
p. 46). It was only after the following year that he rectified his opinions on
this point.

4. Dune: L’éolution de la mécanique, p. 111. Mouret (notes to the transla-
tion of Maxwell, The Theory of Heat, trans. La Chaleur. Paris, 1891, p. 199)
remarks that Carnot’s principle “has received many statements, a proof
that the fact which it expresses is better felt than understood.”’ Dastre
(La vie et la mort. Paris, s.d., p. 87) says: ‘‘It is very remarkable that no one
can give a very general statement of this principle the authority of which
has changed physics.”’

5. H. Porcaré: Thermodynamique, p. 120. This statement has the
advantage of being very like Carnot’s own ideas. Carnot does not use the
word source, but the definition which he gives of the words Aearth and
refrigerator, which he uses, is entirely conformable to the concept of source
in modern physicists (cf. Réflexions. Paris, 1903, p. 17).

6. S. Carnot: ic., p. 28. Cf, concerning the reservations necessary to
formulate in regard to this assimilation, earlier, p. 264.

9. Dunem: Lc., p. 362.—HANNEQLUIN (/.c., pp. 140, 141) was, on the con-
trary, of the opinion that Carnot’s principle should have been foreseen by
the mechanical theory, since space offers the possibility of escape to atoms.
Doubtless, progress by deduction is possible—in mathematics, for example;
but in physical sciences, where it is a question of not very complicated
deductions, it is well, as a general rule, to be suspicious of those conclusions
to which Herbert Spencer was devoted and which impute more or less a
lack of intelligence to those who reasoned in the past. If the thing was not
foreseen, it is safe to wager that it was impossible to foresee it—that is, that
it is not a pure deduction, but that empirical elements enter into it. As a
matter of fact, the atomists, if they supposed space to be infinite, posited
at the same time, at least implicitly, an actual infinity of atoms, so that
those which escaped were replaced by others coming from the infinity of
space. Cf. Lucretius, Book I, /. 1050: Infinita opus est vis undique materiat,
which serves precisely as the conclusion of a demonstration in which the
necessity of an infinite number of atoms is deduced from the persistence
of laws and of things in time.

8. Crausius: Théorie mécanique de la chaleur. Paris, 1868, p. 315.

g. Artes: Chaleur et énergie. Paris, s.d., p. 12 and ff.

10. G. Mouret: L’entropie. Paris, 1896, p. 4.

11, H. Pomoars: lc, p. 16.

12. G. Mourzt: Sadi Carnot et la science de l’énergie. Revue géndrale des
sciences, Vol. III, 1892, p. 467 and ff.


288 IDENTITY AND REALITY


13. Georc Heim: Die Lehre von der Energie. Leipzig, 1887, p. 61 and ff.
14. Ostwa np: Vorlesungen ueber Naturphilosophic. Leipzig, 1902, pp. 246-265.
15. Lasswitz: Wirklichketten, and ed. Leipzig, 1903, p. 105 and ff.

16. Newton: Principia, Book I, Sect. VII.

17. We shall see later that mechanical interpretations of Carnot’s
principle have been sought for; but to do this recourse was necessary to
conceptions of a particular order involving the intervention cither of
hidden masses or of statistical considerations (cf. p. 274).

18. H. Pomcaré : La science et Phypothése, p. 162.

1g. R. Crausrus: Le second principe fondamental de la théorie mécanique de
la chaleur. Revue des cours scientifiques, 1868, p. 158.

a0. Cf. p. 232, note 2, and p. 278 and ff.

a1. Cf. p. 272 and Appendix IV.

22. ArisroTLe: Metaphysics, Book Il, Chap. II, § 8.

23. Dune: Origines de la statique, pp. 53, 58-60.

24. Cf. P. Tannery: Pour Uhistotre de la science helléne. Paris, 1887,
pp. 206, 207. It must be noted, however, that for Anaxagoras, the
direction of evolution was exactly the opposite of that which we are
obliged to suppose according to Carnot’s principle; he affirmed that all
was intermingled in the beginning and that things became differentiated
afterwards under the influence of intelligence (7b., p. 298, fragment 8).

25. Descartes: Principes, 3rd Part, Chap. LXXXVHI.

26. Carnot is, amongst others, quoted as an authority by Helmholtz
in his celebrated study of 1847 on the conservation of energy (MW issenschaftliche
Abhandlungen, p. 17).

27. G. Herm: Die Lehre von der Energie. Leipzig, 1887, p. 53.

28. Hagcxer: The Riddle of the Universe, trans. Joseph McCabe. New
York, 1900, p. 247.

29. ARRHENIUS: L’évolution des mondes, trans. Scyrig. Paris, 1910, p. 4, 204.

go. One will find the exposition of an hypothesis analogous to that of
Rankine in Siemens, Sctentific Works. London, 1899, p. 433. Suppositions of
the same sort were formulated, amongst others, by Lyell, Principles of Geology,
toth ed., London, 1868, p. 242, and also, more recently, by Zehnder,
Die Mechamk des Weltalls, Freiburg, 1897, p. 166, and by Arrhenius, /.c.;
cf., concerning the objections to the hypothesis of Arrhenius, H. Poincare,
Legons sur les hypotheses cosmogoniques, Paris, 1gtt. Poincaré concludes that
according to this system the death of the universe would only be retarded
(p. 256), and that in any case we ought to give up the dream of ‘‘an eternal
return” and of the perpetual re-birth of the world (p. 29). It is therefore, in a
word, an explanation by immensity like that which calls into play radio-
active bodies or like Boltzmann's hypothesis (cf., pp. 273-275).

3). This is Maxwell’s opinion. Scientific Papers, Vol. 11, p. 62.

ga. M. Ranuing: On the Reconcentralion of the Mechanical Energy of the
Universe. Phil. Mag., TV, 4, 1852, p. 358 and ff.

Venpet: Théorie mécanique de la chalew. Paris, 1868-72,
p. 167.

94. CE. Ranouviern: Exsguisse d'une classification systimatique des doctrines
philosephiques. Paris, 1885, p. 199.


CARNOT’S PRINCIPLE 28g


35. Vmot.: Bucotics, Eclogue IV, 34~36.

*‘Alter erit tum Tiphys et altera quae vehat Argo
Delectos heroas; erunt etiam altera bella;
Atque iterum ad Troiam magnus mittetur Achilles.”

36. Renovuvier: l.c.

37. One will find also a curious example of the perennial character of
these conceptions, flowing directly from our causal tendency in L’ Evolution
des mondes by Arrhenius (pp. 231, 245). This scientist, whose theory, as is
known, envisages the possibility of cyclic return in the history of planetary
systems, joins to this conception that of panspermia, and thus arrives at the
supposition that beings, in the entire universe, resulting from the develop-
ment of the same germs, have a certain relation. ‘““The dream which makes
us see worlds inhabited by living beings, in whose constitution carbon would
be replaced, for example, by silicium or by titanium, falls into the domain
of improbabilities.”” It is clear that nothing hinders us from supposing
space filled equally with germs of silicium or of utanium which, of course,
will be able to develop only if they reach the surface of a celestial body
offering favourable conditions. But the propensity which Arrhenius obeys
is evidently that which inspired the conceptions of those ancient scientists
of whom we have spoken, and this is why his theory tends to approach that
of the ‘same beings and the same accidents” of the Stoics.

38. Cf. Oscar Ewaxrp: Nietzsche's Lehre in thren Grundbegriffen, die ewige
Wiederkunft des Gleichen und der Sinn des Uebermenschen. Berlin, 1903, passim;
and G. BaTau tt, L’hypothése de Pdternel retour. Revue philosophique, Vol. LVII,
p. 158 and ff.

gg. W. Weper and R. Kontrauscn: Ueber die Elecktricitaetsmenge, etc.
Poggendorf’s Annalen, XCIX, 1856, p. 24.

40. Ruruerroro: Radto-Activity. Cambridge, 1906, p. 327.

41. [b., pp. 492-496.

42. Bovtzmann: Vorlesungen ueber Gastheorie, trans. Legons sur la théorie des
gaz, GALoTT! et BENARD. Paris, 1905, p. 252 and ff.

43. H. Porncar£: Thermodynamique. Paris, 1892, pp. il eae

44. Id., Le mécanisme et Vexpérience. Revue de métaphysique, 1, 1893, p. 535.

45. 1b., p. 537.

46. Dunem: L’évolution de la mécanique. Paris, 1903, p. 153.

47. Lippmann: La théorte cindtique des gaz et le principe de Carnot. Congrés
international de physique de 1900, Vol. I, p. 549.

48. Macn: Die Principien der Waermelehre. Leipzig, 1896, p. 364.

49. G. Gouy: Le mouvement brownien et les mouvements moléculaires. Revue
géndrale des sciences, 1895, p. 5 and ff.

50. H. Porncars: (le hanes, p. 184. Cf. id., La science et P'hypo-
nia Pp. 209.
sr. Id., Le mécanisme et Vexpérience. Revue de mitaphysique, Vol. I, 1893,

- §37-
Hs L. BOLTZMANN: Legons str la théorie des gaz, and Part. Paris, 1905,

252.
ge Luraniz: Recwsil des letives, etc., 4th Writing, § 98, ed. Erdmann,
P. 757: -


290 IDENTITY AND REALITY


54. Heim: Dw Lehre von der Energie. Leipzig, 1887, p. 58.

55. LAVOISIER: Ewores. Paris, 1862, Vol. HT, p. 175.

56. Bourroux: De fa contingence des lots de fa nature. Paris, F. Alcan, 1874,
P- 29.

57. HANNEQUIN: J.c., p. 285.

58. J. Perrin: Tratté de chime physique. Paris, 1903, pp. 142, 178.

59. Beracson: Introduction d la métaphysique. Revue de mélaphysique, 1903,
Pp. 90.

60. PLancx, whose eminent authority in these questions nced not be
emphasized, after having stated that the limits established between the
traditional chapters of physics (such as mechanics, acoustics, heat, electricity,
etc.) tend more and more to be obliterated, comes to the conclusion that
the physics of the future will know but one important division, that of
reversible and irreversible processes, members of the first having a greater
resemblance to one another than any of them can have to a process of the
other class (Die Etnheit des physikalischen Weltbildes. Leipzig, 1909, p. 18).

61. Bacon: Novum Organon, Book I, Aph. 51.


CHAPTER IX


THE IRRATIONAL


MECHANICAL theories reduce the universe to a vortex of
corpuscles colliding with each other according to immutable
laws. It has been humorously said, and not altogether unjustly,
that these theories consist in supposing that a supreme intelli-
gence—God—in contemplating the world, would have
approximately the same sensation as we experience in the
presence of a game of billiards.(1)

Our sensations are very different. Our universe is not mute,
cold, colourless; it is sound, heat, colour. But mechanism tells
us that these qualities cannot belong to the object itself; the
latter conserves those qualities only which have to do with
space and the occupancy of space. At one fell swoop all our
senses become dispossessed (we shall see presently that, contrary
to a rather general opinion, the sense of touch 1s dispossessed
like the others)—irretrievably dispossessed ; for, having at the
outset destroyed the quality of sensations—their guid proprium
—mechanism 1s unable to reconstitute 1t. On this point the
insufficiency of kinetic theories is absolute and irremediable.

Philosophers, more or less influenced by materialism, have
sometimes pretended to question this; and D. F. Strauss
declared that the future alone would decide it.(2) But scientists
are more cautious. “‘Physiologists,” said Alexander Herzen,
“might indeed have studied objectively for centuries the
nerves and the brain, they would not have succeeded in
having the faintest idea of what a sensation is, if they themselves
did not experience subjectively these states of consciousness.”’ (3)
It is not, perhaps, superfluous to emphasize the fact that this
Is not an opinion peculiar to contemporary scientists. The
passage just cited is only a paraphrase of what Leibniz, with
just as much precision and more picturesqueness, said in the
Monadology: “We must, morcover, confess that perception
and that which depends upon it is inexplicable by mechanical
causes—that 1s, by figures and motions. Let us pretend that
there is a machine the structure of which engenders thinking,
fecling, perceiving; we might conceive of it as enlarged, but
keeping the same proportions, so that we might enter therein


292 IDENTITY AND REALITY


as into a mill. This done, we shall only find in visiting its
interior, parts pushing against each other, and never that which
will explain a perception.”(4) All of this, moreover, was
virtually contained in the passage of Democritus which has
been preserved by Sextus Empiricus: ‘‘For it is by opinion and
convention that things are sweet or bitter, by opinion that
they are hot or cold, by opinion that they have colour; but in
reality there are atoms and the void.”(5) As Bergson says:
“It is of the very essence of materialism to affirm the complete
relativity of sensible qualities.” (6)

But if modern science has made no innovations in this
point of view, its discoveries incontestably have confirmed the
theories in question in rather a striking manner. That heat and
light can only be a movement of particles follows doubtless
from the a@ priert conceptions which constitute the foundation
of mechanism, and Descartes, in boldly proclaiming it, only
based his opinions on these conceptions: ‘Add fire to it, add
heat to it, and let it burn as much as you please, if you do not
suppose in addition that its particles move, or are detached
from those contiguous to them, I cannot imagine that it re-
ceives any alteration or change.’’(7) Spinoza and Leibniz have
likewise (p. 253) affirmed that the axiom, “everything is motion,”
can only be proved by a priort reasonings and not by experience.
It is, none the less, true that the phenomena of interference
and polarization which we observe directly and which are
not explainable, at least not easily, by any other supposition,
lend peculiar weight to the thesis, as also does the Brownian
movement, as it was observed by Gouy, since by its effects
it renders directly visible the agitation of particles.

But its most striking confirmation has come from physiology,
from what is called the theory of the “specific energy of sense
organs.”’ This, too, is a theoretical conception, but one that is
based upon directly observable physical and physiological
facts. It was formulated about 1830 by the physiologist
Johannes Miller and consists in affirming that the specific
nature of the sensation depends not on that of the external
cause which produces it, but solely on the organ which trans-
mits it, Thus, if the optic nerve be affected by some sort of
excitation, whether it be what we properly call light, or a
mechanical action, an electric excitation, or even a pathological


THE IRRATIONAL 293


process, what we feel will always be a sensation of light.
Miller’s original theory has since undergone certain modifica-
tions, but in spite of numerous attacks its essential parts seem
to have held their own.(8) Physiological facts tend to confirm it.
Helmholtz, who was its decided supporter, made the observa-
tion, amongst others, that our sense organs seem so constituted as
to be accessible to excitations of a certain nature and protected
against all others. Thus the retina is protected against pressure
and electric excitation, whereas light can easily penetrate
to it.(g) He also showed that the purest colours that the eye
1s capable of perceiving are merely subjective.(10) But very
substantial physical facts also come to its help. Thus, since the
work of Ampére (i1) and of Melloni,(12) there can be no
doubt about the identity of the vibrations that give rise in
us to sensations of heat and of light. One and the same move-
ment of cther which strikes our skin and our eye can be felt
by us under these two very divergent forms. It is to be noted
that facts of this kind had not been foreseen by deductive
reasonings; certain phenomena known for a long time, such
as the appearance of sensations of light caused by pressure
exerted upon the eye, were, as Helmholtz pointed out, explained
in quite a different fashion: former opticians supposed that
in this case there was really created objective light, and
Johannes Miller had to prove the contrary by experiment ;(13)
science, though confirming a@ priort conceptions, went beyond
them.

To experimental demonstrations it is proper to add slightly
more indirect arguments, which also seem to prove that the
form of sensations, their quality, must belong to us. Thus the
physicists agree in supposing that sound, light, and heat can only
be vibrations outside of us. They are multiplicities, but they
do not appear to us as such; a beautiful solid colour gives us
certainly the impression of unity. The intensity of our sensa-
tion, as Tyndall (14) noted, varies quite differently from the
energy of the movement of vibration which is its cause. More-
over, there is no analogy in the way in which our different
organs perceive what we are nevertheless obliged to conceive
of as being analogous outside of these organs. The ear perceives
ten octaves, whereas the eye must be content with scarcely a
sixth. Within these limits the different sensations appear to the


204 IDENTITY AND REALITY >


ear as clearly graduated ; between three notes it will designate
without hesitation that which must be situated between the
other two, whereas for the eye the sensations are equivalent.
If we have not learned by heart the scale of the colours of the
spectrum we see no more reason for placing the yellow between
the red and blue than for putting the red between the ycllow
and the blue. And yet, even for the car, sensation has nothing
quantitative in it; that of a g, as Cournot (15) justly remarked,
is not equal to one and a half the sensation of its ¢. The
ear perceives each elementary sensation separately and two
simultaneous sensations always give it the impression of some-
thing compound; whereas, to the cye, a mixture of colours
creates the impression of a simple thing: a mixture of red
and blue gives the sensation of violet, and a mixture of blue
and yellow that of green—both appearing comparable to
the colours of the spectrum. A mixture of very similar
tones affects the eye agreeably and the car very dis-
agreeably.(16)

It is just as certain that, in addition to the vibrations by
which our organs are directly affected, others exist entirely
analogous but which we do not perceive directly. The real
spectrum, we know, extends cnormously on two sides beyond
the red and the violet. These vibrations make no impression
upon our retina, and yet in every other respect they act exactly
like the light which we know, for they can be refracted, reficcted,
polarized, and can undergo interference. In the same way we
do not perceive directly the Hertzian waves, the X-rays, or
the cathode rays; we do not even perceive electricity, which
is one of the most important forms of energy—perhaps its
fundamental form. It is clear that if, after the manner of
Condillac,(17) we suppose a being whose sense organs are
different from ours, whose cye, for example, would perceive
as does the ear, or would perceive, in a distinct manner,
polarized light, or would have organs for directly perceiving
one or the other of the movements of the ether of which we have
just spoken, the external world would appear to it very
differently from what it does to us. It is even possible that this
supposition really takes place in nature, for it is not certain
that the organs of animals are absolutely like ours; on the
contrary, it is quite possible that they are still affected when


THE IRRATIONAL 295


ours cease to function—indeed, animals may possess organs
which we entirely lack.(18)

Yet in spite of the imposing array of concordant facts
which tend to confirm in this matter atomistic conceptions,
objections have been raised by philosophers. Czolbe has gone
the farthest in this direction. He supposes that sound and light
waves are themselves endowed with these qualities, and that
they are propagated in the brain only by a purely mechanical
process; all the opposing proofs of science seem to him to be
mercly apparent and destined to disappear with the future
progress of physics.(19) Lotze expressed himself with more
reserve; he believes that the proofs given are insufficient.
Nothing prevents us from supposing that things in themselves
are red in colour or sweet to the taste; they act upon us only
by movements which are not, as such, either red or sweet,
but it might be that these movements recreate in us the original
qualitics of the objects, on the analogy of the telephone of
which the receiver gives back to the electric energy its original
form. (20). Boutroux attacks still more closely the problem of
the specific energy of the nerves. “If it happens that the same
agent impresses differently the different senses, it 1s perhaps
because, appearing as something simple, it is really complex,
comprising as many distinct agents as it causes diverse sensa-
tions. Heat, light, and electricity, for instance, may accompany
each other in a morc or less constant manner, without being
on that account confused in one and the same agent.”’(21)
The greater part of the phenomena cited on this subject are
based upon electric excitations; it is, therefore, especially
important to expatiate on the nature of these latter, as Bergson
has done. “One may ask,” he says, “whether the electric
excitation does not include diverse components corresponding
objectively to sensations of different kinds, and whether the
réle of cach sense is not simply to extract from it the component
pertinent to it.”” The physicist has been able to identify light
and electro-magnetic disturbance. Inversely, it may be said
that what he calls here clectro-magnetic disturbance is
light. (22)

In spite of the great and legitimate authonty attached to
the names of Lotze, Boutroux, and Bergson, we do not observe
that science has as yet taken these doctrines into consideration,


206 IDENTITY AND REALITY


This is easily explained. Bergson, who formulates the problem
with superlative precision, alters ingeniously the electro-
magnetic theory of light, but this inversion profoundly modifies
its essence. The physicist, who considers electric phenomena
to be simple and light to be a form of these phenomena, will
certainly refuse to follow what he will regard as an absolutely
opposite theory. At the most he will be able to concede that
electric vibrations, because of an unknown process which
they undergo at the extremity of the nerves, become compli-
cated in such a manner as to be transformed into waves which
we call luminous. But this hypothesis will be of no help to
Bergson, since it will always remain a fact that vibrations,
outside the body, are purely electric, participate in no way
in the nature of light, and are capable of creating in us sensations
other than luminous.

It is curious that these conceptions have come forward only
since the nineteenth century—that is, since the theory of the
specific energy of the nerves was formulated; whereas, for
many years, it had been admitted that sound was due to
material vibrations—in other words, that the same vibrations
could be felt directly as such by the organs of touch and as
sound by the ear.

But this theory only states precisely what in fact constitutes
the fundamental postulate of mechanism. At the outset, and
a priort, mechanism must recognize that from its point of view
sensation is unexplainable. It can but make the most of a bad
bargain, extolling as a result obtained the simple recognition
of an unsurmountable barrier. To declare that the quality of the
sensation, its quid proprium, is engendered by the organ, and
does not exist external to it, is apparently to define more
clearly the limits of the problem—to withdraw it from physics
and to lodge it in physiology, putting off its solution until
this latter science will in its turn have achieved a progress
analogous to that of the former; but this is only a deception.
In supposing that physiology will some day become nothing
more than a chapter of physics and that we shall succeed in
understanding exactly what takes place in a nerve, we know
in advance, according to Leibniz and Herzen, that in pene-
trating the nerve we shall only find mechanical movement and
nothing resembling a sensation. There is nothing left us,


THE IRRATIONAL 297


therefore, if we wish to continue the pretence of explaining
the universe, but to deny sensation, or, if you prefer, to treat
it as a negligible quantity, as an opinion or a convention, as
did Democritus; or, as we should call it, an epiphenomenon.
That, evidently, is strange. Phenomenon is only sensation; to
explain the phenomenon, therefore, is to explain the sensation.
How can one pretend to accept as an explanation what is a
pure and simple negation?

We are not surprised at this situation. We know the true
réle of mechanism and we remark only that, as the faithful
scrvant of causality, it begins at the very start, in denying a
part of reality, the work of the destruction of the external world,
a work which the principles of conservation and of unity are
designed to bring to final consummation. Surely, the objections
of philosophers are from this point of view entirely justified.
But it 1s clear, in so far as science is concerned, that they are
condemned to remain without effect. If our efforts have not
been entirely in vain, the reader has realized how profoundly
mechanical conceptions penetrate science, to what a degree
they are a part of it. But sensation remains and will inevitably
remain always a stranger to mechanism. Yet let us under-
stand cach other; we spoke of scnsation and not of sensibility.
We can casily imagine a theory explaining mechanically how
an organism reacts in a predetermined fashion under the
influence of a ray of light. Light, being a movement, we
understand that it can engendcr movement. But if I suppose
that the organism in question has a sensation of light, this
sensation remains inaccessible to mechanical explanation, as
does my own sensation. To say that it 1s a movement has no
meaning ; for my sensation of light, I am immediately certain,
has nothing in common with that of movement.

We here find, therefore, a real limit to causal explanation,
in so far at Icast as the latter takes place under the form of
mechanism ; and it is clear that this limit is insuperable. It may
be said that here there is something unknowable, transcendent,
but these terms perhaps give rise to equivocation. It must be
remembered that what we affirm we do not know here 1s solely
the manner by which mechanical movement is transformed into
sensation. As to the two terms of the transformation, we
believe, on the contrary, that we know them perfectly. That


298 IDENTITY AND REALITY


light is a movement, we have seen, is as certain as a theoretical
conception in science can be; and as to sensation, it is the
primordial fact from which all others are deduced. We conceive
both of them perfectly; we are obliged also to suppose that
they must be bound to each other. Indeed, this movement
gives rise to that sensation; but it is a relation which we do
not succeed in rendering logical, it remains in its turn a pure
and simple fact. It is, therefore, preferable, in order to prevent
all misunderstanding, and to mark more clearly the peculiar
nature of the unknowable, of the transcendent, which we here
assume, to designate it by a different term.(23) We shall make
use of the term irrational. The very definite meaning assigned
to it in mathematics need not embarrass us, and, on the other
hand, the signification which we here attribute to it is like
that which it has, for instance, in the expression—rational
mechanics. It has the advantage of clearly indicating that it
is a question of a fact, which we believe to be certain, but
which remains and always will remain incomprchensible,
inaccessible to our reason, irreducible to purely rational
elements.

It must be understood, on the other hand, that in admitting
the existence of this limit we affirm not only that we shall
never succeed in understanding this “‘irrational,’ but that
we shall never approach this understanding—that we shall
approach only the limit. It is this which distinguishes our
concept from that which Leibniz at times formulates. Leibniz
seems to admit that nature could not bring into being anything
which was contradictory or unintelligible. What appears to us
as such is really infinitely complicated: to be understood it
would demand an interminable analysis;(24) for want of
which we make use of experiment. Leibniz sums up this
doctrine in one of those striking figures of which he had the
secret by saying that all things are created by intelligible
causes—that is, by causes which could be seized by us “‘if
an angel wished to reveal them to us.’’(25) We shall say,
with Schopenhauer (26), that the revelation of the angel
would be of no service to us, the organ for understanding it
being absent. We believe, therefore, as Spir does,(27) that on
this point there is irremediable contradiction between our
intellect and nature, or (what amounts to the same thing)


THE IRRATIONAL 299


sensation, the intellect postulating identity and sensation
demanding diversity.

This irrational, lying as it were beyond mechanical theories,
is not the only one whose existence we are obliged to assume,
in accepting the image of reality, as these theories present it
to us; an analogous clement exists in the very heart of these
doctrines. We have already encountered it in treating of
impact and of action at a distance. Indeed, the manner in
which bodies act upon each other is as little conceivable as
their action upon our senses. It will, perhaps, be uscful to
examine from a slightly different point of view the obstacle
here presented.

There can be no doubt, in the first place, that this mutual
action of bodics is an essential element, one of the bases of
mechanical theorics. We have seen that, as a matter of fact, all
presuppose it; but itis easy to be convinced that this supposition
is necessary. Their fundamental postulate, indeed, is the
existence of matter. Now Schopenhaucr has told us that for
matter to be is to act. ““We cannot even conceive of a manner of
being other than that.’’(28) The molecules, which a little while
ago formed liquid water, when transformed into vapour are
removed from my perception—that Is because they are simply
dispersed in the air-~but they continue to exist, cach one of them
occupics a determined part of space, which becomes from that
very fact impenetrable to every other molecule. If this action of
the atom were to ccasc, the atom itsclf would cease to exist. One
might object that, according to the kinetic theory of gases,
the atom which is supposed to exert no action at a distance,
while it is frecly traversing space (that is, between two impacts),
does not, strictly speaking, act. Doubtless; but precisely in
order to conceive that it exists in the interval, we are obliged to
suppose that it is unceasingly prepared for action—that action
exists in it in the state of a faculty or “power,” without which
it would be inconccivable that it could be exerted at the next
impact. Rosenberger,(29) the very competent historian of
physics, was astonished that the laws of percussion, which
constitutes the fundamental phenomenon of physics—that to
which we seck to reduce all others—were studied so very late
and incompletely in a century, nevertheless, devoted to experi-
ments ; indeed, the first work of this kind was that by Mariotte


goo IDENTITY AND REALITY


in his Treatise on Percussion (1677). But this is no just indication
of the réle which this phenomenon was destined to play in
mechanical theories. That it should explain other phenomena,
rendering them intelligible, was to suppose it itself intelligible.
Doubtless this was an illusion; but we have seen (p. 97) that
this illusion was determined by the very nature of mechanical
explanation. It is, therefore, quite natural that people pretended
to deduce the rules of impact @ priori; to search for them
a postertort would have been contradictory. The most one could
do was to verify them.

Following the same line of thought, we can easily under-
stand why, as Cournot (30) and Stallo (31) very carefully
proved, impenetrability is not an empirical notion and does
not even seem to be suggested by experience. It is quite sufficient
to refer to the opinion of Leibniz already cited.(32) What
Leibniz means to prove is that unless a notion of this kind is
accepted, all reciprocal mechanical action between bodics—
that is, all phenomena—becomes impossible. It is, therefore,
as he himself says, a metaphysical principle, and Schopenhauer
has admirably singled out the essence of this concept by
declaring that impenetrability is none other than the principle
of activity (Wirksamkeit) of bodies. (33)

And now, knowing the true nature of scientific explanation,
we can directly ascertain that this phenomenon cludes it.
To do this we have only to resume the investigation which we
undertook in the second chapter, and to try to determine to
what point the hypotheses formulated as regards the mode of
action of atoms can yield to the exigencies of the principle of
identity. The radical inability of the dynamic conception
strikes us at once. Indeed, in this case the movement must
be born of something which is fundamentally heterogencous
to it (p. 77): that which emanates from the centre, traverses
space—travels—is certainly not a movement; the dynamic
hypothesis expressly prevents us from conceiving it as such.
There is here, therefore, an incomprehensible transformation,
a lack of identity—that is, there is no longer any explanation.

The concept of action by contact appears in the first place
more satisfying. The body causing motion was itself in motion,
it only communicated this motion to another body. Identity,
therefore, seems to have been maintained. Something—


THE IRRATIONAL gor


motion—was simply displaced, passing from the first body to
the second; this, in a word, is motion considered as substance,
which is the conception from which emanates the principle
of inertia. But as we make a closer study of this concept,
we see it escaping our imagination. There can be no motion
without material substratum, without something which moves.
Motion has nothing in common with a substance, and the
most we can do is to consider it as a state. Supposing we were
to accept this last concept, considering that this state must last
indefinitely, as the principle of inertia demands, how could
it be detached from one body to be attached to another?
This would necessitate, as Lotze has very justly remarked,(34)
that between the two this state had existed for a moment—
infinitely short, if one will—in itself, as a true substance, which
is absurd. But it is not possible to suppose that this transmission
would require only an infinitely short space of time. Everything
in nature takes place in time, and to admit that something
can be produced outside it 1s to concede that the course of the
entire universe 13 no longer conditioned by time.(35) As a
matter of fact, it is absolutely impossible to imagine the trans-
mission of motion from atom to atom without introducing
a special faculty, a mysterious agent (p. 72). The deduction
of phenomena by mechanism succeeds in appearance only
because we retain, more or less explicitly, for the atom a
principle of transitive activity, which we call impenetrability
(solidity, antitypy), and because this occult quality is allied
by a singularly powerful association of images to matter.

Let us notice, however, that if this mechanical action seems
unintelligible to us it is not because of its unfamiliarity. Action
by contact appears to us in every respect as the most natural
thing in the world. We have the immediate consciousness of
it by the sense of touch and the muscular sense ; we come under
its influence and we exercise it ourselves continually, and it 1s
the principal source from which our concept of matter is
derived. As to the notion of force which characterizes the
dynamic hypotheses, it is certain that at every moment I
submit to the action of gravitation—that I have only to hold
an object in my hand to feel it bear down toward the earth,
and that every part of my body bears downward equally;
and J feel this very distinctly and at every moment, since I am


go2 IDENTITY AND REALITY


obliged to calculate my movements in consequence of it. The
notion of force is derived, moreover, from a sensation which
we designate sometimes by the same term, but which we
distinguish better by calling it effort. But this action which
I exert or of which I am the object, certain as it is as a fact,
remains inaccessible to my understanding. No one has grasped
this better nor expressed it more vigorously than Hume.
“The first time,’’ says this philosopher, “‘a man saw the com-
munication of motion by impulse, as by the shock of two billiard
balls, he could not pronounce that the one event was connected;
but only that it was conjotned with the other. After he had
observed several] instances of this nature, he then pronounccs
them to be connected. What alteration has happencd to give
rise to this new idea of connection? Nothing but that he now
feels these events to be connected in his imagination, and can
readily foretell the existence of one from the appearance of
the other.’”’(36) In other words, mechanical action 1s a law,
but is not and never can become a deduction.

Let us notice in passing that Hume was by no means the
first to utter opinions of this kind. The transcendent nature
of the obstacle which our comprehension encounters had been
recognized for a long time. The problem, indeed, 1s none
other than that which is known under the name of ‘“‘com-
munication of substances.’’ The scholastics treated of it, and
Holkot notably developcd ideas regarding it, the likeness of
which to those of Hume’s is surprising.(37) Locke also stated
that the communication of motion is incomprehensible.(38)
Leibniz makes this incomprchensibility an integral part of
his conception of “pre-established harmony,”’ everything taking
place, apparently, as if mechanism alone determined the
course of the world, but really each monad manceuvring alone,
with no possible communication with others, and offering only,
in virtue of an order established from the beginnings of things,
an image, a murror of the world. The occasionalism of Corde-
moy, developed by Malebranche, states preciscly that each
encounter of matter necessitates the intervention of a mysterious
agent—the will of God. “Bodies have no action,” says Male-
branche,‘ and when a ball which is moving encounters and
moves another, it communicates to it nothing which it has;
for the ball itself has not the force which it communicates to it.


THE IRRATIONAL 303


A natural cause 1s, therefore, not a real and a true cause, but
only an occasional cause, which determines the Author of
nature to act in such and such a manner, in such and such an
encounter.’’(39) Let us note that what Malebranche here calls
“‘a real and true cause’ does not enter into the concept of
what we have designated under the term of scientific causality.
We shall consider later the notion of which he makes use.
Having said this, let us return to Hume’s very precise analysis.

His statement, as we reflect upon it, provokes amazement.
It 1s true that we proved in Chapter II that the atom could
not act, even by contact; but that is because, as we have
stated in Chapter VII, the atom is no longer matter; It was
stripped of all the properties which constitute matter, and is,
strictly speaking, only a bit of space. But we are here reasoning,
it scems, about true matter, such as common sense knows it,
and Hume, in speaking of his billiard balls, represented them
certainly as real, visible, and tangible. Can it be that even this
concept does not include transitive action?

We have just used the term Jang:ble. This was because the
sense of touch seems to some to be the supreme judge of reality.
This is the theory of the primacy of touch, which especially
since Berkeley has become generally current, and which Buffon,
Condillac, Maine de Biran, John Stuart Mill, Spencer, and
Bain(40) have adopted. In what concerns more particularly
the sense of sight, it admits, as Berkeley has stated, in his
admirable Essay Towards a New Theory of Viston,(41) that our
visual impressions are only signs which we translate, in conse-
quence of instantaneous associations of ideas, into tactile images,
our notion of space being solely due to the sense of touch.

Let us say at once that this theory hardly secms acceptable.
If really one of our senses had the power of imposing its law
upon the others, it would seem that a fact of such importance
ought to be revealed by signs impossible to mistake, by a pro-
found and universal sentiment which would allow no doubt to
exist.(42) Now it is quite easy to determine that this 1s not the
case. Modern psychology offers us valuable testimony on
this point. We refer to observations upon the comparison of
spatial sensation in those born blind and in those who can see.
Already, in the seventeenth century, Molyneux and Locke
had noticed that there was a problem there to solve.(43)


304 IDENTITY AND REALITY


Since then Hamilton has drawn attention to Platner’s observa-
tion.(44) Finally, Charles Dunan has given exactitude to
these conceptions by observing that if we are obliged to suppose
that the sensation of space is different in those born blind and
in those who see (about which everyone is agreed), we must
recognize also that with the latter the sensation of space results
from the sense of vision alone, and that far from transforming
visual images into tactile images, as Berkeley stated, we trans-
late the latter into the former.(45) Quite recently, Lalande
has made observations which tend also to demonstrate that
in certain cases visual perceptions give us a more powerful
feeling of objective reality than any other sensation.(46) These
opinions have been profoundly discussed by the French
Philosophical Society.(47) What we especially wish to retain
from this interesting debate is that apparently no precise
argument was furnished in favour of the primacy of touch,
which, let us repeat, would be surprising if touch were the
true sense of externality. On the contrary, it is possible to show
that it enjoys as such no privilege, and to recognize at the same
time whence comes our illusion in this respect.

Let us state in the first place that the term, like many others
based on everyday life, is not precise. Our language is full
of figures of speech. Thus touch appears to us, on the one hand,
as a peculiar sense with which we are endowed; but on the
other, having conceived the existence of the external world,
we apply immediately the same term to the exterior pheno-
menon which seems to condition this sensation. Just as we
call ight our sensation and the vibration of the ether which
takes place outside us, we also say: these two bodies touch
each other, although of course we do not at all mean to
attribute to them the sense of touch. But if we put aside what
has to do with this transposition, we very quickly see that it
is a question for touch of specific sensory impressions, just
like those of hearing and sight.

One can be directly assured of this by observing that the
tactile sensations, like the visual or auditory sensations, are
purely qualitative and in no degree contain that clement of
continuous quantity which seems to us to be an integral part
of our concept of space. When we state that one ball is twice
as large as another, will the second give to our touch a sensation


THE IRRATIONAL 305


double that of the first? Not at all. We shall have simply two
analogous but different sensations, something like two shades
of the same colour or two tones differing by an octave. We
shall come back to this question and we shall see how the
element of quantity is superposed upon this qualitative sen-
sation (p. 34).

If we start from the mechanical conception of the external
world, the tactual sensation, like every other sensation, is
inexplicable. This seems to be less evident than for sight and
hearing, because for touch the confusion between our sensation
and the external phenomenon is more complete; but it is
enough to analyse the concept in order to recognize that the
notion of matter, acting mechanically, displacing other matter,
contains nothing of the quid proprium of our sensation of touch.
The ‘“‘mill” of Leibniz will produce no more of that sensation
than of any other. Doubtless if, as Lotze supposes, the real world
contains, beside mechanical actions, other elements, these
latter could not penetrate into this mill, whereas the first
would enter therein freely. But this, too, is an ulusion based
upon the fact that in trying to understand the functioning of
our brain, we are constrained to imagine it as some kind of
mechanism. Really we have no immediate knowledge of the
manner in which it functions. The very fact that the brain is
the seat of sensations and ideas is a recent discovery. The
ancients sought for this seat, at least partially, in the heart,
and modern languages still keep certain traces of this opinion
as in ‘‘to learn by heart,’ “the heart’s desires.””> We know,
having learned it by external observation, that the brain has
pretty nearly the form of a large sponge; but were it to have
the form of an artichoke or an orange, we should not be any
more surprised, for we are ignorant of the relation that exists
between that form and its activity ; and even if we were to know
it, it would never appear to us—as Leibniz so well explained—
as logical or necessary.

Motion being considered the fundamental phenomenon, it is
quite natural that the faculty possessed by one piece of matter
of moving another appears to us as an essential property;
hence the concept of impenetrability, which is the basis of the
definition of matter and the concept of mass, which is the numer-
ical expression of that faculty, and which in mechanical theory


306 IDENTITY AND REALITY


is entirely substituted for the concept of matter. It is, therefore,
this faculty which for us becomes the true criterion of materi-
ality. But, as we have just stated, there is constant confusion
between the touch sensation and the external touch pheno-
menon. This latter, in consequence of the considerations
already mentioned (p. 82), appearing to us indispensable for
material action, the touch sensation benefits by it and im-
mediately appears to us as if clothed with a particular dignity,
as the revealer of materiality, and consequently of space.
Lucretius proclaims: “For, if it be not body, nothing can
touch and be touched.’’(48) Here, at first sight, is a statement
which clearly stipulates the primacy of touch. But it must be
noticed that Lucretius supposes that the thing can touch,
which evidently has no relation to the touch sensation. More-
over, in the lines which immediately precede, Lucretius has
superbly celebrated the destructive effects of the tempest,
and ends with this declaration: ‘“‘Wherefore again and again
there are unseen bodies of wind, inasmuch asin their deed
and ways they are found to rival mighty streams, whose body
all may see.’’(49) And so what seems to him to be the dis-
tinctive sign of materiality—in our case materiality of the
air—is, indeed, the power of producing some effect, as we
should say mass.

But, important as 1s this rationally deduced concept of
matter, it is less immediate. In the beginning, we doubt not,
the image of the external world is only made up of hypostatized
sensations, Can we resolutely abandon this procedure? The
effort which we would thus impose upon our imagination
would seem to be very great. Indeed, the external world being
only sensation, how suppose the reality of something which
would have been completely stripped of it, and which conse-
quently could no longer become sensation? For this bit of
matter, of course, could move another bit, but neither it nor
any of the others upon which it would act could become a
cause of sensation to us; it would, therefore, be without any
relation to our sensation, and consequently would fade away.
That is why in thinking of matter we retain by a powerful
and unconscious effort this clement of sensation. If we try to
dissociate it entirely, the imagination rebels. In other words,
and in spite of the definition which we give, matter continues to


THE IRRATIONAL 307


be for us especially a hypostatized tactual and visual sensation.
Bergson has aptly remarked that atoms supposedly stripped
of physical qualities are really only determined “in relation
to a possible vision and a possible contact.”’(50) Let us here
observe, that from this point of view again touch enjoys no
special privilege. It is sometimes said that the world of
atoms is a world of blind people: this is very inexact, for if it
is certain that we shall never see the particles, the movement of
which constitutes what we call /ight, it also seems just as evident
that corporeal particles will never be able to give us the touch
sensation, this latter being very probably, just as is the sensation
of light, a consequence of the agitation of the terminations of
our nerves by the mozements of these corpuscles. The world
of atoms is, therefore, also a world of anesthetized people—
that is, as we said at the beginning of the chapter, without
any possible relation to our sensation.

We see this still more clearly in the electric theory of matter.
There, indeed, the bold leap has been made, all relations
between the sensation and the supposed substratum of reality,
the electron, have been cut. Obviously, “this singular point in
the ether’ is not at all tangible. Nor do we pretend any more
that it is material. It must explain matter, but it is not matter.
Moreover, the fact that this theory was able to arise and to
acquire so rapidly a preponderant place in science constitutes
one more proof against the primacy of touch. If this sense
were really the supreme revealer of external reality, a theory
of reality so completely in abstraction from its impressions
would be inconceivable.

But when we think of tangible matter, it is the touch sensation
which is at the bottom of this concept, and Hume’s billiard
balls are made of the same matter. It ts not astonishing, then,
that transitive action is not amongst their properties. It is the
simple statement that two sensations which differ from each
other are also independent of each other, whence it follows
that hypostatized into qualities they also remain so. “‘Solidity,
extension, motion—these qualities are all complete in them-
selves, and never point out any other event which may result
from them,” says Hume. (51)

The transitive action of matter, the power of displacing
an other matter, is, therefore, something irrational, in the


308 IDENTITY AND REALITY


sense which we have previously given to this term—that is,
it remains and will remain irreducible to purely rational
elements. (52) Consequently, the explanation of the phenomenon
as mechanism presents it to us seems to us to be encompassed
or limited by two irrationals: one turned toward the object—
we cannot understand how bodies can act upon each other;
the other turned toward the subject—we cannot understand
how movement in us can be transformed into sensations.

It is also clear that in both cases the irrational is of the
same order, and we can even believe that it is identical. It
becomes so if, abandoning resolutely all hypostasis of tactile
sensations, we form our concept of matter only with the aid
of the notion of transitive action, as we do in the electric
theory of matter; indeed, and as a consequence, the sensations
of touch becoming analogous to those of hearing and sight,
the enigma for all of them is the same.

But we can come to the same result in another way—by
assimilating what takes place outside us with that which takes
place within us. When movements of matter strike certain of
our organs and are transformed, they become sensations ;
on the other hand, there are formed in the depths of our being
what we call volitions, which, passing through other organs,
become movements. We can suppose that the second are the
consequence of the first. And so, sensation being only the
interior aspect of the action of bodies upon us, and volition
being the interior aspect of our action upon bodics, we may
rightfully suppose that it is through sensations and volitions
that matter reacts. As Schopenhauer said, in exercising an
act of volition we are ‘‘behind the scenes” of nature.(53) To
be sure, our will seems to us to be free; but the stone thrown
in the air, were it endowed with consciousness, would also,
doubtless, imagine that it went up and down by an act of free
will.(54) It is evident, moreover, that this simile explains
nothing, for we do not understand how a volition in us is
transformed into movement. But we do understand at least
that the irrational may well be unique.

If we refer to the analysis we made of the significance of
the term cause, it is evident that we have merely assimilated
an act of brute nature to a phenomenon depending not on
scientific but on theological causality. Have we, then, gone


THE IRRATIONAL 309


too far in affirming that the latter is entirely excluded from
science? Yes and no. Let us note in the first place that this
concept by entering into science is transformed. The act of
volition is free in essence; but as science can embrace only the
phenomena subject to the domination of law, we are neces-
sarily led to climinate this liberty, to treat it as an epipheno-
menon—to conceive, as it were, of a volition stnpped of the
fecling of liberty, which is, of course, contradictory but for
the moment indispensable. This is clearly seen in the passage
of Malebranche (p. 303), who, bringing divinity into the
question, is obliged to suppose that its acts are strictly deter-
mined—that is, to strip divinity in these circumstances of its
free will. It is, therefore, no longer only a theological causality ;
it is a concept akin to and intermediary in some degree between
this latter and scientific causality. It 1s like the first in sup-
posing a fundamental dissimilarity, an absolute heterogeneity,
between cause and cffect; and like the second in that it
excludes liberty. This concept may be designated as that of
efficient causality.

Morcover, this notion appears only at the extreme limit of
the domain of explanation. Science, with a powerful and
untiring effort, is looking for identity in phenomena, and, on
occasion, even imposing it upon them. Where this effort
remains sterile, where irrationality shows itself, the mental
association between the two concepts of causality—one issuing
from reason and the other emanating from the immediate
sensation of the will—insinuates, surreptitiously, so to speak,
the second, or at least its reflex, into the place of the first. This
is what Malebranche did when he attributed the action of
bodies to the will of a divinity. With the one difference, that
we substitute for this pseudo-theological conception a pseudo-
metaphysical conception; we act in the same way when
endowing atoms with a mysterious power which we call
wmpenetrability or force, but which, of course, under this aspect
remains just as irrational as the act of Malebranche’s divinity ;
for the effect which we mean to produce is movement, and
what we place in the body can only be a faculty. It is enough,
moreover, in scrutinizing these concepts to recognize that they
are derived from sensations indissolubly linked to acts of will.
Leibniz, in introducing his notion of the principle of action or


grI0 IDENTITY AND REALITY


of passion, declares that it is “‘very intelligible even though
it be in the province of metaphysics”; but this term “‘intelli-
gible” has not the same force with him as it has with us.
What he means to affirm is that the concept sought for corre-
sponds to something which we feel distinctly and directly,
and the accumulation of the terms power, action, resistance,
and effort, leaves no doubt that the sensation which is evoked
by that association of ideas was really that one which accom-
panies in us the accomplishment of an act.(55) Of course,
just like Malebranche’s divinity, this metaphysical entuty,
although derived from volition, cannot be free. Impenetra-
bility or force surrounding the atom, both appear to us as
constant. Doubtless, if necessary, they could vary in tame
according to a definite rule—that would be to suppose a law
without any possible reason—but they cannot vary frecly
without invalidating the very foundations of science.

The four concepts of which we have recognized the existence,
and which constitute four different ways of understanding the
relation between antecedent and consequent, have different
domains. Law, without exception, governs all phenomena,
which are the objects of science, and each phenomenon in
particular under all its aspects, in so far at least as we conceive
of it as coming within the purview of science. We try to apply
scientific causality equally to all phenomena of science, and we
always find, by more or less violating nature, one side of the
phenomena to which it can adapt itself; but, just as Boutroux
states in the passage which we quoted (p. 283), that adaptation
is never complete, so that there can never be entre persistence,
coincidence, complete identity, between anteccdent and conse-
quent. The typical phenomenon —that to which we reduce the
others—motion, is not itself explicable unless we assimilate
it to rest. As soon as we conceive it as change, difficulties
become apparent which we succeed in overcoming only with
the help of such artifices as the infinitesimal calculus. The
domain of this concept is, therefore, more restricted than that
of the preceding one. Theological causality rules phenomena,
in so far as we conceive them as cvading science, prevision ;
and finally, effictent causality, which is a kind of hybrid concept,
intermediary between the last two, and is applied, more or
less happily, to that part of the phenomena of science which


THE IRRATIONAL 311


evades scientific causality—that is, their irrational side. Theo-
logical causality, in its very essence, is entirely foreign to
science; efficient causality enters into it, optionally, as a
make-shift. Only the concepts of law and scientific causality
are applicable constantly to it—science is their work, and is
in truth governed by them.

Here we must mention still another concept, that of purpose.
In a quite recent past, teleology was held in great esteem by
science. Without speaking of the more or less surreptitious use
made of it by the physical sciences properly so called (a use
which we shall see has not completely ceased) it alone appeared
capable of furnishing truly synthetic points of view in the
biological sciences. To be sure, Descartes had stated that the
organism was only a machine, and in the eighteenth century
the materialists had magnificently developed this thesis. But
it was not apparent that this view was capable of contributing
ideas upon the genesis of the organism or of its parts. That
there was in each organic being a whole marvellously adapted
to its environment and to its mode of existence was what
even a superficial observation made clear and what a profound
study confirmed. Upon this agreement was based the teleological
proof of the existence of God, which we know dominated for
many centuries a large portion of human thought. Almost on
the eve of Lamarck’s work, in an atmosphere very favourable
to materialism, the Abbé Galiani stated this idea with great
force and cloquence.(56) Kant also was of the opinion that
one could never dispense with considerations of teleology in
the explanation of organic beings: “It is absolutely certain
that we cannot learn to know in a sufficient manner and with
still more reason explain organic beings and their internal
possibility by purely mechanical principles of nature, and
it can be boldly affirmed with equal certitude that it is absurd
for men to attempt such a thing and to hope that some new
Newton will some day come to explain the production of a
blade of grass by natural laws over which no purpose has
presided : this view must be absolutely denied to men.”’(57)

The situation is completely modified with the emergence
of the theory or principle of evolution. Yet on this point we
must be more specific. Indeed, if we try to fix precisely the
scope of this principle, we notice that it does not seem to


312 IDENTITY AND REALITY


be interpreted in the same way by everyone. Thus certain
philosophers accuse biologists of perverting its meaning;
declaring that in order to find its real signification we must
“rid it of its materialistic flavour.’’(58) This situation cannot
fail to astonish, if we recall that the concept of evolution arose
in relation to biological facts and theories, and that even
to-day it is especially in this science that it finds its application.
One immediately suspects that between the two adversarics
there must be a misunderstanding. We believe that it is possible
to show that this is really so, that the principle of evolution
is double, or, if you prefer it, that it presents two aspects, the
ambiguity coming from the fact that the biological sciences,
in comparison with the physical sciences, are in an infinitely
less advanced stage of development, and that consequently
the differentiation achieved in the former is not simultancously
imposed in the latter.

Let us go back to the time of the great discussion between
Cuvier and Geoffroy Saint Hilaire. What did the prevailing
theory affirm? It maintained that species must be considered
as fixed, invariable, each one having arisen with determined
characteristics and having kept them, if it still exists, or if it
has disappeared, until its disappearance, The innovators, on the
contrary, maintained that the species, by the very fact of its
cxistence, modified itself. Everyone was, and still 1s, seemingly,
more or less in agreement upon the sense 1n which this modifica-
tion of the species, or its evolution, as this concept was called
later, is produced. The species adapts itself more and more to
its environment; it manages bettcr to avoid or to overcome
the dangers which threaten it, and to hold in the world the
most favoured position.

If we stop at this conception, we see that evolution postulates
a becoming, the changing of the present state in view of a
future state. It is, therefore, a concept analogous to Carnot’s
principle: just as the substance of which the temperature 1s
higher than that of the substances surrounding it tries to put
itself in equilibrium with them, so the animal species, carried
into an environment which does not suit it, tries to modify
itself in such a way as to bring about a condition which can
also be called a state of equilibrium. Consequently we under-
stand why Jean Perrin, while trying to designate Carnot’s


THE IRRATIONAL 313


principle by a general term, hit upon the name, “principle of
evolution,” analogous to the German des Geschehens, which we
have already mentioned.(59) It is in this sense that the
philosophers of whom we have already spoken have understood
the principle.

But we saw that Carnot’s principle in itself was not
rational.(60) It is rational that things remain, not that
they change. The biological principle of evolution, taken in
this sense, is, therefore, not rational either. Why does the
animal species try to adapt itself? And what is the mysterious
force which impels it? These are questions which our intellect
will never cease to ask and to which explanatory science must
always reply. That is why all the efforts of philosophers,
tending to limit its bent, to maintain for the principle of
evolution its sense of principle of change, are, and always
will remain, useless. Just as with Carnot’s principle, our
intellect will not be satisfied unless it can adapt it to mechanism.
This necessity is cven more urgent in biology than in physics.
Indeed, Carnot’s principle is an empirical law, directly
observable; it is the most general and the most common of
rules—it governs the totality of phenomena. This is far from
being so for the variability of animals and vegetables; even
admitting that this is an absolutely demonstrated fact, it 1s far
from impressing itsclf upon our attention as much as the fact
of the establishment of the equilibrium of temperature. That
is why it could not really become a part of science until an
explanation of it had been found, or at least until a way had
been indicated by which it scems possible to find an explanation.
This was done, or at least attempted, by the initiators of the
concept of evolution in biology—Lamarck, Darwin, Wallace.
Did they succeed? Opinions differ on this subject, even amongst
biologists.

Yet a certain number of points seem established. At any
rate, biologists, who are partisans of evolution, seem convinced
that either one of the causes already indicated at present—
such as heredity of acquired characteristics, selection by sexual
attraction, selection by the struggle for existence, etc.—or the
entirety of these causes, or even the intervention of causes not
yet imagined are sufficient to explain what appears to us as
a tendency toward a future state. The principle of evolution


S14 IDENTITY AND REALITY


thus explained resembles Carnot’s principle interpreted by
Maxwell’s theory. It becomes a causal conception, a principle
of conservation; it tends, indeed, to make us see that all forms
of organic life known to us emanate from a single and simple
form, through many gradual transformations and under the
action of explainable, that is, mechanical causes. It is a
development quite analogous to that of the primitive nebula
supposed to have engendered in its bosom, in virtue of forces
which from all eternity were inherent in it, all the diversity of
our planetary system.

Evolution thus becomes, as Wilbois has remarked, a pure
appearance covering a true fixity(61)—in other words, an
epigenesis has been substituted for the genesis.

If this aspect of the principle is adopted, and this is, naturally
enough, the way it appears to most biologists, (62) the arguments
of Abbé Galiani and of Kant seem no longer to be valid, and
there seems to be no necessity to have recourse to teleology in
order to explain the organic world. Causality appears capable
of undertaking this task, which amounts to saying, as we have
seen, that we may entertain the hope of reducing organic
being to pure mechanism. We have pointed out (p. 63) how
enormously far off this result must now appcar to us; but, at
any rate, we have not the feeling of being scparated from it by
an insuperable barrier. We see here nothing unknowable,
nothing transcendent,(63) with the exception, of course, of
sensation and volition. These are and will remain, like the tran-
sitive action in inorganic nature, cternally irrational. If we
suppose that the explanation of an organic being can be
complete, sensation and volition will appear as cpiphenomena,
since they are only the internal form of a phenomenon of which
the external aspect alone is accessible to rational science.

Moreover, in supposing this reduction to mechanism carried
to its very limit, it is evident that the primitive being, the
source of all others, must in its turn be conceived as having
evolved from inorganic matter. This conclusion may seem
hazardous from the experimental point of view, since the
results of micro-biological research tend to make us reject


spontancous generation ; it constitutes, however, the necessary
completion and crowning of the edifice, as eminent evolutionists


have proclaimed it,


THE IRRATIONAL 315


If at a glance we take in the whole progress of science, we
cannot refuse to acknowledge that teleology has a tendency
to recede constantly before causality, as Laplace (64) had
already affirmed and as Sully-Prudhomme (65) has clearly
shown. This is because our mind never hesitates between the
two modes of explanation: every time that a “‘causal’’ explana-
tion is offered, even one that is remote and obscure, the
“teleological” explanation immediately gives way to it. That
the future is determined by the present seems doubtless obscure
to our reason, which is obliged to formulate this postulate in
order to live and act. But that the present should be determined
by a future which does not yet exist, which may never exist,
if I admit my free will, if I do not conceive of the course of
the universe as entirely determined, this is what is absolutely
repugnant to reason. The only way of decreasing this repug-
nance consists in confounding cause and end, and in supposing
the absolute determination of everything. Then, indeed, the
world appears to us a solid block rigorously determined in
every detail, by every particular detail. This is the point of
view which the encyclopedists loved to develop. ‘“The universe
for one who could encompass it from a single point of view
would only be, if it is permitted to say so, a unique fact and
a great truth,’ wrote d’Alembert. “The absolute independence
of a single fact,” said Diderot, ‘‘is incompatible with the idea
of the whole.’’(66) In the universe thus conceived it becomes
indifferent whether we wish to determine the future by the
present or, on the contrary, the present by the future. But we
are absolutely in ignorance whether in reality the universe does
constitute such a block. If it exists, our mind does not permit
us to know it; in order to perceive we are obliged contrari-
wise to break it up into isolated phenomena, and in order to
act we are also forced to believe that it does not exist, that the
course of the world is not determined in advance, and that
we arc free to influence it.

It is true, moreover, that tcleology implies prescience,
and prescience in turn presupposes consciousness. If I do
a certain thing in order to attain a certain end, it is because
I foresee that the act will lead to the consequence which
I desire. Doubtless, in appeasing my hunger and thirst, in
accomplishing a sexual act, I am conscious only of following


316 IDENTITY AND REALITY


an immediate need, an obscure instinct, whereas after reflection
I arrive at the idea that these are teleological acts directed
toward the conservation of the individual or the species.
But, in that case, I suppose a superior knowledge (Nature or
God) which knows of these ends, how otherwise could it will
them? Unless, of course, I succeed, as does the theory of evolu-
tion, in turning toward causality by imagining that only the
species have been able to persist where these needs and these
instincts were formed and perfected, in which case teleology
is only apparent and immediately vanishes. But if I affirm
that a ray of light goes from one point to another by the
shortest way, and if 1 wish to see in this statement something
other than an empirical rule, I attribute, it would scem, to the
ray not only the choice of ways to follow, but also the anticipated
knowledge of the result to be obtained. This is assuredly a
view, which, as Poincaré said, “involves something which 1s
shocking to the mind,’’(67) and from which our imagination
will always try to free itself. It has done this in this particular
case, as we know, and the pretended “‘economy”’ of nature is
transformed for us into a sort of prodigality, since we suppose
that undulations would surge forth in every direction if they
did not mutually cancel one another.

Lange declared that all intrusion of final causes, in addition
to forces acting according to necessity, could have no other
meaning than that of arbitrarily closing to investigation a
part of the domain of science.(68) It would be to fail to
recognize that teleological considerations can merely be
provisional. It seems evident to us, on the contrary, that they
are capable of rendering immense service where causality as
yet has not been able to penetrate. It is certain that before the
day of evolutionary theories, they alone were able to permit
of general ideas in the biological sciences. And even now,
while professing in theory the purest evolutionism, the biologist,
who studies the functioning of an organ, will always reason
for the most part as if this organ had been especially adapted
to this function by a conscious and prescient will. And there is
no contradiction here; the scientist has simply the feeling, as
has every man, that the causal explanation is something distant
and difficult, while he believes the teleological explanation to
be provisional—a preliminary step.(69)


THE IRRATIONAL 317


Certain very general statements of science, such as the
principle of least action and Carnot’s principle, have an
appearance of teleology; but we can see precisely from the
latter that teleological considerations, if they can aid us in
discovering general views of nature, are incapable of satisfying
our need of explanation. It is, it seems, indeed to considerations
of a purposive order that one can reduce the very remarkable
attempt of Lalande to give to Carnot’s principle the appearance
of conformity to the laws of our reason. The transformations
operating in virtue of the principle are considered by him as
reasonable because, having for a law progress toward equality,
they tend by that very fact to satisfy the human intelligence
more and more.(70) Indeed, as we have seen, the ultimate end
of the universe, in virtue of the principle, would be a state of
perfect and infinitely stable equilibrium. This would be not
only a state of absolute repose, but also of absolute indifferenti-
ation; and it is evident that this state of complete annihilation
would also be entircly rational, for we have arrived again at
the sphere of Parmenides. Let us state at once to what
extent the result of this deduction, in virtue of the method
which we follow, is inadmissible to us. It is enough to envisage
real scicnce, present and past, to be convinced that Carnot’s
principle is irrational—that is, that our reason accepts it with
difficulty, as something which penetrates it from without;
that it docs not appcar to It as a statement justifying itself, as
do the principles of conservation, but as one which our reason
invincibly attempts to justify by reducing it to conceptions
which are appropriate to it, explaining it, for instance, by
mechanical theories, or again, subordinating it to hypotheses
of cyclic return. Thus the irrationality of the principle seems
a fact to us. But it is possible, we believe, to show the reasons
for it. The Eleatic unity of Being is supposed to represent entire
reality, past, present, and future. Even its diminished image,
Laplace’s nebula, seems to us to possess an explicative virtue
because it is placed at the beginning, and consequently lends
itself to a causal development. Here, on the contrary, un-
differentiated chaos is transferred to the end, and, therefore, can
no longer explain anything. We are going toward a condition
in which there will be no longer any possible change in time
and in space; but while waiting, in order to attain it, the


318 IDENTITY AND REALITY


present state must become modified in time, to the furtherance
of this future state, and this we must consider inadmissible.

But could not causality and teleology exist side by side as an
explanation of the same phenomena? It has been imagined
that above the groups of facts bound together by causality,
there might be a leading idea holding these groups together.
Let us consider as an example masons who are constructing
a house. Apparently it is their acts which determine the con-
struction ; and yet they are only executing the architect’s plans.
Let us fix at once the limits of this hypothesis; it is inapplic-
able within the limits of the series of facts governed by laws.
Masons, being men, have free will; they have the choice of
the acts which they perform, and consequently if they have
not themselves conceived an end, they can very casily try
to attain an end indicated to them by another. Butin the case
of inorganic agents, whose actions are obedient to inflexible
laws, there is no choice, everything being determined. Nowhere,
thercfore, can teleology enter. It cannot withdraw the pheno-
menon from the domination of the law, and it can directly con-
trol only what does not appear to be governed by the law—-that
is, what is outside of science.

On the other hand, nothing prevents the laws themselves,
in so far as they are not explained by causality, from being
conceived as governed by teleology. Every purely empirical
rule, from the very fact that it appears to us as contingent, may
be considered as having emanated from a will envisaging
an end. As long as I do not know why water has a maximum
density at four degrees, as long as that constant scems arbitrary
to me, it is perfectly legitimate for me to imagine that it
results from a decree of divine free will-- in order, for instance,
to prevent rivers and ponds from freezing in winter to their
very depths and thus to conserve the life of the animals
dwelling thercin. But if some day we succeed in explaining
this constant, with the help of considerations about the
arrangement of atoms of hydrogen and oxygen, the supposition
on this point will become inadmissible and I shall be obliged
to set it farther back.

The extreme limits of this enforced retreat can, even at the
present moment, be indicated. They evidently coincide with
those of a possible causal explanation. Thus, that which is


THE IRRATIONAL 319


irrational—transitive action, sensation—always, and no matter
what the future development of science is, may be conceived
of as teleological, as due to divine intervention, and as instituted
by it for an end otherwise undefined. Occasionalism from the
scientific point of view will remain irrefutable.


NOTES


H. Porwncaré : La science et 'hypothédse, p. 193.

D. F. Strauss: Gesammelte Werke. Bonn, 1876, Vol. VI, p. 269.
A. Herzen: La cerveau et Pactiwité cérébrale. Lausanne, 1887, p. 34.
Lersniz: Monadologie. Opera, ed. Erdmann, § 17.

Mvutracu: Fragmenta philosophorum graecorum. Paris, 1860, p. 357-
Bercson : Matiére et mémoire. Paris, F. Alcan, 1903, p. 66.

7. Descartes: Le monde. Cuvres, Vol. XI. Paris, 1gog, p. 7.

8. Cf. Biver: L’éme et le corps. Paris, s.d., p. 262. According to recent
studies, the same spots in our epidermis are not susceptible of fecling
sensations of different kinds. There are really four cutaneous senses—contact,
cold, heat, and pain—with special peripheral organs, special means of
conduction, particular centres, etc. Cf. loteyko and Stepanowska, Psycho-
hystologte de la douleur. Compte rendu dans la Revue de métaphysique, March 1go9,
Pp. 7.

9. HetmHoLtz: Wissenschaftliche Abhandlungen. Leipzig, 1882, Vol. II,
p. 602.

10. Id., Populaere wissenschaftliche Vortraege. Brunswick, 1876, HI, p. 53-

11. Cf. Rupens: Le spectre infra-rouge. Congrés international de physique de
gue, Vol. I, p. 142.

12. Merroni: Sur Videntité de diverses radiations. Comptes rendus de [’ Académie
des sciences, XV, 1842, p. 454 and ff. Cf, Aria: Observations, etc. Travaux
de la Société de Bordeaux, Vol. TV, p. 78 and fff.

13. Hecanortz: Vortraege, 4th ed. Brunswick, 1896, Vol. II, p. 220.

14. TYNDALL: Fragments of Science. London, 1871, pp. 137 and 195.

15. Cournot: Matérialisme, etc. Paris, 1875, p. 398.

16. KozLowsx! (Sur la nature des combinaisons chimiques. Congrés de philo-
sophie de rgoo, Vol. HI, pp. 553, 540), by an ingenious hypothesis connects
the difference between hearing and sight with the fact that the sensations
of this last organ have a spatial character which is lacking in sounds.

17. Conpitiac: Logique. CEwres. Paris, 1778, Vol. XXII, p. 77.

18. Hazecxer: The Riddle of the Universe, trans. McCabe. New York,
1900, p. 341. Le Dantaec: Les limites du connaissable. Paris, F. Alcan, 1903,

. rt2.
: 19. Cf. Lance: Geschichte des Materialismus, 4th ed. Iserlohn, 1882,
p. 459 and ff.

20. Lorzx: Mataphysik. Leipzig, 1898, pp. 506-507.

at. Bourroux: De la contingence des lois de la nature. Paris, 1874, p. 73-


ee


$20 IDENTITY AND REALITY


22. Bercson: Matiére ef mémoire. Paris, 1903, p. 41.

23. Certain discussions which have taken place in this domain seem to
us due precisely to this misunderstanding. Cf. especially, Fouillée, L’abus
de l’inconnaissable. Revue philosophique, XXXVI, 1893, p. 365.

24. Lerniz: De scientia unwversali, ed. Erdmann, p. 83.

25. Id., Philosophische Schriflen, ed. Gerhardt, Vol. VII, p. 265. We have
translated percipi by to be seized, because of the context. The doctrine of
Leibniz has been admirably summarized by Couturat, La logigue de Letbniz,
Paris, 1901, pp. 256, 257, 261. Cf., however, Appendix I, p. 451.

26. SCHOPENHAUER: Die Welt als Wille und Vorstellung. Saemmiliche
Werke, ed. Frauenstaedt, Vol. III, p. 206.

27. Spin: Pensée et réalité, p. g and ff. Cf. preface of Penyon, p. vii.

28. Cf. p. 82.

29. RoSENBERGER: Geschichie, Vol. II, p. 175.

go. Cournot: Tratté de (enchainement, Vol. 1, p. 246.

31. Srauio: /.c., p. 88.

32. Cf. p. 72 and Appendix I, p. 447 and ff.

33. SCHOPENHAUER: Die Welt als Wille und Vorstellung, Vol. 1, pp. 12-13.

34. H. Lorze: Grundzucge der Naturphilosophie, and ed. Leipzig, 1889,
p. 17.

35. 1b., p. 35.

36. Hume: An Inquiry Concermng Human Understanding, Part II.

37. Cf. GonzALEz: Histoire de la philosophic. Paris, 1890, p. 408.

38. Locxe: An Essay Concermng Human Understanding. London, 1759,
Vol. I, Cap. XXII, p. 135.

39. MaALeBRANCHE: De la recherche de ia vérité. Paris, 1712, Vol. HI,
p. 123.

40. Cf. Dunan: L’espace iisuel et espace tactile. Revue philosophique,
Vol. XXV, p. 136, and Laranpe, Bull. de la Société frangaise de philosophic,
3rd year, 1903, p. 60.

41. Berxevey: An Essay towards a New Theory of Vision. Works, ed. Fraser.
Oxford, 1871, Vol. I, more particularly § 45 and ff.

42. Hartmann believed that the importance of touch as “a sense of
reality” is limited to the adult, whereas in the child it is taste and in certain
animals the olfactory sense which play this réle (Das Grundproblem der
Erkenntaisstheorte. Leipzig, s.d., p. 5).

43. Berxecey: /.c., § 8.

44. Cf. Dunan: L.c., p. 355.

45. 1b., pp. 152-153.

46. LaLaNvE: Revue philosophique, Vol. LUI, 1902.

47. Bulletin de la Socidtd frangaise de philosophie, 3rd year, 1903, p. 58 and ff.
It may be the case that as Kozlowski supposes (Psychologiczne zrodla.
Warsaw, 1899, pp. 43, 57 and ff.; Zasady. Warsaw, 1903, pp. 234, 251),
the difficulty of coming to an agreement in this matter is duc especially
to the fact that one tries to reduce all spatial sensations to one source, cither
of sight, or of touch, or of muscular sense, and that it is neceasary in the
case of people who see to attribute the sensation of space of two dimensions
to sight and the sensation of the third dimension to other senses.


THE IRRATIONAL 321
48. Lucretius: De rerum natura, Book I, line 305. Cf. Book II, line 434:


‘* Tactus enim, tactus, pro Divom numina sancta
Corporis est .


49. [6., Book I, lines 296-299.

50. Berason: Matiére ef mémoire. Paris, F. Alcan, 1903, p. 22.

51. Hume: le., p. 454.

52. It is to be noted, however, that relativism has tried and, it would
seem, has succeeded, at least partly, in an operation of this kind. But it is in
profoundly modifying the essence of the instrument—that is, of reason itself,
the limit between the rational and the irrational being, quite evidently,
a function of this essence. Cf. on the subject La Déduction Relativiste,
Chap. XXHI.

53. SCHOPENHAUER : Ueber die vierfache Wurzel, od. Frauenstaedt. Leipzig,
1877, p. 145,

54. Spmoza: Ofera. The Hague, 1883, Vol. I], p. 208. “Hic sane lapis
quandoquidem sut tantummodo conatus est conscius, et minime indifferens, se liberrimum
esse, et nulla alta de causa in motu perseverare, credet, quam guia vult.”’

55. Cf. Appendix I, p. 451.

56. Moretiet, Mémoires indédits de Vabbd, etc., and ed. Paris 1822,
Vol. I, p. 135 and ff.

57. KANT: Critique of Judgment. Bernard, London, 1914, Part H, Div. H,
§ 76. In spite of what has been said on this subject by Renouvier (Esguisse
d’une classification, ctc., p. 195) we believe that Haeckel (History of the Creation,
trans. Lankester. New York, 1876, p. go and ff.) was right and that this
passage is contradicted by what Kant said a few pages later (/.c., § 97,
p. 111). But if one cannot remove the logical contradiction one can under-
stand, if necessary, from a psychological point of view how Kant was brought
to it. Kant was, doubtless, from an abstract point of view, convinced that
everything ought to be explicable “by mechanical reasons,” as Leibniz
used to say. But for the organized being, the evidence of purpose appeared
to him, at the very moment when he was examining this question, as so
very overwhelming that the causal problem seemed to him radically
insoluble.

58. E. re Rov: La nouvelle philosphie. Revue de métaphysique, UX, 1901,

. 294.
: nae Perrin: Traité de chimie physique. Paris, 1903, p. 141. Cf.
Chap. VIII, p. 265.

60. Cf. also on this subject earlier, p. 317.

61. J. Wivsors: L'esprit positif. Revue de métaphysique, %, 1902, p. 335.

62. Cf., for example, Jacques Loxs: Zur neueren Entwicklung der Biologie.
Annalen der Naturphilosophie, Vol. IV, fasc. 2. This conception is, moreover,
also that of numerous philosophers. Cf. René Berruecor, Bulletin de tu
Société francaise de philosophie, 5th year, 1905, p. 250 and ff., and Hermann
Couen, Logik der reinen Erkenntniss. Berlin, 1902, p. 247.

63. I have recently somewhat changed my opinions on this point.
Cf. De l'explication dans les sciences, Chap. VII.


g22 IDENTITY AND REALITY


64. LapLace: Théorie analytique des probabilites. CEuvres, Paris, 1886,
Vol. VII, p. 6.

65. SuLLY-PrupHOMME and Ricner: Le probléme des causes finales. Paris,
1903, Pp. gO.

66. Dmwerot: Pensdes sur (interpretation de la nature. CEucvres. Paris, 1875,
Vol. I, § 11. Leibniz had already said: “For we must know that every-
thing is bound together in each one of the possible worlds. The Universe,
whatever it may be, is of one whole piece, like an ocean” (ed. Erdmann,
p. §06).

67. H. Pomvcarsé: La science et V'hypothése, p. 154. One may compare with
this opinion that of Descartes which we quoted, p. 78.

68. F. Lancs: Geschichte des Materialismus, p. 14.

69. It is in this conception of the provisional value of teleological explana-
tion that the remarkable observations of Goblet seem to culminate also.
Fonction et fnalité. Revue philosophique, XLVI, 1899 ; La fnalité sans intelligence.
Revue de métaphysique, VIII, 1g00; La finalité en biologie. Revue philosophique,
LVITI, 1904.

70. A. LaLanns: La dissolution oppsode d ('évolution dans les sciences physiques
eb morales. Paris, F. Alcan, pp. 66, 67, 117.


CHAPTER X


NON-MECHANICAL THEORIES


In discussing a possible explanation for the change of state
of a body by displacement (p. 93) we saw that two ways are
open to us. We can suppose that the arrangement or the motion
of the parts of the body was modified—this is the mechanical
explanation—but we can also claim that to the substance of
the body another substance is added, invisible but pre-
existing elsewhere. If we apply this method of explanation to
the phenomenon of heat, we shall arrive at the theory of heat-
fluid. In general, we shall build up theories of a class different
from that of mechanical theories and which may be designated
by the generic term of “theories of quality.”

We have just seen from the preceding chapter that the true
quality, the guid proprium, of sensation has no place in mechanism.
In it sensation remains unexplained no matter what one does.
Is it possible to proceed otherwise than do the atomic theories?
It will evidently be necessary to start from sensation and
objectify it. We do this constantly and instinctively. We have
the sensation of redness, but instead of treating it as something
belonging to us, we place it outside of ourselves; we attach
it to other sensations, thus forming what we call an object,
of which we affirm the existence: thus what was in the first
place our sensation becomes a quality of the object—the object
is red. We name this “common sense’’—philosophers call it
“naive realism’’—and, in fact, it is a metaphysical system, an
aggregate of conceptions of the causes of our sensations, of
“the thing in itself.”

Now it is easy to prove that common sense admits that an
object may change a part of its qualities and yet remain the
same. This dog, now grown, is little like what it was four
years ago, when it was just born; we consider, however, that
it is the same dog. The red paint has been scraped off the
table and it has been painted black, yet we shall not hesitate
to say that it is still the same table. In the case of the dog, we
easily see where this conviction comes from. Men—I know
through myself, I have the immediate conviction of it—preserve

identity in spite of very profound changes, I remember


324 IDENTITY AND REALITY


quite distinctly my looks at the age of ten, and I do not hesitate
to declare that that little boy was I: 1 may some day be com-
pletely disfigured by a sickness or an accident, but it will still
be I. The man who believes in fairy tales admits that he can
be changed into an animal, while retaining consciousness of
the continuity of his ego. This 1s because the animal appears
to us as a being which we suppose to possess sensations and
volitions analogous to those of men; it is, therefore, natural
to admit that there is in it a principle of individuation, com-
pletely different from its exterior aspect. In other words, if I
believe that the dog is the same as four years ago, it is because I
am convinced that it is a subject in very much the same way as
I am. This is not true in the case of the table; but it may well
be that an unconscious assimilation of this object with living
beings influences our belief. It is certain also that the crudeness
of our senses is a help. The object at first sight appears to us
really the same— identical with what it was before—and it is
only in considering it more closely that we perccive that slight
differences have come about: the dog has grown fat, the paint
of the table is not so fresh. At any rate, this conviction of a
fundamental identity exists even for inanimate objects; it is a
fact: only it fluctuates, for in this case, I no longer have a
definite criterion. What changes shall I allow without ceasing
to declare that the table has remained the same? I should
find it very difficult to state them, as is indicated by the classical
joke about the identity of the much-mended knife. But, more or
less consciously, I divide the qualities of the table into the more
essential ones, such as the material of which it is made or its
dimensions, and the less essential, such as its colour and the
fact of its being provided with castors. What guides me,
evidently, is the greater or less facility of acting upon cither
one or the other of them ; there are properties I know which it is
almost impossible to modify. If, in examining the table, I
find that a crack in the top, which I had noticed before, no
longer exists, I shall have doubts about its identity.

Applying these notions to the variation of things in time, it
may be admitted that there is in them a substance that is
immutable and accidents that are changing.

It seems at first sight that we have thus come to the very
foundations of peripateticism. But let us beware; the true


NON-MECHANICAL THEORIES 325,


doctrine of Aristotle, according to Malebranche, is not physics
but logic. In this respect it here escapes our criticism. But it
can be proved, we believe, that in speaking of physical pheno-
mena, peripateticism, particularly in the Middle Ages, had a
tendency to depart from this purely logical limit—thus, in fact,
giving rise to theories analogous to those to which we have
just referred.

We have seen that the atomist, by a mental operation pre-
ceding every theoretical research, excludes from reality a large
part of sensation, declaring that there is nothing beyond matter
and motion. The peripatetic—we use this term with the reserva-
tions which we have just indicated—is not obliged to proceed
in this way. He is, from this point of view, incontestably nearer
common sense. No one can better characterize the distinctive
features of this method than Paul Tannery has done: “On
the one hand, a tendency to attach oneself to phenomena, as
the senses reveal them to a superficial and naive observation,
one may even say a marked respect for common beliefs, if
only they are not visibly erroneous; on the other hand, a
tendency to go back as far as possible and as quickly as possible
in the serics of causes, and to do this by a simple analysis
of the concept and without new recourse to experience.’’(1)
To this picture, destined to mark the distinctive characteristics
of the Staginite’s own philosophy, only a touch is necessary to
make it correspond exactly to the tendencies which dominated
the doctrines of the philosophers of whom we have spoken;
this is because the number of known facts having increased,
the emphasis is placed more on experience and less on facts
pertaining to common sense proper. But it is preferably with
the help of a logical process and following as far as possible
the traces of Aristotle himself that one tries to make a distinc-
tion between the substance and the accident, between that
which remains and that which is modified. It is clear, conse-
quently, that, starting from the notion of the object as common
sense presents it to us—that is to say, from a group of qualities—
there is no motive for attributing purely mechanical qualities
to the substance; one can, on the contrary, choose freely from
among the qualities of the bodies those which one shall propose
to consider as “‘substantial.” Indeed, all the qualities of objects
cannot remain, certain ones are purely accidental; when a


326 IDENTITY AND REALITY


body ceases to be round, who in the world, according to
Condillac’s very just remark, will ask what has become of
its roundness?(2) But when a body ceases to be hot or becomes
moist, we may very well ask what has become of its heat and
whence comes its moisture. These two qualities, heat and
moisture, are those Aristotle considered as the most essential
in bodies, with the addition, naturally, of coldness and dryness,
which are only their opposites. These four qualities, associated
in pairs, characterized the four elements: hot-dry (fire), hot-
moist (air), cold-moist (water), cold-dry (earth).

Setting aside again the logical and metaphysical import
of the doctrine and keeping to its purely physical aspect, it is
clear that these four qualities appear as real substances—that
is, in a way, as elements of the elements. Aristotle himself has
sometimes expressed himself accordingly. Thus in the Second
Book of De generatione et corruplione, when engaged in deducing the
fundamental concept of his four elements, he searches for what
may be the “principles of the body perceptible to our senses.”’
‘This is why,’ he says, “neither whiteness nor blackness,
neither sweetness nor bitterness, nor any of the opposite sensibles
are an element of the bodies’ (Chapter II). After having
limited these principles to four, he continues: “Since there are
four clements, and the possible combinations for four terms
are six, but since also the opposites cannot be coupled together
. . . itis evident that there will remain but four combinations
of the elements” (Chapter ITI). What Aristotle is speaking of
here as elements are therefore not the substances which he
elsewhere designates by this term, but qualities.

Hippocrates (3) also believed that the human body is
composed of four elements—-dryness, moisture, cold, and heat.
These four elements form the aliments which in their turn are
transformed into humours—-Hippocrates recognized four of
them also—and these last are the essential components of
bodies.

In the Middle Ages we continually see theories of this kind
breaking through the purely logical apparatusof Aristotelianism.
In the East, at the beginning of the tenth century, Saadia,
one of the great Jewish initiators, who had such an important
influence on the intellectual movement of that period, in
speaking of the destruction of a body by fire, declares that in this


NON-MECHANICAL THEORIES 327


case the parts of the body destroyed are separated, but, being
elements, remain without change and return simply to their
original place, ‘‘the heat which was in the body reverting to the
element of fire, its moisture and its coldness to their respective
clements.’’(4) In the West, in the ninth century, Scotus Erigena
states that bodies are constituted by the union, not of sub-
stantial elements themselves, but of their qualitative accidents ;
and yet these accidents are in a way themselves substances—
since they remain indestructible, they can only separate in order
to unite again in new combinations and thus create new
bodies.(5) In the twelfth century William of Conches teaches
that the four clements were created at the beginning of the
world and have since been used to create bodies. In these
latter the material particles of the elements are simply juxta-
posed. These particles are in fact the true elements. ‘‘All
bodies are composed of elements. An element, as it is defined
by philosophers, is a simple and minute particle of any body
whatever, simple in what concerns its quality, minute in what
concerns its quantity.’’(6) The bodies which we call earth,
water, air, and fire are not elements in themselves; the earth
which we know 1s a body where dry and cold particles predomi-
nate. But the earth is porous and surrounded by water, air, and
fire. It is, therefore, natural that what we designate by the name
of earth also contains particles of the three other clements:
those of the element carth prevail; they are there ‘“‘naturally,”
the others being there only “accidentally.”

The distinctive feature of these doctrines is the manner in
which the mixture of elements is conceived, and from Lasswitz’s
splendid book (7) we see how this question troubled the philo-
sophy of the Middle Ages. The representatives of scholasticism
tried to render precise what Aristotle had left somewhat vague.
Avicenna and Averroes amongst the Arabians, Albertus Magnus
and Saint Thomas in Europe constructed antagonistic theories.
That is because with some the purely logical aspect of Aristotel-
ianism prevails, whereas with others its properly scientific theor
retical aspect dominates. Those who are interested in practical
science, who observe and experiment, lean naturally rather
to this latter doctrine. Amongst them are the alchemists
for whom the theory of the combination and separation of
bodies is of particular importance. To an alchemist of the


328 IDENTITY AND REALITY


Middle Ages, an element is a body endowed with certain
qualities, which it preserves in combining and communicates
to the combination into which it enters. Yet given the
nature of the phenomena to which the alchemists devoted
their attention, Aristotle’s four cardinal qualities could be
of but little help to them. What interested them was not to
know whether a body should be considered dry or moist, hot
or cold, but whether it was combustible or volatile, or whether,
on the contrary, it resisted fire, whether it was of a metallic
nature, etc. From this arose the assumption of elements differ-
ing from those of the Aristotelians. The relation of these new
fundamental substances—which were generally supposed to be
three: salt, sulphur, mercury—to the former elements of Aris-
totle, the existence of which was not denied by the alchemists,
has never been well defined,(8) but their role as bearers of
qualities is entirely clear. Paracelsus, who was wholly imbued
with these theories,(q) states that, in analysing, one always
finds again the same three elements. What burns is sulphur,
what smokes and sublimates is mercury, what remains as
residuum after the combustion is salt. Nothing save sulphur
burns (10) and it is inversely inferred, from the combustibility of
a body, that it contains sulphur.

It is hardly necessary to show how closely this conception
is allied to the very foundation of the philosophic doctrine of
that time. Because combustible bodies constitute a class or
genus, it is concluded that they should contain a common
element, and this element, hypostasis of combustibility, the
common quality, which unites the different species, is for that
very reason a hypostasis of the “‘idea’’ of the genus “‘combus-
tible.”” This genus is a subdivision of a superior class of
concepts as appears from the term ‘“‘combustible matter’’;
this particular concept is thus formed from another more
general one, matter, to which a determinant is added. If this
latter is not something arising and disappearing, without any
reason for it being required, but, on the contrary, as for Scotus
Erigena, is something which persists and only changes place,
it becomes itself a sort of substance.

In following out this doctrine to the end, we arrive at a
representation of the material world as a whole composed,
apart from a fundamental substance which represents the


NON-MECHANICAL THEORIES 329


most general concept of matter, of an entire series of secondary
substances or hypostatizations of the qualities. The most
complete system which has been imagined in this realm of
ideas had as its author a philosopher of the seventeenth century,
Claude Guillermet de Berigard. But although, as we have just
seen, these ideas of substantialized qualities are derived by a
legitimate evolution from peripatetic conceptions, Berigard’s
system is no longer merely tributary to pcripateticism. It is,
on the contrary, atomistic, though qualitatively atomistic
according to the expression of Lasswitz, who has drawn atten-
tion to this theory and whom we shall follow in this analysis.
Berigard supposes an infinite variety of atoms, which, though
spherical corpuscles, represent cach an elementary quality; he
shows that the four fundamental qualities of Aristotle are not
enough to explain the perceptible world, which, being infinitely
diverse, presupposes an infinite diversity of qualities and con-
sequently of clements.(11) The atom-qualites (Berigard him-
self characterizes them as corporeal qualities, gualitates corporatae)
penetrate the pores (meatus) of matter and thus confer upon
it corresponding properties.(12) Every modification of the
material world consists of nothing but the movement of these
substances which sometimes are added to the body, thereby
determining its species, and we call this its origin (generatio),
someumes are separated from it and constitute its corruption.
Alteration is produced when following a movement of sub-
stances, the propertics of the body are not sufficiently modified
to produce a new species.(13) It is to be noted, however, that
Berigard has not remained, in his deductions, entirely consistent
with himself; he has yiclded to the attraction of atomism,
attributing certain qualities not to elementary substances,
but to the process of their grouping. Thus he believes that
liquidness results from the fact that the “‘principles” of the
body do not adhere very strongly together, which accounts
for their being mobile; and that all elementary substances
must be liquid.(14)

Apart from these anomalies, Berigard’s doctrine furnishes
us with the most perfect example of a purely qualitative physical
hypothesis. It helps us thus to understand what would have
been, in a certain sense, the result of the alchemists’ theories.
Yet these latter, precisely because they are much more


330 IDENTITY AND REALITY


faithful to the spirit of peripateticism, stop well on this side of
the limit. They suppose, in agreement with the Aristotelian
doctrine, that between the substratum of the body, the primary
matter, and the body clothed with its qualities, the relation is
the same as between matter (such as iron) and an object
which is formed from it (such as a key or a knife). Therefore
matter can change its form; alchemists sometimes say, its
clothing.

The alchemists did not consider all qualities as substantial,
but only a very small number, the others appearing to them as
purely accidental. For this reason their affirmations, from the
point of view of modern science, seem to us frequently tainted
with a certain ambiguity. Thus sulphur, mercury, and salt
which compose the bodies are not elements in the sense we
give to this word, for they are not always identical with them-
selves. Paracelsus expressly declares that the different bodies
are made of particular mercurt, sulfura et sales.(15) Another
ambiguity results from the fact that soon a distinction 1s
drawn between the elements and the known bodies bearing
the same name. This differentiation increases as science
advances. Homberg, in the seventeenth century, believes
that ordinary sulphur is composed of carth, an acid, and
elementary sulphur, which is the principle of combustibility. (16)

Thus, besides the essential properties which really characterize
it, a body has still others which can be modified without its
inmost nature being changed. The metals which at first sight
are considered as a clearly limited class of bodies, having a
great number of properties in common, are supposed to contain
the same “primary matter”; while the propertics in which
they differ can only be of secondary importancc.(17) One
can hope to transmute one metal into another, either by reduc-
ing the first in the beginning to that materta prima,(18) or, as the
alchemists generally supposed, by acting directly upon its
properties. For example, in successively removing from pewter
its sound, its softness, its fusibility—those characteristics which
distinguish it from silver—one will transform it into silver (19),
to which it is supposed to be closely related, doubtless because
of the common colour. For certain other metals, in order to
change them into silver or gold, one will have first of all to
modify their colour—leucosis or xanthosis, depending upon


NON-MECHANICAL THEORIES 931


whether it is a question of whitening or making yellow—and
forthwith every chemical operation which seems to modify the
colour of a metal assumes immediately importance in the
eycs of the investigators.(20) Mercury, doubtless because of its
fluidity, which appears paradoxical, seemed to some an excellent
starting-point for changes of properties. They spoke of “‘harden-
ing” it, and many were the recipes given for this : Boyle believed
that it could be transformed, without any addition of metal,
into a substance like silver ;(21) and Macquer, in the Dictionnaire
de chimie of 1778, insisted upon the ‘hardening’ of mercury
by phosphorous vapours or by boiling linseed oil.(22) When
alchemists wish to transform an ordinary metal into a precious
metal, they speak in imaginative language of “clothing it with a
royal mantle.”’ The phenomenon of the precipitation of copper
by iron in blue vitriol is considered an indubitable fact of
transmutation ;(23) the metal is said to ‘‘take off the armour
of Mars and put on the robe of Venus.”

During the seventeenth century the prestige of peripateticism,
as a philosophical and scientific doctrine, diminishes little by
little. But the theories of quality which had sprung from it
continue to dominate chemistry perhaps in a still more absolute
fashion precisely because they are free from the purely logical
equipment of Aristotle’s doctrine. Toward the middle of the
cighteenth century, there is an important change, of which
we have spoken in Chapter VII (p. 235). The very multiplicity
of the experiments in transmutation has brought about the
ruin of that hypothesis. And then as one learned little by little
to recognize that the modifications of colour such as that
produced by orpiment (aurt pigmentum) were only apparent,
and the futility of all so-called recipes was acknowledged, one
began to conccive that there might be clementary substances
differing essentially from one another. It is not the metals
themselves which are considered as elements, but their “dimes.”
The fact that these latter in our atmospheric conditions are
very often more stable than the metals themselves had probably
contributed to it. But doubtless we ought to look for the principal
reason for this in the need which was felt to attribute the many
common traits of metals to a common element. This hypothetical
element of which the existence is supposed, not only in metals,
but also in all inflammable bodies, is phlogiston, which inherited


$32 IDENTITY AND REALITY


the properties which chemists in other days attributed to their
different elements. “They make it the principle of odours, of
colours, of flavour, of volatility, of fusibility, of dissolubility, (24)
etc.,”’ says an author contemporary with Lavoisier (perhaps,
indeed, Lavoisier himself) ; and the fact, observed by Stahl,(25)
that inflammability is susceptible of being transmitted from
one body to another seems to confirm directly this point of
view. In the same way it is belicved that all acids contain a
“primary acid,’’(26) all salts ‘‘a fossil salt,’’(27) all carthy
calces a single “earthy substance.” (28)

We have already seen (p. 234) how slowly the new notion
of the chemical element was elaborated. Phlogiston scems at
first to have escaped it; Kopp states, with a certain surprise,
that chemists, while firmly believing in its existence, do not
seem to make any attempt at isolating 1t.(29) This was because
phlogiston was at bottom a heritage of previous ages; it was not
an element in the sense in which we use that word, but a
kind of quality-bearing principle, and the idea of isolating it
would have appeared to a chemist of that age almost as bold
as the idea of trying to isolate feat to Saadia. The evolution,
however, which we have tried to trace still continuing,
phlogiston came to be considered, little by little, as an element
like others,(go0) and from that tume on its isolation appeared
less paradoxical, to such a degree that toward the end of that
period phlogiston is identified with inflammable air (hydrogen).

How deeply rooted was this tendency of which we have been
speaking is evident from the history of the celebrated actdum
pingue. From the fact that calx, soda, and potash may become
caustic, and that causticity may be transmitted from onc to
the other, the chemist Meyer had inferred the existence of a
special acid, a support of causticity, as phlogiston was of
inflammability ; and this hypothesis was accepted with enthu-
siasm by the whole scientific world.

Before Meyer, Black had formulated the opinion that caustic
alkalis were distinguished from others by the loss of a substance,
“fixed air” (carbonic acid). Black had clearly proved that in
becoming caustic the alkalis lost an important part of their
weight.(31) But this did not prevent the majority of chemists
from adhering to Meyer's theory. Lavoisier himself at first
spoke of Meyer only with great praise.(32)


NON-MECHANICAL THEORIES 333


There is no doubt that these ideas had much to do with the
strong opposition which Lavoisier’s theory encountered. To
sacrifice phlogiston was to abandon definitely a conception
which in the first place had seemed evident and indisputable—
to wit, that the likeness of properties indicated the presence of
a common clement, the bearer of these properties.

It is truly astonishing to ascertain what a mass of facts were
known before Lavoisier about the increase of weight of oxidized
bodies, and about the rdle of the air in this operation(33)—
facts which were unexplained or very poorly explained by the
theory of “‘something which leaves,’ whereas the explanation
by “something which is added” was very clear and was
suggested, moreover, long before by Jean Rey. The chemists’
obstinacy in preferring the theory of phlogiston is explained
only by the fact that combustibility, in so far as it is a striking
and definitcly charactenzed phenomenon, could not in their
opinion dispense with a qualitative material substratum. When
the phlogisticians reproached Lavoisier for not having explained
why certain bodies burn and others do not,(34) they revealed
the true foundation on which their faith rested.

And so in 1788, at the moment when the new school’s
triumph seemed complete, apparently it is from that side that
the last resistance came. The commentary on Kirwan’s Essay
brings its principal effort to bear on this point, and Lavoisier
himself, after having properly praised Stahl’s discovery,
feels called upon to make known with much insistence that
‘It is unnecessary to suppose that there exists in these substances
a principle common to all, that they all contain the base of
inflammable air—that 1s, hydrogen.’’(35) Moreover, lke all
great revolutionists, Lavoisier had not completely freed himself
from all attachment to the old ideas. The name of oxygen
indicates that he considered the new element the bearer of a
quality ;(36) and it is well known that this conception resulted
in the erroneous theory of ‘“‘murium,” and that many efforts
were necessary to put that spectre to flight.(37) In the same
way Berthelot sets forth rightly that Lavoisier believed that
oxygen coloured the blood as it coloured the metallic oxides,
and that this correlation “‘had a tendency to make oxygen the
generator of coloured matters, as was formerly supposed of
phlogiston.”’ (38)


334 IDENTITY AND REALITY


In another branch of the physical sciences, theories of quality
have persisted for a still longer time. It is, in fact, amongst
them, as we have seen, that we must classify hypotheses of fluids
and of emission. The “‘caloric,’? semi-material fluid, bearer of
a quality, belongs to the same family as phlogiston, and the
relation of Newton’s luminous corpuscles to the qualitative
atoms of Berigard is equally obvious.

Is it astonishing that in this region of ideas science has so
slowly evolved, and that it has abandoned doctrines which
appear to us as entirely untenable only step by step and, as it
were, against its will, as, for instance, in the case of phlogiston?
It is enough, on the other hand, to reflect upon the true nature
of our conceptions of quality to understand to what a degree
these doctrines conformed to the fundamental postulates of our
mind. When, starting cither from an immediate impression of
our senses, or from a series of observed phenomena, we succeed
in endowing a body with a property, when we say this
body is red or is inflammable, and when we see this property
appear and disappear in the body, we certainly feel the tendency,
if this quality seems sufficiently important to us, to ask the
question, Where does it come from-~-where has it gone?
Doubtless, as we have already said, this question will not be
asked about roundness; but it will be asked about heat. Now,
in stating it, we indicate that we are inclined to consider heat
as something which persists in time and which consequently
only brings about changes by altering its position. This is
hypostatizing the quality and attnbuting to it the character
of a substance, and this is the kind of explanation of the
phenomenon which our causal tendency will inevitably suggest
to us, unless previously we have purposely destroyed the
quality by the conception of a universal mechanism, which
itself is an emanation of the causal principle. Moreover, the
explanation by the transmission of a quality has about it
something immediate, complete, and satisfying —advantages
which are not found to the same degree in mechanical explana-
tions. This becomes evident by comparing the manner in which
the relations between properties of elements and those of
compounds are treated by contemporary chemistry with the
procedure which the theories of quality used in this respect.

We stated (Chapter VII, p. 238) that the study of the relations


NON-MECHANICAL THEORIES 335


between the properties of elements and those of their compounds
constitutes the principal task of theoretical chemistry. But
this is only to formulate the side of the problem referring to
law. But on this point, as on others, law alone is not enough
for our understanding. We wish to know not only how things
change, but also why they change. When it is a question of
bodies entering into a combination, we are very careful to
state that we ought not to expect them to preserve their
properties ; we even make of this the very criterion of the real
chemical combination which is defined as the union of bodies
whose properties are modified.(39) From a purely empirical
point of view this definition is irreproachable; when I place
together that silvery and soft metal which I call sodium and
the greenish and irritant gas which I designate as chlorine,
I shall see finally appear in their place the uncoloured crystals
of a well-known substance, sea-salt. But how could this happen,
where do the properties of sea-salt come from, and what has
become of those of the chlorine and the sodium, if} as chemistry
correctly teaches us, these two elements continue to exist in
the chloride of sodium? “It is at first difficult to conceive,”
says Berthelot, “how bodies endowed with properties so little
like those of sea-salt, are yet the only and true elements of it;
one would be inclined to believe in the intervention of some
other component which analysis has been powerless to reveal
to us.”(40) Berthelot rightly states that chemistry possesses
sufficient means, from the experimental point of view, to
reassure us on this point, to prove to us that these components
are really the only ones. Is there need to show that after this
demonstration the phenomenon remains as incomprehensible
as before? If chemistry is not a purely empirical science, if
there exists a “‘theoretical” or “‘ rational” chemistry, if only
we have the hope of constructing one—it evidently has, or
ought to have, as its task to explain, as Huxley has stated, why
properties of matter result from those of the elements which
compose it.(41)

It is curious to notice that Comte was of the same opinion.
‘“‘Chemistry,”’ he said in defining this science, “‘has, as its final
object, given the properties of all simple bodies, to find those
of all the compounds which they may form,”(42) which
apparently indicates that the second must be deducible from


336 IDENTITY AND REALITY


the first. One might in truth find this affirmation equivocal.
Comte, it is well known, admitted in science only empirical
rules; might he not have imagined that deduction would
take place with the aid of rules of this kind? But here is another
passage: ‘‘All the fundamental data of chemistry ought, in
the last analysis, to be reducible to the knowledge of the essential
properties of the only simple bodies.’’(43) Here there is no
longer any doubt, since every empirical rule is excluded.
Comte evidently, in making these statements, no longer thought
of his definition of science and yielded to an instinctive need
of explanation.

Doubtless theoretical chemistry has not yet made much
progress in the direction of these ideas. We only know a small
number of properties by the combination of which, according
to van’t Hoff’s expression, “The linkage with the chemical
formula is so surely established that they are deducible from
that formula as a necessary consequence of adopted atomistic
and molecular conceptions.”(44) But it is enough to open a
manual of physical chemistry, such as the splendid works of
van’t Hoff or of Ostwald, or even an ordinary manual of
chemistry, to be convinced that efforts are really being turned
in that direction. The end envisaged is obviously to attach all
properties to the chemical formula, starting with the funda-
mental properties of elementary atoms, notably with atomic
weight—that is, by deducing them cither from the number
and the nature of grouped atoms or from the manner in which
they are grouped. The relations of the first order, those which
can be deduced from the simple consideration of molecular
weights, manifest themselves with great precision when the
bodies are in a gaseous condition or in diluted solutions;
those of the second order find their expression in formulae
called constitutional formulae. It is because the same atoms
of carbon, hydrogen, and nitrogen are combined in two
different ways that ammonium cyanate and urea—to choose
the well-known example of the famous synthesis of Woehler—
possess such different properties, and it is because their atoms
or groups are placed around an atom of carbon in an asym-
metrical manner that the body rotates the plane of polarization.
We see that the scope of these researches includes really almost
the whole of modern chemistry, and we also see that it is in


NON-MECHANICAL THEORIES 337


no way a question of seeking for simple empirical rules, but
for real explanations. Doubtless chemical atoms are still far
from being identified with physical atoms, although notable
progress has been made in that direction, especially in the
theory of tons of Svante Arrhenius; but the fact that, even
when the conceptions of the two sciences seemed to be separated
by an abyss, one spoke in chemistry of the atom and the mole-
cule, proves decisively that a true mechanical theory has
always been in view. When Sully-Prudhomme proclaims that
“the specific properties of bodies tend more and more to be
explained by . . . the architecture of the ultimate parts .. .
—that is, at bottom, mechanically”’(45)—his affirmation may
be contested in so far as it refers to the facts, but it is irre-
proachable in so far as it is the expression of a postulate. Some,
doubtless, have found that the theory has been long in coming ;
that is because of illusions about the facility of the task.
Disillusionment has followed, one of the most eminent theorists
of chemistry has admitted it in bitter terms ;(46) it is the source
from which have come those violent attacks which that scientist
has directed against mechanical theories in general as well as a
new non-mcechanical theory, which we shall discuss later on.
But this docs not alter the fact that the general tendencies of
chemistry have been until now such as we have just charac-
terized them.(47) Morcover, there appears to be no doubt that
these tendencies are directly due to the principle of causality
—that is, to the desire to establish identity in ame. Further,
we have seen, in discussing unity of matter, that chemistry
has not only the tendency to explain the properties of com-
ponents by those of clements, but also to reduce to a minimum
the properties with which it is obliged to endow its elementary
atoms. One would like to reduce everything to considerations
of atomic weights, because evidently in this way the single
matter is more nearly approached ; and it 1s felt to be a serious
inconvenience that this reduction has not yet taken place for
valence, and that this latter must remain an “occult quality.”
But these are very remote prospects; at present we not only
do not know how to explain the properties of elements, but
even in assuming these latter, those of compounds appear
enigmatic to us. One is apt to be astonished that chemical
theory seems to accept placidly, even though provisionally,
Y


338 IDENTITY AND REALITY


such a state of things, and Huxley, in the passage to which we
referred (p. 335), has vigorously expressed this astonishment.
After having noted the strange change of properties which
we observe when oxygen and hydrogen combine to form
water, the great biologist continues: ‘Nevertheless, we call
these, and many other strange phenomena, the properties of
the water, and we do not hesitate to believe that, in some way
or another, they result from the properties of the component
elements of the water.” This is because Huxley had never
really weighed the wealth of good will which is shown by us
every time the causal explanation is resorted to. It is, no
doubt, very “strange” that water contains hydrogen and
oxygen. What we designate by the terms hydrogen and oxygen
are bodies having each one a collection of well-known pro-
perties. It is by these that we define them, and they are an
integral part of the concept. We obviously cannot affirm that
they remain unchanged in water, but we believe that ‘“‘in
some way or another’’—we leave to the future the task of
achieving the necessary precision on this point—they are
hidden in it. This is the same subterfuge which, on a like
occasion, Black’s theory of heat employed, and which, more-
over, we also employ under certain circumstances more openly,
notably in the concept of “‘potential energy’’( p. 192).
Chemistry, of course, does not entirely ignore this difficulty,
a difficulty all the more apparent since we sometimes recognize
an element under several equivalent forms called allotropic
states. Supposing it really were contained in a compound,
which of its different states does it assume? The theorists
get out of all these difficulties with the help of an ambiguity.
The element contained in a combination is “‘atomic.”’ As soon
as they are disengaged the atoms reunite in molecules; it is,
therefore, not at all astonishing that the element then shows
entirely different properties. This subterfuge shows us clearly
that it really is a question of a pure metaphysical concept,
since it is understood that this ‘“‘atomic element,’’ which is the
true element, being the only one which enters into combinations
and which persists, is radically different from the body which
we know under the same name and which never can be really
isolated, and consequently never can be perceived. It is, there-
fore, something analogous, from this point of view, to sulphur


NON-MECHANICAL THEORIES 339


or to mercury, as they were conceived by the chemists of the
seventeenth century.

It is certain that our present hypothesis aapties to an infinitely
larger number of facts and is adapted to them in a much more
precise way, following matter and energy closely in their
transformation, and controlling the data with the help of
measuring instruments; but the explanations which it gives,
or, rather, which it promises, are much less precise. Let us
come back to the three equations of the oxide of mercury
(Chapter VI, p. 222). A phlogistician would find it quite
natural that the mercury precipitated fer se should give metallic
mercury, since the phlogiston, a principle of ‘‘metallicity,”’ was
added to it. At present we have the choice between two sorts
of conceptions. Either we admit the chemical elements as
ultimates; there then exists no real relation between the
different metals, and the analogy between their properties is
essentially inexplicable, and all the more is it inexplicable
since these propertics appear at a given moment. Or else
we suppose that they are the compounds of a particular order,
and we can then hope that we shall some day learn why the
matter which composes them manifests in them these meiallic
qualitics; but this explanation seems to us vague and far off.
The qualitative explanation of perfect simplicity and clearness
is replaced by an hypothesis which from the point of view of
quality cxplains obviously very little, as Huxley and Berthelot
show in the passages just cited. It is evident, moreover, that
this insufficiency of mechanical theories is due to their very
essence; they completely and intentionally set aside quality
as sensation, and in respect to other properties they tend
doubtless to explain them, but the elements which they employ
have so little varicty that this explanation seems extraordinarily
difficult. One must not, therefore, be too astonished at the
vitality which these qualitative theories have manifested in
chemistry. If one forgets momentarily that chemical equations
symbolize a phenomenon which takes place in a determined
sense, it is certain that, as far as equality between the two
members is concerned, representation according to the theory
of phlogiston was more complete, since it presupposed a real
pre-existence of the most striking property which appeared in
the course of the phenomenon, meiallictty.


340 IDENTITY AND REALITY


We are thus finally brought back to the doctrines of quality
by a somewhat long detour, which we, nevertheless, felt un-
avoidable: this past, withal a rather recent one, has become so
foreign to us that to illuminate it we cannot use too freely the
elements of comparison offered by the present. At least we
hope that we have proved by what precedes that the problem
which these doctrines sought to solve is the same as that with
which contemporary science is wrestling—how to explain the
appearance or the disappearance of properties? Mechanical]
theorics postulate that all must be reduced to arrangements
and movements of elements to which one attributes in advance
but a minimum of properties—the ideal being, as we know,
to strip them completely of such; the theories of quality, on
the contrary {we can reunite under this denomination Aristote-
lianism conceived in its scientific aspect, and the theories which
issue from it up to and including that of phlogiston, and also
the theory of fluids in physics}, presuppose more directly
that the quality itself has pre-cxisted, that it has been displaced
under a more or less hypostatized form, that it has united
itself with the body or that it has Ieft it. It is the dry and moist,
the hot and cold, forming the human body according to
Hippocrates: it is, in Saadia, the heat of the body returning,
after the destruction of this latter, to the clement of fire; it
is also, in Stahl, phlogiston, inflammability, and, in Black, the
caloric fluid passing from one body to another. And through all
these doctrines we clearly see that the causal tendency shows
itself with great vigour.

The deduction just undertaken brings to light another
problem. If, indeed, it is true that the theorics of quality are
tributaries of the same tendencies, born of the same principle
as mechanism, what advantage, then, does the latter system
present, how explain that it tends more and more to dominate
science?

Let us attempt in the first place to imagine what a purely
qualitative science might be. Quality, we have scen, is only a
hypostatized sensation. Two sensations, however similar we may
conceive them-—-from the moment that they do not appear to
us as absolutely identical, as are, for instance, the sensations
of two pieces of cloth of the same colour, or the tones of two


tuning-forks played in unison—can only be distinguished by a


NON-MECHANICAL THEORIES 341


qualitative sign ; this is also true of the sensations of two billiard
balls of different size (p. 305). Remaining, therefore, in the
domain of pure quality, we may easily identify a sensation ;(48)
we can also create a numerical scale in order to be able to
judge as we do for temperature or for cxamination marks, but
we cannot go farther than that. The fact that, in the case of
the three notes or the three samples (lighter or darker) of the
same red colour, or, again, the three billiard balls of different
size, [ can always indicate the note or the sample or the ball
which must be placed between the other two, will not help me
in the least. For even when I have set up a complete scale, such
as a scale of notes or of colours or a series of billiard balls, I can-
not by any artifice pass from one tone, from one shade, from
one ball to those which border on it. For example, it will be
impossible to declare that two notes are equivalent to a third;
they cannot be added. This seems particularly clear in this
case because a combination of two notes forms a chord and not
a single note. But at bottom it is the same for colour or for
size conceived as a pure tactile sensation; the fact that two
shades are capable of furnishing a third, and the same for
two bilhard balls, has nothing to do with immediate sensation.
Not only each quality, as Hume said,(49q) but each shade
of quality, or rather of sensation (the quality being already a
transposition, a hypostasis) is something complete and does not
suggest anything else.

In what way docs a sensation of quantity, of size, become
superposed upon this purely qualitative sensation? That
depends evidently, as the very term quantity suggests, on
substantialistic conceptions. I consider that the cause of my
sensation ball is the existence of a definite object, formed
of a certain material. If I unite the material of two equal
balls, and give to it the form of a single ball, I shall obtain
a sensation which, a little while ago, seemed to me similar
but different qualitatively. And now, considering that the
material has only changed place, that it has only undergone
a modification through which its identity seems to me to
be assured, I shall declare that between one of the two
original balls and the one which I have just formed, there
is only a difference of more or less, a difference of quantity.
I can also succeed in thus reducing to quantity shades and


342 IDENTITY AND REALITY


notes, by observing that the same chord shortened or lengthened
will give tones of different pitch, and that a sample dyed
with double the same colour will have a determined shade.
It is well known, moreover, that we have even found numerical
relations between different colours by introducing the considera-
tion of wave-lengths; but in this case the relation between the
modification of the object and my sensation is less immediate,
and that is why I am less inclined to lose from sight that this
latter knows nothing directly of these considerations of quantity.
But this is just as certain for the balls. In order to strengthen
our conviction on this important point we have only to consider
the sensation of quantity under its most elementary form and
to substitute sight for touch. Let us suppose a hundred oranges
arranged in a square of ten on a side. Doubtless I can look at
them one by one, and in that case I shall have one hundred
similar sensations. But if, at the very outsct, I glance at them
all, I shall bave the sensation of a “‘square of oranges’’—that is,
a single sensation. By saying that this square is made of one
hundred oranges, I affirm that 1f I place in a certain way one
hundred objects of which each one in particular gives me the
sensation ‘“orange”’ I shall obtain that of the square in question ;
but in itself this latter is as primitive as the first. A stick of
6 metres will not give me twice the sensation of a stick of
3 metres, I simply know that if I place end to end two sticks
of 3 metres I shall have the sensation of a stick of 6 metres.
This substitution of the external object, its supposed cause,
in place of the pure sensation, presents, therefore, the great
advantage of attaching one sensation to another, of explaining
one sensation by another, that of the six-metre stick by that of
the three, and so on. The possibility of this addition, inapplicable
as long as we remain in the domain of pure qualitative sensation,
involves evidently that of all analogous operations. Thereafter
we shall continue this operation in the strictly scientific domain,
where, moreover, sensation will inconvenience us less and less.
To be able to affirm that mass and energy are conserved (which
will permit explanations by identity, as in the case of the stick)
we must evidently have transformed them heforehand into
quantities. And thus it is that for the quality is substituted a
magnitude capable of being added. The advantage resulting
from this, from the point of view of science, even when science


NON-MECHANICAL THEORIES 343


is concerned merely with laws rather than causes, is enormous.
Indeed, this conception permits the application of mathematics ;
in all languages of the world, to calculate and to foresee are
synonyms.

In the case of the stick and the ball the substitution of the
object for the sensation is done unconsciously; it is the effect
of what is called common sense, the functioning of which we
shall study a little later. This substitution is so rapid that
we must make an effort to come back to pure sensation.
Language is, so to speak, incapable of expressing the pure
sensation; it is, as has been observed, entirely modelled on
common sense, and refers constantly, not to the sensation,
but to the external object. In substituting for sound or colour,
vibrations, a quantitative phenomenon, we also introduce
mathematics into a domain of qualitative sensation; but since
we are acting consciously, the substitution is less complete,
the quantitative element, we have seen, docs not intermingle
with our sensation.

Remaining strictly in the domain of quality, the science
which can be built up will be extremely limited, since the
number of different sensations is infinite and the repetition
of actually identical sensations is very rare. In truth, no one
has ever tried to build up a science of this kind; that of
Aristotle 1s already very remote. He really tried to treat “hot”
as a pure and simple quality ; and from the fruitlessness of the
effort attempted by this great mind, it is now clearly seen how
impractical is that way. By the side of “hot” Aristotle was
obliged to establish ‘‘cold” as a distinct quality, since, indeed,
these are two totally different sensations.(50) But even using
these two opposite qualities, he could reach no clear conception
of a gradation of heat, a conception which appears to us of
the greatest simplicity. He never could have succeeded, indeed,
except by considering hot and cold as real substances which
are mixed in varying proportions; this would have meant, of
course, departing still farther from the qualitative point of
view. His expressions, moreover, are sufficiently ambiguous
for his disciples in the Middle Ages to have understood him at
times in this way.

But if hot and cold become substances, it is easier to do away
with one of the two, somewhat as in the science of electricity


344 IDENTITY AND REALITY


the theory of two fluids has had to yield to that of a single fluid.
We then come to the conception of heat-substance or heat-
fluid, which, indeed, was prevalent for a long time in science.
It is also clearly allied to the theories of quality, and under
this aspect we considered it earlier; but it is a qualitative
theory strongly diluted by considerations of quantity, since it is
by this means that the different gradations of heat are connected
with each other.

It is seen, moreover, that if purely qualitative theories arc
condemned to remain entircly sterile from a scientific point
of view, it is not the same for these intermediary theories. The
conception of heat-fluid rendered great service to the physicists
of the eighteenth century; it permitted the establishment of
laws of mixture, the study of conditions of change in the state
of aggregation, ctc. Carnot also was known to have used it in
his celebrated monograph. Since, in a note, he admitted that
he considered heat to be a movement, it has sometimes been
inferred that he only used the notion of heat-fluid to conform
to the general opinion of the learned public of his times. This
is drawing too rapid a conclusion. One may easily suspect,
in carefully reading the Considerations, that the conception
of heat as a fluid in the process of spreading was not cntircly
useless to him. It is certain that mechanistic conceptions could
have been of no use to him for this; they would rather have
embarrassed him, for it is dificult to make strict mechanism
agree with Carnot’s principle (Chapter VIII, p. 264). Such
qualitative conceptions as these still remain, as we have seen,
in science and notably in chemistry; who will say that they
are not destined still to render considerable service? They
stop at the explanation of “‘becoming”’ and do not aspire to
give that of “‘being.”” They are, therefore, the expression of
a less rigorous application of the principle of identity than the
mechanical theories; they may sometimes guide scientific
thought precisely where, as in the case of Carnot's principle,
the principle of absolute identity is necessarily in default.

A distinctive feature of qualitative, compared with mechanical
theories, is that they admit of continuity; as long as heat and
electricity were believed to be fluids, an atomic constitution did
not seem necessary for either one or the other. This, Ict us
remark in passing, is an argument against the thesis according


NON-MECHANCIAL THEORIES 345


to which mathematics introduced the discrete into physics.
For us the basis of this distinction lies in the deduction which
we presented previously (Chapter II, p. 93f.). The discrete
atom becomes necessary when we attribute change to the
arrangement of parts, which must be immutable in time; and
being essentially extended, must preserve indefinitely their
spatial properties which cannot therefore be other than definite.
The hypostatized qualities, on the contrary, are in no wise
spatial in essence. If I suppose heat to be a fluid, I shall not
attribute to it a definite volume, the same quantity may occupy
any volume. Identity will be here assured, not, as for the atom,
by the persistence of spatial limits, but by that of a sign of
intensity, primarily based upon the consideration of a sensation
—the same heat being that which appears such to the touch
—for which we shall substitute next a derived concept, such
as that based upon the thermomcetric scale. Consequently the
discrete will no longer be necessary.

But, of course, all qualitative theones, however diluted they
may be, present the same essential inconvenience, owing to
the fact that the domain of the supposed quality appears
absolutely delimited, surrounded somehow by an impassable
barrier and without any possible relation to the rest of the
phenomena of nature. So long as heat was a fluid and electricity
another fluid different from the first, no transition between
the two was possible; or to be more precise, one might have
been able to imagine, if necessary, that one was transformed
into the other by a sort of rearrangement of the molecules,
somewhat as white phosphorus becomes red phosphorus;
but in that case the fluid would cease to be specifically caloric,
this characteristic becoming an attribute of the mode of
arrangement of its particles. In other words, the fluid would
no longer be the hypostasis of a sensation and the theory would
cease to be qualitative. Ideas of this kind may be sometimes
detected in the eighteenth century. But science has clearly
conceived the existence of diverse forms of energy only by the
transformation of mechanical into heat-energy, etc. ; moreover,
even before this the likeness between heat and light, on the
one hand, and vibratory motion, on the other, had been clearly
established ; the idea existed, therefore, that it was everywhere
a question not of arrangement but of modes of movement.


346 IDENTITY AND REALITY


In the same line of thought the establishment of clear relations
between different chemical elements would lead directly to
the prevalence of the concept of the unity of matter —that is,
the qualitative, specific differences which we are obliged to
suppose at the present moment would disappear to make
room for differences of arrangement or of movement.

Thus, starting from a qualitative theory, science as it pro-
gresses comes more and more to substitute quantity for
quality. It must be noted that the principle of law alone, the
permanent interest in establishing relations between things,
suffices as the motive of this progress. But it must not be for-
gotten that the point of departure, the qualitative theory, is
already a causal conception, in this sense that it postulates the
persistence of something (which is in this case a hypostatized
sensation). Moreover, this advance, which ends in the replace-
ment of one causal concept by another, occurs also in the
direction of causality. Indeed, every time that we pass from
a quality to a quantity we move away from the sensation and
substitute for it more and more a hypothetical concept. When
instead of Aristotle’s hot and cold, we introduce, first, Aeat,
and then caloric fluid, we have already created a highly
abstract concept; this fluid is very different from our sensation,
since it creates in us at least three highly characteristic sensa-
tions— cold, hot, burn. The difference is still more accentuated
when heat becomes a movement. Now all these concepts have
not and cannot have any relation to our sensation other
than that of being a supposed cause of this sensation. It is,
therefore, by substituting for the sensation what is supposed
to be its cause that progress has been brought about. It is
also in this sense, and not only because it does not stop at
becoming but pretends also to explain the cause of being,
that mechanism constitutes a more complete expression of the
causal principle.

Conceptions analogous to the theories of quality constitute
in great part the foundation of a group of doctrines which
arose in the first half of the nineteenth century. However, the
speculations of the German Naturphilosophen, to which we here
allude, have taken place rather on the border-line of science;
if they were not absolutely without influence upon its develop-
ment—we must not forget that they inspired Oersted, to whom


NON-MECHANICAL THEORIES 347


is due the discovery of electro-magnetism—yet they do not
scem at any time to have formed real scientific theories. We
need not, therefore, examine them. But another theory has
recently been formulated which, though connected in certain
ways with these older doctrines, is none the less essentially
scientific. The name of its author, Ostwald, the celebrated
chemical theorist, is alone enough to draw attention to these
conceptions, remarkable for more than one reason.

Ostwald believes that the external world constitutes the
manifestation of a single principle—energy. We know the world
only through our sensations; now these latter are nothing but
differences of energy.(51) One can subordinate all phe-
nomena to the concept of energy; this alone determines all of
them.(52) The concept of energy includes that of cause.(53)
Even space is known to us only by the energy necessary to
penetrate it.(54) If we suppose it to be immutable, if we
postulate its conservation—it is because it is a question of the
conservation of a particular form of energy, the energy of
volume.(55) Energy is at the same time the most general of
substances and the most general of accidents.(56) It is a reality,
whereas matter is an invention “rather imperfect moreover,
which we have forged in order to represent what permanency
there is in all vicissitudes.’’(57) If one separates energy from
matter, the latter vanishes.(58) Energy, in a word, 1s, to a
greater degree than the ether of certain atomistic physicists,
the ultmate element, the single substratum of all reality.
It goes without saying that we could never dream of really
decomposing it; but in our minds we attempt this operation,
since we decompose it into factors in different ways. Certain
of these factors belong to the class which Ostwald designates
by the name of “factors of intensity,’’ such as, for instance,
velocity or temperature. These are not real magnitudes, since
they cannot be added together ; two bodies of identical weight
form together a body of double weight, but two bodies of the
same velocity or of the same temperature will only furnish
one body of identical velocity or of identical temperature.
Ostwald observes that if energy is divided by a factor of intensity,
magnitudes are obtained which remain constant—that is, which
can only be modified if the system receives energy from the
outside; such are mass, quantity of motion, quantity of elec-


348 IDENTITY AND REALITY


tricity. The principle of the conservation of matter ceases to
appear, as it had appeared until now, as a fundamental state-
ment of science and becomes a particular case of the conserva-
tion of those magnitudes which Ostwald calls ‘‘capacities.”’(59)

It must be recognized that Ostwald’s system is in many
ways extremely alluring. The deduction of the “‘capacities’’—
this general concept that appears to include everything which,
among phenomena, ought to be conserved, this process which
permits it to be grasped a@ priort---favours, at first sight, the
supposition that we have really discovered one of the funda-
mental secrets of nature, perhaps the most general principle
directing it. As we look closer, grave doubts arise.

Let us set aside the astonishment provoked by the deduction
of the immutability of space—a notion which we feel to be,
if not prior to, at least simultancous with the very origin of
every experience—from a conception as complicated as the
energy of volume: that is, in the last analysis, from the con-
servation of energy. This affirmation may not be an essential
part of the system, and Ostwald might surrender it without
jeopardizing his theory. Let us not insist cither upon a certain
ilogicalness of detail, which, if necessary, might be removed. (60)
Let us consider the very heart of the system, the concept
of energy and the principle of its conservation. We have
seen that Ostwald believes that it is something which dominates
and determines our entire expericnce; yet he does not think
that this principle is a priori (in this he is evidently quite
right), but he assigns to it an empirical origin.(61) It would
seem that it would have to be, therefore, at least an observation
of continuous and daily experiencc, being established from all
eternity. But, as we have seen, it is quite recent. Before the
seventeenth century, not only had no one ever stated it (contrary
to what took place in the case of the conservation of matter),
but no one had ever even had a presentiment of it; and its
formula is so difficult to understand that when it was stated
for the first time (by Descartes) it was stated crroncously.
Even at the present moment it remains, in so far as it is an
empirical law, not only difficult, but in many cases impossible
to verify; not to speak of recent discoveries, notably the dis-
covery of radio-active bodies, which certainly tend to invalidate
it in so far as it is a notion directly deduced from experience.


NON-MECHANICAL THEORIES 349


In fact, Hertz tells us that energy is in no way a substance:
its conservation is simply plausible; and in that case must be
deduced from the principle of causality, and not inversely, as
Ostwald declares.

On the other hand, the exceedingly ingenious system of
intensities and of capacities leads to an anomaly menacing it in
its most essential part. Temperature, according to the definition
of Ostwald, is incontestably one of the most characteristic
factors of intensity, since two bodies having the same tempera-
ture, when united, do not change it. Dividing heat energy by
temperaturercsults in entropy. Entropy ought, therefore, accord-
ing to Ostwald, to enter into the class of capacities—that is, to
remain constant. But we know that its essential characteristic
(except in the limiting case, unrealizable in the physical
world) is, on the contrary, to increase constantly. Ostwald
has tried to brush aside this difficulty so destructive of his
system. With the help of certain experimental data, and
notably, it seems, those of Landolt, he deduces that mass
might not be constant, but subject to incessant modifications
in one and the same direction.(62) Evidently this supposition
entirely modifies the notion of capacities established by Ostwald
himself; all capacities arc assimilated to entropy. Who does
not see the artificiality of such a system? That matter may be
dissociated is assuredly admissible; but the facts by which this
dissociation is shown, taking things at their best, are rare
and meagre. What analogy is there between this situation and
the manncr in which entropy behaves whose manifest and
incessant tendency to increase appears to us as the great
spring regulating the becoming of phenomena, as, moreover,
Ostwald himself recognizes? Is it not evident, on the contrary,
that instead of bchaving like entropy, mass behaves rather
like energy; that the principle of conservation of mass in no
way resembles that of Carnot and is entirely analogous to the
principle of the conservation of energy? The experimental
anomalies discovered for the first of these principles are certainly
not less than those ascertained for the last. Not to speak of the
fact that, as Etard justly observes,(63) the concepts of matter
and of energy are so indissolubly linked in our thought that the
destruction of one engenders the disappearance of the other;
for when m= 0, mv* equally becomes null, velocity evidently


$50 IDENTITY AND REALITY


remaining finite. And how can one Imagine energy not having
mass as a substratum? Under these circumstances to set up
the conservation of energy as the immovable basis for a theory
of the world and to suppose that the conservation of mass is
only an appearance which facts will eventually refute, seems
truly contrary to all the rules of logic.

It may, moreover, be said that Ostwald, in forming his
theory of energy, contradicts the general principles which he
himself had proclaimed. These principles, we have seen from
a passage cited at the beginning of this book (Chapter I, p. 17),
are those of Auguste Comte. They are summed up in the
affirmation that the law alone is enough for the explanation
of the phenomenon; this is, therefore, the Aypotheses non fingo
carried to the last extremity, the proscription of all that goes
beyond the law. Is there need to show that the hypothesis of
energy as conceived by Ostwald does not confine itself within
these limits? More, and better than the atoms of whatever
mechanistic theorist, the energy of the Leipzig scientist is a
true ontological being, a thing in itself.(64) It exists absolutely,
independently of any other thing, encompassing substance and
accident, space and cause, being itself its own cause, causa sut,
and causing the whole phenomenal world. The fact that such
an eminent mind as Ostwald, in spite of his clear profession of
faith, was unable to remain within the domain of pure law,
that he had sought, outside of this latter, to construct a veritable
system of explanations is certainly most significant. It is equally
worthy of note that once having left the concept of conformity
to strict law, he immediately adopted as the basis of his theory
a notion of something immutable in time, a constant. Finally
it is curious to observe to what a degree in this system, just
as in the atomic theory, Carnot’s principle appears as an
anomaly.(65) Ostwald, we have just scen, sought to get round
the difficulty by supposing that the other “‘capacities’”’ shared
the same fate. But really the logic of his system demands
rather an assimilation in the opposite sense ; it is entropy which
ought to behave like mass and quantity of motion, and be
indefinitely preserved. In other words, the growth of entropy
being the main spring of change, there must be no modification in
time. This is indeed, as we have seen, the formula of all
“explanations.” Perhaps it will even be found that from this


NON-MECHANICAL THEORIES 351


point of view the kinetic theories are still superior to the
theory of Ostwald. It is certainly less paradoxical to try to
explain Carnot’s principle by statistics than to seek, while
maintaining the constancy of energy, to establish an analogy
between mass and entropy.


NOTES


1. P. Tannery: Les principes de la science de la nature chez Aristotle. Congrés
de plilosophie de 1900, Vol. IV, p. 214.

a. Connitrac: Logique. Ceuvres. Paris, an IV, Vol. XXI, p. 83.

3. Gacenus: De clementis secundum Hippocratem, Book 1. Opera, ed. Kuchn,
Vol. I, pp. 457, 477, 479, 480, 487. Cf. Lasswirz, Geschichte, Vol. I, p. 229.

4. Cf. Lasswrrz, 1d., p. 156.

5. Scotus Erioena: De diztstone naturae. Oxford, 1681, I, Chaps. XXXI,
XXXIT. Cf. Lasswitz, lc., Vol. 1, p. 39.

6. Elementa philosophiae, in Bena. Opera. Cologne, 1688, Vol. H, p. 209.
Cf, Lasswiiz, /.c., vol. I., p. 74.

9. Lasswriz: l.c., Vol. I, p. 235 and ff.

8. For PaArace sus, as for most alchemists, Aristotle’s elements are found
beneath the chemical elements; here there are, so to speak, two degrees
of simplicity (Kopp, Die Alchemie, Vol. 1, p. 35). A litdle later, Nicolas le
Fevre identifies, on the contrary, Aristotle’s clements and those of the
chemists: phlegm is water, the spirituous or mercurial principle is air, the
sulphurous or oily principle is fire, the salty principle earth.

g. PARACELSUs was the initiator of iatrochemistry. We saw (p. 228 and ff.)
that theories about elements remain about the same. Only the goal of
chemistry is modified.

10. PARACELSUS: Opera, ed. Huser. Bale, 1589, Paramirum, Book I, p. 74.

81, Circulus Pisanus Claudii BeriGarvi Molinensis De veleri ef peripatetica
philosophia. Udine, 1643, Book 1V, Circulus XX, p. 125. Cf. Lasswrrz, l.c.,
Vol. I, p. 491.

12, /b., Circulus HI, p. 17. Lasswrrz, p. 4go.

13. /b., Circulus II, p. 6. Lasswrrz, 1.

14. /b., Circulus XVIII, p. 115. Lasswrrz, p. 497.

15. Kopp: Geschichte, Vol. 1, p. 97.

16. J6., p. 182.

17. Libavius expresses a general belief in affirming that metals distare
videntur, non tam substantia, quem accidentium absolutione (Kopp, Alchemie,
Vol. I, p. 46). It is this belief in the facility of transmutation which later
constituted the most serious obstacle in the progress of analytical chemistry—
cf. id., Geschichte, Vol. III, p. 56. Differences between metals appearing
quite insignificant, it was supposed that they could be made to disappear
by a sort of fermentation, which led to attributing to the philosopher's
stone, considered as a ferment, properties which appear to us so chimerical.
In the same way it was thought that metals could multiply themselves,
that copper coloured white with arsenic and added to silver actually


352 IDENTITY AND REALITY


increased the quantity of this last metal (Kopp, Alchemie, Vol. I, p. 166),
which, moreover, was conformable to Aristotle’s theory of mixture.

18. Cf. Berruevor: Les origines de [ Alchimie. Paris, 1885, p. 282.

19. £b., p. 208.

20. KuncKEL, also in the cighteenth century, based his belief in trans-
mutation on the change of colour which gold undergoes when it is subjected
to the action of salammoniac or borax (Kopp, Alchemie, Vol. I, p. 61 and ff.).

a1. Jb., Vol. I, pp. 53, 249.

22. Jb., p. 250.

23. Kopp (id., p. 46) believes it to be the only really efficacious receipt
for metallic transmutation ; the true nature of the reaction has been explained
by Angelo Sala, at the beginning of the seventeeth century.

24. Cf. BerTHELoT: La révolution chimique. Paris, 1902, p. 54.

25. Cf. Kopp: Geschichte, Vol. HI, p. 307. This was the fundamental
experiment for the theory of phlogiston, an experiment which had for this
conception the same importance as that of the oxidation of metals in an
enclosed vessel had later for the antiphlogisticians.

26. Kopp: Geschichte, Vol. II, p. 15. Stahl even claims to have transmuted
sulphuric acid into muriatic and nitric acid; cf. 1b., p. 352.

27. Ib., Vol. I, p. 75.

28. 1b., Vol. HIT, p. 144.

29. 1b., Vol. 1, p. 150.

go. 1b., pp. 151, 152, 222. Cf. Lavonrer: Bwres, Vol. 1, p. 154.

31. Lavorsier: Guzres, Vol. I, p. 468.

32. ‘Few works on modern chemistry show more genius than that of
Meyer’s”’ (ib., p. 482). Later Lavoisier, on the contrary, celebrated the merit
of Black (Essai sur le phlogistique de Kirwan. Paris, 1788, p. 23).

33. A summary of this will be found in Kopp: Geschichte, Vol. HI, p. 119

ff.


34. Kopp: Geschichte, Vol. HI, p. 155.

35. Essai sur le phiogistique, p. 23.

36. Lavorier: Traité élémentaire de chimae. Ceuvres. Paris, 1864, Vol. I,
pp. 9, 48, 57.

37. 16., Vol. I, p. 61; cf. Davy, Works. London, 1839, Vol. V, p. 513.

38. Bertuevor: Lavoisier, p. 180. Cf. Lavommer, Euvres, Vol. I, p. 180.

39. It is very characteristic from this point of view that in the theory
of ions the fact that in an aqueous solution all the physical properties of the
salts are additive is considered as a proof that there is complete dissociation—
that is, no combination at all. Cf. Arrhenius, La dissociation électrolytique.
Congrés international de physique de 1900, Vol. II, p. 377.

40. Bertuevot: La Synthése chimique. Paris, F. Alcan, 1876, p. 7.

41. Huxrey: Lay Sermons. London, 1887, p. 118.

42. Comre: Cows, Vol. Ill, p. 18.

43. 1b., p. 15.

44 VAN’T Horr: Legons de chimie physique, trans. Corvisy, 9rd Part.
Paris, 1900, p. 3.

45. Suty-PrupHommn anp Ricugt: Le probléme des causes finales. Paris,
F. Alcan, p. 91.


NON-MECHANICAL THEORIES 353


46. Ostwaro: Lettre sur Pénergétique. Revues générale des sciences, V1, 1895,
p. 1071.

47- The tendencies which we mention in the text have been strongly
accentuated since I wrote these lines. Cf. on this subject La Déduction
Relativisie, § 198 and ff.

48. This supposes evidently that my sensation under analogous conditions
will be the same, for it may be, indeed, that the material appears to me to be
of a more or less vivid colour, according to the predispositions of my eyes.
But this implicit postulate admitted, one does not well see why Lasswitz
affirms (Geschichte der Atomistik, Vol. I, p. 498) that one cannot recognize a
quality as identical unless it 1s transformed into quantity. It seems sufficient
in a somewhat prolonged observation to acquire the conviction that a
tuning-fork or a material coloured with Turkey red (a coloured glass may be
substituted for it) does not become sensibly modified during a relatively
long lapse of time and that one may, therefore, judge by comparing the
sensation with that of the type which has already been established.

49. Cf. p. 307.

50. It is known that Gassendi also assumed the existence of a matter
that is cold side by side witn calorific matter. Cf. Rosenberger, Geschichte,
Vol. IT, p. 118. Cf. also Chap. IX, p. 319, Note 8, the observations on
the transmission of sensations of cold or heat through the different peripheral
organs,

51. Ostwatp: Le déroute de Vatomisme contemporain. Revue générale des
sciences, VI, p. 956.

52. 1., Voriesungen ueber Naturphilosophte, 2nd ed. Leipzig, 1902, p. 152.

53. 16., p. 153.

54. La déroute, etc., p. 957-

55. Vorlesungen, etc., p. 285.

56. 1b., p. 146.

57. La déroute, cic., p. 956. It may be that on this particular point
Ostwald’s ideas have been somewhat modified, as seems to be shown in
passages we shall quote later.

58. 1b., p. 957.

59. Vorlesungen, ctc., pp. 281-282.

60. HoEFLer: <ur gegenwaertigen Naturphilosophie. Berlin, 1906, p. 37,
has attracted attention to this anomaly. Ostwald admits the undulations;
but can energy itself vibrate, when under its mechanical form (because of }?)
it can have neither negative value nor direction?

61. Vorlesungen, ctc., pp. 173 and 186.

62. /b., p. 281.

63. Erarp: Les nouvelles théories chimiques. Paris. s.d., p. 12.

64. Cf. especially, Vorlesungen, etc., p. 242, where Ostwald, protesting
against any other supposition for “the thing in itself,” shows that energy
should be considered as such. Driesch (Naturbegriffe und Natururtheile. Leip-
zig, 1904, p. 106) quite justly calls Ostwald’s theory “‘metamorphosed
materialism.”

65. Osrwa.p (Vorlesungen, p. 281) calls it an “irregularity in our image
of the world.”

Zz


CHAPTER XI


COMMON SENSE


In this chapter we shall try to show that while it is true that
what we call concepts of common sense are fashioned by an
unconscious process, the process is otherwise strictly analogous
to the operation by which we form scientific theories; that
here, too, the causal tendency, the pnnciple of identity in time,
plays a preponderant réle, and that from this point of view
common sense is an integral part of science; or, inversely, that
science is, as has been said, but with perhaps a slightly different
meaning—only a prolongation of common sense. In preceding
chapters we were obliged to discuss briefly by anticipation
certain particular aspects of the problem. We are now going
to examine it a little more closely.

As I open my eyes I perceive objects, and this perception
seems to be something simple and primitive. But this is not so.
When a man born blind gains his sight—this statement has
become a common-place in psychology—he has at first only
confused sensations ; it 1s only by use that he relates them to the
tactile sensations which have been familiar to him for a long
time, and thenceforth he succeeds in really perceiving ‘‘objects’’
by sight. Perception is, therefore, a complicated operation.
Memory plays a considerable rdle in it: “‘consciousness means
memory,”’(1) ‘‘there is no perception which is not mingled
with recollections,”’(2) says Bergson, and mingled to such a
degree that “perceiving ends in being only an occasion for
remembering.”(3) These memories, moreover, are often those
of several senses: this is why people who see have spatial per-
ceptions that are always composed of memories, of visual
and tactile sensations, mutually evoked. Yet it is important to
remember that these recollections are distinguished in the
last analysis from those designated ordinarily by this name,
in the sense that we are not conscious that they are recollections,
but that they appear to be an integral part of the actual
sensation which evoked them. These evoked sensations and
their synthesis—-their “concretion,” to use the singularly expres-
sive term coined by Ampére(4)—are so rapid, so instantaneous,
that it is only with the help of a very arduous analysis that


COMMON SENSE 355


we succeed in certain cases in unravelling these associations
and in reaching, with Bergson, “‘the immediate data of conscious-
ness.”” Without pretending to fathom this subject, let us try,
with the aid of a few simple analyses of concrete facts, to throw
light upon several points which particularly interest us.

In the distance I see a tree. I see (or I think I see, which is the
same thing here) a host of details—branches, leaves, ruggedness
of bark, etc. It is entirely certain that my real sensation has only
a few vague marks and that all the rest belongs to the concretion
of memory.(5) To be convinced of this, I need only look
closely at a scene on the stage or at an impressionistic picture,
either of which, at the right distance, gives me the impression
of the real thing. The very colours which are the object of my
direct sensation are very different from those I think I perceive.
For many long years the pictures of impressionists have pro-
voked exclamations or laughter from the great majority of
the public, enlightened connoisseurs as well as the mob, and
even from the generality of painters. It was considered absurd
that a forest should be violet in the distance. And yet we have
no doubt to-day that it actually is so; but our memory imme-
diately transforms this image, with the help of the memory
of the same forest seen close by, and consequently we swear
that we sec it green, which means that we really see it such.
The work of impressionism has consisted precisely in partly
retracing this work of transformation and in approaching more
closely the immediate, the fugitive sensation.

Let us note that memory which intervenes so rapidly and so
efficaciously is very often a generalized memory. It is not
necessary for me to have seen near by the tree or the forest
at which I am looking from afar; any tree, any forest, not
too unlike those that I know well, will suffice to put my memory
in movement at the first vague but characteristic specks of
colour which I see; this is because I know that a tree, a forest,
look like this from afar. This knowledge which I have evidently
acquired by experience is a generalized experience—in other
words, a law. Thus my perception is not only influenced by
what I remember, but also by the way in which I have
generalized it—that is, by what I know. But perhaps it will be
wise to illustrate this statement by still another example.

I am in a train that is standing still. Through the left window


356 IDENTITY AND REALITY


I see another train standing still also, through the right window
I see the station. I look to the left; at a certain moment I
have a distinct sensation that my train, without a jolt, has
started to move. I look out of the right window;; the station
building is not moving. Instantly my sensation is modified,
my train is not moving; if I look to the left again, it is the other
train which is going. That may happen at a station absolutely
unknown to me, which I see for the first time as I try to verify
things by a glance through the right window. This fact will
not make me hesitate, my sensation will be modified just as
rapidly ; apparently because I know, at the first glance, that it is
a building and that buildings are generally rooted to the ground.
This is a generalized experience, a law. But it goes without
saying that the intellectual process of which we are speaking
does not reach my consciousness : it is like the action of memory
itself, entirely unconscious; it is an integral part of what I
judge to be my pure and simple perception.

If we now try to remount this stream, strip perception of all
that memory brings to it, we shall evidently, in the last analysis,
end at consecutive states of consciousness that may be divided
between different senses, but which will contain no element
not ours—since they will be states of our consciousness, and
which, therefore, will include no trace of that division into
distinct objects which characterizes the data of common
sense.

What is the source of this “‘segmentation of reality’’?
Bergson (6) tells us that it takes place because of the exigencies
of practical life, and this thesis is certainly right. Nothing is so
important as to be capable of foreseeing these states of conscious-
ness. Indeed, I soon see that they are essentially variable,
variable in time, which means, in this case, variable as a
function of other states of consciousness, of which I know and
foresee the periodicity, such as the return of day and night
or that of the seasons. Moreover, I feel immediately that this
variation is independent of my will and that if I am not able
to foresee it in order to react, the states of consciousness which
will follow will be disagreeable. This is why, in order to establish
laws allowing me to exercise this prevision, I have the greatest
interest in subdividing these states of consciousness into
particular sensations, especially those among them which


COMMON SENSE 357


usually accompany or follow one another, succeeding thus in
associating themselves and in evoking each other by the effect
of memory. Thus the appearance of a white spot of a deter-
mined nature coming within the field of my vision makes me
believe that in combining my actions in an appropriate manner
I shall succeed in procuring that agreeable sensation which I
call “the taste of sugar.”

What I thus constitute is the phenomenon, considered, of
course, as belonging cxclusively to me, as taking place solely
in my consciousness. There is nothing, it seems, which can
suggest the notion of something outside me. Assuredly these
sensations are independent of my will; but they are always
my sensations. How conceive that there is an element in them
which does not come from me? And yet this is what we con-
tinually do (Chapter X, p. 323f.). The sensation of red, which
belongs to me, I transform into the quality of an external object
by affirming: this object 1s red. Is this not an inexplicable
leap? Philosophers, no doubt, have maintained that there is no
leap there. According to their belief, common sense, in affiirm-
ing the existence of the table and its red quality, claims to
announce nothing which is external to my consciousness. It
simply predicts that, under certain conditions, I shall appre-
hend the group of sensations which I designate as table and
as red. All would end, therefore, with the sensation or the
possibility of a sensation. It 1s enough to question any man
whose understanding has been preserved from “‘metaphysical
doubt” or even to probe one’s own consciousness to perceive
to what a degree this explanation is at variance with reality.
Common sense 1s certainly an ontology; it clearly affirms the
existence of external objects and 1s very far from supposing that
the existence depends on our consciousness.

Thus I feel no hesitation in affirming the existence of objects
of which I have no sensation. I am quite convinced that that
table which I no longer see still exists. Shall one say that it is
because I have preserved the memory of it? But the room
where I spent my childhood, its one window, its blue walls,
the curtains and my little bed—my memory of these is so precise
that I only have to close my eyes to see them again; and that
friend whom I lost a few years ago, and who was the better
part of myself, my thought has only to touch lightly upon that


358 IDENTITY AND REALITY


dear likeness to make his presence become painfully real to
me, almost palpable. And yet I am convinced that all of that
has ceased to exist, whereas other objects which have entirely
disappeared from my memory, or which have never even
been a part of my direct sensation, yet appear to me, if I ask
myself, as existing. There is, therefore, no concomitant variation
and, therefore, no real relation.

It is also quite clear, it seems, that the question of simple
utility cannot furnish the explanation sought for. Doubtless,
when I have once formed the whole concept of an external
world and of objects which move in it, this concept will help
enormously to classify my sensations and consequently to
predict them also. But the problem is to know how I was
able to take the first step, to conceive even the possibility that
something can exist outside of me, outside of my consciousness ;
how, supposing even that the concept of “‘an outside’? comes
to me from another source, I had the paradoxical idea of
placing in it what is my own sensation, what belongs incon-
testably to me.

Let us note at once that though the external world, as it is
conceived by common sense, does not depend on direct
sensation, it is, nevertheless, entirely constructed with the help
of elements borrowed from it. In this sense it 1s exact to say
that it is the result of my memory, and also that it represents a
possibility of sensation. The table which I no longer see,
which is in no way bound to my actual sensation, was, however,
a part of my state of consciousness some moments previously ;
and although I have never been to the city of Lucknow, I
can nevertheless conceive it as existing, because I imagine that
in going there—that is, in putting into execution a determined
series of actions—lI shall have a more or less determined sensa-
tion, of which the elements are furnished without any doubt
by sensations I have really felt, since they could not have come
to me in any other way.

Certain philosophers have tried to assimilate memories of
sensations, or images constructed with the aid of more or less
transformed memories, to real sensations, maintaining that
between the two there is only a difference of intensity, the
first being strong states of consciousness, and the second,
weak ones. But this is surely unjustifiable. When I see the


COMMON SENSE 359


table through a more and more heavy fog, or in the growing
dusk, or when I am shown on a screen a view of Lucknow
which becomes dimmer and dimmer, can I at any moment
really confuse these sensations with those of mental images?
In other words, as Spir asks,(7) as the actual sensations them-
selves pass through all the degrees of intensity, from zero to the
point where they become intolerable, how, at any degree
whatsoever of this scale, can we confuse sensation and memory?
Doubtless, I can experience illusions; I can have dreams or
hallucinations. But, then, I am myself conscious that it is a
question of facts having nothing in common with the normal
functioning of my mind. The case is a little more embarrassing,
if I suppose that I am simply mistaken, when, for instance,
at dusk in the country, I think I see a man where really it is
only a tree-trunk. Indeed, it is certain that at a given moment
I saw the man, I had a real sensation; but this error comes
evidently from the fact that my memories recalled to me that
I had previously seen men whose silhouette resembled that of
this tree-trunk. Is this not a confusion of memory and real
sensation? Not at all. Every actual sensation, we have seen,
is largely composed of memories, but these latter differ from
real memorics. We might correctly say, in speaking of an error
of this kind, that memory disturbed us, but we should never
compare it to a real memory.

Thus an object of which I affirm the existence when I have
not the sensation of it is still composed of my sensations, but of
sensations which I do not experience at the very moment. I
therefore affirm, literally, the actual existence of sensations
which are mine and yet of which I am not conscious.

This affirmation seems contradictory, and it is so indeed.
To affirm the existence of objects when they are no longer
evident to our senses constitutes, as Hume rightly says, “‘a
contradiction in terms, and supposes that the senses continue
to operate even after they have ceased all manner of opera-
tion.”’(8) Consequently, to attenuate this contradiction it is
most often stated that we affirm the existence, not of the sensa-
tion itself, but of its cause. It was in this sense that Schopenhauer
declared that matter is wholly (durch und durch) causality, (9)
and that Huxley defined it as ‘“‘a name for the unknown and
hypothetical cause of our own states of consciousness.’’({10)


360 IDENTITY AND REALITY


But here we must remember that causality means identity—
causa aequat effectum. When we affirm that an object which is
not part of our actual sensation constitutes a possibility of
sensation, we simply have recourse to the eternal subterfuge
we employ every time that identity is manifestly lacking, and
where we want it most. This possibility of sensation, as its
etymology indicates, moreover, is a being of the same order as
Aristotle’s quality of potentiality,(11) or as the potential energy
of the physicists. It 1s something which manifests itself in no
way and which consequently does not exist, but of which we
are obliged, nevertheless, to suppose the existence to satisfy
our need of identity, because we know that it may manifest
itself (cf. pp. 192 f., 385).

What is, indeed, most remarkable about this possibility of
sensation 1s the permanency which I attribute to it and which
clashes with my immediate sensation. ‘‘This idea of something
which is distinguished from our fleeting impressions by what,
in Kantian language, is called Perdurability; something which
is fixed and the same, while our impressions vary ; something
which exists whether we are aware of it or not, and which
is always square (or of some other given figure) whether it
appears to us square or round, constitutes altogether our idea
of external substance,” says Mill.(12) Ostwald, starting from an
entirely different point of view, comes also to the conclusion
that what is essential in a concept expressed by a substantive
—that is, the concept of an object---is that it represents some-
thing durable and independent of time.(13) The procedure of
unconscious reasoning which we here suppose would then be
the following. I have had a mixture of sensations which I
call the red table : I know that these sensations may come back ;
consequently, to satisfy my causal tendency, I suppose that these
sensations exist during the interval. Now since, by hypothesis,
they do not exist within me, they must exist somewhere else;
there must be, therefore, a “somewhere else,” a non-ego, a
world exterior to my consciousness.

The fact that we have an irresistible tendency to hypostatize
our sensations—that is, to detach them from ourselves and to
assume their existence outside of ourselves—is incontestable;
we have had sufficient examples of it in the development of this
book. Let us think of Leibniz’s ‘“‘mill’’ ; what does this reasoning


COMMON SENSE 361


show? That sensation is something unintelligible, irrational.
And what would be necessary to make the sensation intelligible,
rational? There would have to be identity between what the
mill produces and what it receives, between the external world
and the sensation. Leibniz represented the brain as a mechan-
ism ; that is because it constitutes a simple prolongation of the
external world (Chapter IX, p. 305). But between the sensation
and the external world there is no doubt that the former is the
primordial element, the existence of the latter being only the
result of a deduction. If, therefore, there must be identity, it is
because we had supposed that our sensations really can exist,
wander around (if we dare express ourselves thus) outside of our-
selves. This is so true that we feel the greatest repugnance to
admit that the reasoning of the physicist and of the physiologist
is really valid under these circumstances. This is why Bergson
requires (p. 295) that light (of course, the light-sensation)
be recognized as a component of electricity and not inversely ;
and Lotze, having reached the conviction that there must be a
subject for this sensation, since, as he amusingly says, ‘‘a
splendour whose brightness no one saw, the sound of a note
which no one heard, sweetness which no one tasted,’’ would
be ‘“‘just as impossible as a toothache which no one felt,”’(14)
finally asks himself whether things themselves would not
experience the sensations which they make us experience;
this would be, indeed, the most complete and the most
logical formula of the hypostasis of sensation, and of its per-
sistency outside of us. Moreover, this formula would lead
straight to a purely qualitative physics.

Let us remark that common sense does not proceed absolutely
thus. Sensations have, indeed, really helped to constitute the
object, but they have not remained entirely intact. When it is
a question of sound and colour, it is understood that what I
place outside of me, by virtue of common sense, is a simple
hypostasis of my sensation. But if we think of the concept of
matter, which is the most important one of the external world
(one might speak of the material world, and this would be a
synonym), the situation changes. Matter is not a hypostasis,
pure and simple, of sensation—if it were, it would be, like colour
or sound, a purely qualitative concept—but it is a quantity,
or at least it admits the application of the category of quantity.


362 IDENTITY AND REALITY


Matter is a complicated concept in the elaboration of which
all our senses participate, the most important being, at least
in the case of normal men, sight and touch. We have no inten-
tion of attempting a complete deduction of this concept with
the help of sensation alone; this, perhaps, is not possible,
for it is not quite certain whether, the concept of matter being
closely allied to that of space, there are not purely a prion
elements involved depending on the very constitution of our
reason. But the analysis already furnished (p. 341f.) clearly
shows, in our opinion, that the relation between the concept of
material quantity and our corresponding qualitative sensations
is analogous to that which unites the concept of light vibration
with the sensation of colour or that of sound vibration with
the sensation of sound.

We shall leave aside completely, as being outside of our
subject, the question of how, to this image of the external
world, resulting from our sensation, or, in Schopenhauer’s
words, from our representation, is attached that which we
can deduce from our will. Even if one postulates that this
latter is primitive and that our conception of the non-ego
comes primarily from the assumption of a will foreign to ours,
or that one adopts even for the origin of the concept of the
non-ego whatever metaphysical hypothesis one wishes, our
demonstration remains unassailable in its essential parts.
It is enough, indeed, to recognize that common sense constitutes
the concept of a present object with the help of (more or less
transformed) hypostatized sensations, and that consequently the
concept of an absent object is made up of the same sensations
of which the persistence 1s supposed. Consequently it becomes
evident that, in forming these concepts of external objects
according to the system of common sense, our understanding
has followed no other rules than those which we recognize in
scrutinizing the operations of science. It is always the principle
of causality, the tendency to see, under the pressure of a need
for explanation, everything persisting without change; there is
also, in answer to this need, the same procedure in substituting
a quantitative cause for a qualitative sensation.(15) And since,
of course, the point of departure can be no other than our sensa-
tion, it is natural that the first system to adopt be that of making
these sensations undergo the minimum of transformation, of


COMMON SENSE 363


hypostatizing them as much as possible as they are; this is
what we call common sense.

The word is, moreover, well chosen. The system simplifies
relations with our fellow-men. It is of little importance, from
this point of view, whether our concepts are more or less
adequate to things; since errors are the same in the case of other
men, they are eliminated when we communicate with them.
‘“‘Amongst men nothing is equal, nothing is similar, except
the names of things,” says Euripides(16); and d’Alembert,
in the Discours préliminaire dl Encyclopédie, asks, “whether this
reciprocal communication (between men), added to the
resemblance which we perceive between our sensations and
those of our fellow-beings, does not contribute greatly toward
forming the invincible leaning we have to suppose the existence
of all objects which strike us.’’(17) Without going as far as
d’Alembert, since, indeed, we suppose that the concept of the
object is formed in a different way, we admit that the agreement
of others and the usefulness of the communication confirm our
inclination.

And yet the system also renders great service in our relations
with things. There are really, as Mach formulates it, following
Mill,(18) ‘“‘groups of sensations,’’(19) which, if they have
not absolute immutability, change, however, so little and so
slowly that it is advantageous for us to suppose their persistence
in time and in space —that is, the existence of objects. Poincaré
expresses himself similarly, qualifying sensations as “united
together by I know not what indestructible cement and not by a
day’s chance.”’(20)

Ostwald, whose theory, we have seen, tends to set aside
entircly the concept of matter, explains that only different
forms of energy united in a single and identical space act
upon our senses and our instruments, whereas one energy
presented separately could affect neither one nor the other.(21)
Very striking proofs would be necessary, evidently, to estab-
lish such a thesis. What is certain is that our sensations
follow each other in such a way that the constitution of this
world of objects is possible. And it is also certain, as we have
said, that once this world is constituted, prevision is facilitated.
In other words, in the field of common sense, just as in that of
science, conceptions created by the causal principle (or, if you


364. IDENTITY AND REALITY


prefer, with its aid) favour the application of the principle of
conformity to law. And since, on the other hand, generalized
experience—that is, conformity to law—concurs in the for-
mation of the common-sense reality, the result is that, from the
beginning of the operations of our understanding, the two
principles of causality and conformity to law collaborate and
that their operations become inextricably entangled, just as they
do later on in science.

Yet, since it is a question in the latter of our relations with
things, errors no longer become eliminated, and, as soon as
we advance a little in research, the world of common sense
immediately appears to us what it is in reality—to wit, an
introductory and very imperfect sketch of a scientific and
metaphysical system. Indeed, at the very first step we are
forced to abandon the supposition that things are what to us
they seem to be; and as soon as we have made that first con-
cession, we are immediately and irresistibly drawn toward the
complete dissolution of this conception, which at first seemed so
indubitable. Here is a stick. I see its double in the looking-glass
without believing that the image 1s a real stick. I plunge it
into water and it appears to me bent, but immediately “my
reason straightens it,’’ according to La Fontaine’s admirable
expression. Now my reason can only do this by reasoning. I am,
therefore, led to talk about reflection and refraction, about
light rays and undulations. Light becomes a movement, the
stick 1s decomposed into a nebula of atoms, and the same
reasoning which “straightened” it when it was plunged into
the water constrains me afterward to affirm that its matter or
its substance must persist even when [ burn it.

What must be especially noted here is that the same procedure
which served to form the concept of common sense serves also
to dissolve it. Causalism—if it is permitted to use this term—
is not a privilege of the scientist. It is the characteristic of
man. It will help in no way to try to brush aside this “ontology.”
Hertz saw this clearly when he declared that “‘every thinking
person experiences herein difficulties which the scientist
ordinarily qualifies as metaphysical,’ and when he drew from
it this conclusion, ‘‘that no scruple which, in any fashion
whatever, has made an impression on our mind, can be
brushed aside by the fact that it is qualified as metaphysi-


COMMON SENSE 365


cal.”"(22) Thus this dissolution of reality operates both in an
irresistible and an insensible fashion. Common sense is only
a more or less artificial halting-place on a constantly sloping
decline. From the moment the stick ceased to be a pure visual
sensation to me, calling up the possibility of a tactile sensation,
I can no longer stop, I am pushed on from experience to
experience and from reasoning to reasoning until it vanishes
completely in the ether.

Another halting-place, equally factitious, on the same road
is represented by mechanism. A conception infinitely more
perfect than that of common sense, it shows also to a greater
extent its agreement with reality and consequently is capable
of aiding us in the discovery of a much larger number of rela-
tions. Moreover, mechanism is also like common sense in this
respect, as Renouvier (23) admirably perceived, that in reduc-
ing sensibility to certain elements, the most abstract of all, such
as movement, resistance, penctrability, elements no doubt
incompletely determined, but of which the concept is, neverthe-
less, constituted in somewhat the same way in all men, it
becomes by this fact a means of facilitating communications,
a kind of “‘scientific common sense.”’

But it goes without saying that mechanism, being a more
advanced product of our thought, is for the very reason more
logical than common sense because it 1s more differentiated.
It, therefore, construes in a more exclusive manner our tendency
to suppose persistence in time, and is consequently opposed in
a certain measure to the group of conceptions resulting from
Carnot’s principle where variation in time is affirmed. In
common sense, on the contrary, these two tendencies are
entirely mingled. When I think, for instance, of a being whom
I know endowed with life, such as a child or a dog, the idea of
the modification which he will undergo in time 1s an integral
part of my concept of this external object. It is the same toa
certain point for objects deprived of life of which the change in
time has struck us ; for example, a building or a picture of which
we foresee the senescence and of which the absolute conserva-
tion, if we were to see it again without change after many
years, would appear as an abnormal fact. This is why an
appeal made, in regard to scientific theories, to notions of
common sense is apt to introduce into our reasoning an element


366 IDENTITY AND REALITY


of confusion. And this is the profound source of the fundamental
error which we have discovered in Helmholtz and in Hertz,
an error which consists in establishing perfect identification
between laws and properties of bodies. It is certain, as we
have shown, that at first sight the former appear simply as a
more precise translation of the latter. But, looking more closely,
we see that in forming this concept of property we have retained
precisely this possibility of change in time which cannot be
applied to the concept of law.

What we have stated about the genesis of the notions of
common sense will make us understand better the futility of
the effort to exclude causality from science. What would be
the point of departure of a science strictly conformable to the
idea of Comte and of Mach—that is, solely inspired by the
principle of conformity to law, setting aside, to cite Renouvier,
all substantialistic conceptions in favour of an absolute pheno-
menalism? It would have to start apparently from our sensa-
tions, for Mach himself says: ‘“‘Not things, but colours, sounds,
pressures, spaces, durations (what we call generally sensations),
are the real elements of the world.” (24) In truth, one would have
to go still farther and take as a point of departure those “‘im-
mediate data of consciousness,’ which Bergson has disengaged.
Does science proceed in this way? Not in the least. It leaves at
first this problem completely aside. When it does speak of it,
it is to relegate its solution to one of its most backward and
complex branches, physiology; sometimes science discards it
completely, declaring it to be metaphysical in essence. The
point of departure of science is, on the contrary, solely from
data of common sense ; this is quite easy to verify, and, moreover,
eminent scientists have expressly stated it. Duhem thinks that
“our most sublime scientific knowledge has, in the last analysis,
no other foundation than the data of common sense’’(25) ;
and Mach warns us that “the scientist for his routine work
(den Handgebrauch) cannot get along without the most palpable
conceptions of substance.’’(26) The physicist, indeed, begins
by believing blindly, as does every man, in the conceptions
of common sense. He modifies them afterward, but how does
he modify them? Solely by proceeding from reality to reality.
When he has decomposed the stick into a nebula of atoms, or
even, if you prefer, of electric ions, these atoms or these ions are


COMMON SENSE 367


as real to him as the stick was; he has never, indeed, ‘“‘reduced”’
anything but substantive to substantive, object to object.
At no time, unless it is a question of “errors of observation,”
or of phenomena expressly qualified as “subjective,” will the
physicist permit the consideration of the subject to intervene.
At no moment in the course of his deductions will he substitute
for an object something manifestly unreal.(27) ‘Ask your
imagination,” exclaimed Tyndall, in speaking of the hypotheses
concerning the nature of light, “if it will accept a vibrating
multiple proportion.” (28) And Hartmann declares that only
the inhabitants of a lunatic asylum would attempt to explain
physics with the help of concepts wittingly unreal.(29)

But this question seems so important to us that we ask
to be allowed to dwell on it a little more, lest any doubt exist.
Indeed, the matter has been so admirably elucidated by
Duhem that if we cannot always adopt the views of this eminent
scientist, at least his analysis will be of constant service to us.
Duhem describes an experiment in physics in these words:
‘Go into this laboratory ; approach this table encumbered with
a lot of apparatus, an electric battery, copper wires covered
with silk, small cups full of mercury, coils, an iron bar support-
ing a mirror; the observer puts into little holes the metallic
stem of a hook, the head of which is of ebony; the iron swings
and the mirror, bound to it, casts upon a celluloid ruler a
band of light of which the observer follows the movements ;
indisputably this is an experiment; by means of the movement
of this spot of light the physicist observes minutely the oscilla-
tions of the piece of iron. Now ask him what he is doing.
Will he reply: I am studying the oscillations of the iron bar
which supports the mirror? No, he will reply that he 1s measuring
the electric resistance of a coil. If you show your amazement,
if you ask him what sense these words have and what their
relation is to the phenomena which he has ascertained, and
which you have ascertained at the same time—he will tell you
that your question would demand many long explanations
and he will advise you to take a course in electricity.” (30)
Whoever has the least idea of physical researches will imme-
diately recognize that this description, scrupulously exact,
characterizes an entirely general case. Not only experiments
in electricity, but almost all experiments in physics performed


968 IDENTITY AND REALITY


in a laboratory of to-day are of this type. Everything would
remain a sealed book to the man unacquainted with the special
chapter of physics to which the experiments belong, no matter
what trouble he may take to observe them. Duhem establishes,
with great exactness, that the theoretical interpretation to which
phenomena are subjected by the physicist is only possible
through the use of instruments.(31) He concludes that between
phenomena really observed and the result of an experiment
formulated by a physicist a very complex intellectual elaboration
intervenes.(32) In a word, ‘“‘an experiment in physics is not
simply the observation of a phenomenon;; it is, in addition, the
theoretical interpretation of this phenomenon,’’(33) and since
it is impossible to give even an account of an experiment in
physics without using theoretical language,(34) “‘the statement
of the result of an experiment implies, in general, an act of
faith concerning a whole group of theories.” (35)

Duhem believes that these deductions indicate that there is a
close solidarity between the scientific facts of an entire division
of physics and even of several divisions. We believe that they
show us, in addition, to what a degree the physicist is closely
attached to the concept of thing. What, as a matter of fact,
does the electrician study during the experiment described?
He studies an electric current; to him this current and the
“resistance”? which the coil opposes to it are certainly real.
A man, unacquainted with physics, seeing the experiment,
understands nothing. He thinks that what happens is a pheno-
menon which involves an iron bar, mirror, etc.—all odjects of
common sense; but since he is unacquainted with electrical
theories, he cannot perceive the object—that is, the current,
which alone is really observed by the physicist. And it is easy
to see why it 1s impossible to state this experiment without
speaking of the hypothesis. This is because the experiment
has to do with something created by this latter ; and, of course,
the statement when formulated will imply an act of faith in a
theory, for it will have to do with the object the existence of
which is the basis of the hypothesis in question or even of a
group of hypotheses.

Will it be said that the theory does not really imply the
existence of these objects, that they are simply terms used to
indicate a group of phenomena? We saw (Chapter I, p. 52!:)


COMMON SENSE 369


that the entire attitude of science is a protest against a supposi-
tion of this kind. Let us observe, moreover, that this supposition
is entirely analogous to that formulated by philosophers, who
deny that common sense denotes the affirmation of anything
whatsoever outside our consciousness (p. 357) and to whom
the electric current, therefore, will still be a “‘permanent
possibility of sensation.’”’ But the conception will be, in this
case, just as insufficient as in the case of an object of common
sense; it will mean doing violence to the profound feeling of
the electrician, as it did a moment before to that of the naive
man. Hide the galvanometer behind a screen and ask the
electrician if the current is passing. He will, perhaps, believe
that you are asking whether a switch has not been turned by
mistake, and he will verify it; but it may be that he will
have doubts about the functioning of his battery, and, in that
case, he will want to see the galvanometer. But insist ; explain
to him that you are asking him whether he believes that the
current has ceased to flow because of the single fact that he can-
not see the galvanometer. If the man you are addressing has
no philosophical background, if he has been preserved from
‘metaphysical doubt,”’ and if you have made him understand
the import of your question (which will not be easy, so strange
will it sound to him), well, then, if he is an honest man he
will laugh in your face. Doubt, in this case, will appear to him
as unjustifiable as if you asked him whether he doubted the
existence of his wife or of his workshop simply because he
perceives neither of them at that moment. His belief in the
objects of the two kinds is evidently analogous and _ flows
from the same source. And even the scientist, accessible to
philosophic doubt, when, in his laboratory, he works with the
help of the current, and as long as he works with it, believes
in it “with all his heart,” as the popular expression goes.
He is forced to believe in it, forced to make use of “the most
naive conceptions of substance,”” to quote Mach. Doubtless,
his faith is neither absolute nor immutable, but such is the
case also with his belief in common sense, which he abandons
when he gives himself up to metaphysical speculation and
which he takes up again as soon as he enters everyday life.
Electricians have at all times so thoroughly believed in the
current—they have seen it so much——that they have ended by
AA


370 IDENTITY AND REALITY


‘“‘materializing”’ it, in very much the same way as a spiritualist
medium pretends to materialize his thought. Whoever asks
whether the current 1s, in truth, a real object need only be
referred to the most recent theories, where the current consists
of a true flux of electrons; it is, indeed, impossible to doubt
that these latter are conceived as real, since it is they that
constitute matter and are supposed to be, consequently, the
source of all reality.

To strengthen our conviction in this respect it will be enough
to note to what a degree this creation of objects constitutes a
general and common process in the physical sciences. Thus
discoveries made with the help of such instruments of research
as the microscope or the telescope are expressed quite naturally
under this form. This is so true, the analogy we have just spoken
of is so complete, that one would have great difficulty, probably,
in explaining to a biologist, accustomed to observe under the
microscope the evolutions of a particular micro-organism,
that this micro-organism was not absolutely real to the same
degree as any animal whatsoever seen with the naked eye.
Now it is certain that the consensus omnium, the consensus of
opinion of the immense majority of mankind about the existence
of the real world, 1s an integral part of the concept of common
sense ; whereas the microbe in question is certainly unknown to
a great part of humanity, and most of those who believe in its
existence do so only on the word of scientists. One might,
indeed, object that some rare animal, such as the okapi, has,
only been seen up to this day by a privileged few, but the case
at bottom is very different. To be convinced of this it is enough
to have observed a man who, for the first time, has been shown
a drop of putrid water under the microscope. As soon as he
removes his eye from the microscope, he evidently conceives
doubts about the realzty of the image he has just seen; he asks
himself whether it 1s the same drop which he now sees with
his naked eye, stripped of all appearance of organic life, and
whether there was not a little fraud somewhere or an error
on the part of the instrument. These doubts are known to have
been shared, at the beginning of microscopic or telescopic
studies, by many eminent minds ; Comte again believed that he
ought to protest.(36)

But, in a more direct and therefore a more conclusive way,


COMMON SENSE 371


it can be shown that reality for the two sorts of objects, those
seen with the naked eye and those perceived under the micro-
scope, is not entirely of the same order. We have already spoken
(p. 303) of the “supremacy of touch,” and we gave the reasons
why we felt it should not be accepted. But it seems undeniable
to us, that in all that concerns space and the occupation of
space, the sense of touch and its memory play a most important
réle. Now there can be no question of touching a microbe;
its size is much too small for its form to make an impression
upon the termini of our tactile nerves. When we think of that
organism and of the space which it occupies, we imagine
as the subject of the sensation a minute being, but one en-
dowed with senses analogous to ours; it is to this being that a
microbe would appear as really occupying a space—to this
being it would seem rea/ in the same degree that our animals
are to us. This is so true that a student is apt to forget the
true scale of images he is looking at and to transpose them
simply into the world of sizes perceptible to the naked eye,
and this, as has been recently stated by an eminent histologist,
can engender errors of a peculiar kind.(37)

Perhaps we shall see better still the nature of objects of this
kind by observing certain of those we know both by direct
sensation and scientific observation. Descartes had already
remarked that we have “two entirely diverse ideas of the
Sun”: one which ‘draws its origin from the senses,” and the
other ‘‘which is based on reasons of Astronomy.” (38) To our
immediate sensation, the sun is a spot of light; it might be, if
necessary, only an ephemeral phenomenon. Heraclitus assumed
that a new sun began every day at dawn and perished at dusk.
Scientific reasoning, based upon telescopic observations, has
transformed it into a stellar body the size of which far surpasses
that of our earth. And so science, where common sense was
not enough for the constitution of a true material object,
has come to its help and has worked entirely in the same
direction, by affirming the permanence of the thing even when
it remains invisible, and in giving to it reality or corporeity,
if one may say so, forming it according to models furnished
by naive realism: the sun Is an incandescent mass somewhat
like those masses which emanate from a Bessemer converter.
Moreover, when once this image of the sun is formed, science


372 IDENTITY AND REALITY


keeps to it; it never returns to direct sensation. Whenever it is a
question of the sun in astronomy, you will have to think of
the immense incandescent stellar body ; you will never hear of
the little ephemeral spot of light.

Let us now recall what we stated about scientific concepts
of a very different order, such as mass, force, energy. These
concepts in the beginning are evidently only relations.
Mass is the coefficient which bodies manifest at the moment
of mechanical action ; force 1s only the cause of the acceleration,
which is a difference of two velocities; energy is a concept
still more complicated, impossible in certain cases to define
in its entirety. It is, moreover, a simple integral, characterizing
not a body but a system, and of which only the variations are
studied. This does not prevent physics from manifesting the
tendency to treat these concepts as real things. In certain
respects the reality which is attributed to them 1s even superior
to that which common sense assumes in objects created by it.
Indeed the distinctive character of these last, perdurability,
is here intensified. All objects of the external world which we
know are modified in time and by the action of time; of this
we have an immediate and absolute conviction—a conviction,
moreover, which is an integral part of our concept of the
object or of time itself. But mass, force, and energy persist;
they are entirely independent of the action of time.

It is almost useless to show that the situation is the same
with regard to the atom—a concept still nearer the concepts
of common sense than those we have just discussed, since
the notion of mechanism of which it forms the basis can be
considered as a sort of scientific common sense (p. 365).
The principal function of the atom also is to be eternal,
immutable.

We can corroborate in still another way the result we have
just reached. Perdurability, if it is the most apparent distinctive
feature of objects created by common sense with respect to
our sensations, 1s, however, not the only one. Another dis-
tinction, at least as essential, it seems, is clearly perceived if
we refer to considerations of quantity, as we have stated them
(Pp. 341f.). The world of common sense, we saw, is qualitative
in part; but only in part: for all that has to do with space
and with the occupation of space appears to us as distinctly


COMMON SENSE 373


quantitative, whereas our immediate sensation can only be
purely qualitative.

Does science reverse this evolution of common sense? Does it
penetrate through quantitative perception as far as the qualita-
tive sensation? On the contrary, it accentuates the evolution
and forces it to its utmost limits. This attitude is so striking that
it has often been noticed even by superficial observers, and this
progressive substitution of quantity for quality has becn made
one of the characteristic features of science in general, or at
least of modern science. This is because physics, improving
on common sense, introduces considerations of quantity
where this latter ignored them. It declares that two lights
of different colour are only distinguishable by the wave-length,
which is incontestably a purely quantitative concept; it even
ends by reducing to considerations of quantity, distinctions as
fundamental as those existing between electricity and light.

Thus science creates new objects which resemble entirely
those of naive realism, and even entities of a particular order,
where the distinctive feature of the object, perdurability, 1s
pushed to the extreme. It brings out the concept of quantity
where common sense has been powerless to accomplish this
task; and when it transforms the image of naive realism, it is
only in substituting for the object another object, the first con-
dition of which is to exist independently of our sensation.
Therefore, in the advance which separates it from common
sense, science never returns toward sensation; on the contrary,
it pushes on, always forward, in the way and in the direction
which have led thought from sensation to common sense.

This general proposition may be directly verified in the case
of Duhem’s electrician. The electric current is certainly in
no way an object of common sense. Indeed, what characterizes
clearly objects of common sense is that they are composed of
hypostatized sensations ; now we have no specific sensations of
electricity, since we possess no organ sensitive to that form
of energy. A wire through which a current of 10,000 volts
passes does not change in aspect when the switch is turned on;
and when the current or the spark passes through our bodies
all that we experience is a simple mechanical shock. This 1s
why it is very difficult to speak about the current in common-
sense terms as we do, for instance, about the animalcules in


IDENTITY AND REALITY


the drop of putrid water, or about the sun, for both being
visible with the aid of optical instruments become immediately,
as we have seen, objects of a sort of enlarged common sense.
However this difficulty is not absolutely insurmountable, and it
is important to note in what way we can, if necessary, succeed
in overcoming it. Duhem’s electrician, who sent the spectator to
take a course in electricity, was satisfied to state that it would
take very long to explain, which is perfectly true. And yet if
the questioner had insisted, if he had constrained him to attempt
a short explanation, there is no doubt that the explanation
would have been conceived in terms of common sense; it
would have involved objects as they are conceived generally
by common sense. In doing this, the electrician would simply
have retraced in the opposite direction the way followed by
science in forming the concept of the electric current: it
started from the data of common sense, it can therefore, if
necessary, return to them. Evidently this will necessitate a
great deal of circumlocution. But, note carefully, if, starting
from the electric current and its properties, one wishes to
return to the immediate sensation, there is no other way
than by these concepts of common sense, since between the
current and the sensation there exists no direct bond. Thus
the current in so far as it is an object independent of us, though
not belonging to common sense proper, nor even to common
sense extended to microscopic or telescopic objects, is none
the less dependent wholly on this conception. It is, indeed,
the product of a double transposition: in the first place, the
transposition which hypostatizes the sensations into objects
of common sense, and secondly, that which, using these objects
as a basis, creates concepts of scientific theory, which are in
their turn new realities, new objects.

It is further to be noted that this is no mysterious peculiarity
of our imagination. The scientist obeys only two principles,
that of conformity to law and that of causality. The first, it is
clear, can only serve to establish relations between concepts
already pre-existing. It is, therefore, powerless by itself alone
to modify these concepts; when it shows their insufficiency
(p. 346) the principle of causality which has created them
must intervene to modify them. Now this principle proceeds from
identity to identity or what is supposed to be such. It cannot,


COMMON SENSE 375


therefore, replace one concept by another which is hetero-
geneous to it and consequently, if we start from an object
considered as real, we shall naturally arrive at an object of
the same kind. There is undoubtedly somewhere, at the begin-
ning (or at the end, if you wish), between the sensation and
the object, a kind of gulf which the principle of causality
readily crosses; but the leap is forced upon us and, moreover,
we make it unconsciously. The work of science is, on the
contrary, conscious, the scientist proceeds with slow steps,
the length of which he may change to suit himself, and conse-
quently any deviation, any rupture of continuity, would
immediately become apparent.

We may also see why in certain respects, and especially in
respect to perdurability, the concepts created by science, such
as the atom, mass, or energy, seem to be things, as it were, in a
higher degree than objects of common sense. Indeed, how
does the scientist succeed in showing the insufficiency of
common sense? In looking for the cause, in equating the
antecedent with the consequent—that is, in trying to find what,
in one and in the other, might have remained identical. Let
us recall the example of the stick; when seeing it bent in the
water, I affirm that it has nevertheless remained straight—
I evoke the persistence of something which is incontestably a
concept of common sense; but when, having burned it, I
maintain that its “‘matter’’ has not perished, I have recourse
to concepts which are no longer a part of it. I do this because,
the stick as such manifestly not persisting, I wish to imagine
something the existence of which I may suppose both in the
burned object and in the gases which arise from combustion.
It is, therefore, because the perdurability of common sense
objects is not sufficient that we abandon them, that we create
a series of new objects which then appear necessarily endowed
with a superior perdurability and thereby are more detached,
and still more independent of us, participating more in the
character of the thing in itself.(39) It is evident, moreover,
that this deduction docs not apply solely to science as we know
it to-day, but to science in general. Indeed, the peripatetic
system, so different from ours, employed, nevertheless, in this
respect quite analogous processes. Aristotle’s hot may claim
to be a pure quality, but its true destiny is to explain changes by


376 IDENTITY AND REALITY


displacement, it has, therefore, a perdurability superior to
that of a simple object of perception. It is almost needless to
show that this community of method comes from the fact
that it is a question of the direct consequences of the causal
principle.

We see how inapplicable 1s the injunction one might be
tempted to give to the scientist, of limiting himself to the
destruction of the reality of common sense without creating a
new one. He has created in destroying, and it is only in behalf
of the new reality that he has abolished the old one.

One may also advise him to abolish all reality at once, and by
decree, so to speak. Indeed, to escape from common sense
there is still another way than that of scientific thought: the
way of metaphysical thought. The physicist, if only he professes
idealistic opinions in philosophy, will have no difficulty,
apparently, in effecting this escape; but in appearance only.
The most determined solipsist, when he opens his cyes in the
morning, sees matter, and touches it when he stretches out his
hand. This “metaphysics” is operating in us without our
consent, instantaneously, irresistibly, to such a degree that we
believe in a simple passive reception of our senses where really
there 1s a very complicated effort in our brain. “I know,
moreover,” says Reid, “‘that this belief (in the reality of the
outside world) is not the effect of argumentation and reasoning ;
it is the immediate effect of my constitution.”’ And before this
‘philosopher of common sense,’’ as he has been called,(40)
a metaphysician who professed opinions diametrically opposed,
perhaps the most extreme Pyrrhonist ever known in the history
of modern philosophy, Huet, Bishop of Avranches, wrote:
‘“‘When it 1s a question of guiding one’s life, of accomplishing
one’s duties, we cease to be philosophers, to be doubtful,
uncertain; we become idiots, simple-minded, credulous, we
call things by their names. . . .”’(41)

Huet, without doubt, meant simply that we need common
sense in order to act. But the prodigious facility with which
the concepts of common sense, which we believed were
abolished, return, shows that that abolition was only apparent,
that we were not entirely freed from them, and that we were
always dominated by the “ontological” need.(42)

Of course, according to the theory of common sense, which we


COMMON SENSE 377


have discussed, this need has nothing mysterious or primordial
about it. It is simply an expression of the tendency to see our
sensations persist in time. They vary without ceasing, and this
seems unreasonable to us. They must remain, and since they
cannot remain in us, we place them outside; we perhaps even
create the outside wherein to lodge them. If, now, by the
intervention of science, this first series of created objects is
shown to be contradictory, non-existent, we must immediately
create others. Indeed, our sensations cannot subsist by them-
selves independently, for their variation in time would be
without cause; that cause, therefore, must be created, a per-
manent cause, and if it cannot be the objects endowed with
the qualities of common sense, it will be the atoms and electrons.
It is this which finally convinces us that the scientist can never
disengage himself from the odject, that he can only replace one
reality by another, a little less illogical, but at bottom just as
chimerical and destined, moreover, to sink in its turn into the
abyss of ether, or rather of non-differentiated space.

If, on the contrary, the scientist ceases his causal deductions,
or if he eliminates them completely from science, the simple
result will be that the conception of common sense will remain
standing, a conception just as ontological as any other, but
the complcte inconsistency of which is revealed by the
slightest scientific reasoning. Let us suppress every atomic
and mechanical hypothesis from a given chapter of science.
There will still remain laws—that is, statements of relations,
not between the phenomena of our consciousness, but between
material objects, that is, between causal images. We shall,
therefore, have gained absolutely nothing, from a philosophical
point of view, in eliminating the “‘metaphysics”’ of theories,
nor in giving to these latter, by more or less complicated
artifices, a form such that their ontological content, the
hypothesis on the nature of reality, should be, so to speak,
obliterated. (43)

As to abstaining from all metaphysics, that would be a
vain pretence indeed. Metaphysics penetrates all science, for
the very simple reason that it is contained in its point of
departure. We cannot even isolate it in a precise region.
Primum vivere, deinde philosophari seems to be a precept dictated
by wisdom. It is really a chimerical rule almost as inapplicable


378 IDENTITY AND REALITY


as if we were advised to rid ourselves of the force of gravitation.
Vivere est philosophan..

From what precedes we perceive that there is not the great
difference sometimes supposed between common sense and
science. We believe literally, as Le Roy has stated, that science
corresponds to the same attitude as common sense.(44) When
this philosopher tells us that the scientist makes scientific facts
and not brute facts,(45) we agree with him, since the scientific
fact appears to us related to an object which the scientist has
created. But it is on condition that we are assured that in
doing so he has exactly followed the same process which
common sense employed in creating the brute fact. When Le
Roy affirms (46) that in the phenomenon of the eclipse there
are two facts—one a common-sense fact, the other a fact of the
scientist—we beg to explain. There is, in the first place, in the
phenomenon of the eclipse a series of “immediate data of
consciousness,’ according to Bergson, infinitely difficult to
attain, because our consciousness transforms them instantly,
infinitely difficult also to state, because all language has been
made in view of the “realities” created by common sense
and scientific theories. But what is certain is that these imme-
diate data contain only subjective states and nothing which
resembles an external fact. The external fact, the brute fact,
comes into existence with common sense. But once in existence
it is attacked by scientific criticism. Or rather brute fact and
scientific fact are one; between the two there is no breach of
continuity. When I look at the sun about to be eclipsed, what
do I see? Is it brillant and plane or something convex? It is
not easy to say. It is quite certain that our ancestors saw a
plane spot, but since our childhood we have been so often told
that it 1s a sphere, that we think we see it; and surely the
astronomer, who looks at the sun every day, watching the spots
move and change their aspect according to their situation as
the sun turns, sees the sun as a sphere. He sees it still better
in the moon, which is nearer us, and of which the relief is
much sharper. No one can doubt that if he 1s accustomed to
secing it as a spherical body in the telescope, he will see it so
also when he looks at it with the naked eye, and the vision of a
plane spot is no longer possible for him ; just as we think we sce


a man in the dark but are quite incapable of seeing him again


COMMON SENSE 379


when we are convinced that it is only a tree.(47) As to the sky,
certainly we are quite incapable of seeing the crystal vault of
our ancestors. This expression which designated a reality for
them, something they thought they saw, is a pure metaphor
for us. In looking toward the sky we no longer see a limit, so
to speak; we have the impression of looking into infinite space
without a limit. Moreover, all these facts come without any
doubt from the fundamental statement which we formulated a
little while ago: generalized memory—that is, our knowledge—
enters into our perception, is a constitutive part of it. Le Roy
concedes that between common sense and science there is no
precise limit, between them there exists a vague zone.(48)
This, we think, is an insufficient concession; we affirm abso-
lute continuity, common sense being only a scientific and
metaphysical system, and being transformed under the influ-
ence of science, with much greater slowness, however, than the
properly called scientific theories.

Our conception is much nearer that of Duhem, from whom,
especially at the beginning of this exposition, we have borrowed
so freely. However we are not quite sure that we have under-
stood the difference which this eminent scientist has established
between common sense and scientific theories. Duhem com-
pares a naval officer giving an order in technical language
to his sailors with a physicist speaking of batteries, pressure,
and electric-motive force, and points out that the officer’s
commands correspond in his men’s minds to determinate acts,
whereas the physicist’s statement can be realized in infinitely
different ways.(49) But cannot the physicist, in his turn,
speak in a less general, more definite manner? And cannot the
naval officer express himself in more general terms so as to
indicate simply the end to be attained? When a captain,
before entering port, indicates to the pilot the part of the
harbour in which he wishes to anchor, has not the pilot the
choice of infinitely varied movements, manceuvrings, by which
he can attain the desired anchorage? The very order, moreover,
of the officer, looking at it closely, leaves a vast field of inde-
termination. The sailor knows that he must pull such a rope,
but to do this he can place his left leg in front of his right one,
or inversely, and so on; in a word, he has the choice between
a really unlimited multiplicity of different movements which


380 IDENTITY AND REALITY


will only have in common, just like the different operations of
the physicist corresponding to the same statement, the con-
summation of a result considered as one and the same. Duhem,
we think, more nearly approaches reality by opposing the
spontaneous abstractions of common sense to the slow, com-
plicated, conscious abstractions of physical theories.(50) This,
we believe, is the real difference; common sense acts uncon-
sciously, and even when it has been modified by science (as in
the case of the moon, which the astronomer sees convex), its
action is instantaneous. Moreover, it acts almost identically
in the great majority of men; thus its decrees, because of their
spontaneity and the general consensus by which they benefit,
appear to acquire a superior certainty. But really they are
of the same nature, engendered by the same process as those
of science.


NOTES
1. Bercson: Introduction d la métaphysique. Revue de métaphysique, X1, 1903,


Pp. 5-

2. Id., Matiére et mémoire. Paris, 1903, p. 20

3. Ib., p. 59.

4. A. M. Ampere: Essat sur la philosophie des sciences. Paris, 1834-43.
Vol. I, p. 51.

5. The very curious psychological observations on cerebral deafness or
blindness seem to be related to considerations of this kind. The organ of
sensation being intact, the sick person hears or sees, but, auditory or visual
memory being abolished, he no longer recognizes sensations which were
familiar to him. Cf. Mach, La connaissance et l’erreur, trans. Dufour. Paris,
1908, pp. 59-60.

6. Berason: Percepiton et matiére. Revue de métaphysique, 1V, 1896, p. 272.
Matiere et mémoire, p. 202.

4. Spin: Pensée et réalité. Paris, 1896, p.

8. Hume: A Treatise of Human Nature. eae 1896, Book I, Part IV,
§ 2. Cf. Psychologie trans. RENouvmER ET Piton. Paris, 1878, p. 249.

g. SCHOPENHAUER: Ueber die vierfache Wurzel, etc. Werke, ed. Frauen-
staedt. Leipzig, 1877, p. 82. Cf. Die Welt als Wille und Vorstellung, Vol. I,
p. 10.

10. Huxiey: Lay Sermons. London, 1887, p. 124,

11. AnwsrorLte: De Caelo, Book III, Chap. HI, § 1. “An element, we
take it, isa body into which other bodies may be analysed, present in them

potentially or in actuality.”’

12. J. S. Mux: Examination of Sir William Hamilton's Philosophy. New
York, 1873, pp. 236-297.


COMMON SENSE 381


13. Ostwap: Vorlesungen, p. 40.

14. Lotze: Metaphysik. Leipzig, 1879, pp. 506-507.

15. We believe that it is the more or less conscious but very powerful
feeling for this analogy, which is found at the base of affirmations of the
continuity of common sense and of science. We may mention especially
on this subject the declaration at which Painlevé arrives in the conclusion
of his work on the principle of energy. “If it is a convention to say that the
earth rotates, it is equally a convention to say that it exists, and these two
conventions are justified by identical reasons” (Bull. Soc. phil., 5th year,
1905, p. 50). Let us add, however, that, according to Painlevé, both con-
ventions have their sole source in what he calls “‘the principle of causality,”
which is only the conviction that the laws of nature are not modifiable in
space and time (cf. also ib., p. 31 and ff.); this is, therefore, the statement
which we have qualified as the principle of conformity to /aw. Hermann
Cohen (Logik der reinen Erkenntnis. Berlin, 1902, p. 379), after having declared
that matter and ether are two equivalent hypotheses, adds: “It is the
prejudice of sensation which makes matter appear less under the aspect of
an hypothesis.”’

16. Euripmes: Phoentssae, p. 501.

17. D’ALemMBERT: Discours préliminaire aU Encyclopédie, p. 21. An analogous
theory concerning the réle of the social element in conceptions of common
sense has been recently formulated by Lalande (La Dissolution, Paris. 1899,
p- 175, and Bulletin de la Société frangaise de philosophie, 3rd year, 1903,
p. 58 and ff.).

18. J. S. Mirz: Examination of Sir William Hamilton’s Philosophy. New
York, 1873, p. 238.

19. E. Macn: Die oekonomische Natur der physikaltschen Forschung. Almanach
der Akademie der Wissenschaften. Vienne, 1882, p. 307.

20. H. Porncart#: La valeur de la science, p. 270.

a1. OstTwacp: Vorlesungen. Leipzig, 1902, p. 181.

a2. H. Hertz: Gesammelte Werke. Leipzig, 1895, Vol. IIT, p. 27 and ff.

23. RENOUVIER: Critique philosophique, IX, p. 349.

24. E. Macnu: La mécanique, trans. E, BERTRAND. Paris, 1904, p. 451.

25. Dunem: L’évolution de la mécantque, p. 179.

26. Macn: Du Principten der Waermelehre. Leipzig, 1896, p. 420.

27. The point of view developed in the text appears as the exact counter-
part of Spir’s opinion, according to which science proceeds from change to
change, but never arrives at a real object (Pensée et réalité, pp. 89-99).
Yet it seems that the divergence is one of terms rather than of real content
in the two theses. But Spir, doubtless, has been influenced by his confusion
between lawfulness and causality.

28. TYNDALL: Fragments of Science. London, 1871, p. 136.

ag. HartTMANN: Das Grundproblem der Erkennstnistheorte, p. 22.

go. Dunem: La théorie physique. Paris, 1906, pp. 234-235.

g1. Ib., p. 248.

32. Ib., p. 247.

33. Ib., p. 233.

34. 1b. pp. 266-267.


382 IDENTITY AND REALITY


35. Dunem: La théorie physique. Paris, 1906, p. g00. Lavorigr already
stated “the impossibility of separating nomenclature from science and
science from nomenclature” (Traité élémentatre de chimie. Guvres. Paris, 1864,
Vol. I, p. 2). Lavoisier’s nomenclature is evidently the expression of a theory.

36. Cf. earlier, Chap. I, p. 21.

37. “It is evident that since the microscopic world differs greatly from
the one familiar to us, the histologist is subject to certain characteristic
errors. Within the visual field he has representations as large as ordinary
objects, but these are only pure phantoms, which correspond to structures
entirely subject to the laws of molecular physics. This antinomy must always
be borne in mind by anyone who wishes to understand the architecture and
the mechanism of anatomic elements. In my last study on the nervous
fibre I had occasion to state that this precept has not always been followed.”
Notice sur les travaux scientifiques de M. F. Nageotte. Paris, 1911, p. 9; cf. 36.,
P- 59-

38. Descarres: Meditations. Ceurres, Vol. UX. Paris, 1904, p. 31.

39. PLancx has admirably seen that that which forces us to introduce
certain considerations of molecular movement, even into domains which
at first seem inaccessible to them, such as that of irreversible phenomena,
is the necessity of detaching science from what he calls ‘‘anthropomorphic
considerations’’—that is, considerations relative to the personality of the
observer—and that it is this progressive emancipation which constitutes the
true characteristic of the evolution of theoretical science. He recognizes
equally that this evolution is in opposition to the positivistic conception,
which would demand a return to sensation, and a science establishing
direct relations between elements of sensation. (Acht Vorlesungen ueber
theoretische Physik. Leipzig, 1910, pp. 3-7.) Wundt, on his part, understood
perfectly that it was this necessity of supposing a substratum mobile in
space (that is, unmodifiable in time), a necessity made pressing because of
the progress of electromagnetic theories, which brought about the ruin
of the energetic conception (Die Prinzipien der mechanischen Naturlehre, p. 3).

40. T. Rem: Works, ed. Hamilton. Edinburgh, 1846. Of the Human Mind,
p. 183.

41. Huet: Traité philosophique de la faiblesse de Uesprit humain. Amsterdam,
1723, p. 242.

42. Hartmann (Das Grundproblem der Erkenntnistheorie, p. 14 and ff.)
maliciously points out with what deplorable case idealistic philosophers,
even in the course of their most apparently abstract reasonings, fall again
into naive realism.

43. HARTMANN, amongst others, has well brought to light that what is
generally embellished with the name of positivism is, from a metaphysical]
standpoint, only a scarcely transformed naive realism (l.c., p. 55).

44. E. Le Roy: Sctence et Philosophie. Revue de métaphysique, VII, 1899,
p. 511.

45. Id., La science positive et la liberté. Congrés de philosophie de 1900, Vol. I,


Pp. 333-
46. Id., Bulletin de la socidté francaise de philosophie, 1901, p. 17.
47. HeitmHortz (Vortraege und Reden, 4th ed. Brunswick, 1896, p. 114)


COMMON SENSE 383


recounts that as a child he saw, as he was passing a tower, some little dolls
on the upper balcony and that one day he asked his mother to put up
her arm and take a few of them. “Later,” he adds, “I have often looked
toward the balcony of that tower, where there were men, but they no
longer consented to be transformed, by my more wary cyes, into pretty
dolls.”® This is an excellent example of the impossibility of return to primitive
perception, when it has been modified by more recent knowledge.

48. E. re Roy: Bull. soc. phil., 1901, p. 20.

49. Dunem: L.c., p. 240.

50. Id., l.c., p. 272.


CHAPTER XII


CONCLUSIONS


From the preceding pages this conclusion, it seems, stands
out: it is not true that the sole end of science is action, nor
that it is solely governed by the desire for economy in this
action. Science also wishes to make us understand nature. It
tends, indeed, according to Le Roy’s expression, toward the
“progressive rationalization of reality.” (1)

Science has, in truth, been established with the almost
complete certainty that nature is regulated, but also with the
tenacious hope that it will manifest itself as intelligible. In
every chapter of science these two principles have been applied
simultaneously and continue to be so applied. Their action is
irrevocably entangled, because they pass and repass their ac-
quisitions to each other ; not only, as has been said, do empirical
facts serve to establish theories which bring about the dis-
covery of new facts, but also considerations of conservation,
of identity, intervene at every step in empirical science, which
is, in spite of appearances, saturated with these a priort
elements.

Science is not positive and does not even contain positive data
in the precise meaning which Auguste Comte and his adherents
have given to this term—that is, data “stripped of all ontology.”
Ontology is of a piece with science itself and cannot be
separated from it. Those who pretend to separate them are
unconsciously using a current metaphysical system, a common
sense more or less transformed by science of the past, which is
familiar to them. The positivist plan is, therefore, truly chimeri-
cal. Not only does it correspond neither to modern science
nor to any which humanity has known at any epoch of evolu-
tion, but it implies and demands such a modification, such an
unsettling of our habits of thought, that we have infinite
difficulty in conceiving it and especially in measuring all of its
consequences. Indeed, the only means of doing away with
every ontology would consist in accomplishing that operation
at the very beginning of physics, by dissolving the object and
returning to the immediate data of Bergson, in order to try
afterwards to establish direct relations between these data,


CONCLUSIONS 385


without passing through the hypothesis of an objective existence.
Is such a science possible? Malebranche expressly denied it.
He attempted to show that in no case could one pretend to
measure sensations directly by one another, as subjective
phenomena; and that all comparison of these presupposes
a preliminary reduction to objective causes, and therefore a
subjection of them to fixation in time and space.(2) This
seems to be an impregnable deduction. We saw (p. 341) that
a purely qualitative science, which was still substantialistic,
though capable of setting up scales, could no longer measure.
With still greater reason would this be so in the science that is
truly phenomenalistic, from which the very quality itself,
viewed as substratum, would be excluded. And yet must the
possibility of a science of this kind be radically denied, and its
entire uselessness from the point of view of prevision be asserted ?
What makes one hesitate before this absolute negation is
precisely the novelty, the unknown factor in the proposed
method. Without further attempt to go to the bottom of this
question, which would be too great a digression from the
subject of this book, let us observe, once again, how greatly
science thus constituted, supposing even that it were possible,
would depart from all that we know. It would certainly no
longer be physics, but rather a sort of psycho-physics pushed to
the extreme; it would, indeed, be infinitely more than all we
know under this name, removed from physics, since modern
psycho-physics, it is easily understood, presupposes physics as a
basis, and consequently the whole ontological world of common
sense and of science.—The ontological character of scientific
explanation is ineffaceable. Doubtless, through the unity of
matter it finally ends in uniform and empty space. But here
there is destruction of reality, of the whole external world; and
in this destruction, it goes without saying, law also has been
abolished, for there being no longer any diversity either in
time or in space, there is no longer any phenomenon, and
therefore nothing which law may rule.(3) Therefore, and
contrary to what is sometimes supposed believable, there is not,
there cannot be, in the natural evolution of scientific theories,
any phase where ontological reality would disappear, and at
the same time the concept of conformity to law remain stand-
ing. Their disappearance is certainly stmultaneous, and if we
BB


386 IDENTITY AND REALITY


take the world of scientific theory at the moment, so to speak,
when it is going to evolve into non-entity, we shall find it as
ontological as that of the reality of common sense; the singular
points of the ether, in so far as we differentiate them from
their medium by any means whatsoever, will be just as real,
just as much odjecis, and even more fundamentally indepen-
dent of us and our sensation than anything in our percep-
tion. Explanatory science, indeed, rejoins absolute idealism
or solipsism, but it is only in complete acosmism that these
two ways encounter each other. Between these two parallel
lines, along which science and philosophy, each one by itself,
tend to destroy reality, one cannot imagine any point incommon,
except one situated in infinity.

This explains a peculiar characteristic of physicists’ research
into the constitution of matter, a characteristic which 1s
certainly of a nature to strike the attention of the philosopher—
to wit, the unconscious certainty, one might almost say the
alacrity, which the scientist shows in this domain, whereas to
the philosopher, his conclusions appear formidable, extravagant
in the literal sense of the word, completely departing from the
ordinary plan of experimental research. How does it happen,
then, that the physicist does not possess this feeling at all, that
he has, on the contrary, the very distinct impression of being
in his own domain and of following his customary methods?
It is because, starting from a conception of the world such as
our naive perception offers, he has never transformed it except
by putting into play the very rules according to which this
conception was constituted. He has continually substituted the
invisible for the visible, but what he has created is of the same
order as what he has destroyed. He simply treats the atom
as the biologist treats the microbe, the first is compared to a
billiard ball as the second is compared to an animal.

With all the more reason the scientist feels himself protected
from doubt in less extreme, less exposed parts of his domain;
and it is not astonishing that this security has at times been
envied by the philosopher. This is why frequently renewed
attempts have been made to extract a real philosophy from
science with the help of processes of extrapolation and generali-
zation. The progress and ultimate end of this kind of enterprise
may be traced in advance to a certain extent. Indeed, in


CONCLUSIONS 387


creating science, man has constantly obeyed his causal instinct ;
starting from sensation, he has unceasingly tried to explain it,
to make it yield to the exigencies of his reason. Therefore,
what will be most general in science will necessarily be also
a form of these exigencies, and, consequently, a conception
saturated with the a priori: a causal hypothesis such as that of
the persistence of qualities and especially the atomic or
mechanical theory. And so it is that believing to generalize
the results of experience we succeed paradoxically in liberating
our conceptions, prior to experience, from the restrictions
imposed by experience.

It goes without saying that in pressing his thought into the
ontological mould, in giving to it the form of an hypothesis
about the reality of things, the scientist, just like the common-
sense man, acts in an entirely unconscious manner. It 1s not
astonishing, therefore, to see him unacquainted with the process
which he is applying—nay, even with the metaphysical tendency
which is pushing him on. No more than any other man does
the scientist see himself thinking. Doubtless, if he has peculiarly
powerful gifts, he may succeed, by a slow and patient analysis,
In sometimes recognizing the true path which his thought
has followed; but the fact of being a scientist, nay, even a
"great scientist, has nothing to do with it. Indeed, the distinctive
quality of a great scientist is a powerful scientific instinct, a
sort of divination which allows him to touch the high places
only. The discovery, it has often been noticed, comes to him
suddenly—after long labour, of course; it is a flash, a revelation:
is it astonishing that he has not been able to trace its genesis?
And so it follows that we must not look to the scientist for
the principles which have really guided his thought ; we must not
even believe him on his word when he tries to state them. He
may have discovered these principles in almost any other way
than by a patient analysis of his own thought. He has most
often found them already fashioned in some book; they pene-
trated him without his knowledge, because they pervaded the
intellectual atmosphere surrounding him.

This explains how one can go astray in searching for the
principles of science, even on the supposition that one is
following closely the scientists; their methodical ways are
cheerfully accepted, without questioning whether the aforesaid


988 IDENTITY AND REALITY


methods had ever really been applied by the scientists them-
selves. It is this error, we think, which is at the bottom
of the affirmation according to which, as a very eminent
contemporary philosopher says, “Mathematical physics turns
aside from the essence of things and their inner substantiality
in order to turn toward their numerical order and connection,
and their functional and mathematical structure.’ (4)
Declarations of this sort may certainly be found in the
creators of modern physical science—in Kepler, in Newton,
even in Descartes, in Boyle, and in Boscovich. But if, on the
other hand, we consider without prejudice and on its merits
their work as scientists, we easily perceive that it offers a quite
different picture. Thus Boscovich seems, indeed, according to
the title of his Theoria, to reduce the concept of force to that of
law. But it is clear, when one reaches the heart of the work, that
he considers this force to be, on the contrary, a real being,
a thing, the true essence of nature, which he has sought for
and found; his argumentation against the corpuscular theory
would have no meaning if this were not so. Boyle, we have
seen, was one of the strictest atomists known to the history
of science at any time; he invented the term “corpuscular”
for the particular form of the theory which he adopted and
which he constantly used. His foregone conclusion from
this point of view greatly impressed his contemporaries, such
as Spinoza and Leibniz ;(5) and it is clear that in attempting
to reduce a change of colour to the displacement of molecules,
as he did many times, he was not concerned simply with the
rule of a phenomenon, but with its true nature, its essence,
and its cause. And as to Descartes, it is certain that he sought
for the essence of things as eagerly as the scholastics, but,
unlike these latter, he found it in space; surely no one has
been more affirmative, more apodictic than he in this respect.
In spite of appearances the situation was the same with Kepler
and with Newton. Kepler, while seeking for the laws of
planetary attraction, sought at the same time for its cause, and
formulated a whole theory on this subject. Newton, in spite of
the hypotheses non fingo, based his Opticks on the theory of emis-
sion. His famous definition of mass by density can only be
explained, as Rosenberger has justly shown,(6) by strongly
entrenched atomistic convictions. And it is reasonable to doubt


CONCLUSIONS 389


whether, in eliminating every real hypothesis, he ever conceived
the action of gravitation as a pure and simple law; on the
contrary, he openly accepted in the first place the partly theo-
logical hypothesis of More, attempting to give it a more
scientific appearance by the assumption of a particular medium,
and afterward allowed Cotes, in the preface to the second
edition of Principia, to speak of force acting at a distance as of
a real being.(7)

This situation is so apparent that, in building up anti-
substantialistic conceptions of science, it could not be entirely
ignored. The difficulty has generally been avoided by treating
the works and the attempts in question as simple digressions,
by pretending to believe that it was a question of parts which
were not essential to the whole of the work and which could
be casily detached. Now it is certain that, on the contrary,
such an opcration would be extremely difficult, even for
Newton, whose Opticks and Principia would be deprived of
some of their most essential chapters. And if one tried to do
it for Descartes, all his Principia would have to be effaced.
Evidently the scientific work of these great scientists holds
together and is ordered in quite a different sense from the
statements of method which are cited.

We saw at the beginning of this book(8) that the primitive
source of what might be called the positivist error lies in the
confusion between law and cause, in the misunderstanding
of the truth, that in explaining a phenomenon by a law we
are only using a synecdoche. The fact, however, that many
scientists have made statements condemning all search for
essence and for cause is susceptible, we believe, of more direct
psychological explanations. It must be noted that it is a very
simple principle, which can be expressed under a precise
form like that finally given it by Comte, and for that very
reason it is tempting in itself. Moreover, it flatters the scientist’s
pride, since it makes his chosen field appear to be in a manner
sovereign, and entirely independent of the other pursuits of
human thought. It is conceivable that it was on these last
grounds that positivism conquered the nineteenth century, an
epoch distinguished for the fruitfulness of experimental research.
But it is not at all astonishing that this conception in a way
surreptitiously seduced many minds before that time. One


390 IDENTITY AND REALITY


should rather be astonished at the contrary, and, indeed, if this
conception did not appear sooner, if, when sometimes formu-
lated very distinctly (as it was, for instance, by Berkeley) it again
disappeared, immediately forgotten, it is not, as has frequently
been said, because of a kind of vicious propensity of the human
mind toward ontology, but rather because it is entirely contrary
to the real advance of the intellect as much in the individual
thinker as in the whole evolution of science. What would have
happened in the past if humanity, seeking the impossible,
had adopted Berkeley’s or Comte’s point of view and considered
that there is no cause beyond law or that it ought not to be
sought for? The great idealistic philosopher prudently abstained
from applying his principle. But Auguste Comte expressed
himself with greater precision. Thus he praised Fourier for
having dealt with heat without trying to know whether it was
matter or movement.(g) He denied that the undulatory theory
or any other could ever possess “‘any real usefulness in guiding
our minds in the effective study of optics” ;(10) he considered
that the “pretended optical interferences or the analogous
crossings in acoustics” were “essentially subjective phenomena,”
the contrary opinion of physicists being ‘‘a serious illusion”’ ;(11)
he affirmed that all comparison between light, sound, or motion
will always be ‘“‘an arbitrary assumption” ;(12) he condemned
in general as due “‘to the prolonged preponderance of the old
philosophical mind” all tendencies attempting to establish
relations between what to-day we call the different forms of
energy.(13) Moreover, it 1s easy to ascertain that these errors
of the founder of positivism are in no way accidental. Starting
from the utilitarian concept of science, as we saw in Chapter I,
one can justify explicative hypotheses, if necessary. However,
it becomes difficult to explain the physicist’s predilection for
atomic conceptions ; and we see that Comte’s anathema against
the undulatory theory, etc., is really a part of his doctrine.
Principles of positivism, or, at any rate, analogous principles,
have since been adopted, at least in appearance, by many
scientists, who have often felt bound to protest, like Comte,
against atomic theories; but, as a matter of fact, and in spite
of the aid given to this tendency by the great and legitimate
authority of Mach, it remains to-day, as it did during the
nineteenth century, without the least influence on the progress


CONCLUSIONS 3QI


of science. The scientists of the beginning of the twentieth
century continue to build up atomic theories just as their
predecessors have done. All, doubtless, do not believe in the
truth of the theories which they imagine or which they follow;
but all believe in their utility. All see in them, for want of
something better, an instrument of research of great value,
“working hypotheses.” These play an extremely important
réle. Bacon believed that one could arrive at scientific dis-
covcries by mechanical processes of induction, so to speak;
he went to great lengths in elaborating detailed plans the use of
which would leave little to be attributed “to the penetration
and vigour of minds,” making them, on the contrary, “all
nearly equal.’’(14) It is incontestable that certain rules stated
by Bacon (such as, for example, those of concomitant variations)
are useful in scientific reasoning. But his tables or schemes, one
may boldly affirm, have never been employed in a constant
manner by a scientist worthy of that name; at any rate, no
scientific discovery, great or small, is due to their applica-
tion.(15) It would seem that one cannot better refute Bacon’s
opinions than by citing those of three eminent men, counted
amongst the creators of that especially experimental science, the
chemistry of the end of the cighteenth century and the first
half of the nineteenth. “To attempt an expcriment,” says
Berthollet, “‘one must have an end, be guided by an hypo-
thesis.”’(16) Humphry Davy affirms that “it is only in forming
theories and in comparing them with facts that we can hope
to discover the true system of nature.’’(17) And Liebig, after
having declared that between experiments in Bacon’s sense
and true scientific research “there is the same relation as
between the noise a child produces by striking on a drum
and music,’’(18) shows that, on the contrary, it 1s the scientific
imagination which plays the most important role in discoveries,
and that experiment, like the calculus, only aids in the process
of thought.

Among our contemporaries, Poincaré, in his Report to
the Congrés International de Physique de rgoo, stated that to
wish to experiment without preconceived ideas would be to
render all experiment sterile, and, moreover, that it 1s
impossible to free oneself from ideas of this kind;(19) and
Duhem showed the close dependence of experiments upon


392 IDENTITY AND REALITY


scientific theories,(20) and made clear the impossibility of the
famous experimentum crucis, which plays such an important part
in the Baconian theory.(21)

As to the “working hypotheses,” the only point of view
which directly interests the scientist is their fertility, their
aptitude for making him discover relations between phenomena
which he had not suspected. What assumptions have ever
equalled from this point of view the utility of mechanical
hypotheses? In the entire domain of science, which they fill,
they have produced, and are producing, a prodigious harvest
of discoveries of the highest value. Where scientists in the
first place have thought there was only a quite superficial
similitude, subsequent research has sometimes brought to light
in a most unexpected manner a more profound analogy.
Let us recall how sceptical people were at first about Kekuleé’s
hypothesis concerning the structure of the components of
carbon and the position of atoms in the molecule; and even
when it was proved that this description explained admirably
an immense series of phenomena, which, until then, constituted
a kind of impenetrable jungle, to many it still seemed grossly
inadequate. And yet what an astonishing extension and verifica-
tion of these theories were Le Bel’s and van’t Hoff’s discoveries
about the asymmetric atom of carbon!(22) Who does not
marvel at the rdle of the atomic hypotheses in the recent
progress of electricity and at the alliance of chemistry with it
through the efforts of Svante Arrhenius? And is it not sur-
prising to notice that the greater part of irreversible phenomena,
which by their nature seem to clude causal explanations,
appear traced, so to speak, to a mechanical phenomenon,
viz. friction, to the point that physicists are now convinced
that it is more than a simple analogy—something which
reveals the intimate nature of things?(23) We have cited only
recent, almost contemporary, examples, but there were just
as many in the past, as, for instance, only to mention one
illustrious example, the so brilliantly realized previsions which
were deduced from Fresnel’s theorem.(24)

So also the history of sciences shows us that, thanks to
atomic conceptions, humanity has really foreseen to some
extent certain important scientific truths, and developed a
kind of prescience. When the Greck atomists affirmed that


CONCLUSIONS 393


air, like any other substance, must be composed of discrete
parts, it was a pure a priori conception. No fact was known
at that time to confirm this opinion ; on the contrary, everything
seemed to show that air is a continuum. But we can now
prove experimentally that this last opinion is untenable,
that the gases really have a structure, are discontinuous. (25)
So also the chemists of the nineteenth century, by attaching
a tenacious hope to the hypothesis of the unity of matter,
were in opposition to the best established experimental facts
which formed the very basis of their own doctrine. And yet
phenomena relating to cathode rays, to radiant matter, etc.,
are tending to furnish an experimental foundation to this
hypothesis. What is taking place as regards the reversibility
of chemical reactions is of the same order. It is certain (Ber-
thollet’s ideas on this having had almost no influence on the
progress of science) that this notion was absolutely foreign
to the mind of a chemist in the middle of the nineteenth
century; and nothing was less justifiable from this point of
view than the use of the sign of equality to unite the two
terms of what is called a “chemical equation” (p. 225). This
sign, a palpable manifestation of the causal tendency, expressed
a postulate or, if you will, a hope, which, in the light of the
then prevailing theories, was unrealizable or rather absurd,
since it was understood that the two sides of the equation
indicated, one the initial state and the other the final state of
the phenomenon, which always had to take place in the same
direction, without hope of return. It is all the more astonishing
to state that this almost chimerical hope has, in a certain
measure, been realized: chemical reactions appear to us
to-day as generally reversible and we can, in fact, replace the
equation sign (the meaning of which was distorted), by van’t
Hoff’s two arrows.

But the most striking, the most marvellous phenomenon of
this order, is the existence of the principles of conservation.
In virtue of the causal tendency, humanity had a presentiment
of them; it had formed the concept of the atom-substance
long before any experiment on the conservation of matter,
and it vaguely conceived mechanical systems as implying
the persistence of motion before inertia and the conservation
of energy. So if, on the one hand, these principles seem simply


394 IDENTITY AND REALITY


to formulate a knowledge that humanity had always possessed,
on the other hand, they surpass, so to speak, the very limits
of the hope it had a right to conceive. Thus heat and light
might well have been movements, conforming to the postulate
of universal mechanism, without any possibility of converting.
these movements of particles into movements of mass, or
vice versa. This was approximately the conception of Leibniz
and Huygens, and, in general, of most mechanistic physicists
before the establishment of the conservation of energy. This
last discovery 1s a quite unexpected confirmation. In the same
way the most determined mechanist would never have dared
to hope in the nineteenth century, before the work of Gouy,
that the agitation of molecules could ever be made directly
visible by its most immediate mechanical effects. These
surprising agreements attracted the attention of thinkers. We
saw (Chapter IT, p. g1) that Cournot, in stating the perennial
character of atomic theories, had concluded that it was possible
that its inventors had “immediately fallen on the very key
of natural phenomena.”’ At other times he thought that he
could infer from the conservation of the weight of matter that
the idea of substance is not merely a logical abstraction, but
that it has “‘its foundation in the essence of bodies.” (26) Many
remarks of contemporary physicists may be cited in which
they express their astonishment at the agreement between
the conceptions of the mind and the results of experimental
research. Poincaré’s observation on irreversible phenomena,
which we have noted earlier, belongs to this region of ideas.
At another time this eminent theorist marvels rightly at the
surprising analogy between electric oscillation and the motion
of the pendulum.(27) Boltzmann states that “fall the conse-
quences of the mechanical theory of heat, even those belonging
to the most incongruous domains, have been confirmed by
experiment; it may even be said that they agree most strangely,
even in their finest shades, with the pulse of nature.” (28)
Hertz, in the beginning of his mechanics, declares that in a
general manner, in order that we may form images of things,
the logical consequences of these images must indeed be
images of the consequences which things really produce in
nature. There must, therefore, be agreement between nature
our minds.(29)


CONCLUSIONS 395


It was consequently wrong to have called, as we did, causal
hypotheses, simple instruments of research, “working” hypo-
theses. They are more than the scaffolding destined to disappear
when the building is constructed. They have their own value;
they correspond certainly to something very profound and
very essential in nature itself.

And so, and this is very important to notice, the agreement
between the postulates of our mind and phenomena goes
beyond pure conformity to law. Nature not only shows itself
to be ordered, but, even to a certain point, really intelligible.
This point of view has sometimes becn misunderstood. Spir
himself, although on many points he had clearly recognized
the action of the principle of identity in science, and had
deduced from it atomism and the principles of conservation,
insisted, on the other hand, upon the fact that only the order
of phenomena, and not any real object or any plurality of
objects, remains immutable in the world, and that scientific
explanation will have reached its highest aim in the determina-
tion of laws.(30)

People have sometimes feigned to see in the atomism of
contemporary science a kind of historical accident; this is
assuredly an crror, atomism has its root in the depth of our
spirit. It is certain that the agreements which we discover
between these theories and the results of experiment fortify
the hold they have upon us; but our faith does not rest
exclusively on this agreement, it is prior to it. If this is not
recognized, we must deny all analogy between modern atomic
theories and those of the ancients, for what facts could the
Jainas or Democritus allege? But this analogy is, on the contrary,
flagrant. One may even ask, taking everything into considera-
tion, whether our faith can be stronger than that of the ancients.
For we sce difficulties and contradictions of which they were
ignorant. According to Lucretius, hard bodies, such as the
diamond or rock, contain interlaced atoms; those of liquids
are round, whereas smoke and flame are composed of pointed,
but not curved atoms. Milk and honey have round and polished
atoms; those of absinthe are, on the contrary, hooked. In the
same way pleasant images are transmitted by polished atoms
and disagreeable ones by atoms of great roughness.(31) Still
in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries physicists and


396 IDENTITY AND REALITY


chemists advanced mechanical theories which appear to us
stupefying in their boldness. Lémery believed that acids are
composed of pointed particles ;(32) Boyle, that the particles
of the air are small springs ;(33) Boerhaave compares the
different organs of the human body to pumps, springs, and
sieves.(34) We are, alas, far from being able to give explanations
that are as simple and clear; and we are also sometimes forced
to note disagreements. Indeed, the agreement between the
rational and the real cannot be complete. However surprising
it may be to state that, with the help of the ‘“‘statistical’’
method, irreversible phenomena are in a certain measure
explainable by mechanism (another example of those agreements
just mentioned), this statement has not the importance which
we are tempted to attribute to it. Indeed, even if the explana-
tion were complete, it would not satisfy us. For mechanism
has no explicative power of its own; it gains all it has from the
fact that it is a causal formula which 1s founded on identity.
Now we cannot (of this there is no doubt) completely satisfy our
causal tendency, our need of identity, for what it postulates in
the last analysis is the annihilation of the phenomenon.
Moreover, if the agreement were complete, if nature were,
indeed, entirely explicable, intelligible, it ought to be capable
of being constructed a priori. For the term intelligible can mean
nothing else than reducible to purely rational clements. This
would not imply, need we say, the impossibility of progress
in the knowledge of nature. Humanity has waited centuries
for the revelation of certain properties of the circle and of the
ellipse which we know were, nevertheless, implicitly contained
in the definition of these curves, since we can deduce them
from it by syllogisms and with the help of a small number of
postulates and of axioms recognized as valid at all times.
But for the circle and ellipse we use no experiments. Of what
avail would they be since it is a question of purely rational
deduction? That it was possible to proceed in the same way
in regard to nature, to arrive at a knowledge of it through
pure deduction, was thought, certainly, by many great minds.
Probably many of the ancient atomists were of this opinion.
Descartes also seems to have believed it. He demands openly an
absolute certainty for the principles stated by him, and guaran-
tees to deduce all nature from them. No doubt his powerful


CONCLUSIONS 397


scientific instinct suggested to him that it was not possible to
dispense completely with experiments. And so he has given
them a small place in his system; but he has introduced them
there by a sort of illogicalness. He affirms that in approaching
reality one will find that, from principles laid down by
him, many consequences result; and the experiment will
decide which of these consequences will be realized.(35)
But if the principles and deductions must be entirely rational,
one does not see how, from syllogism to syllogism, everything is
not connected in an absolutely unique, rigorous manner,
leaving no room for choice, and consequently for experiment.
After Descartes, Spinoza, starting from the Cartesian principles
and proceeding with that pitiless logic and that “metaphysical
rapture” which was the characteristic of that prodigious mind,
states this formula, the most absolute expression of the postulate
of intelligibility: “The order and the connection of ideas
are the same as the order and the connection of things’’ ;(36)
he proves this proposition by using an ‘‘axiom’’ which compares
effect to necessary, logical consequence. But Spinoza, who
knew mathematics, was not a physicist and wisely abstained
from applying this principle to science. Leibniz, we have seen,
was strongly convinced that everything in the physical world
must take place mechanice. He believed also in the absolute
domination of sufficient reason, and the formula in which he
states this opinion and which we cited (p. 28) is at bottom
that of Spinoza; but, being of a more comprehensive and less
absolute genius than the latter, he affirms, on the other hand,
that there are contingent truths which demand an infinite
analysis, and that for that reason God alone can know them
to be necessary.(37)

In the nineteenth century Hegel, though proclaiming by a
sort of illogicalness that metaphysics must follow experience
and not precede it, comes back, nevertheless, to Spinoza’s
postulate as far as intelligibility is concerned and tries to
deduce really a prior: the entire system of the productive ideas
of nature ;(38) and it is well known that Taine openly pro-
claimed himself to be his disciple at least in so far as the postulate
of intelligibility is concerned.

From the point of view of science, what have been the
results of the efforts of deduction, attempted by so many and


398 IDENTITY AND REALITY


such powerful minds? Let us put aside the principles of kinetic
theories which we have seen must be attributed to a deduction ;
there remains only that kind of presentiment for the principles
of conservation of which we have spoken and which seems
indeed to have led, since the time of antiquity, to the affirmation
of the conservation of the weight of matter. But every attempt
at the total deduction of nature has remained lamentably
vain. The work of Descartes constitutes, no doubt, the most
prodigious effort humanity has attempted in that line of
thought. Before this colossal, cyclopic construction we are
imbued with an almost religious respect. But, alas, this
palace is an irretrievable ruin. Who believes to-day in Cartesian
vortices, in the three elementary matters, in channelled parts—
all things for which he claimed ‘“‘a more than moral certitude”?
Doubtless, some partial deductions of Descartes, the principle
of inertia and that of the conservation of motion, must be
counted (although the expression of the second was erroneous)
amongst the highest conquests of science; but they belong
precisely to the outline that we have traced above. Leibniz
abstained from all general deductive construction, even while
applying his principle of the equality of cause and effect, with
a marvellous scientific instinct, where it became necessary, to
the discovery and demonstration of the principle of the con-
servation of ms viva. The impotence of pure deduction stands
out also in Kant’s work. Kant, we shall presently see, did
not believe in the entire intelligibility of nature and applied
himself to the task of tracing a limit between what in science
is derived from deduction and what is due to experience.
Yet he was led to ascribe too much power to the first. His
formule are in agreement with the science of his times and
with the consequences which such a vigorous mind could
draw from them. Thus he deduces gravitation proportional
to the mass and inversely proportional to the square of the
distance as a part of the essential concept of matter, but the
same deduction leads him to establish a repulsion inversely
proportional to the cube of the distance.(39) But doubtless the
work of the German metaphysicians of the period immediately
following offers the best demonstration of the sterility of @ priori
speculations in science. Nothing is more instructive in this
respect (to choose only a few very striking examples) than


CONCLUSIONS 399


Schelling’s deductions on the evaporation and condensation of
water (40) and on the ellipse as a trajectory of the heavenly
bodies ;(41) Hegel’s deductions on reflection and_polariza-
tion,(42) on the nature of light,(43) on the retardation of the
oscillations of the pendulum on the equator (44), on the car-
bonic acid which potash ‘“‘produces in the air to be afterward
saturated with it,’’(45) or on the necessity of a void in the plane-
tary system between Mars and Jupiter,(46) a necessity shown at
the very moment when Piazzi discovered the first minor planet,
Ceres. But the metaphysicians have not been the only ones to
attempt deductions, scientists themselves have sometimes be-
lieved that they could reason about abstract principles, and
they, too, have made serious mistakes. Fouillée (47) has brought
some of these to light, the authors of which are seen to be such
distinguished men of science as Prévost and Dumas, J. Miiller,
Magendie, Pasteur.

This defeat of the deductive effort does not surprise us.
We know that reason proceeds only from identity to identity ;
it cannot, therefore, draw from itself the diversity of nature.
‘‘Blind metaphysical necessity, which is certainly the same
always and everywhere, could produce no variety of things,”
says Newton.(48) Contrary to Spinoza’s postulate, the order
of nature cannot be entirely conformable to that of thought.
If it were, there would be complete identity in time and space
—~-that is to say, nature would not exist. In other words, the
very existence of nature is a decisive proof that it cannot be
entirely intelligible.

The principle of identity is the vastest hypothesis we can
formulate, since it applies to the whole of the sensible world;
but its action, as an hypothesis, resembles that of no other.
Indeed, in forming any other hypothesis we can at least have
the illusion that it will apply to all the phenomena which
it has undertaken to explain. But here we know in advance
that we arc condemned to fail, and fail, not only in what
concerns the entire domain of facts belonging to that
hypothesis, which is in this case the universe, but in the
explanation of each particular fact. No phenomenon, even
the most insignificant, is completely explainable. We may try
in vain to “reduce” the phenomenon to others, to substitute
for it more and more simple ones; each reduction is a rent in


400 IDENTITY AND REALITY


identity, at each one we leave a shred of it, and finally there
remain on each side of our explanation these two enigmas,
which, however, are only two aspects of a single one—sensation
and transitive action. In order to explain this double enigma
which constitutes apparently the very essence of nature, we
ought to understand efficient causality, the ‘communication
of substances’’; but we know that it is inaccessible to our
understanding, “‘irrational.’” The opposite has been affirmed:
this is because it was confused with scientific causality, which is
quite another thing, which is identity, and which constitutes, on
the contrary, the essence of our understanding. Some have tried,
on the other hand, to exclude even this scientific causality
from the domain of science—that is, the same mistake has been
made in the opposite direction, scientific causality was identi-
fied with efficient causality. The first mistake was that of
Descartes and Spinoza ; the second that of Berkeley and Comte.
The first believed in universal intelligibility, whereas the latter,
limiting science to law, affirmed by it that intelligibility ought
in no way to intervene in science, or, in other words, that nothing
was intelligible.

The true way was shown by Kant: there, is indeed, agreement
between our understanding and reality, but this agreement is
partial, since in the end we run against contradictions which
we call antinomies. Reality is partially intelligible, and our
scientific knowledge is mixed with a priort elements and with
others that are a postertort.

But, when it is a question of separating these clements from
each other, a task Kant undertook in two admirable works,
Metaphysiche Anfangsgriinde der Naturwissenschaft and Vom Ueber-
gange von den metaphysischen Anfangsgriinden der Naturwissenschaft
zur Physik, we can no longer follow the great philosopher to the
very end. We have already mentioned some of the results he
obtained. They clearly show that in general he assigned too
large a part to deduction. Thus, in speaking of the conservation
of matter, he says: ‘‘From general metaphysics this principle is
borrowed and taken as a basis: that in all changes of nature no
substance is lost or created. Here we do nothing but show what
is substance in matter.” (49) This, indeed, as we have seen, is the
real foundation of the statement. But, for Kant, the last part of
his proposition is equally a priori; the concept of matter, he


CONCLUSIONS 401


believes, includes not only that of mass, but also that of weight,
just as the concept of motion includes that of uniform and
rectilinear motion—that is, inertia.

Kant thinks that science admits of a pure part—that is, a part
purely rational, and which consequently is entirely a priori.
This part includes not only what, since the time of Ampére, has
been called kinematics (and which corresponds to what Kant
designated as phoronomy), but also a part of mechanics. Now,
this is not so. There exists no pure mechanics nor even pure
kinematics. Our kinematics of to-day presupposes the principle
of inertia, including the composition of motion. For of what
use would it be to compound rectilinear “segments,” as has
been proposed,(50) if it were not understood that bodies
move in a straight line and that motions are combined in that
manner? Let us suppose that we are dealing with celestial
bodies and let us try to adopt for them the theory which was
still that of Copernicus, the theory of ‘‘natural’? motion in a
circle. Evidently we shall no longer find our a prior: kinematics.
If we desire to make a purely rational science of kinematics,
without any recourse to experiment, our only resource is to
present it as hypothetical. On that condition it can be deduced
quite rigorously, and all that need be done afterward is to
show that these results agree with experience. But such was
not Kant's idea.

Kant’s merit in this field is none the less important. It was
in following his steps that Whewell succeeded in specifying
correctly the manner in which we ought to represent the role
of deduction and empiricism in certain declarations of science:
“It 1s a Paradox that experience should lead us to truths
confessedly universal and apparently necessary, such as the
Laws of Motion are. The Solution of this paradox is that these
laws are interpretations of the axioms of causation. The
axioms are universally and necessarily true, but the mght
interpretation of the terms which they involve is learnt by
experience. Our Idea of Cause supplies the Form; experience,
the Matter, of these Laws.’’(51) In another passage Whewell,
after having expounded the same theory, insists that “without
this teaching (of experience) the laws of motion could never
have been distinctly known.”(52) Although he has expressed
himself sometimes in rather a contradictory fashion (53) and

cc


402 IDENTITY AND REALITY


has not applied this method to the conservation of weight
(which he considered, as we have already indicated, as entirely
a priort, because he thought, as did Kant, that the concept
of weight was included in that of substance) (54), one cannot
apparently deny Whewell the merit of having been the first
clearly to indicate the peculiar nature of the statements which
are deducible from the principle of identity. His thesis has
often been revived, with the necessary corrections.(55) This
solution, however, has not attracted all the attention it merits.
Even doubts on the subject of the origin of the principles of
conservation persist. Poincaré certainly expresses the general
opinion of contemporary scientists when, wishing to show
why the principle of the conservation of energy ‘“‘occupies a
sort of privileged place’’—that is, why we attribute to it a
value surpassing its experimental foundations—he looks for
“the little reasons” of this apparent anomaly.(56) Helm, too,
with regard to the constancy of energy, declares that all con-
siderations based on the principle of causality must be banished
from science and confined to metaphysics.(57)

As has been shown, we believe that the fact that the principles
of conservation constitute a class of peculiar propositions
derived from the principle of causality, is of capital importance,
since it appears to us as being of a nature to throw an important
light on the manner in which science and even our entire
knowledge of the external world are constituted. And so we
have done our utmost to base this conception of principles upon
a study of their history and a logical analysis of their content.

Thus what is really a priori in science is in the first place the
series of postulates which we need for empirical sclence—that
is, in order to be able to formulate this proposition: nature is
ordered and we can know its course. Nevertheless, this rigorously
empirical science is an artificial creation, and sctence is not
exclusively empirical; it is also the application to nature, in
successive phases, of the principle of identity, the essence of
our understanding. But from this principle we can draw no
precise proposition by deduction; this is why there can be no
pure science, contrary to what Kant supposed. In trying to
explain phenomena we attempt to make them comply with
what this principle postulates, and that is why its intervention
in science shows itself as a tendency, the causal tendency.


CONCLUSIONS 403


We see that nature shows itself in a great measure to be
plastic, according to the expression of William James ;(58)
it submits to this tendency of our reason. We know also that
in going to the extremity we shall arrive at an msuperable
barrier. But within this limit nothing permits us to indicate in
advance where and how we shall be able to apply this principle
and to give satisfaction to our causal tendency. In other words,
if we know where the analogy between the order of ideas and
that of things, to use Spinoza’s language, no longer exists, no
a priori reasoning permits us to indicate where it exists. Whether
it is a question of explaining phenomena by mechanism, of
finding formule of conservation, of eliminating time, or of
reducing matter to ether, everywhere we can only proceed by
studying reality, by observing, by experimenting, and by
trying to adapt our reasonings to the results of these observa-
tions and of these experiments. Every proposition which is
causal, explicative—that is, having in view reduction to identity
—finds our understanding marvellously ready to accept it;
every proposition of this kind appears plausible: but it is
this preparation which constitutes the sole a priort element of
these propositions, all the rest is empirical. And although he
entircly misunderstood, or rather expressly denied, the impor-
tance in science of the non-empirical elements, the fact of
having eloquently proclaimed the necessity of experimental
research at an epoch when deduction alone was in favour 1s
Bacon’s imperishable merit.

The manner in which our understanding proceeds in applying
the principle of identity explains why it is subject to errors
in this matter. Principles of conservation have been formulated
which science has had to abandon completely later on, or
again it was necessary to transform greatly their tenor, to
modify the expression of what is conserved. In the course of
our investigations we have come upon examples of both.
Black’s principle of the conservation of heat belongs to the
first category; this proposition appears to us now as manifestly
erroneous, and, what is more, as contradicted by facts of
common experience, such as the production of heat by friction.
Black’s principle, however, was for a long time considered
as firmly established and as one of the most solid bases of
physics. Descartes’ principle of the conservation of motion is


404. IDENTITY AND REALITY


an example of the second category. Descartes had the feeling
that in the communication of motion something must be
conserved. Of course, we see now that even under this inde-
terminate form the proposition is already far from being
purely a prior, for the faculty which a body in motion possesses
of transmitting this motion is a fact, and a fact impossible to
prove by deduction since it is unintelligible. But deduction in
this domain is so little able to lead us to the goal that, seeking
for what is conserved, Descartes went astray, and his error was
shared by his contemporaries.

Other examples may be cited. In the beginning of the
seventeenth century Quercetanus (Du Chéne) assumed that
with the ashes of a plant one could reproduce the plant in
solution, or at least its essential form. This meant affirming
to a certain extent the persistence of the specificity of the
plant after combustion. The theory, designated under the
name of palingenesis, although based on observations obviously
erroneous, had immediately many partisans and for a long
time held its own in spite of the refutations of Van Helmont
and Kunckel.(59) In the eighteenth century the hypothesis of
the preformation of germs, formulated, it seems, by Leibniz, (60)
but given its definite form by Hallcr, enjoyed great prestige.
At first sight one might be tempted to treat as a simple
scientific curiosity a theory according to which in the beginning,
at creation, individuals carried in individualized form in them-
selves the germs of all those who were to be their descendants in
the course of centuries. But observers who are well informed
tell us that elements of this doctrine are found even in the
most modern conceptions of embryology, and, moreover, that
the hypothesis of Haller, as well as later theories, is derived
from this same state of mind—that is, from the desire we feel
to substitute epigenesis for genesis ; in other words, to treat the
becoming as an appearance hiding a real identity in time. (61)

Approaching our times, about 1872, Preyer, a physiologist
of renown, formulated a principle which he called “the law
of the constancy of organic life,” a principle which caused
many lively discussions, but which was finally almost unani-
mously rejected, because it was too contrary to facts.(62)
Manifestly, therefore, the causal tendency, the avidity with

which our mind seizes upon everything which has the


CONCLUSIONS 408


appearance of a proposition of identity, may lead us into error,
and there may arise on that side a certain danger, albeit a
slight one, and one which the control exercised by experience
is sufficient to correct.

From the theoretical considerations which precede, is it
possible to draw any indications concerning the methods
scicnce ought to follow? It seems to us that, on the whole,
our results end in confirming the processes which scientists
have applied more or less consciously up to the present time;
and this is but natural, seeing that our special desire has been
to extract rules from these very processes. We believe that we
have shown that the methods of science hold together better
than is generally supposed and that their basis is not that usually
attributed to them; and in this way we have come to under-
stand better the necessity of certain developments. Thus
atomic theories must be maintained in science. Certainly the
treatises of mathematical physics are full of them at the present
time. But at times one detects a sort of discomfort in the
authors; feeling that their spatial representations end in
contradictions, they excuse themselves for using them. Van’t
Hoff, for example, one of the authors of the theory of the
asymmetric atom of carbon, seems to regret that one is obliged
to use the molecular conception, upon whose hypothetical
character he lays stress. This necessity, however, appears pro-
visional to him.(63) Maxwell, who has done so much for the
development of mechanical conceptions, whose principal work
—his treatise on electricity—is, as Poincaré states,(64) domi-
nated by the desire to show in each particular case the possibility
of mechanical explanations, and who has at least partially
succeeded in introducing them into the domain of Carnot’s
principle, which until then seemed closed to them, Maxwell
himself sometimes yields to this tendency. In his communication
to the Mathematical and Physical Section of the British Associa-
tion, before giving a brief and brilliant exposition of the kinetic
theory of gases, he warns his hearers that this is only a metaphor,
an illustration, and is only useful as such. There are men who
can get along without this help, and Maxwell admits implicitly
that this is a mark of superiority; but the majority have need
of it, and science must satisfy both.(65) Duhem, who has so
clearly recognized the essential character of the theories (cf.


406 IDENTITY AND REALITY


Chapter XI, p. 367), declares also that the use of mechanical
theories is a question of personal convenience.(66) These
reservations seem unjustified. No doubt, it is possible, by
completely neglecting the natural development of science, to
give to certain of its parts the appearance of pure empiricism.
Attempts of this kind will always be interesting, as is everything
which proceeds logically from a single point of view. Such
an exposition will also have the additional advantage of
making us see clearly the results that have been reached. But
it involves inconveniences also.

The principle of inertia, we have seen, can be proved experi-
mentally ; the entire branch of mechanics depending upon it
can consequently be treated, conformably to the programme
of Kirchhoff, as a “‘descriptive science.” But for the conserva-
tion of energy we have found experimental demonstrations to
be insufficient; if, therefore, one makes these proofs its basis,
starting from the work of Joule and neglecting all prior
developments, not only is a heresy committed from an historical
point of view,(67) but one runs the risk of completely perverting
the signification and import of the principle. Moreover,
expounded without hypotheses, the experimental results appear
to us as something definite, finished, without our having seen
the way which has led us to them, nor the way which can
lead us farther; for science is not Baconian, and experiment
alone, without the help of hypothesis, cannot lead far. That
is why the image of science or of a part of science, offered us
thus, will be in a sense static. Whereas as a matter of fact
science is in perpetual flux, is dynamic.

We have seen (p. 20 f.) that Comte believed that certain
laws possessed this character of definiteness, which led him to
veto any research capable of modifying them; and it is clear
that this conception would have been impossible except for
his horror of all explanatory theory.

Without wishing consequently to proscribe the attempts of
which we have been speaking, especially in the exposition of
chapters of science in a very advanced phase of evolution, we
believe that the scientist ought, every time that the development
demands it, to use to a great extent kinetic considerations. It is

certain that from the point of view even of the strictest experi-
mental science, we have an interest in following causal deduc-


CONCLUSIONS 407


tions to the end, even though they are the most abstract in
appearance. Boltzmann, in stating the speculations of which
we have spoken concerning Carnot’s principle, has very rightly
insisted upon this fact, that they ought not to be considered
as unimportant, for they may suggest experiments about
the limits of the divisibility of matter, the size of the spheres of
action, etc.

The scientist in building up his hypotheses ought not even
to be too much afraid of ultimate contradictions. The agreement
between the causal image and the phenomenon, between
thought and nature, cannot be complete; but there is a real
and profound analogy. Every mechanical theory of a series
of phenomena constitutes an immense scientific advance;
it will lead surely to discoveries, for it contains a revelation of
the essence of these phenomena. However perfect in many
respects Fresnel’s theory was, it would certainly have been
wrong to take literally the affirmation of the existence of the
luminiferous ether endowed with the contradictory properties
we know. But that there was similarity, more than that, an
identity of properties between light and the mode of spatial
motion called undulation, that was certain, and this truth
has remained even when Fresnel’s conceptions have given
place to those of Maxwell. Now these undulations could only
be conceived of in a medium; it was, therefore, wise to accept
the luminiferous ether 1n spite of its irreconcilable properties. (68)
One must be resigned to these contradictions which result
from the limitations of our understanding. Doubtless, one
should try to reduce them to a minimum and a great progress
will have been made every time an agreement has been
found in the theory of two distinct parts of science. But no
theory, however perfect it may be, will ever be logical or
intelligible to the very end. Scientists have been very much
concerned with certain fundamental problems of mechanism.
Must the elementary particles be considered as infinitely
elastic or as infinitely hard? Leibniz and Huygens have
earnestly discussed this question. In the same way we have seen
that an explanation has been sought for the elasticity of atoms
by motions of all kinds. Finally, there have been great discus-
sions on the question whether we ought to consider the atom
as a corpuscle or as a centre of forces. This research and these


408 IDENTITY AND REALITY


discussions have been very useful; there would evidently be
an advantage in definitely putting aside action at a distance,
which is too repugnant to our understanding. By reducing all
transitive action to a single type, we should have, in the first
place, a minimum of the irrational, which is always satisfactory
from a theoretical point of view; and besides, this hypothesis
would without doubt be truer—that is, would present a greater
analogy with reality, and would better than any other enable
us to discover more relations between phenomena. This would
be a real advance and would have its immediate repercussion
even on the part of science devoted solely to law: it is probable
that our calculations would be simplified by it, for it is less
complicated to suppose that a particle is only influenced by what
is contiguous to it than to admit that it is directly under the
influence of the entire universe. An eminent theorist has shown
in this respect that Maxwell’s equations, which are based upon
the exclusion of action at a distance, are only a particular case,
a simplification, of those of Helmholtz, where such action, on
the contrary, is postulated ;(69) and another scientist, while
declaring that he would consider the corpuscular and dynamic
conceptions as equivalent, confesses nevertheless to have been
surprised by the simplicity and elegance of certain formule
of Hertz.(70)

As to the ultimate end which these theories have in view, an
end essentially unattainable, it hes in the explanation of
phenomena by an element differentiated to the least possible
extent from space, or, if you will, it lies in the reduction of
matter to space. From this point of view science can never
turn aside from the path traced for it by perhaps the most
powerful mind humanity can boast of—Descartcs. (Descartes’
mistake was in believing that deductions could produce anything
but hypothetical constructions.) Never will any theory whatso-
ever be simply true. We saw that the superiority of corpuscular
mechanism over dynamism resides in the fact that it corre-
sponds more nearly to a postulate relative to space ; and that the
virtue, the “explicative force,’”’ of mechanism in general comes
solely from the causal principle—that is, from the fact that
the persistence of something is stipulated—and not from the
fact that the thing of which the conservation is postulated,
the dynamic or corpuscular atom, can ever be rendered com-


CONCLUSIONS 409


prehensible, its essential function, transitive action, being
fundamentally inaccessible to our intelligence. The end of the
reduction can only be irrational. It may very well be that in
this respect electric theories, which presuppose an action from
place to place, the mechanical nature of which is not deter-
mined, constitute the best solution. But while waiting for that
solution to be firmly established and universally accepted,
scientists are right in using in their theories, without too many
scruples, both corpuscles and actions at a distance, neglecting
momentarily the contradictions in which they end.

So scientists are wise in not wrangling too much over the un-
conscious ‘“‘deceits’’ of the theories we have noted, such as the
theory which considers the ether both as identical and differen-
tiated (p. 251). These are simple consequences of the causal
instinct which ends in the causal illusion, and they are justified
by the partial agreement between our thought and reality. As
Duhem has said: ‘“‘No teaching of physics can (and we add ever
could) be given under a form which leaves nothing to be desired
from a logical point of view.’’(71) In the same line of thought
one must not be too surprised if physicists are led to use,
side by side, two or even several contradictory theories or
incongruous mechanical models, as Maxwell has done amongst
others. No doubt, this 1s rather inconvenient; a theory well
regulated and logical would be infinitely preferable, because,
being é¢ruer, it would have much more chance of rendering us
service. Duhem is right, therefore, in protesting against the
abuse of these procedures ;(72) but perhaps too much rigour in
this matter is not advisable. In a science like that of electricity,
which 1s in a state of rapid development, somewhat irregular
procedures of this kind may render great service. And it must
also be added that since common sense can here be of no
direct help to us (lacking as we do for electricity the organ of
immediate sensation), material images, whatever they be, are
often indispensable to uphold our wavering imagination.

Yet, in using atomic theories, it would be wise for the
scientist to see clearly the nature of these conceptions, and the
nature of the a priort elements which they conceal. He will
then understand better that their basis is immutable, because
they rest upon what constitutes the foundations of the human
mind. Very great scientists at times have been turned aside


410 IDENTITY AND REALITY


from the right path on this point. Thus Boltzmann admitted
that there might be a question of changing atoms.(73) There
would have been nothing to say against this hypothesis if this
physicist had conceived the atoms (or what supposedly were
such) as composed of smaller particles which remained im-
mutable. But, according to all appearances, he wished to speak
of ultimate particles of matter, and hence his supposition is
inadmissible. Atoms which should simply change in time
(nothing else could be imagined) would change without cause ;
they could not, therefore, explain anything—that is, they would
lose their reason for being, and being only creatures of reason
they would cease to exist. Nor must we ever lose sight of the fact
that we do not know where the analogy between mechanism,
or, better still, between the causal conception of the world and
nature ceases. The only thing of which we are sure is that it
must cease somewhere. If, then, we come upon a phenomenon
which does not seem to conform to this conception, we doubtless
have the right to try every way of making it conform; but we
are not permitted to throw it aside, or reject it, if it appears
unruly. It may be precisely that the future has many ideas of
this kind in store for us. After having sought a long time for
what especially persists, science, since the importance of
Carnot’s principle has been clearly recognized, is turning its
attention more and more toward that which is modified,
toward perpetual flux, and it is clear that on this ground
causal considerations will always be more or less at fault.
Within these limits we would say with Ostwald (74) that the
identity of thought and being postulated by Spinoza, Schelling,
and Hegel, remains the programme of science, a programme
toward the realization of which its efforts tend. This tendency
shows itself through the influence of the causal considerations
of which mechanical theories constitute a particular expression.
It is permissible, therefore, to state that science really tends
toward the reduction of all phenomena to a universal mechanism
or atomism, defining these terms so as to include electrical
theories, and remembering that the causality of being, so near
a relative of the causality of becoming, demands that the
elementary particles be made of a single matter possessing
only a minimum of qualities, in such a way that it may be,
to a certain extent, identified with space or its hypostasis,


CONCLUSIONS qtr


ether. Not that this reduction is really possible, nor that we
can believe that this atomism constitutes the essence of things,
nor that it is capable of offering a system free from contradic-
tion—but because it is, amongst all the images which our
intellect is capable of conceiving, the only one, which, satisfying
at least to a certain degree our tendency in the direction of
identity, offers at the same time real and sometimes surprising
agreements with phenomena, It is, therefore, in following up
this image, in rendering it more and more adequate to the facts,
that we have the greatest chance of knowing these latter better.
In other words, reduction to mechanism and atomism is not in
itself an end but a means. It is a rule which guides the progress
of science, as Lange has shown.(75)

It cannot be said that science approaches indefinitely reduc-
tion to mechanism, if by this last term is meant a logical,
coherent hypothesis, free from contradictions. Science only
accomplishes finite progress, and all the mechanical hypotheses
which it forms being contradictory in themselves—that is,
absurd at bottom—it always remains separated by an infinite
distance from that logical conception toward which it seems
to tend.

It is as a guide, as the directing principle, that mechanism
has rendered invaluable services to science and—the past
being a sure guarantee for the future—will doubtless render
still more. Adopting it frankly as such, we shall have, moreover,
the advantage of ridding theoretical science of certain phantoms
(as Bacon would say) which haunt it, such as the “tendency
to unity” or the “tendency to simplicity.” In a certain sense
the tendency to unity exists, since our understanding, denying
all diversity in time and space, tends to reduce finally the
totality of phcnomena to an indistinct whole. But this tendency
is not an independent principle and it is not at all mysterious.
It is a direct consequence of the principle of identity. In regard
to simplicity we must make distinctions. Science surely tends to
simplify acquired knowledge—that is, to summarize it by
formulating more and more general laws and theories; this is a
consequence of the principle of the economy of effort, which
is the source of empirical science. But 1t is not true to say that
as science advances our conception of a real phenomenon
gains in simplicity; for if science often discovers the simple


412 IDENTITY AND REALITY


beneath the complex, at other times, as Poincaré shows, it is,
on the contrary, the complex which science discovers beneath
the appearances of simplicity. Thus the simplicity of Newton’s
law might very well be only apparent. “Who knows whether
it is not due to some mechanism, to the impact of some subtile
matter . . . and whether it did not become simple only through
the play of averages and large numbers.’’(76) And if of two
formulz, of two theoretical solutions, we ought always, the
merits being equal, to adopt the simplest, it is not correct
that of two eventualities the one which corresponds to the
simplest theory must be realized. It was simple to suppose that
the planets turn around the sun in circles, and since Copernicus
had at his disposal only crude observations, he acted logically
in adopting this hypothesis. An ellipse is, as a matter of fact,
a more complicated line than a circle, and the fact that the sun
is in one of its foci, the other remaining empty, shocks our
sense of symmetry at first; but this did not prevent Kepler,
in his turn, from being right in not hesitating in this case.
In the same way the laws of Mariotte and Gay-Lussac on the
volume of gases are very simple; does this prove that they are
correct—that is, that they are laws really followed by nature
itself? In the present state of science the question is no longer
even asked; we know very well that no gas exactly follows the
laws of which we are speaking, and in stating them or in apply-
ing them we are extremely careful to specify that we are dealing
with an entirely hypothetical thing which we designate as
“perfect gas.”” We saw, however, that the question presented
itself to Comte (cf. p. 20f.), and that he settled it in the opposite
sense. Milhaud, in a remarkable analysis, has shown that the
source of Comte’s inspiration was a real dogma, and he has
disclosed its foundations.(77) They are quite foreign to the
philosophy of the physical sciences, having their origin in a
sociological conception. Comte was extremely preoccupied with
the idea of order; he had placed it at the very centre of his
system. Having put aside theological traditions, he could estab-
lish order only on the basis of experience. Experience, therefore,
must needs set up definite principles and laws, which should
remain immovable for all time.
Law, such as science really understands it, is an ideal con-
struction, an image transformed by our understanding of the


CONCLUSIONS 413


ordering of nature; it cannot, therefore, directly express reality
or be truly adequate to it. It did not exist before we had
formulated it, and it will no longer exist when we shall have
merged it in a wider law. To suppose that an empirical rule
conceived by us will no longer be modifiable in the future is
to affirm, on the contrary, that that rule exists objectively in
nature itself; for no one could pretend that in the knowledge of
rules we shall ever be able to pass definite limits, since there is
no possibility of tracing these limits, or even of conceiving
their existence. In this respect, it is asserted that nature is in
agreement with thought. The latter, in formulating laws,
must allow itself to be guided by considerations of simplicity.
Thus, in the last instance, we attribute these same considerations
to nature. Let us observe, moreover, that every definition of
simplicity can only be relative to the faculties of our mind,
to the means it has at its disposal and to its habits. As Le Roy
has shown,(78) the sine function which enters, for instance,
into the law of refraction appears simple to us, because we are
accustomed to use it, and we even possess tables for it ; but if we
were obliged to express it under a purely arithmetical form, by
a polynomial, it would be very complicated. To-morrow,
perhaps, we shall discover a new process for the mathematical
calculus which will make the problems now embarrassing us
scem simple. We have here most evidently an accidental
element which it seems difficult to attribute to nature. Moreover,
we never really do so. When an astronomer, laboriously, by
successive approximations, calculates the ‘“‘perturbations’’
which the planets cause one another, he has not the least
doubt that nature solves this same problem instantaneously
with an absolute exactitude and without any difficulty. As
Fresnel has said: “Nature is not embarrassed by difficulties of
analysis.’’(79) This is why Poincaré believes that nature “has
too often given the lie’? to those who proclaim that it loves
simplicity,(80) and why Duhem also comes to the conclusion
that simplicity, “‘so ardently sought for, is an unattainable
chimera.’’(81)

Let us add, as Poincaré indicated in the passage quoted
a little before, that even where nature may appear to us as
simple, this may be purely an appearance. This simplicity may
casily cover a real diversity of very numerous facts; it would


414 IDENTITY AND REALITY


then be statistical. When we watch from some distance the
movement of a crowd emerging from a gateway, we discover
without difficulty that the phenomenon has an entirely regular
aspect; yet each one of the individuals which compose it is
making very different movements. In the same way the regu-
larity of births and deaths in important aggregates covers a
group of facts peculiar to each individual.

Upon this same postulate of the simplicity of nature is
based a fundamental objection which is sometimes brought
against atomism, and to which notably Stallo seems to give
much importance.(82) In formulating the kinetic theory of
gases, one evidently seeks to explain that state of matter by
the solid state, or, if you will, by the ultra-solid (p. 71 f.). Now
it is easy to be convinced, that everywhere and always—whether
it is a question of purely physical phenomena, such as the
change of volume as a function of the pressure and the tempera-
ture, diffusion, specific heat, or even of chemical reactions (the
law of Gay-Lussac)—the laws which regulate the gaseous
state are simpler than the laws applicable to the solid state of
matter. Therefore, it 1s concluded, “if there be a typical and
primary state of matter, it is not the solid, but the gaseous,”
and consequently “the gaseous form is the true basis for the
explanation of the solid form, and not, conversely, the solid
for the explanation of the gas.’’(83)

This objection, in the light of what we have just established,
appears to us as purely specious. It presupposes that the simpler
phenomenon must be, by that very fact, more fundamental.
Now, we have just seen, simplicity here may only be statistical,
and as the number of molecules in one cubic centimetre of
gas is incomparably larger than the number of human indivi-
duals in any aggregate of which we know, or the existence of
which we can even suppose in the future, and as the regularity
of phenomena evidently increases as a function of this number,
it is not astonishing that the laws which gases obey are much
more regular than those of human statistics.

So also it is certain that if we do not adopt mechanism as a
guide our analogical reasoning will wander, so to speak,
without a compass on the limitless ocean of possibilities. This
is Clearly seen in the strange hypotheses of the Watur-Philosophen,
and it is this which has rendered their reasonings so sterile.


CONCLUSIONS 415


And yet one cannot pass too absolute a judgment. The analogies
between nature and our understanding are many and profound.
A vigorous mind may, therefore, by simple analogical reasoning
arrive at important scientific discoveries. Indeed, there is no
doubt but that many great discoveries are due to reasonings
of this kind.(84) It is not, therefore, astonishing that Oersted,
starting from the doctrines of “the philosophy of nature,”’
discovered electro-magnetism; and it may very well be that
the relations formulated by Ostwald, which seem at present
to be rather numerical combinations, may bring us to generali-
zations of great valuc.

It may, however, be predicted apparently without too great
a risk of error that the theories and the hypotheses which will
be at the basis of this kind of reasoning will be ephemeral.
Only the foundation of mechanism, the explanation of pheno-
mena by motion, is and will be really eternal.

As long as humanity attempts to develop science, mechanism
will continue to be developed with it. The return to peripateti-
cism, extolled with such force and learning by Duhem,(85)
appears impossible to us. Indeed, it does not seem to us that
the pure doctrine of Aristotle was a truly scientific doctrine.
It became so, as in the case of the alchemists, only by deviation
from it. Nor do we believe that the recent developments of
theoretical physics and chemistry, as, for instance, in the work
of Gibbs, constitute really an advance in the direction of
Aristotclian physics. The analogies are thin and superficial.
The similarity established between change of state and
motions is probably the only real one; and even on this point
the resemblance is perhaps more in the expressions than in the
conceptions of the two doctrines. When we are told that the
modern theory contemplates change “‘in itself,” as Aristotle
did, it seems to us that at bottom the analogy holds especially
of a kind of negative fact, namely that neither regards atoms
as intervening, the intrusion of which, being the expression
of a strict causality, ends in re-establishing identity, that is in
denying change itself. But modern theories of change pretend
in no way to penetrate to the bottom of it ; they are not explica-
tive, as Aristotle’s conceptions were believed to be. Duhem
himself recognizes this difference. It follows that these theories
do not exclude mechanism as an explanation. Gibbs himself


416 IDENTITY AND REALITY


used mechanistic conceptions, and no one pretends that the
most recent development of physics, which, we have seen,
seems entirely directed toward atomism, has entered into
conflict at any point whatsoever with his theories.(86) The
two kinds of conception seem to live together peacefully.—
But as to the process itself of analogical reasoning, it must be
clearly understood that it is still more indestructble, if that 1s
possible, than mechanism, for by it alone can we approach
reality. Whatever we do we are always obliged to suppose—at
least momentarily—that nature proceeds, as does our reasoning.
The error of Descartes and the Natur-Philosophen, as also of
Comte, consisted solely in using analogy, not to formulate
assumptions to verify, but for apodictic affirmations.

It is only just, however, to point out that something of this
spirit subsists in our present physics. When we assign a peculiar
place to the principles of conservation, and when in general
we attribute to every proposition emanating from the principle
of identity an importance surpassing its experimental basis,
we evidently assume in nature a tendency analogous to that of
our mind. Are we wrong? We have already replied to that
question; the analogy between our intelligence and nature
cannot be denied. Moreover, it seems evident that the funda-
mental opinions of humanity have not varied much in that
respect. Anaxagoras, and before him Hermotimus, Aristotle
tells us, “proclaimed that it is intelligence which, in nature
as well as in animate beings, is the cause of order and regularity
everywhere in the world.’’(87) But we are forced to go farther
than these ancient philosophers, since beyond order we again
perceive the plasticity of nature with respect to the causal
principle. Unless we suppose, as did Spir, that there is in this
agreement an “organized deception,’’(88) planned in advance,
we are indeed forced to assume this analogy and to admit a

partial harmony.

Should we wonder at it? Doubtless, if we oppose the world
of consciousness to that of the noumenon. But it must not be
forgotten that this, on the whole, is only a metaphysical theory ;
that it is we who have created the conception of the noumenon,
and that we created it in order that it may act. If it remains
without action it vanishes immediately, just like the gods of
Epicurus, or the ether of physicists when we deprive it of mass.


CONCLUSIONS 417


We therefore postulate action at the same time as the concept,
and consequently also the analogy. If, therefore, in this dual-
istic concept, the analogy appears as a miracle, it is a miracle
of the same order as sensation.

But this conception is not the only one. It is equally allowable
for me to consider my ego as a part of the great whole or to
judge, on the contrary, that the entire world is only my


sensation.
Are not the mountains, waves and skies a part
Of me and of my soul, as I of them?


says Byron in verses Schopenhauer loved to cite.(89) If we
adopt a conception of this kind, wonder disappears, or rather
the difficulty will then consist in understanding how it happens
that the analogy is not more complete, that there remain
unknowable, transcendent elements.

Here again we are on the ground of metaphysics proper.
We cannot, indeed, evade a reply to this question: Are the
results at which theoretical science has arrived of a nature
to determine our choice between the different systems which
metaphysics offers us? To this question von Hartmann, in
a remarkable book,(g0) appears to give an affirmative answer.
He states that science, with the help of experience and of
observation, and starting from common-sense notions, arrives
finally at substituting for them an entirely different conception,
mechanism. But, on the other hand, science, though destroying
the reality of common sense, maintains time and space. It
culminates, thereforc, in a noumenon subject to the conditions
of time and of space—that is, in a determined, metaphysical
system, called “transcendental realism.”

In the light of the results at which we have arrived we cannot
evidently recognize this conclusion as valid. Let us state in
the first place that, contrary to what Hartmann seems to
suppose, mechanism in its turn 1s not an end ; It Is only a stage,
just like common sense, a somewhat artificial resting-place
upon a road which does not admit of such. We have put aside
the greater part of sensible qualities, declaring them, with
Democritus, conventional; we only wish to retain what is
strictly necessary to define a body. It is here that the difficulty
arises. What can we logically retain? According to the reply
which we give to this question, the form of the mechanical

DD


418 IDENTITY AND REALITY


system which we adopt will vary; but in scrutinizing things
profoundly we shall soon come to the conviction that we can
retain no sensible quality, the atom cannot even “harbour”
its impenetrability, which is manifestly an “‘occult quality,”
and the body vanishes into space, which has for a logical
corollary the disappearance of space itself and of time. Con-
sequently, in applying the reasoning of Hartmann, one would
conclude that science leads us not to his “transcendental
realism,”’ but to idealism, or, if you wish, to the most absolutely
negative dogmatism, since its formula would be: Nothing
exists or can exist. But we know that mechanism is not a
result of science. Science confirms it to a certain extent, just as
experience of ordinary life seems to confirm the naive realism
of common sense; it is invariably the agreement bctwcen
reason and reality, evidently a partial agreement. But
mechanism is itself prior to science, or, at least, coeval with it.
The fact that theoretical science, constructed with the aid of
mechanism, conserves the notions of time and space is not at
all enigmatic. It is like those numerical games made for the
amusement of children, who marvel at finding their initial
number after a whole series of complicated operations. Finally,
as a last argument against Hartmann’s reasoning, it cannot
even be said that mechanism really conserves intact the concepts
of space and time. For we have seen that mechanical theories
notably suppose time to be reversible, which assuredly clears the
way for its elimination, and enables us to see once more that
mechanism 1s only a stage.

And yet does not the very process of this elimination suggest
to us that there might be something justified in the argument in
question? Indeed, if our understanding postulates elimination,
reality resists it, and its resistance is shown by Carnot’s principle
(p. 286). We therefore have but to change the point of departure

of the reasoning and substitute Carnot’s principle for mech-
anism : does not the generality of this formula prove that reality
cannot be conceived independently of time? No doubt, in a
certain measure. What we see clearly, indeed, in this is that we
cannot exclude conditions of time in the consideration of a
phenomenon. But we knew that from the beginning; we
knew that every external phenomenon was inconceivable for
us outside of the conditions of time and space. Carnot’s


CONCLUSIONS 419


principle simply expresses this truth in a clearer way. Science,
on this point also, teaches us nothing about the noumenon;; it
only states precisely that there is a partial agreement between
our intelligence and the external world. One may start from
the fact of this agreement to arrive at the existence of the
external world, as Leibniz (91) did amongst others; but one
may also use, as do idealistic philosophers, the fact that this
agreement is only partial, that there is also disagreement, to
prove the impossibility of the same external world. One may
finally, like Kant, attempt a conciliation by supposing that
the agreement is due to intuitive elements indissolubly mixed
with our sensation. These are matters which are the exclusive
property of metaphysics.

A study of the history of philosophy readily assures us of this
truth. If the solutions which the moderns have proposed for
these problems differ from those formulated in antiquity or
during the Middle Ages, it is rather in form than in substance,
and it seems that the progress of the physical sciences can only
definitely influence this form of the solution. The agreement
and the disagreement of which we are speaking are manifest
with the advent of common sense. Our sensations really present
themselves in groups, and render possible the constitution of
a world of persistent objects (p. 363); but as soon as we seek
to penetrate a little more deeply into the nature of things, we
see this world dissolve (p. 364f.). Shall we say that this second
evolution already belongs to science? No doubt, but we have
seen that, from this point of view, there is an absolute con-
tinuity between science and common sense. As a matter of
fact, atomism belongs to the dawn of human thought ; common
sense, science, and metaphysics are, so to speak, blended in it.

Science in progressing does not abolish atomism; on the
contrary, it develops it and renders it more precise. But at the
same time it posits the antagonistic conception in Carnot’s
principle. In other words, its tendency is toward both the
abolition of reality and its affirmation. In it the two opposite
philosophical tendencies exist together peacefully. Therefore,
from the metaphysical point of view one can draw from it no
conclusion going beyond Hermotimus’ statement as properly
modified. me ee

We may remark that we are here repeating, in slightly dif


420 IDENTITY AND REALITY


ferent terms, a proposition which we have already expressed.
In fact, since theory is in search of a reality behind that of the
world of common sense, the affirmation: “‘no theory will ever
be simply true”’ (p. 408) amounts to this: “‘one cannot consider
the entity created by a theory as a thing in itself.”” A very
different meaning, however, is sometimes attributed to state-
ments of this kind. By declaring that hypotheses could not be
transformed into realities, that in their nature they were neither
true nor false, that they were unverifiable in their essence—
propositions perfectly correct if applied to the totality of our
assumptions about the external world—one has sought to
affirm a fundamental difference between the world of theory and
that of common sense. Now the difference, we have seen, does
not exist from this point of view; and if by the term reality
we understand not that of the thing in itself, but that of the
sensible object, as common sense conccives it, the proposition
becomes certainly incorrect. In the first place, from the historical
point of view it is easy to show that some theories must have
passed into common sense. Sound certainly did not appear
to our far-off ancestors as a vibration; but men have learned a
long time since to see and to feel these vibrations under certain
conditions, and it cannot, it would scem, be contested that, for
a large part of humanity at present, the concept of these vibra-
tions is a part of sound considered as a real object. The
transformation which the sun, the moon, the sky have under-
gone considered as objects is of the same order. Moreover,
from a philosophical point of view, we saw that as soon as
we admit of the intervention of memory in our perception,
we are, in fact, forced to admit also that of our knowledge,
which leads us equally to affirm the evolution of common sense.
Thus it 1s possible that what was an hypothesis, an assumption,
agrees so well, in the consequences that we draw from it,
with our sensations, that a connection, an association more and
more intimate becomes established, and that finally the latter
is instantaneously and automatically called forth by the former.
At that moment the hypothesis will be a part of the reality
of common sense; it will become, in Le Roy’s terminology, a
brute fact. But from the logical point of view, little will be
changed ; brute facts being at bottom only causal hypotheses,
just like scientific facts and theories.


CONCLUSIONS 421


The elaboration of scientific hypotheses is the continuation
of the process which creates the realities of common sense;
but the work being conscious, their authority is thereby
lessened. We feel that between the hypotheses and the facts
there are the laws; these latter, while not expected, like hypo-
theses, to penetrate into the secret of nature’s work, appear
to us because of this as nearer to the facts themselves. So
when the law, stipulating the conservation of a concept,
secms to create a veritable object, almost a thing in itself,(g2)
this rule exercises upon our mind the double authority of laws
and hypotheses. This is evidently only a slightly different
form of the explanation which we gave before (p. 215), but
perhaps it will seem more direct under this new aspect. It
seems also to point out more clearly the peculiar nature of
the propositions in question, the reason why, in spite of what
we have learned about the réle of causality in science, about
its incessant intervention at the moment of the latter’s genesis,
they constitute, nevertheless, quite evidently a well-defined
class, that of plausible statements. This is because in this case
the influence of the causal tendency attains its culminating
point, shows itself in the very heart of the domain which
appears to belong to pure law alone; the statement appears
to be deducible directly from the causal principle and yet it 1s
susceptible of being treated as an experimental law.

To a less degree, because less immediately derived from the
causal principle, all those laws which are susceptible of a
mechanical or spatial interpretation, like those which regulate
the radiation of heat or like Newton’s law, partake of this
authority. Poincaré, speaking of the law of attraction, attributes
a particular dignity to the constant 2, which is there in the
quality of exponent; he declares it essential, whereas the greater
part of the others would only be accidental. It seems to us that
no other foundation can be found for this distinction than
the fact that in the first case there exists a possible spatial
interpretation.


In the light of the results obtained in our work, we now
propose to return to the point of departure and once again
attack the important problem with which we dealt at the
beginning, namely, that of the relation between the two


422 IDENTITY AND REALITY


principles of conformity to law and causality. We there
established that the second could not be deduced from the
first, and what we have since learned can only confirm this
conclusion. The principle of conformity to law, indeed,
dominates all science; as science stretches out its domain, that
of conformity to law increases, since the limits of both coincide.
This is not so with the principle of scientific causality, which is a
form of the principle of identity. In postulating the intelligibility
of nature it ends in its complete destruction.

We have just stated, however, that nature lends itself also
to the exigencies of the causal principle, that there is harmony
there, partial it is true, but real just the same. May it not be
that these two propositions are in reality but one? That entire
obedience to pure law and partial obedience to causality are
at bottom one and the same thing, or at least are involved in
each other? To state the problem in a slightly different form,
may not the very fact of the existence of rules have as its
corollary that certain concepts, certain expressions, must
remain constant? Many thinkers seem to have admitted, more
or less explicitly, that one must reply in the affirmative to
that question, and this is again, we believe, one of the sources
of the confusion between the two principles of conformity to
law and causality. Assuredly this confusion is impossible if
the principle of causality is taken in its strict sense; it, indeed,
postulates the conservation of everything, whereas conformity
to law implies change. But not for a single instant can we
apply causality with that rigour. Nature exists, and this fact
alone suffices to keep us from doing so. Therefore, even while
pretending to make a profession of faith in favour of the
causal principle, we also make a kind of mental reservation ;
it will be applicable not totally but partially. Hence the
confusion spoken of becomes possible.

It is doubtless somewhat in this way that Lucretius reasoned.
After having solemnly proclaimed that “nothing comes from
nothing,” and that “nothing can be resolved into nothing’ —
which is the principle of causality in its most absolute form—
he adds also that this rule is necessary in order that “‘trees
may always bear the same fruit.’’ Does he mean to affirm
that these fruits are always there? Not at all; he knows very
well that they ripen and perish. What he postulates is that


CONCLUSIONS 423


something in them—the germs, the atoms—persists; so that
as soon as he stated the principle, he tacitly renounced applying
it with all its force. But, on the other hand, the partial applica-
tion seemed indispensable to him in safe-guarding order in
nature—that is, as we have just indicated, that the absolute rule
of conformity to law involves the partial rule of causality.

This thesis has found but few to contradict it. Newton
plainly adopted it in adding to it a very remarkable sort of
demonstration to which we shall return later. Kant seems to
have shared this way of looking at things.(93) Hartmann
considers, as demonstrated, that the lawfulness of phenomena
can only be observed if the latter have immutable substances
as substrata.(94) Contemporary thinkers seem also to be
of the same opinion. “It is clear,’ says Milhaud, “‘that if
the world is governed by law, there will be quantities which
will remain constant.’’(95) Kozlowski adopts almost textually
the declaration of Lucretius; after having pointed out that the
persistence of matter is ‘‘a postulate of purely rational origin,”
he adds: “It is a condttto sine qua non of regularity in the
phenomenal world. In a world where everything might give birth
fo everything, no regularity, no prevision, and consequently no
science would be possible.” (96)

In other cases a somewhat subjective form is given to this
thesis (which evidently modifies its content). Thus Bergson
believes that “stable visions about the instability of reality” are
forced upon us by our concern for the practical knowledge
of reality—in other words, that to be able to formulate rules
permitting us to act, we are forced to suppose the conservation
of certain concepts. And it may be said that an analogous
affirmation forms logically, in a certain sense, one of the corner-
stones of the system of the Marburg school. We know, indeed,
that these philosophers, whose work constitutes an incomparable
whole, profess that the concept of mathematical function is
the foundation of our reason; the concept of substance is
subordinated to it, and its rdle to science and in philosophy
would in a way be limited to preparing for the accession, the
penetration of the first; identity would only be an instrument
of knowledge.(97) Consequently, just as Bergson says, under-
standing would create the constant in its concern to seize the
variable.


424 IDENTITY AND REALITY


Let us examine, first of all, the thesis under its objecti-
vistic form. In order to refute this opinion easily, we must be
able to show that conformity to law could reign alone—that
is, that we can Imagine a universe (not ours, of course) which
would be so ordered as to suggest the idea of rule to an intelli-
gence contemplating it, but from which, nevertheless, every-
thing which might suggest the idea of a persistence, of an
identity of things in time, would be absent. It would seem to
be enough to formulate clearly this proposition, to perceive
how difficult is its demonstration. It is, indeed, a question of
reasoning in abstracto upon the nature and properties of the
universe. Now, since the universe includes everything, terms
of comparison are lacking. Can one even say that it exists?
can one affirm that it has properties? This only has sense if
I oppose it to the ego. In reasoning about these properties, I
shall necessarily be led to compare the universe with what is
only a part of it; who knows, then, whether my conclusions
will not be infected with error? We know but one universe.
It alone 1s, and is what it is. Such as it is, it admits at the same
time the application of the principle of conformity to law and
that of causality. The two in it are indissolubly linked. How
separate them?

Happily the analysis we have just made concerning the
action of the principle of causality in science will permit us
to descend from the heights of the most quintessential abstrac-
tion, where we are led infallibly by considerations upon uni-
verses, possible or impossible to conceive of, into regions
enjoying a slightly less rarefied atmosphere. Let us, then, take
up one by one the different manifestations of the causal
principle in science.

We have, in the first place, the atomic theory. It was of
this, we have just seen, that Lucretius thought. Sixteen centuries
afterward, Newton, with more insistence, devcloped the same
thought. After having summarized, with a few strokes of great
precision what constitutes the eternal foundation of corpuscular
atomism, he writes: ‘“‘God in the Beginning form’d Matter in
solid, massy, hard, impenetrable, moveable Particles, . . . and
these primitive Particles being Solids, are incomparably harder
than any porous Bodies compounded of them; even so very
hard as never to wear or break in pieces, . . . While the


CONCLUSIONS 425


Particles continue entire, they may compose Bodies of one
and the same Nature and Texture in all Ages. But should they
wear away, or break in pieces, the Nature of Things depending
on them would be changed. Water and Earth composed of
old worn Particles and Fragments of Particles would not be
the same Nature and Texture now, with Water and Earth
composed of entire Particles, in the Beginning. And, therefore,
that Nature may be lasting, the Changes of corporeal Things
are to be placed only in the various Separations and new
Associations and Motions of these permanent Particles.’ (98)
In other words, the fact that bodies at all times obey the
same laws shows that they are composed of imperishable
particles: this is exactly what Lucretius said.

What is the import of this reasoning? At first sight one has
the illusion that it tends to establish a real logical bond between
the qualities of objects and the nature of the particles of which
they are composed ; but it is not so. If Newton had been asked
what was the size and the form of the particles of water or earth
(he was thinking, doubtless, of Aristotelian elements), and how
one could deduce from them the qualities of these bodies, he
would have certainly declined to reply. And if Lucretius had
been more affirmative about the atoms with which he meant
to compose his trees and fruits, it is certain that his assumptions
would not appear very conclusive to us; in fact, both relied
on a statement that can be formulated in these terms: We
cannot imagine qualities of bodies being derived from any-
thing but those of the clementary particles which compose
them.

Undcr this aspect the reasoning reveals its true nature to us.
It is a causal reasoning, an hypothesis about the nature of
external things, about the supposed causes of phenomena.
Newton’s exposition confirms it: far from attempting to
deduce the atomic theory by this reasoning, Newton lays it
down as a premise. Now the atomic theory is derived from the
postulate: there is no change other than displacement. It is
implicitly assumed, therefore, that what is displaced must
remain without change; if it is a material atom, it must,
of course, be eternal. Hence there is no difficulty in deducing
as a consequence that which was contained in the premises.
The persistence of laws really plays no réle in this deduction ;


4.26 IDENTITY AND REALITY


it is a pure superfluity, and the entire reasoning constitutes
simply one more proof of the difficulty we have in limiting
ourselves to the phenomenon, in abstaining from all causal
reasoning, this reasoning being the foundation of our intellect.
This is so true that after all there remains a sort of doubt:
Is not something else there? Does there not exist between law
and causality a more profound bond which has escaped our
analysis?

Let us try to probe more deeply this reasoning of Lucretius
and Newton. We are in a much better position to discuss
this matter than the contemporaries of either of them. Whcre
these, speaking of the composition of bodies, could reason only
upon vague conjectures, we can use the infinitely more precise
concepts of contemporary chemistry. Now a glance is enough
to show that similarity of properties does not necessarily involve
similarity of substances. Cesium bromide and potassium iodide
are two bodies resembling each other from many points of
view, and yet we must suppose, according to prevalent
theories,(99) that they have nothing in common as substances—
that not a single atom of the first body is identical with an
atom of the second. Yet these are very simple combinations,
the simplest we know. As we pass to more complex bodies,
like those which belong to the subject of organic chemistry,
we see the nature of the component atom influence the
qualities of the compound less and less. When, in a slightly
complicated organic molecule, we replace an atom of hydrogen
by an atom of chlorine, its properties are scarcely modified,
even though chlorine and hydrogen are elements endowed
with extremely different qualities. The modification is still
less marked if we put in the place of this atom of hydrogen a
group composed of carbon and of hydrogen, as CH,, or in
place of the chlorine the group NO,; in both cases, however,
the thing substituted and the substitute differ greatly. Contrari-
wise, the same atoms, being differently grouped, may constitute
unities manifesting properties as distinct as possible. The
elements themselves, in what is called their “‘aJlotropic modifica-
tions,” furnish convincing examples of this: oxygen and ozone,
charcoal and diamond, yellow phosphorus and red phosphorus,
are doubtless very different bodies; yet we are obliged to
suppose that the matter has remained the same and that its


CONCLUSIONS 427


grouping alone has changed. This is, perhaps, still more evident
if we examine combinations, especially those of organic
chemistry. At the very origin of that science, Woehler’s
celebrated synthesis gave a striking example of this; it is hard
to imagine two bodies more different than cyanate of ammonium
and urea. Let us suppose a slightly complicated organic
molecule, say (to be definite), of rosanaline hydrochloride,
which is, we know, the colouring matter known under the
name of fuchsine. The atoms which compose this body may,
especially if we are not satisfied with simple isomerism, and
consent to divide the molecule, constitute bodies which will
be acids, bases, alcohols, aldehydes, acetones, etc. In fact,
since all organic bodies have about the same elementary
composition, when we place in a cup a piece of chalk, water,
and nitrate of soda, we can with its contents reproduce almost all
of them, and when we add to them a little sulphur and phos-
phorus, we may obtain the substances which compose the
human brain. Evidently the peculiar character, the quid
proprium, of these substances appears to us as much less con-
ditioned by the elements of which they are composed than by
their grouping.

If we mount still higher, to organized beings, to the “‘trees
and fruits’ of Lucretius, we shall, no doubt, be obliged to leave
somewhat the solid domain of facts: physiology is only at its
beginning, and science can scarcely formulate the vaguest
assumptions about the true nature of the chemical reactions
which go on within animals and plants. Yet the few data it
offers us are enough to indicate what the progress of scientific
thought on this subject 1s. Here 1s a plant which has grown
inland; it contains a certain quantity of potash salts, as we
are easily assured by analysing its ashes. We carry it to the
seashore, to a spot where the soil is poor in potash and rich
in soda. At first the plant will suffer, but with appropriate
care we shall succeed in making it grow again, and in analysing
its ashes we observe that a notable part of the potash salts
has been replaced by saits of soda. Doubtless, replacing the
potash by the soda has not been absolutely without influence
on the other properties, the plant differs a little even externally
from what it was in the first place; but let us not forget that
the {ype of the species is only an abstract concept. The individuals


428 IDENTITY AND REALITY


which compose it—we are sure of this in advance, because of
“the principle of indiscernibles”—are really all different; the
problem is to know whether these divergences are suffi-
ciently accentuated to oblige us to make a new classification.
They are not in the present case: botanists have not even
designated the plant thus transformed as a variety. We can,
therefore, say with Lucretius, that it is still the same plant and
that it bears the same fruits. Yet the change which we have
produced in its composition is considerable; we cannot for
an instant doubt that the potash and the soda play an important
réle in its development, for if we do not give it the necessary
alkali it cannot live. We are, no doubt, much less advanced
on the question of the organic substances which the plant
contains; but since we know that they are of an extremely
complicated constitution, we can at least conceive (and that
alone concerns us for the moment) that if by some artifice
we succeed in replacing a substance playing a considerable
role in its economy by its superior homologue (that is, by a
substance having the same constitution, but where for an
atom of hydrogen would be substituted a CH, group), the
properties of the substance being but little modified, it would
play the same rdle—that is, it would still be the same plant.

This reasoning, valid for Lucretius, does not seem to be

entirely so for Newton; it is certain, indeed, that if we are
able with different materials to constitute unities that are
similar, we do not succeed in making them ?zdenttcal. However
complicated we imagine the organic substance, the substitution
for an atom of hydrogen of an atom of chlorine or of a group
CH, will provoke a change of properties which may be slightly
apparent, but which ought, nevertheless, to be clearly denoted ;
that is because chemical bodies, according to prevalent theories,
due to the fixity of the elements and the law of multiple
proportions, appear to us absolutely defined species without
any transition. But do these assumptions correspond to reality?
It is perhaps possible to doubt it.

One easily discovers, in closely scrutinizing chemical pheno-
mena, that theory confers upon them greater regularity than
they really possess. When I affirm that silver has such and
such a property, I know very well that if my statement is not
entirely crude, it will not be completely true for the immense


CONCLUSIONS 429


majority of pieces of this metal which fall under my hand
and yet which constitute in their entirety the species “‘silver.”’
What the chemist generally means by this name is what he
more exactly designates by the term “‘pure silver.”” We have
already spoken of the important work which Stas and those
who have verified his data have been obliged to undertake to
arrive at this substance; evidently whenever one wishes to
verify the affirmations of those who have held the substance
in their hands, one must have recourse to long and minute
preparations. The atomic theory explains these difficulties by
the immense number of atoms of silver contained in a gramme
of this metal and the strong attraction which these atoms
exercise upon others of a different sort (for instance, upon
atoms of oxygen), whence it results that it must be extremely
difficult to prepare a gramme of matter containing only silver.
The explanation is plausible. But what one is trying to explain
here is the fact that the silver which I encounter corresponds
so little to the scheme which I have formed—that is to say,
precisely the lack of identity in its properties; one cannot,
therefore, use this pretended identity of properties to deduce
from it the necessity of atomism.

Without wishing to return to Berthollet’s ideas it may well
be asked whether the enormous difficulties encountered by
chemists in determining atomic weights, however approxi-
mately, do not come from the fact that these constants are not
really immutable, but vary within certain limits. Crookes, (100)
amongst others, scems to be of this opinion, which may well be
illustrated by reference to the new theories on the constitution
of matter. Let us suppose that the chemical atom is composed
of a great number of particles (nearly a thousand, we are told)
of sub-atoms. This would be a sort of molecule, but an infinitely
more complex molecule than any of those we know. Conse-
quently, according to what we know about this kind of con-
struction, the nature of the sub-atom would only have a slight
influence on the properties of the whole. If one of these sub-atoms
were to be replaced by another, more or less analogous, the
whole would still have properties entirely similar ; the situation
is the same as for the trees and fruits of Lucretius.

We know, moreover, that what is supposed to constitute
these sub-atoms, these ions or electrons, to give them their


430 IDENTITY AND REALITY


true name, is nothing but the ether. The properties of the
compound cannot, therefore, be derived from those of the
component, since it is understood that this latter is single and
self-identical throughout. Shall we say that it is at least the
fixity of the properties of the ether which guarantees that of the
atoms, of the molecules, and consequently the persistence of
the laws? But the ether, we know, ought not to have properties,
or rather it should only have negative ones, since it is nothing
but an hypostasis of space. We thus come to this conclusion
that the constancy of laws has no other guarantee than the
fixity of the properties of space; under its paradoxical appear-
ance this is a pure truism, since we know, by preliminary
convention, that law is independent of displacement in space.

Moreover, we might have come to the same result by a road
more rapid but perhaps less sure. Let us observe, indeed, that
the ancient atomists, and very probably Newton, believed in
the unity of matter. Therefore, they thought also that the
properties of different bodies, if they had to be derived from
those of atoms, could not be deduced from those of the matter
of atoms, but from their shape. Thus, to choose a concrete
example, Lémery attributes the particular qualities of acids to
the fact that they contain “pointed parts.”(101) Now, shape
is a spatial function, so that the properties that are brought
into play are those of space.

It is not, therefore, legitimate to suppose that the resemblance
of properties must necessarily have its source in a fundamental
identity of primary matter. This would mean returning to
the scholastic conception, according to which there must be
in every individual of the species dog a common principle
of dogness or to the theory, prevalent before the time of Lavoisier,
which supposed in metals a common principle of metallictty. It is
certain that nature contains a great number of objects which
resemble one another, and that we have the gift of noticing
this resemblance, of generalizing, and of thus deducing rules.
If we stop there, if we abstain from “explaining” them, from
wishing to find the causes, we shall never arrive at atomic
conceptions; if, however, we throw ourselves into this search

we shall succeed more and more in attributing the properties
of the compound to the qualities resulting from the manner of
grouping, and not to the properties of the components which,


CONCLUSIONS 431


on the contrary, we gradually strip of every quality ;(102) the
primary element which we seem to be pursuing always escapes
us, and is finally dissolved into space: it is a procedure the
legitimacy of which we have sufficiently established; it is in
strict correlation with the tendency which guides us in these
researches, since it flows directly from a principle, analogous
to and the logical continuation of that of causality proper.
After atomic theories, the principles of conservation constitute
the most important manifestation of causality in science. May
it be supposed that there is an intimate bond between these
statements and the reign of law?—in other words, does not the
very fact that we can submit events to calculation demand that
certain expressions remain constant? Milhaud seems to affirm
this; but this thesis, far from being evident, appears to us to
be very difficult to establish. It is rightly assumed that, in order
to study a phenomenon, we are obliged to set it apart artificially
from the great whole, to isolate it, to make it as “pure” as
this may be done; we only follow as far as possible the varia-
tion of a single element at a time, while we suppose that, during
this time, all others remain without change. But it does not
follow that these elements, the constancy of which we moment-
arily suppose, are really immutable; on the contrary, we have
a very distinct feeling that the “pure” phenomenon thus
created is an abstraction, that the natural phenomenon 1s
infinitely complex, and that when, in a short time, we pass
to phenomena of a different kind, in the next chapter of
science, what we laid down as constant will appear to us as
variable, and vice versa. If in mechanics m appears constant,
that only means that we are studying the motions of bodies,
assuming that during the duration of the phenomena in which
we are interested the mass will not vary, or what is the same
thing, assuming that purely mechanical phenomena exist. We
are not occupied with the thermal, electric, or chemical state of
the bodies we are dealing with; we lay this down as invariable.
But really we do not doubt for a single instant that the
mechanical phenomenon is accompanied by thermal, electric, or
chemical phenomena. It in no way follows that, when we study
these phenomena in their turn, m must remain constant. Were
it otherwise one could directly prove the conservation of mass
by mechanics. Now from all evidence this demonstration is


432 IDENTITY AND REALITY


impossible; there is, indeed, a certain connection between the
two ideas, but it works with the help of the postulate: Every
phenomenon is mechanical. Hence every accessory pheno-
menon, every cause of trouble, disappearing by hypothesis,
it is evident that the condition which we impose upon the
mechanical phenomenon becomes general. In the seventeenth
and eighteenth centuries, when mechanics was already well
developed, no one evidently believed in the conservation of
mass in chemical phenomena, and there was no contradiction
in this; in the same way, if, to-morrow, Landolt’s observations
are confirmed and generalized our mechanics will remain
intact. To summarize: if the existence of an order in nature
must demand the constancy of certain terms, one ought to
be able to deduce the principles of conservation from the very
concept of this order. But we only have to refer to our analysis
of the three principles: None has ever been or can be deduced
a priori—all require experiment; therefore, if experiment had
pointed clearly in the opposite direction, we should not have
stated them; nature, however, we cannot doubt, would have
continued to appear to us as ordered. Indeed, it so appeared
to our ancestors; and humanity lived many centuries before
conceiving these principles. Humanity, nevertheless, acted—that
is, predicted, which could not be done without postulating
conformity to law.

Finally, the causal principle creates in science the tendency
to eliminate time, and, by its extension to space, flowing equally
from the principle of identity, the tendency toward the
unification of matter. But these are conceptions which have not
the least connection with the principle of conformity to law.
Law, while stipulating definite relations between antecedent
and consequent, diversifies them clearly by that very fact,
instead of confusing them: we here again find antagonism
between the principle of conformity to law and the principle
of causality in its integral sense—the elimination of time being,
indeed, a very advanced form of this principle. This is still
more true for the unification of matter and its ultimate end,
the dissolution of matter in space; this complete disappearance
of reality constitutes evidently the conception which is the
most opposed to that of a real world governed by inexorable
laws.


CONCLUSIONS 433


We are, therefore, led to conclude that from the very fact of
the existence of law in nature one cannot deduce any of the
consequences which we have attributed to the action of the
principle of identity. The phenomenal world might appear
to us as subject to laws, without anything outside of these laws
persisting. As Cournot has said: “If it were proved that under
the right circumstances bodies could be destroyed without
anything remaining . . . the bodies on that account would
not cease to show us the spectacle of linked and well-ordered
phenomena.”(103) Moreover, may it not be that ‘‘the con-
stants,” the existence of which we believe we establish, are only
amore or less naive appearance? Carnot’s principle affirms a
continued progress in time, and we may reasonably presume that
the world is ruled solely by principles of this kind. Were we
to suppose that evolution in certain cases was infinitely slow,
that would give us a world of real constants, as our present
principles of conservation admit. But we can also suppose it
simply very slow, and hence our constants would only be approxi-
mate, evolving constantly in a determined direction.

Let us observe, however, that the results to which we have
just come have only to do with science. If we were to try to
push our investigations still farther and to attain identity as it
shows itself in the conception of common sense, it is certain that
we should come against an insurmountable barrier. Nor is it
difficult to see the reason why. A world which would not sug-
gest to me the concept of something persistent could not give
birth in me to the concept of object; an object 1s created by
us solely as a first sketch of an explanation of variable sensation,
and perdurability is its essential quality (p. 359f.). Thus such a
world, in so far as it is real and objective, constitutes a con-
tradiction and vanishes. If by the term sensation we designate
anything but the “immediate datum” of Bergson, if we think
of a sensation of an object—it 1s certain that causal deduction is
an integral part of it and cannot be separated from it. But this
is not true, we have seen, of scientific causal deductions, which
have nothing to do with our immediate sensation (except, of
course, in cases where they succeed in influencing the concep-
tion of common sense, p. 359f.). It is precisely this circumstance
which has permitted us to indulge in the preceding reasonings.

The world of which we can thus to a certain extent form an

EE


434 IDENTITY AND REALITY


image nearly resembles the world of Heraclitus (or rather the
one commonly attributed to him, for it may be that really the
great Ephesian was neither so very far from scepticism nor so
attached to the conception of order, nor even so hostile to
every concept of persistency).(104) It would be a world of
apparent persistencies, permitting us to conceive it as exterior
to us (or, if you prefer, forcing us to do so), but from which a
somewhat more careful examination would immediately make
every idea of persistence disappear. In such a world science
would not be ontological, as is ours, but truly positivistic or
idealistic, in the sense that it would encounter the acosmism
of absolute idealism, immediately at the beginning, not
at the end of its route. It would resemble ours in so far as it
would dissolve the object of common sense, but it would
differ from it in the fact that it would not accomplish this
labour to the advantage of a new reality; that it would not
put anything odjective in the place of the object, neither atom,
nor mass, nor force, nor energy, nor any hypostatized quality.
This seems very difficult to accept wholesale, whatever the
positivist theory may say. But on particular points, making use
of our analysis, we can pursue the question farther. Thus
what 1s called force 1s in the beginning from the conceptual
point of view something very complex, since it is an hypostasis
of acceleration, of relation between two velocities —velocity
itself being a derived concept, composed with the help of
the concepts of time and space. It is because the acceleration
is constant in time that we succeed in hypostatizing it, in
transforming it into a thing, and, on the other hand, we are
distinctly aided by the fact that we can, up to a certain point,
compare this hypostasis, force, with our sensation of effort
(just as we are aided in the case of the atom by the fact that we
can assimilate it to a solid body——that is, to an object of common
sense). Consequently in order to prevent phenomena of this
group from giving rise to the concept of a thing, it is necessary
that the relation regarded as constant in time (which is the very
essence of law) should not lend itself either to being simplified
or to being assimilated, however remotely, to our immediate
sensation or to the objects of common sense. This second
condition 1s not indispensable, of this we have proof in energy
and better still in the electron. But the first seems really essential


CONCLUSIONS 435


in the sense that if the relation remains too complicated, our
imagination seems powerless to transform it into a thing. We
have proof of this in the concept of force. No doubt we are so
accustomed to consider the laws of falling terrestrial bodies
from the point of view of acceleration that we should have
great difficulty in avoiding this manner of regarding them.
But for celestial bodies, the discovery of laws in themselves
very complicated, which govern their motions, and the
simplification of these laws, their deduction with the aid of
the composition of a velocity and an acceleration, have been
separated we know by a long lapse of time. One might, there-
fore, imagine without apparently too much trouble that this
Newtonian simplification was not at all possible, and that
Kepler’s laws remained ultimate; and it seems that henceforth
in this chapter of science a new concept of thing could hardly
have arisen.

Is there need to indicate how imperfect is this image to
which we have come with so much difficulty? It would certainly
be difficult to trace any limit as regards this simplicity. We
need only think of energy, of the complicated abstract relation
which it constitutes in reality, to be convinced that our
intellect shows in this respect an extreme good will. And
there is no doubt that this is an essential condition of its
functioning. For we have made it sufficiently clear that the
scientific intellect imperiously demands an ontological reality,
and if science did not permit the creation of a new one, it
would certainly be powerless to destroy the old one—that of
common sense. The science which we are trying to find 1s,
therefore, strictly unimaginable; because, our intellect being
what it is, there is a contradiction between the data of the
problem. Thus one can affirm the impossibility of a law-con-
forming world void of constant quantities. But the source of
this impossibility does not lie in the fact that this world 1s
conceived as law-conforming; this is implied in the term
world, which designates something external to our consciousness,
a unity which can only be composed of substances (as has
been confirmed precisely by the examples of Lucretius and
Newton). In other words, substantiality cannot be deduced
from the existence of law. The persistence of the relation,
implied in the very concept of law, is not enough to give rise


436 IDENTITY AND REALITY


to the concept of substance ; there must be added the tendency,
prior to common sense and creator of this latter, to see our
sensations persist in time.

But, besides this, the analysis just made shows us once more
that the world in which we live is not that of Heraclitus.
Nature really offers us relations susceptible of being simplified,
of being transformed into things ; this is the agreement between
nature and our intellect that we have observed (p. 395).

Let us notice again that this affirmation of the persistence
of certain concepts is not the only one that we can formulate
in respect to the universe. Indeed, side by side with the action
of causality, and in opposition, if not to this action itself,
at least to the fundamental ideas of our intellect whence this
conception is derived, we have the intervention of Carnot’s
principle, which forces us to assume an inevitable advance of
the world in one direction, always the same and without a
possible return. Nor can this be deduced from the conception
of a simple interdependence of phenomena, which evidently
admits cessation, inverse motion, and cyclic return.

In summary and with the aid of mathematical language,
since the concept of interdependence finds its most precise
expression in that of mathematical function, we may say that
the formula Y = f(X) can doubtless be applied to all that
happens, to all phenomena without exception (as far, of course,
as they are conceived to besubject to science—that is, to law) ;
but no one could pretend to make our present conception of
the world, with all we believe we know about it, enter entirely
into this formula, for we know that whatever may be the
modification undergone by X and, consequently, by Y, certain
terms on the two sides of the equation will remain invariable,
and we know also that X, at bottom, is or contains the measure
of time, the only true independent variable, which is subject to
a continual increase. Thus X will never be able to resume
its value, and it will be the same necessarily with Y. In other
words, conceived as the image of the world, as Weltbild,
according to the German expression, the formula Y = f(X)
is incomplete, because it is too lax.

Certain of the arguments just brought against Milhaud’s
contention obviously affect Bergson’s thesis also. However,
for the sake of greater certainty, let us try to determine more


CONCLUSIONS 439


precisely the import of the reasoning under its subjective
form. We have stated, in the course of our investigation, that
causal suppositions facilitate the application of rules; with
the advent of common sense it is clear that the hypothesis
of discrete bodies, that first and naive approximations to
substance, was an integral part of all reasoning with a view
to prevision ; and as to science we saw that one can reasonably
doubt even its possibility in a state where it would be totally
stripped of every causal hypothesis. But may it not be possible,
therefore, that it was this very necessity which created the
concept of causality; that we create discrete objects solely
because we can, in assuming their displacement, better foresee
the future; and that we suppose a fundamental identity in
what science calls at present the diverse forms of energy solely
because that will permit us to foresee better the appearance
of each one of them, and that the conception of the atom is
due solely to the obscure but powerful conviction that we
shall succeed by this means in establishing a mathematical
bond between all phenomena?

Thus presented, this reasoning seems to have an unusual
force. Yet if it were true that persistence was only an auxiliary
construction permitting the establishment of a law of connec-
tion or of a functional relation (according to the terminology
of the Marburg school), how does it happen that the prestige
of the mechanical or atomic explanation, the explanation
per subsiantiam, seems to take precedence over that of law or the
purely functional relation to such an extent? These should be
equivalent ways of comprehension, or rather, mathematical
comprehension, being the veritable end, ought constantly and
from the very beginning to take precedence over the other;
whereas we have seen from the example of Newton’s law of
gravitation, a purely functional conception never remains in
its purity, but, on the contrary, has an invincible tendency to
engender an explicative or substantialistic theory. How explain
that strange tendency to eliminate time if we pursue only
knowledge of the variation, when time is manifestly the inde-
pendent variable indicated by nature? And how much stranger
is the reduction of the phenomenal world to space, to nothing,
a reduction which (as we think we have proved) withdraws all
substratum from mathematical dependence.


438 IDENTITY AND REALITY


In the principles of conservation, in which the search for
constancy and the establishment of a functional dependence
seem to come in contact with each other, we saw that they
cannot be deduced from one another. Examining Milhaud’s
thesis, we found that the conservation of mass cannot be
deduced from mechanics; we may say here that it is hardly
likely that, in laying down this conservation, the intellect has
made an effort, even unconsciously, to construct mechanics.

Moreover, if atomism has really value for the understanding
only in proportion to its mathematical content, would not a
bond be necessary, if not manifest, at least powerful and
essential, always and everywhere, between the two? Now it is
the contrary which certainly has taken place in history. There
seems to be but little mathematics in Hindoo atomism; there is
none in the atomism of Democritus. Doubtless, Democritus was
preceded by Pythagoras, and it 1s allowable consequently to
establish a connection between the two conceptions; but
atomism, Aristotle assures us, took its origin from the conception
of Parmenides, from the theory of persistence, and not from
that of an arithmetical constitution of the universe. It cannot
even be said that atomism and quantitative conceptions are
terms necessarily connected, for we have seen that qualitative
atomic theories have existed. Finally, it is incontestable that
humanity, during long centuries, has explained and understood
by the aid of quality ; this is further attested by certain elements,
the persistence of which in science has been prolonged for
ages, and it is surely very difficult to force conceptions of this
sort into the plan of a mathematical idealism.

May it not be, however, that our intellect, having recognized
from the very beginning, from the birth of common sense, the
services which the assumption of persistence renders, from the
point of view of the perception of functional dependence of
phenomena, has transformed this hypothesis into a principle
to the point of making of it an almost independent state-
ment? Let us remark at once that this theory, in its application
to science, is very near to our own. As soon as it could be
proved by evidence that our reason, by a kind of impulse
capable of surpassing its end, is preoccupied with persistence
even where its application surpasses the need of the establish-
ment of mathematical relations, the action of this tendency


*


CONCLUSIONS 439


would evidently have to be sought for in science and its effect
carefully noted, whatever be the idea, which might be formed
of the genesis of the tendency in question. But it is sufficient,
we think, to envisage the consequences of the theory to perceive
its enormous difficulties. To prove that common sense is not
profoundly ontological is doubtless not a task to frighten
the ingenuity of a philosopher, given our ignorance of the
real ways of our understanding and the plasticity of our reason,
but science and its history are more refractory. Is it possible
to admit that the impulse, supposing it capable of leading
reason to continue its functioning after its goal has been
reached, will succeed also in driving away reason from its
goal to the extent of bringing about the elimination of time
and the assimilation of matter to space? And as for qualitative
theories, they would constitute thus an enigma for which
evidently a particular explanation must be sought.

Thus in order to refute these theories we have only had to
renew cach time, the direction being somewhat modified, the
course of the demonstration which is the foundation of our
work. The reader has doubtless found in the preceding pages
an inclination at times toward tiresome repetition. It is an
inconvenience that our method could scarcely avoid, but, on
the other hand, the conviction perhaps has been acquired
that this method, preached but not practised by Auguste
Comte, and consisting in penetrating the functioning of thought
by analysing its action in science, presents some advantages
over that, more immediate in appearance, which pretends to
proceed by direct introspection.

Finally, there remains one last hypothesis to consider, that
in which the principle of conformity to law would be deduced
from the principle of identity, would be a sort of abridged
edition of it, a short cut. We saw that we sometimes use the
concept of law when really we are thinking of the cause.
This is a synecdoche: we consider the establishment of law as a
preliminary step toward that of the causal relation. Now the
principle of causality is deduced from identity, the foundation
of our reason; may it not be, therefore, that our belief in the
order of nature comes from the fact that at bottom we believe
that it is subject to identity?(105) This hypothesis, at first sight,
seems difficult to accept. Identity, we know, appears to us as


440 IDENTITY AND REALITY


something desirable, but far off, as a flexible principle which
adjusts itself to circumstances, admits of explanations, engenders
illusions. Conformity to law, on the contrary, is rigid; it
claims to govern all that is not subject to the free will of
terrestrial or superterrestrial volition, it admits of no exception.
How could the latter have been derived from the former,
and that at the very dawn of human intelligence, since we
saw that primitive man (not to speak of the animals) conceives
without any doubt numerous phenomena, such as those of
gravitation, as subject to law? Once again, this supposition
seems hardly admissible, and yet one does not dare to affirm
that it is inacceptable. Our individuality being for us the type
of all unity, there is in us a sort of secret longing to believe
in the unity of our intellect, a longing which is somewhat
disturbed by the duality of the guiding principle, which we
have admitted for our scientific thought. Let us, therefore,
not exclude absolutely the idea of unification on this point.
Let us insist rather on this fact, that, at least where contemporary
man Is concerned, in so far as he applies himself to the know-
ledge of reality, the two principles must be considered as
functioning separately, although their action is unceasingly
intermingled.


NOTES


1. E. re Roy: Science et Philosophie. Revue de métaphysique, V11, 1899, p. 534-

2. MALEBRANCHE: De la recherche de la vérité. Paris, 1721, Xith Eclaircisse-
ment, Vol. IV, p. 277 and ff.

3. Cf. earlier, p. 252.

4. Ernst Casstrer: Das Erkenntnisproblem in der Philosophie und Wissenschaft
der neuern £cit. Berlin, 1906-1907, Vol. H, p. 530. Cf. my article, Revue de
mtlophysigut, January 1911, p. 122 and EF.

5. Cf. earlier, p. 253.

6. F. Rosensercer : /saak Newton. Leipzig, 1895, pp. 173, 192. The same
author points out the contradiction between the title Philosophiae naturalis
principia mathematica and the content of the writing, which, in fact, constitutes
only an exposition of the principles of mechanics (ib., p. 172); but this is
because Newton, like Descartes and like Leibniz, had the firm conviction
that everything in physics should be reduced to mechanics.

7. Cf. on this subject, Appendix I, p. 452 and ff.

8. Cf. Chapter I, pp. 18, 39.

g. Comre: Cours de philesophie positive, 4th ed. Paris, 1877, Vol. I, p. 18.


CONCLUSIONS AAI


10. /6., Vol. II, p. 453.

II. Comte : Politique positive, Vol. 1, p. 531. The date at which he expresses
this opinion (1851) only renders it the more curious.

12. Cours, Vol. If, p. 445.

13. 1b., Vol. III, p. 152. He maintained this opinion in 1851, cf. Politique
positive, Vol. I, p. 528: “Six irreducible branches” of physics, ‘“‘perhaps
seven.” It is at least probable that other errors of Comte are connected,
a little less directly, with the same tendency ; such as his opinion on Lamarck’s
theory of the variability of species which he characterizes as an “irrational
hypothesis” (Pol. pos. Vol. I, p. 665); his enthusiasm for the mediocre
conceptions of Gall (Cours, Vol. II, pp. 513, 534-587), an enthusiasm
which, even to the end of his life, he only partially got over (cf. Pol. pos.,
Vol. I, p. 669 and ff.) ; his hostility toward organic chemistry, which appeared
to him “a heterogeneous and factitious assemblage,’”? which must be
“destroyed”? (Cours, III, p. 174) and against which he renewed his attacks
even in 1851 (Pol. pos., Vol. I, p. 550), more than twenty years after
Wochler’s synthesis (1828), after the discovery of compound ammonia
by Wurtz (1849), and on the very eve of the appearance of Gerhardt’s
theory of types (1853); finally his misunderstanding of the development
of general chemistry, on which he wished to impose a peculiar theory of
binary composition (Cours, III, p. 81 and ff.; VI, p. 614), a theory which was
probably only a clumsy generalization of Berzelius’s conceptions, which the
chemists about that time were gradually abandoning ; with the result that
Comte, noticing the small success of his theory, accused them of a ‘‘meta-
physical spirit”’ (Pol. pos., Vol. I, p. 551).

14. Bacon: Movum Organon, Book I, Aph. 61. It is very curious to observe
that, just lke Comte and evidently for analogous reasons, Bacon was
strangely mistaken in his judgment about the great conquests of science.
Thus he severely blamed Copernicus (Glob. int., Cap. VI), and Gilbert,
whose works on electricity are a veritable monument to the purest scientific
thought, was his pet aversion (Novum Org., I, § 54; 11, Aph. 48). Naturally
we in no wise mean to attribute to Comte, on this question, opinions
analogous to those of Bacon. On the contrary, Comte constantly insisted
upon the necessity of hypothesis; absolute empiricism, according to him,
is ‘“‘not only entirely sterile, but even radically impossible for our under-
standing” (Cours, Vol. VI, p. 471). He only protested against hypotheses
characterized by him as ‘‘metaphysical.”? But this attitude, although less
absolute than that of Bacon, was enough to lead him into erorrs of the
same kind.

15. ROSENBERGER: Geschichte, 11, p. 191, remarks on Bacon’s little real
influence on the progress of science. Boyle seems to have allowed himself
to be tempted to apply, not, indeed, Bacon’s schemes (that would probably
have been impossible), but certain of his principles. Rosenberger thinks
that this circumstance was the reason why, having in hand all the experi-
mental data of Mariotte’s law, it slipped from him in the end.

16. BeERTHOLLET: Essai de statique chimique. Paris, 1803, p. 5.

17. Encyclopaedia Britannica, gth ed., article Dagy, p. 847.

18. Lizsic: Reden und Abhandlungen. Leipzig. 1874, p. 249.


442 IDENTITY AND REALITY


19. Congres international de physique, Vol. 1, p. 3.

20. Dunem: La théorie physique, p. 300; cf. earlier, p. 368.

a1. Id., La théorie physique, p. 308.

22. VAN’T Horr has recalled, with just pride, that Emile Fischer, in his
researches which ended in the synthesis of glucose, was guided by considera-
tions of stereochemistry (Revue générale des sciences, V, 1894, p. 272). It is
known that this theory was applied also to pentavalent nitrogen and quadri-
valent tin and sulphur.

23. H. Pomwrcart: La science et Phypothése, p. 208.

24. Cf. Dunem: La théorie physique, p. 43.

25. Cf. O. Reynowps: Proceedings of the Royal Society, Vol. XXVIII,
February 6, 1879.

26. Cournot: Traité de ’enchatnement. Paris, 1861, p. 157.

27. H. Pomcare: La science et Phypothése, p. 191.

28. BoLttrzmMann: Ueber die Unentbehrlichkeit der Atomistik, Wiedemann’s
Annalen, Vol. LX, 1897, p. 243. Cf. also id., Legons sur la théorie des gaz.
Trans. GALotr1 and Benarp, 2nd Part. Paris, 1905, p. 8.

29. H. Hertz: Gesammelte Werke. Leipzig, 1895, Vol. I, p. 1.

go. Spm: Lc., pp. 225, 271. It is probably because he believed that these
deductions could be complete that there entered into them only a priori
elements, that, the confirmation by experiment appearing uscless to him,
the agreement between this latter and our reason did not strike him.

31. Lucretius: Book II, line 388 and ff.

32. Dunem: Le mixte, p. 20. Cf. Kopp, Geschichte, Vol. IH, p. 31.

33. 1b., p. 28.

34. Dasrre: La vie et la mort, p. 32.

35. Descartes: Discours de la méthode, CEurres, Vol. VI. Paris, 1902,
p. 64 and ff.

36. Spmvoza: Ethics, 2nd Part, Prop. 7: ‘“‘Ordo et connexio idearum idem est
ac crdo et connexio rerum.” This was incontestably in Cartesian logic, but, of
course, we do not mean to affirm that Spinoza had not drawn from other
sources. Giordano Bruno had already said: ‘‘Primo dungue voglio che notiate
essere una e medesima scala per la quale la natura discende a la produzion de le cose
¢ Vinteletto ascende a la cognizion di quelle’ (De la causa, ed. Wagner. Leipzig,
1890, p. 285).

37- Lerpniz: De scientia universali. Opera, ed. Erdmann, p. 83.

38. Hxecer: Vorlesungen ueber die Naturphilosophie. Werke. Berlin, 1842,
Vol. VII, Preface by MIcHELET, p. 15.

99. Kant: Metaphysiche Antangsgriinde, p. 54.

40. Scuecuwne: Werke. Stuttgart, 1856, Vol. IV, p. 501.

41. Ib., p. 271.

42. Hacer: Vorlesungen ueber die Naturphilosophie. Werke. Berlin, 1849,
Vol. VII, § 278.

48. 1b., § 276,

44. db

45- Ib

46. Id., De orbitis planetarum. lena, 1801, Piazzi’s discovery dates from
January 1st of the same year,


CONCLUSIONS 443


47. Fourn.ts: Le mouvement positiviste. Paris, 1896, p. 19.

48. NewTon: Principia, trans. Motte. New York, 1848, p. 506. The context
makes clear that he is speaking of the diversity which rules everything
“fas to times and places.”

49. Kant: Metaphysiche Anfangsgriinde, p. 74.

50. Cf. Carinon: Etude critique sur la mécanique. Nancy, 1885, p. 12
and ff.

51. WHEWELL: The Philosophy of the Inductive Sciences. London, 1840,
p. 28.

52. 1b., p. 239.

53. Cf. for example, ib., p. 213, where he appears to affirm that inertia
could have been discovered independently of experiment, and p. 24 where
the kinematics appears as entirely a priori.

54. Cf. earlier, p. 177.

55. Cf. earlier, p. 146 and ff.

56. H. Pomvcaré: La science et l’hypothése. Paris, s.d., p. 157.

57. Hein: Die Lehre von der Energie. Leipzig, 1889, p. 41.

58. W. James: “The Dilemma of Determinism.” The Will to Believe.
New York, 1877, p. 145.

59. Cf. Kopp: Geschichte, Vol. I, p. 111; Vol. II, p. 243 and ff.

60. Cf. Coururat: Revue de métaphysique, X1, 1903, p. 92.

61. Cf. Le Dantec: Les Neo-Darwiniens. Revue philosophique, XLVIII,
1899. F. Houssay: Les théories atomiques en biologie. Congrés de philosophie de
rgou, Vol. IIL; and Appunn: La théorie de l’epigenése. Congrés de philosophie
de Genéve, 1904, compte rendu de CouTurRatT dans la Revue de métaphysique, X11,
1904, p. 1059. Haller, moreover, had himself indicated as the founda-
tion of his theory the principle: ‘‘There is no becoming.” Es gibt kein
Werden (ib.).

62. Cf. Dastre. La vie et la mort, p. 245.

63. vVAN’r Horr: Legons de chime physique, trans. Corvisy, 1st Part.
Paris, 1898, p. 9.

64. H. Pomvcare: Electrictté et Opitique. Paris, tgo1, p. IV-VIHIT. Ct.
La science et Vhypothése, p. 249.

65. MAXWELL: Scientific Papers, Vol. II, p. 219.

66. Dunem: L’évolution de la mécanique, p. 186.

67. HetmHoLtz (Vortraege und Reden. Brunswick, 1896, p. 407) insists
particularly on the fact that the leading principles which had inspired him
in his work of 1847 on the conservation of energy did not seem to him “new
but, on the contrary, very old.”

68. Macu, whose impartiality on this question can in no way be doubted,
declares that if Young and Fresnel had abandoned the undulatory hypothesis
(because of the difficulties experienced in imagining them in a fluid) the
loss to science would have been as great as if Newton had abandoned
the theory of gravitation (Erkenntnis und Irrtum. Leipzig, 1905, p. 251).

69. PLrancx: Die Maxwell’ sche Theorie. Wiedemann’s Annalen, 1899, Spl.

70. L. Lanog: Das Inertialsystem. Philosophische Studien, 1902, p. 55-

71, Dunem: La théorie physique, p. 424.

9a. ib., p. 145 and ff.


444 IDENTITY AND REALITY


73. BottzMANn: Wiedemann's Annalen, Vol. LX, 1897, p. 240.

74. OstTwaLp: Vorlesungen, p. 6.

75. Lancs: Geschichte des Materialismus, 4th ed. Iserlohn, 1882. Preface,
HERMANN COHEN, p. ix.

96. H. Pomcart: La science et Vhypothése, p. 176; cf. Thermodynamique,
Pp. Vii.

97. Mirunaup: L'idée d’ordre chez Auguste Comte. Revue de métaphysique,
IX, 1901, p. 599. Lavy-Brunt, La philosophie d’ Auguste Comte, and ed. Paris,
also remarks that in Comte ‘‘the scientific interest, however intense it may
be, is subordinated to the social interest.” Cf. ib., pp. 5, 25. It seems,
indeed, that this particular conviction of Comte’s flows in no way from
his conception of science, which would end rather by considering laws as the
ephemeral expression of a momentary condition of the science of a period
(cf. Cours, Vol. VI, pp. 600-601, 622, 630, 642), the restrictions (ib.,
pp. 601, 623) appearing as something foreign to the very substance of the
doctrine. It is true nevertheless, as we have already indicated (p. 398 f.), that
the error could not have taken place if Comtc had not proscribed all theore-


tical research.

78. E. re Roy: Un positivisrne nouveau. Revue de métaphysique, UX, 1gol,
p. 146.

79. A. Fresnet: Mémotre sur fa diffraction de la lumicre. Mémoires de
LP’ Académie royale des sciences, Years 1821-1822, Vol. V, p. 340.

80. H. Pomwvcaré: Thermodynamigue, p. vii.

81. Dung: L’¢volution de la mécanique, p. 343.

82. STALLo: 1.c., p. 132 and ff.

83. Jb., p. 134.

84. Dunem: La théorie physique, p. 50 and ff. Duhem’s thesis goes still
farther: he wishes to establish that “‘search for explanations was not Ariadne’s
clew.” The services rendered by mechanism seem to us, however, very
difficult to deny.

85. It is but right to state, however, that Duhem toward the end of his
life seems to have somewhat changed his opinion on this subject. Thus in his
important book on the Systéme du Monde (Paris, 1913 and following ycars,
Vol. I, pp. 194, 196, 240, 284), after having brought out that none of the
notions of peripatetic mechanism “‘has the least analogy with the notion
of mass”’ of modern physics, and that Aristotle’s theory of motion is open to
an objection which ‘‘ruins’’ it, he praises the University of Paris for having,
in the fourteenth century, “begun to substitute a sensible dynamics for

Aristotle’s dynamics,” and states that in the years to come “‘there will not
rest one stone upon another” in the edifice erected by this latter. (Addition
to the grd ed.]}

86. Bottzmann: Legons sur la théorie des gaz, 20d Part. Paris 1905, p. 206,
establishes “that Gibbs had continually on his mind this idea of molecular
theory, even when he did not use equations of molecular mechanics.”

87. Ansrorie: Metaphysics, Book 1, Chap. III, § 28.

88. Spr: .c., pp. 9, 18, 317. |
| Veber Manfred; cf. Scuoranuausr, Dis Welt als Wille und Vorstellung,

p- 213.


CONCLUSIONS 445


go. Ep. von Hartmann: Das Grundproblem der Erkenntnistheorie. Leipzig,
s.d., p. 21 and ff,

gt. Cf. Coururar: La logique de Leibniz. Paris, F. Alcan, 1go1, p. 258.

g2. It is right to recall that Ostwald’s system resulted in elevating energy
to this dignity (p. 349 f.).

93. Kant: (Xritth der reinen Vernunft, ed. Rosenkranz und Schubert p. 157),
declares that persistence of substance is “‘the substratum of the empirical
representation of time itself, which renders alone possible all determination
of time” (an welchem alle Zeitbestimmung allein moeglich ist). Therefore, in his
opinion, without the persistence of substance, uni ormity of time and
consequently all regularity of phenomena would disappear.

94. HARTMANN: i.¢., pp. 1, 9.

95. G. MitHaup: Science et hypothese. Revue de métaphysique. XI, 1903,
p. 786.

96. Kozrowsxr: Sur la notion de combinaison chimique. Congrés de philosophie
de rgoo, Vol. III, p. 536.

97. CassrRER: Substanzbegriff und Funktionsbegriff. Berlin, 1910, p. 404.
Cf. Natorp (Die logischen Grundlagen der exakten Wissenschaften. Leipzig, and
Berlin, 1910, pp. 70-72): ‘‘Liesse ueberhaupt nichts sich als konstant festhalten,
so waere alle Moeglichkett dahin, die Veraenderung selbst zur Bestimmung zu
bringen. Unumgaenglich bleibt doch, irgendein Letztes zu supponiren, ein Letztes
nicht an sich, sondern fuer die Rechnung, die uns die Natur wissenschaftlich
darstellt.”’

98. Newton: Opticks, grd ed. London, 1721, p. 375. A very analogous
development is found also in Lucretius, Book I, lines 552-565, 584-598.
We cannot say whether Newton had often read the De rerum natura. But
the reasoning of Lucretius is found reproduced in Gassendi, Opera, Lyon,
1658, Vol. I, p. 261, from which he might also have borrowed it.

99. Naturally setting aside for the moment recent developments of electric
theories (cf. p. 97 and ff.).

100. W. Crookes: La genése des elements. Revue scientifique, 1887, p. 203.

tor. Cf. p. 279. Lémery’s contemporary, Sylvius (De (a Boé) deduced,
on the contrary, the properties of the acids from the fact that they contained
“igneous matter.’’ It is thus clearly seen that the procedure of mechanism,
which consists in attributing properties resulting from the manner of
grouping, is opposed to that of qualitative theones which place the pro-
perty in the component.

102. “In a group, the matter does not interest us; it is the form alone
which is important,” said H. Poincaré while showing how the ancient
mathematicians, considering forms of matter differing in appearance,
suddenly found themselves united without knowing why: they had con-
sidered isomorphous groups (Science et méthode. Paris, 1908, p. 30). It is
because he entirely misunderstood this ‘‘manner of grouping,” which is a
fundamental conception of explanatory science, that Hannequin (£5sai
critique, pp. 22¢, 237) succeeds in affirming that science always carries over
to the atom the qualities required by the whole which it constitutes—which
is as much as to deny to the mechanical theory all possible utility and all


possible sense. |


446 IDENTITY AND REALITY


103. Cournor: Traiid de Denchainement. Paris, 1861, p. 156.

104. Cf. on this subject, Appendix IV.

105. It is thus that Spir conceives the relation between the two principles
(1.¢.) pp. 72, 211, 217), and it is doubtless because this deduction seems
evident to him that he sometimes succeeds in confusing them.


APPENDICES


LEIBNIZ, NEWTON, AND ACTION AT A DISTANCE


As soon as Newton had discovered the law of universal gravitation, the
question of action at a distance became inevitable, and was immediately
discussed ; it was the occasion for bitter and famous quarrels (see, for example,
in the Recueil de lettres entre Leibniz et Clarke, 1" écrit, § 1, et 5¢ écrit, § 114,
allusions which have an unfortunate air of appealing to the secular arm,
but it is only just to note that Leibniz had been preceded in this path by
the Newtonians, Cotes, in his famous preface to the Principia, having
declared that the search for the causes of gravity was a sign of atheism).

It is strange, indeed, that doubts could have arisen about the true opinions
of the protagonists. Was Newton really Newtonian, as the cighteenth
century used to say? Did he not, on the contrary, disapprove at bottom
of the hypothesis of action at a distance, formulated by those who invoked
him? And did not Leibniz, ‘‘starting from a system in which he rejected
attraction” change his opinion, in the end, “‘sharing, concerning the nature
of this property—the opinion of Newton’s close disciples,” as Duhem states
(L’évolution de la mécanique, p. 39)? Certainly, the different texts cited may
thus be interpreted. And yet we think that in considering the opinions of
these two great men as a whole we must confirm the ideas of their
contemporaries.

1. Lemniz.—Let us note in the first place that if anyone insists on his
having changed his opinion, it could not be in the sense which we have
just indicated. Indecd, it is especially in the work of his maturity (after
1700) that he speaks against Newtonian ideas with a clearness that leaves
nothing to be desired. Thus, in his Nouveaux Essats, 1703, he says: ‘On peut
juger que la matiére n’aura pas naturellement lattraction mentionnée ct-dessus, et
mira pas d'elle-méme en ligne courbe, parce qu'il nest pas possible de concevoir
comment cela s’y fait, c’est-d-dive de l’expliquer mécaniquement’’; and later he
qualifies this hypothesis as fainéanie, and accuses it of destroying ‘également
notre Philosophie quit cherche les raisons, et la divine sagesse qui les fournit’’ (ed.
Erdmann, p. 203). In his correspondence with Clarke, which dates from
the years 1715-16 and forms the last of Leibniz’s important writings (it is
certainly later than the passages upon force, etc., which are cited), he
expresses himself with still more energy, if that is possible. Let us copy
the most striking passages, 4° écrit, § 45: ‘“‘Zl est surnaturel aussi que
les corps s’altirent de loin, sans aucun moyen; et gu’un corps aille en rond,
sans s’écarter par la tangente, quoique rien ne Vempéchdt de s*écarter ainsi. Car
ces effets na sont point explicables par tes matures des choses.” 5° dent,
§ 35: “Car c'est une dtrange fiction que de faire toute la matiére pesante, et
méne vers toute autre matiére; comme si tout corps attiroit également tout autre corps
selon les masses et les distances; et cela par une attraction proprement dite, qui
ne soit pas dérivéed 'uns impulsion occulte des corps; au lieu que la pesanteur des corps


448 IDENTITY AND REALITY


sensibles vers le centre de la Terre, doit ttre produite par le mouvement de quelque
fiuide. Et il en sera de méme autres pesanteurs, comme de celles des plandtes
vers le Soleil, ou entre elles. Un corps nest jamats mai naturellement, que par un autre
corps qui le pousse en le touchant; et aprés cela il continue jusqu’d ce qu'il soit emplché
par un autre corps qui le touche. Toute autre opération sur le corps est ou miraculeuse ou
imaginaire.” 5° écrit, §1193: “‘Cest par la que tombent les Attractions proprement
dites, et autres opérations inexplicables par les natures des créatures, qu'il faut faire
effectuer par miracle, ou recouriy aux absurdités, c’est-d-dire aux qualitds occultes
scholastiques, qu’on commence a nous débiter sous le spécieux nom de forces, mais
qui nous raménent dans le royaume des ténébres. C’esi inventa fruge, glandibus vesct.
§ 114. “Du temps de M” Boyle, et d’autres excellens hommes qui fleurissoient en
Angleterre sous les commencements de Charles I], on n’auroit pas osé nous débiter
des notions si creuses. J’espere que ce beau temps reviendra sous un aussi bon gouverne-
ment que celui d’d présent, et que les esprits un peu trop divertis par le malheur des
temps, retourneront a@ mieux cultiver les connoissances solides. Le capital de M™
Boyle doit dinculquer que tout se faisoit mécaniquement dans la Physique. Mais
c'est un malheur des hommes de se dégoiter enfin de la raison méme, et de s’ennuyer de
la lumiere.”’ Therefore, to be in agreement with the facts it ought to be sup-
posed that Leibniz, at first favourable to action at a distance, was finally
converted to the opposite side, or else he must twice have changed his
opinion and toward the end of his life he must have returned to the opinions
he professed at the beginning. These suppositions certainly are not at all
unlikely in themselves. What makes them rather difficult to maintain is
a somewhat psychological argument suggested by the correspondence with
Clarke. Writings in which Leibniz speaks of force had been published
long before this. It is hardly likely, in view of the celebrity of their author,
that Clarke should have been unaware of them, if, indeed, he did not expressly
peruse his critic’s works in order to find weapons. Doubtiess Clarke’s tone
is a little more moderate than that of his illustrious adversary. And yet is
it believable that, had he been able to place Leibniz in contradiction with
himself, he would have allowed this argumentum ad hominem to escape? How-
ever there is not a trace of this in the Recueil de letires. But we believe that,
by an examination of the aforesaid texts, it can be directly established that
Leibniz in this question did not change his mind, and that his opinions,
rather difficult to understand because of the fragmentary manner with
which he loved to express himself and which frequently renders his declara-
tions obscure in spite of the apparent clearness of his sentences, have,
nevertheless, been entirely consistent from one end to the other of his
scientific career.

Let us note at once that Leibniz, in discussing these matters, generally
commences by establishing the principle that ‘‘the essence of body”
does not consist in extension alone. This seems now quite evident to
us (although, as we saw in Chapter VII, modern science really tends
equally toward the contrary supposition): but science at that moment
shes pendent staan as is _ paatee had absolutely confused the

concepts of matter and space. t in date of the writings cited
Duhem (it was published in 1691) has precisely the title, Lettre pg aes
si Pessence du corps consiste dans I’ tendus (ed. Erdmann, pp. 119-113). To


APPENDICES 449


quote: ‘Tout cela fait connattre qu'il y a dans la matiére quelque autre chose, que
ce gus est purement Géométrique, c’est-d-dire, que Uétendue et son changement, et
son changement tout nud. Et a le bien considérer, on s'apergoit qu'il y faut joindre
quelque notion supérieure ou métaphysique, sgavoir celle de la substance, action,
et force; et ces notions portent que tout ce qui pdtit doit agir réciproquement, et que
tout ce qui agit doit pdtir quelque réaction; et par conséquent qu’un corps en repos
ne doit pas fire emporié par un autre en mouvement sans changer quelque chose de
la direction et de la vitesse de Vagent. Je demeure d’accord que naturellement tout
corps est élendu, et quil n’y a point d’étendue sans corps. Il ne faut pas néanmoins
confondre les notions du lieu, de espace, ou de l’étendue toute pure, avec la notion
de la substance, qui outre l'étendue, renferme la résistance, c’est-d-dire, l’action et
la passion.” And before this in the Replique d l’abbé de Conti (1687, ed. Dutens,
Vol. III, p. 199), he affirms, “‘qu’1l faudra admetire dans les corps quelque chose de
différent de la grandeur et de la vitesse, d moins qu’on veuille refuser aux corps toute
la puissance d’agir.”’ Likewise in the De primae philosophiae emendatione et de
notione substantiae (which appeared in 1694, Erdmann, p. 122), after having
insisted on his notion of substance, he continues: ‘Quod illi non satis percepisse
videntur, gui essentian ejus [sc. corporis} in sola extenstone . . . collacaverunt.”
In the short Lettre 2 un ami sur le cartéstanisme, we read: “‘C’est depuis quelque
temps quej’ai des démélés avec Messieurs les Cartésiens. . . . Car quoique je demeure
d’accord que le détatl de la nature se doit expliquer mécaniquement, tl faut, qu’outre
Udtendue on congoive dans le corps une force primitive, qui explique intelligiblement
tout ce qu’il y a de solide dans les formes des écoles (Erdmann, p. 123). He also
says in the Supplément d la lettre a Fabri (dated in 1702, Mathem. Schriften,
ed. Gerhardt, Vol. VI, p. 98): ‘““Nempe corporis essentiam Cartesiant collocant in
sola extenstone, ego vero, etsi cum Aristotele et Cartesto contra Democritum Gassendum-
que Vacuum nullum admittam .. . puto tamen cum Democrito et Aristotele contra
Cartesium aliquid in corpore esse passivum praeter extenstonem, id scilicet quo
corpus resistit penetratione.’ And again in the Commentatio de anima brutorum
(1870, Erdmann, p. 463) he comes back to the idea that extension alone
does not suffice for the conception of body.

But from the moment that this “‘superior metaphysical notion” of “‘sub-
stance, action, and force” is to be taken primarily as differentiating body
from space, and furthermore, as we have seen, action at a distance is to
be rejected, it remains then that it is a principle of action manifesting
itself in contact—in other words, as a synonym of our notion of mass,
as it is understood, of course, by physicists, who exclude action at a dis-
tance. What appears to contradict this conception, and what has doubt-
less been one of the principal sources of error for commentators, is the
fact that Leibniz seems sometimes to state that the notion of mass is
not sufficient. The apparently most conclusive passage from this point of
view is found in Systeme Nouveau de la Nature (1695, Erdmann, p. 124):
“Mais depuis ayant taché d’approfondir les principes mémes de la Mécanique, pour
rendre raison des lois de la Nature que l'expérience faisoit connafire, je m’apergus
gue la seule considération d'une masse élendue ne suffisoit pas et qu'il falloit employer
encore la notion de la force, qui est trés intelligible quoiqu'elle soit de ressort de la
Métaphysique.”

This difficulty is solved if one is mindful that the term mass has not here

FF


450 IDENTITY AND REALITY


the same signification as in modern mechanics. This is clearly shown in
the following passage (Supplément d@ Ia lettre d Fabri, already cited, p. 100):
‘Porro, tO dvuvausyov seu potentia tn corpore duplex est, Passiwa et Activa.
Vis passiva proprie constituit Materiam seu Massam, Active évreAdyevay seu
Sormam.” The same distinction between the passive and active power
of matter appears in the Lettre d Wagner (1710, Erdmann, p. 466, § II):
**Respondeo primo, principium activum non tribut a me materiae nudae sive primae,
quae mere passiva est, ef in sola antitypia et extensione consistit; sed corpori seu
maleriae vestitae Sive secundae, quae practerea Entelechiam primitivam seu principium
actinum continet.”’ The following explains still more clearly this distinction:
‘*Respondeo secundo, resistentiam materias nudas non esse actionem, sed meram pas-
stonem, dum nempe habet antitypiam, seu impenetrabilitatem, qua quidem resistil
penetraturo, sed non repercutit, nisi accedat vis elastica.”’ And so also in the Com-
mentatio de anima brutorum: ‘Materia in se sumta seu nuda constituitur per Antitypiam
et Extensionem. Antitypiam voco illud attributum, per quod materia quod sit...
principium . . . motus seu actionis externas. Et tale principium appellamus sub-
Stantiale, item vim primitivan éyreAézecay thy mpwrny .. . guod actioum
cum passivo conjunctum substantiam completam constitutit (Erdmann, p. 469).

This active principle appears, moreover, as an intensive magnitude, the
cause of change in nature: Activum vel Potentia praeditum est Thema (vel rerum
Status) ex quo sequetur mutatio certis quibusdam practerea positis tnertibus, seu
quae talia sunt, ut ex ipsis solis positis uicunque nulla mutatio sequatur (CASSIRER,
Leibniz’s System, Marburg, 1902, p. 336). It is the principle which creates
the laws of motion, since it is the cause of the fact that the sum of the ots vive
cannot increase, one body not being able to push another except at the

of its own vis viva, as appears from the continuation of the Supplément
@ la lettre A Fabri (we cite this passage in Appendix III with reference to
Kepler’s concept of inertia).

Thus the difference between the modern conception of mass and that
of Leibniz is in the fact that in using this term we think both of the passive
and the active side of the phenomenon; whereas Leibniz, although he was
aware, of course, that the two are inseparably linked together (see the
passage from the Lettre sur la question, etc.) separated them, nevertheless,
in thought, and called the faculty of suffering alone, antitypy, impenctrability
or mass, attributing it to primary or bare matter, whereas he thought that
the faculty of acting was form, entelechy or force and, added to the first,
constituted invested matter. Assuming bodies which were endowed with
antitypy alone, they would have been in a way hard bodies, but deprived
of all elasticity ; these expressions are not correct in the sense that the concept
of hardness includes, as far as we are concerned, a faculty of acting, whereas
Leibniz thought really of a sort of purely passive hardness having need,
in order to manifest itself in action, of the accession of an elastic force. This
is seen in the passage already cited from the Lettre d Wagner, and still more

clearly in the continuation of the Supplément 2 fa lettre db Fabri, where he
deduces the fact that every body is essentially elastic. But this cis elastica
is not force or entelechy itself; it must be explained by this force (which
he calls this time active force) and motion, quae ex motu, adeogue et vi activa
~—~—~'-> superaddita, derivari debst, he adds in the Lettre d Wagner after the


APPENDICES 451


words vis elastica, and in the Supplénent 4 la lettre A Fabri he says the same
(/.c., p. 103): ‘Hine autem intelligitur, etsi admittatur vis illa primitiva seu Forma
substantiae, tamen in vi elastica aliisque phaenomenis explicandis semper procedendum
esse Mechanics, nempe per figuras quae sunt modificationes materiae, et per impetus
qui sunt modificationes formae, the word mechanice having here, and in general
with Leibniz, the meaning of action by contact—that is, to the exclusion
of action at a distance ; sometimes, however, he uses it to indicate that which
has to do with primary or bare matter alone, as when he says (Commentatio de
anima brutorum, Erdmann, p. 463): Itague pro certo habendum est, ex solo
mechanismo, seu materia nuda ejusque modificationibus perceptionem explicari non
posse, non magis, quam principium actionis et motus. There is here evidently a
certain vacillation in vocabulary which has contributed to the misunder-
standing of which we have spoken. (Concerning Leibniz’s double concept
of mass, compare also Cassrrer, l.c., p. 333-342, 515.)

The passage which we have just cited shows, moreover, that Leibniz
also attached to this concept of force the perception as well as the soul of
an animal. This is a point of view on which he strongly insists in the greater
part of the writings which we have mentioned in this Appendix. We have
sometimes had to mutilate the quotations, replacing with dots all that
relates to that aspect of the question in order not to interrupt our deduction.
The clearest exposition is in the Lettre d Wagner: Respondeo tertio: Hoc principium
actwum, hanc Entelechiam primam, esse revera principium vitale, etiam percipiendt
facultate praeditum, et indefectible, ob rationes dudum a me allegatas. Idque ipsum
est, quod in brutis pro anima ipsorum habeo. If one observes that Leibniz in his
Systeme Nouveau (cf. p. 352 and 517) introduces the notion of force, declaring
it, without any other explanation, to be “‘trés intelligible quot qu'elle sort
du ressort de la Métaphysique’—in an analogous passage of the treatise
De primae philosophae emendatione (Erdmann, p. 122) he adds after the
words vis seu virtus the parenthesis: “‘quam German: vocant Kraft, Galli la
Sorce,” which clearly shows that he was referring not to a scientific abstraction,
but to a common-sense notion, one comes to the conclusion that Leibniz
was thinking of what we call the sensation of effort. Moreover, he uses this
term in one of his other writings (Lettre a Pélisson, ed. Dutens, Vol. III,
p. 718): ‘‘La notion de force est aussi claire que celle de Paction et de la passion.
Car c'est ce dont action s’ensuit, lorsque rien ne Vempéche; V effort, conatus: et au lieu
que le mouvement est une chose successive, laquelle par conséquent n’extste jamats,
non plus que le temps parce que toutes les parties n’existent jamais ensemble; au
lieu de cela, la force ou l’effort existe tout entier d chaque moment, il dott ttre quelque
chose de véritable et de réel.”” Consequently it does not seem too bold to establish
a relationship between his conceptions and those of Schopenhauer, who
says that in exerting an act of will we find ourselves “behind the scenes
of nature” (cf. Chap. LX, p. 308).

If one admits that Leibniz used the term intelligible in the sense which
we have just indicated, his declaration relative to the complete
intelligibility of nature (see Chapter [X, p. 298) assumes a very different
signification. It seems, moreover, as if one had to have recourse to this
interpretation, for we have seen that Leibniz conceived sensation as
inexplicable by mechanism (p. 291), and the concept of pre-established


452 IDENTITY AND REALITY


harmony (p. 302) proves that he placed transitive action in the same
category; both taking place apparently in a sphere superior to things
which “the angel’? might explain, and which are only to be reached by
an “infinite analysis." We may remark, to avoid all misunderstanding,
that even when we interpret him thus, Leibniz’s postulate differs
from our conception, for he supposes that mechanism (neglecting the
irrational which it contains) can entirely explain nature (with the exception
of sensation), whereas we believe that this “‘explication” by mechanism
aims really only at an identity, which is unrealizable, as Carnot’s principle
shows.

In the text we have preferred to take literally Leibniz’s affirmation,
because it offered us the opportunity of making our thought clear. Indeed,
it seems that Schopenhauer understood it thus; the statement cited by us
(although Leibniz’s name is not mentioned) certainly alludes to it; it is,
moreover, more than probable that Schopenhauer was not aware of the
relationship of the conceptions which we have stated.

Leibniz is known to have superposed a metaphysical world of monads
on the physical world of mechanism ; and the difficulty which one encounters
in trying to grasp his thought becomes particularly acute when one secks
to understand, as in the question just discussed, how this superposition
operates.

2. Newron.—lIt is certain that Newton never expressly affirmed that
gravitation was due to a genuine action at a distance. But the second edition
of Principia, which appeared in 1713, is preceded by a preface by Roger
Cotes, which contains very decided declarations on this subject. Gravitation
is an essential quality of matter, in the same degree as extension, mobility,
and impenetrability; it is not an occult quality, since its existence can be
directly proved ex Phaenomenis ostensum est hanc virtutem revera existere. Can
it be supposed that concerning this very essential question Newton was in
absolute disagreement with his disciple, and that he yet allowed him free
play at the risk of being compromised by him? We know that Newton
cordially detested and systematically fled from anything which resembled
discussion, or polemic. Is it believable that he would have allowed opinions
necessarily shocking to his contemporaries to pass as his, involving him
in contradictions and contentions, if these opinions were diametrically
opposed to those which he really professed? Is it not infinitely more likely
that he approved of them tacitly, to use Rosenberger’s apt expression
(Geschichte, UII, p. 2)?

In regard to these deductions, and to the unanimous sentiment of his
contemporaries and of immediate posterity, a certain number of texts
are cited. The most precise in appearance is a passage from a letter to
Bentley (dated February 25, 1692, Opera, ed. Horsley, London, 1785,
p. 438): “That gravity should be innate, inherent, and essential to
matter, so that one body may act upon another through a vacuum,
without the mediation of anything else, by and through which their action
and force may be conveyed from one to another, is to me so great an
absurdity, that I believe no man who has in philosophical matters a
competent faculty of thinking can ever fall into it.”’ But, looking at it more


APPENDICES 453


closely, one perceives that this declaration is much less conclusive than
it seems to be. We shall see a little later that Clarke, with somewhat less
emphasis, expressed himself in an almost analogous manner; and yet we
cannot doubt that, from our point of view, he was a partisan of action at a
distance. Newton does not at all say that action seems possible to him only
by the contact of two bodies; he is content to declare that one body, in
order to act upon another, has need of an intermediary ; he leaves undeter-
mined the nature of this ‘‘something’’ and more particularly does not
affirm that it must be something of a material nature. Moreover, we need
only notice how these declarations were understood by his correspondent.
Bentley, who was a Hellenist, but well versed in scientific things, and, more-
over, evidently endowed with great assimilative powers, had been charged
to give the first series of eight annual lectures devoted to the defence of
Christianity which Robert Boyle, the celebrated scientist, who was at the
same time a rigid Protestant, had founded with a legacy. This was the
reason why he wrote to Newton, whose letters were replies to Bentley’s
request for information. The lectures were given that same year, 1692,
and were printed soon after. They were very successful, going through
several editions. The passages which we cite are extracts from the seventh
lecture entitled A Confutation of Atheism from the Origin and Frame of the
World; it was delivered on November 7th. ‘Tis utterly inconceivable,”
says Bentley, ‘‘that inanimate brute Matter, without the mediation of
some Immaterial Being, should operate upon and affect other Matter
without mutual contact; that distant Bodies should act upon each other
through a Vacuum without the intervention of something else by and through
which the action may be conveyed from one to the other.”’ And he adds:
*‘Now if these things be repugnant to Human Reason, we have great reason
to afirm that Universal Gravitation, a thing certainly existent in Nature,
is above all Mechanism and material Causes, and proceeds from a higher
principle, a Divine energy and impression”’ (Richard Bentley, E:ght Sermons
Preach’d at the Honourable Robert Boyle’s Lecture, 5th ed, Cambridge, 1724,
pp. 277, 281). The general tenor of this explanation was certainly congenial
to Newton; it is known that from that time on the most intimate relations
existed between the two men, relations which lasted until the death of
Newton. And yet perhaps the latter leaned rather toward a less direct
action of divinity, and the intervention of some sort of medium or of an
immaterial or spiritual principle, the idea of which he had borrowed
from the semi-theological doctrine of Henry More, a philosopher of the
second half of the seventeenth century, whose doctrines seem to have
enjoyed a considerable authority at that time. The outline of this is to
be found in Lasswitz (Wirklichkeiten, and ed., p. 42 and ff.), where one
sees how, with the help of Newton’s religious tendencies, that which at the
beginning was a sort of article of theological faith was transformed by him
into a scientific theory, which, because of his prestige, was accepted by those
around him. From a strictly physical point of view, it is clear that these
conceptions amount to pure and simple action at a distance. Clarke, in his
discussion with Leibniz (4° réplique, § 45, Erdmann, p. 762), again makes
allusion to an immaterial principle: “JI est vrai que si un corps en attiratt un


454 IDENTITY AND REALITY


autre, sans [intervention d’aucun moyen, ce ne serait pas un miracle, mais une contra-
diction; car ce serait supposer qu'une chose agit oi elle n'est pas. Mais le mayen par
lequel deux corps s’attirent l'un P autre peut tire invisible et intangible et d'une nature
différente de mécanisme.”’ Cotes, on the contrary, sets it aside; if Newton
permitted the theory to be stated in this manner, it was probably because,
having come to the conviction that from a scientific point of view these two
kinds of conception amounted to the same thing, he judged it preferable
to separate what was really a theological hypothesis from a book on physics.
It is clear also that one can conceive of force as that ‘‘something"’ inter-
mediary, which is spoken of in the letter to Bentley; but it must be noticed
that this very term force is there evidently applied not to action at a distance,
but, as in Leibniz, to action by contact.

There are, apart from the letter to Bentley, several more or less ambiguous
passages here and there in the Principia and Opticks. One of the most explicit
follows, in the Principia, the famous hypotheses non fingo. But the quotation
should be reproduced in its entirety : Rationem vero harum Gravitatis proprietatum
ex Phaenomenis nondum potui deducere, et Hypotheses non fingo. Quicquid enim ex
Phaenomenis non deducitur, Hypothesis cocanda est; et Hypotheses seu Metaphysicae,
seu Physicae, seu Qualitatum occultarum, seu Mechanicae, tn Philosophia Experi-
mentali locum non habent. In hac Philosophia Propositiones deducuntur ex Phaeno-
menis, et redduniur generales per Inductionem. Sic tmpenetrabilitas, mobdilitas, et
impetus corporum et leges motuum et gravitatis innotuerunt. Et satis est quod Grauitas
revera existat, et agat secundum leges a nobis expositas, et ad corporum coelestium
et maris nostri motus omnes sufficiat (Principia, Arnsterdam, 1714, p. 487).

Surely, if one isolates the sentences in hac philosophia, etc., they have the
appearance of a Comtian profession of faith. But in this respect it is sufficient
to go back to the first phrase: Nondum potui, etc. What Newton meant
was that in the exposition of results of scientific research, one must refrain
from formulating assumptions which would not be confirmed by facts;
but he did not distinguish, in this respect, between assumptions relative
to laws and those concerning the mode of production. Especially, he did
not intend to deny that these assumptions were useful in guiding the
scientist, and still less did he think of forbidding research on the mode of
production. The continuation of the same passage proves this abundantly.
It is a slightly nebulous exposition in which there is a question de Spiritu
guodam subtilissimo corpora crassa pervadente et in iisdem latente. Newton attributes
to this hypothetical being the phenomena of cohesion, electricity, light;
in the same way Sensatio ommis excitatur et membra Animalium ad voluntatem
moventur, vibrationibus scilicet hujus Spiritus per solida nervorum capillamenta ab
extermis sensorum organis ad cerebrum et a cerebro in musculos propagatis. Newton
adds: Sed haec paucis exponi non possunt; neque adest sufficiens copia Experimentorum
guibus leges actionum hujus Spiritus accurate determinari et monstrari debent.
Evidently we have here to do with a genuine hypothesis about the mode
of production, and if Newton refrains from developing it, it is solely because
his research is not far enough advanced. As to the nature of this hypothesis
it is no doubt derived from More’s conceptions, and it is hardly likely that
action by contact would have gained by a more ample exposition.

A declaration analogous to the hypotheses non fingo was inserted by Newton


APPENDICES 455


in the Opticks amongst the Questions added to the first Latin edition (1706).
But here again it is better to quote the entire passage. After having rejected
every attempt to explain gravitation by the action of a universal medium,
Newton continues: ‘“‘And for rejecting such a Medium we have the
Authority of those of the oldest and most celebrated Philosophers of Greece
and Phenicia, who made a Vacuum and Atoms, and the Gravity of Atoms,
the first Principles of their Philosophy; tacitly attributing Gravity to some
other Cause than dense Matter. Later Philosophers banish the Consideration
of such a Cause out of Natural Philosophy, feigning Hypotheses for explain-
ing all things mechanically and referring other Causes to Metaphysicks:
Whereas the main Business of Natural Philosophy is to argue from Phaeno-
mena without feigning Hypotheses, and to deduce Causes from Effects,
till we come to the very first Cause, which certainly is not mechanical”
(Opticks, 3rd ed. London, 1721, p. 343). It is seen that the hostility
toward hypotheses (evidently expecially Cartesian hypotheses) is here
allied with the search for causes, as far as and including the First Cause
(conceived, it seems, somewhat as in Bentley, in the passage already cited).

On the other hand, we find in the Opticks passages which seem to show
that Newton at a certain moment had really thought of reducing gravitation
to the mechanical action of a medium. In Advertisement II to the XXIst
Question (1b., 1721, p. 325), Newton expressly defends himself against
having assumed action at a distance: ‘“‘And to shew that I do not take
Gravity for an Essential Property of Bodies I have added one Question con-
cerning its Cause, chusing to propose it by way of a question, because I
am not yet satisfied about it for want of Experiments.” In the Question
itself, he, indeed, speaks of a medium, conccived evidently as material,
which would be rarer in the interior of the sun, of the stars, of the planets,
and of the comets than in the empty celestial spaces ; this medium, becoming
more and more dense as onc moves away from these bodies, would be the
cause of the gravitation of celestial bodies towards cach other and of parts
of these bodies towards the bodies themselves. The very form of this passage
aS an interrogation and the guarded wording of the Advertisement show
that Newton did not take these declarations too seriously and if, in the
preface to the second edition of the Opticks, he inserted several sentences
where he seems still to protest against the opinion attributed to him of a
direct action at a distance, he, nevertheless, did not think of suppressing
the passages of the XX XIst Question, where he traced the programme of a
physics which would reduce all phenomena to actions at a distance exerted
by particles of bodies.

These were apparently only stylistic phrasings inserted as a precaution
and destined to anticipate polemics from which Newton willingly fled. His
contemporaries certainly understood that to be his true thought, and
everything seems to indicate that they were right. One may suppose that
Newton before reaching the concept of action at a distance must have groped
in the dark; it is probably at this time that he made certain efforts with a
view to explaining the action of gravitation by that of a material medium;
later he made a clever use of these vague attempts to give a semblance of
satisfaction to his adversaries.


456 IDENTITY AND REALITY


It must, however, be recognized that this way of looking at the matter of
Newton’s fundamental opinions cannot be supported by direct proof.
We see in the Correspondence with Cotes (Correspondence of Sir Isaac Newton unth
Professor Cotes, etc., by J. Eppieston. London, 1850, p. 158) that Newton,
who carefully went over the proofs of the second edition, which were sent to
him as they came out, had expressly refused to go through those of Cotes’s
preface. ‘‘I must not see it, for I find I shall be examined on it,” he wrote
to his disciple. (Cotes, in the first place, had rather curiously proposed that
Newton alone, or with Bentley, should write this preface, promising in
advance to sign it and to defend it afterward, but Bentley, in Newton’s name
and in his own, had immediately repelled this proposition, 1b., p. 150).
Eddleston thinks that Newton’s refusal was due to the attacks directed by
Cotes against Leibniz with regard to the infinitesimal calculus, Newton
wishing to leave to his disciple the entire responsibility for these attacks.
But it may be supposed, if need be, that the cut and dried opinions formu-
lated by Cotes with regard to gravitation, had something to do with this
and that Newton did not entirely approve of them. It remains much more
likely, however, that this disapproval (supposing it to be real) was directed
rather to the form than to the contents of Cotes’s conceptions (cf. on Newton's
habit of having his opinions dogmatically stated by his disciples and making
use of them to fight his adversaries, all the while preserving an apparent
neutrality, F. Rosenberger, Jsaak Newton und seine physikalischen Prinzipten,
Leipzig, 1895, pp. 6, 260, 287).

It is curious to notice that Cotes himself wrote later in such a way as
to weaken his declarations concerning the essential nature of gravitation
(EDDLESTON, Correspondence, p. 158).


II
THE PASSAGES FROM PLUTARCH AND SIMPLICIUS


For the passage from Plutarch we made use in our French text (p. 114)
of Bétolaud’s translation (Paris, 1870, p. 139). The very approximative
manner in which certain expressions are rendered seems to facilitate the
confusion. Here is a version which we attempted to render as literally as
possible: ‘‘And what helps the moon not to fall is its motion and the
rapidity of its revolution. Thus objects placed in a sling cannot fall because
of the turning in a circle. For motion which is in conformity with nature
moves each thing if it is not diverted by something else. That is why weight
does not move the moon, because circular motion repels the inclination
downward.”

The word translated by Bétolaud by neutralize is éyypovdperor; it
signifies chases, diverts, pushes back. DUEBNER in his Latin translation (Paris
1856) expressed it by excutit. The term go71, which we have expressed by
inclination downward, is used currently to designate the force which makes the
beam of a balance incline; it may, therefore, be translated also by gravity,
as Bétolaud has done; we, however, have preferred a less precise term, to
distinguish it from Sdpoz, which precedes it.

The passage from Simplicius has been designated by Wontwitt (Archiv
Suer Voelkerpsychologie, Vol. XV) and summarized by Vairati (Le specula-
ztont di Giovanni Benedetti, etc., Ac de Turin, 1897-98, p. 23). We know of no
translation, so we have attempted the following:

“Hipparchus, in his mepi r@r da fapdrnta cdtw Pepouérwy, in regard
to objects thrown upward, above the earth, says that the impulse (ioyv;)
with which an object is thrown upward, as long as it predominates
over the force (dtrayuc, potentia) is the cause of the ascent, and that the
velocity of the ascent of the thrown object is proportional to that pre-
dominance ; but when the former (ia yt) diminishes, the object is no longer
carried upward with the same velocity and afterwards the object thrown
is carried downwards because of its inclination (go71, weight) when there
still exists something of the force (dtvauic) which causes ascent, then
this latter gradually vanishing, the object carried downward is carried
more and more quickly and attains the highest degree of velocity when the
force which has projected upward ceases. He gives the same cause for objects
dropped from above; for there subsists in them to a certain degree the
force of that which has held them back, and this force acting in a contrary
direction determines at the beginning the slowness of the descent.” Aristotle,
Opera, ed. Bekker, Vol. IV; Scholia, ed. Brandis, p. 485.


III
THE COPERNICANS AND THE PRINCIPLE OF INERTIA


We saw (p. 149, Note 14) that according to Rosenberger the triumph of
geocentric theories in antiquity is connected with the absence of the
concept of inertia.

This remark is certainly quite correct. Our immediate sensation seems
at first sight to give us an absolute certainty concerning motion and rest;
the principle of inertia destroys this certainty by convincing us that the
phenomena which we should consider as characterizing rest are in reality
those of rectilinear and uniform motion; and we can therefore envisage
the motion of that which appears to us in apparent rest.

This opinion, however, entails an immense historical difficulty. Logically
the principle of inertia would have to be anterior in time to the heliocentric
theory or the two must at least have been stated simultaneously. Now
Rosenberger himself attributes the principle of inertia to Galileo. What, then,
could be the opinion of Copernicus himself and of those who adhered to
his doctrine in the interval which separates the appearance of the De
revolutionibus (1543) from the publications of Galileo and even in certain
respects we have seen from the publications of Descartes? The historians
of physics, in speaking of the men of this period, do not seem to have cast
all the light that is desirable upon the problem we have just formulated.

It is doubtless because he was conscious of this difficulty that Painlevé
formulated a curious theory as to the origin of the principle of inertia
(Bulletin de la Société frangaise de philosophie, 5th year, 1905, p. 36-37). This
eminent mathematician supposes that Copernicus and the Copernicans
conceived of the principle in its generality; if they did not state it, it is
only because of the material danger which such an affirmation would
have presented. It would seem, however, that in the theological discussions
which arose concerning these theories (as, for example, in the trial of Galileo),
it was solely a question of the earth’s motion. After Galileo’s condemnation,
Descartes, whose prudence is well known, stated the principle of inertia
without apparently having the least consciousness of expressing a daring
opinion from a religious point of view; whereas in speaking of the earth's
motion he, on the contrary, uses endless precaution.

We believe, nevertheless, that there is a great portion of truth in Painlevé’s
theory, that Copernicus and his immediate successors really depended
upon a principle implicitly understood and relative to motion. This principle,
however, was not our principle of inertia, but a much less precise idea,
partly erroneous moreover, which might be called the principle of relative
motion.

In the first place it may be stated that according to Copernicus the
planetary bodies are in no wise moved by inertia. We have mentioned in
the text his opinion on the subject of natural circular motion and the absence
of centrifugal force resulting from the earth’s rotation. In the same context
may be cited what he said about the famous ‘‘third motion” of the terrestrial!
exis, Copernicus apparently would have considered it natural that the


APPENDICES 459


axis of the earth should describe a cone around the axis of the ecliptic;
he therefore believed that he must endow the earth, besides the two motions
of rotation and revolution, with still another motion, destined to maintain
its axis at the same inclination in relation to the plane of the ecliptic:
Sequitur ergo tertius declinationis motus annua quoque revolutione, sed in praecedentia,
hoc est contra motum centri reflectens. Sicque ambobus invicem aequalibus fere et
obvits mutuo evenit, ut axis terrae, et in ipso maximus parellelorum aequinoctialis
in eamdem fere mundi partem spectent, ac si immobiles permanent (De revolutionibus
orbium coelestium, Thorn, 1873, Chap. XI, p. 31).

These theories do not constitute an absolute proof: we have, indeed, seen
that even Descartes did not always correctly deal with the motion of rotation
of the planets. Copernicus was not directly engaged in mechanics; he only
discussed the phenomena of the motion of terrestrial bodies to explain
their relation to the motion of the earth itself. We shall, therefore, ask in the
first place what was the statement that he needed for his theory.

From this point of view, the opinions of Nicolas de Cusa, which we sum-
marized in the text, are of great help to us. Doubtless, Cusa was only a
precursor; his vague affirmations are far from the lucid theory of planetary
motions formulated by the great Polish astronomer. But it is, nevertheless,
true that Cusa had envisaged the possibility of the carth’s motion. Of
course, in doing this, he was conscious of offending the conviction resulting
from our immediate sensation that the earth is something stable. What did
he do to remove this serious objecuon? He emphasized the example of the
ship which, to those on board, seems immovable if they do not see the shore.
At first sight it might be said that this was simply our principle of inertia.
But let us be careful: no more than Sextus Empiricus did Cusa indicate
that his statement was limited to rectilinear and uniform motion. On the
contrary, he applied his idea to whatever motion there might be. If we had
to state precisely its tenor we should formulate it in about the following
terms: it is impossible to determine by immediate sensation or by the direct observation
of mechanical phenomena whether a body ts in motion or not. It was, therefore, an
almost purely negative statement, simply denying mechanical control as far
as the theory of terrestrial motion is concerned, a negation quite under-
standable, indeed, if one realizes that the physics of those days was entirely
under the influence of peripateticism. But it is clear that a proposition like this
could not be of great worth in mechanics, and that it was notably impossible
to deduce from it the resolution of the motion of a projectile, which was the
real point of departure for the principle of inertia. This explains why
Cusa, when he conceived persistent motion in a horizontal plane, in no way
attached it to his conception of the relativity of motion.

Everything indicates that Copernicus professed analogous opinions from
these different points of view. Like Cusa, he used the example of the ship;
he cites for this purpose a verse from Virgil, a very appropriate quotation,
since the poet there depicts immediate sensation, evidently illusory in this
case: Provehimur portu, terraeque urbesque recedunt (De revolutionibus, Thorn,
1873, p. 22). He thus refutes the evidence of our senses in what concerns
the reality of motion: Quamquam in medio mundi terram quiescere inter autores

plerumque convenit, ut inopinabile putent, sive etiam ridiculum contrarium senkre.


460 IDENTITY AND REALITY


Si tamen aitentius rem consideremus, videbitur haec quaestio nondum absoluta et
idcirco minime contemnenda. Omnis enim quae videlur secundum locum mutatio,
aut est propler spectatas rei motum, aut videntis, aut certe disparem utriusque mula-
tionem. Nam inter mota aequaliter ad eadem, non percipitur motus, inter visum dice
et videns (Ib., p. 16).

One might suppose that Copernicus was conscious that it was in this
case a question of a particular kind of motion, of what we call inertial
motion; the expression mota aequaliter ad eadem seems in a way to justify an
intepretation of this kind (the German version of Menzer, Thorn, 1877,
translates ad eadem by in gleicher Richtung, which is a little more precise than
the Latin text and seems to be nearer our modern conceptions). But it is clear
from the context that Copernicus meant quite simply that if the observer
and the object observed do not possess the same motion, since there is
relative displacement, motion becomes evident. He not only made no dif-
ference, from this point of view, between rectilinear and curvilinear motions,
but the latter in certain cases seemed privileged to him; it especially
gave the sensation of rest: /gitur quod aiunt simplicts corports esse motum
stmplicem (de circulari in primis verificatur), quamdiu corpus simplex in loco suo
naturali ac unitate sua permanserit. In loco siquidem non alius, quam circudarts est
motus, qui manet in se totus quiescents similis. Rectus autem superventt us, quae a
loco suo naturali peregrinantur, vel extraduntur, vel quomodolibet extra ipsum sunt.
Nilal autem ordinationi totius et formae mundi tantum repugnat, quandum extra
locum suum quidquam esse. Rectus ergo motus non accidit, nisi rebus non recle se
habentibus, neque perfectis secundem naturam, dum separantur a suo toto et gus
deserunt unitatem (Ib., p. 23).

It is not very difficult, it seems, to understand how Copernicus was led
to conceive these theories. The principle of relative motion, as we have
stated it, is in itself a rather paradoxical conception; as we have said, it is
not only impossible to draw a mechanical conception from it, but it is
contradicted by facts from common experience, such as the stone placed in
a sling. To be sure, nothing indicates that Copernicus had made a more
profound study of the motions of terrestrial bodies; but we know that he
must have been preoccupied with the question of centrifugal motion,
notably when he had to explain the (supposed) absence of this motion
following terrestrial rotation (cf. p. 118f.).

He probably had the feeling that the principle did not quite sufficiently
explain phenomena as we perceive them on the earth. This is why he has
recourse to the distinction between natural motion and violent motion,
established by Aristotle and firmly anchored in the minds of his con-
temporaries. Aristotle, it is true, believed that natural circular motion
only belonged to celestial bodies; but since with Copernicus the earth
becomes a celestial] body, similar to other planets, it is quite easy to attribute
the same privilege to it as well as to the terrestrial objects which it carries
with it in so far as they participate in its motion. Aristotle assumed terrestrial

bodies to have a natural rectilinear motion, downward (heavy bodies)
and upward (light bodies). Copernicus preserved this notion, so that with
him terrestrial objects possess natural motions of two sorts—on the one hand,
circular; on the other, rectilinear (downward and upward). But since he


APPENDICES 461


doubtless hesitated to make rectilinear motion (more especially that
which takes place because of weight) participate in the same privilege
as that of natural circular motion, he devised a distinction between them.
Circular motion becomes, in a way, the pre-eminently natural or simple
motion, since the body ‘“‘persists in its natural place and in its unity,”
and since the motion ‘remains entirely within itself.” Motion, upward and
downward, is inferior to it in the sense that the body ‘has left its natural
place or has been forced outside of it.”” Copernicus knew, moreover, that the
motion of falling bodies is not uniform; but this pecularity, which we believe
to be fundamental from the point of view of the characteristic of the motion
in question, seems secondary to him; he only mentions it in the passage
following that which we have just cited, the distinctions between the motions
accomplished in their place and outside their proper place appearing much
more important to him.

Evidently this whole system has only astronomy in view; as we have
said, Copernicus is solely interested in this, only discussing terrestrial
problems in order to brush aside more readily the objections which might
be formulated against his theory. Moreover, even from this point of view,
the system is very imperfect, as is seen from the objections of his adversaries,
who constantly emphasize arguments drawn from the motion of terrestrial
bodies, such as that of a stone falling from the top of a tower. It would
seem in particular that arguments of this kind in great part prevented
Tycho Brahé from adhering to the Copernican theory, although in other
ways he admitted the convenience of this conception for purposes of calcula-
tion and highly praised its author (ROSENBERGER, Geschichte, Vol. I, p. 135).

Kepler’s ideas on this subject are also very curious. Kepler had a great
admiration for the author of the heliocentric theory, and on every occasion
invoked his thought ; but this did not prevent him from profoundly modifying
one of the principal features of its doctrine, by substituting ellipses for
circles. He also modified its mechanical basis. It may be, moreover, that
these two changes are closely correlative. Indeed, the conception of natural
circular motion issued from ideas upon the particular virtue of the circle’s
figure considered as simple and perfect. Now it was difficult to assign the
same privileges to the ellipse, in which, therefore, it could not be pretended
that bodies moved naturally.

According to Kepler, every body has a tendency to remain in the place
in space where it is found, a tendency independent of the motion with which
it is endowed. The passages in which he applies this theory to celestial bodies
are extremely numerous. Let us cite a few of the most striking ones: Tertius
interveniens. (Opera omnia, ed. Frisch, Frankfort, 1870, Vol. I, p. 590): “‘Fir
mein Person sage ich, dass die Sternkugeln diesse Art haben, dass sie an einem
jeden Ort des Himmels, da sie jedesmal angetroffen werden, stillstehen wiirden, wann
sie nicht getrieben werden solten. Ste werden aber getrieben per speciem tmmateriatam
Solis, in gyrum rapidissime circumactam. Item werden sie getrieben von jhrer selbst
eygnen Magnetischen Krafft, diirch welche sie einhalb der Sonnen xoschiffen, anderthetls
von der Sonnen hinweg ziehlen. Epitome Astronomia, ib., Vol. VI, p. 341: (Globus
aliquid coelestis) habet tamen ratione suae materias naturalem advrapidy transeundi
de loco in locum, habet naturalem inertiam seu quietem, qua quiescit in omni ta


IDENTITY AND REALITY


ubi solitarius collocatur. Tb., p. 345: Dictum est hactenus, practer hanc vim
Solis vectoriam esse etiam naturalem inertiam in planetis tpsis ad motum, qua fil,
ut tnclinati sint, materiae ratione ad manendum loco suo. Pugnant igitur tnter se
potentia Solis vectoria et impotentia planetae seu inertia materialis.

Thus inertia, if it could predominate, would put an end to the displace-
ment of a body which is in motion and would lead it to rest ; it is repugnans
motui and constitutes, as Kepler himself has defined it with precision, a
causa privativa motus (1b., p. 174).

What must be noticed, also, especially in the quotations just given, is
that, according to Kepler, this property is not limited to celestial bodies;
on the contrary, it belongs to them only because they are composed of
matter, materiar ratione—in other words, it is a property general to all matter
as such. And this he has clearly formulated in other passages: Vol. VII,
p. 746: Es hat aber aller koerperliche zeug oder materia aller ding in der gantzen
Welt dise art, oder vilmehr dise tode vnart, dass er plump ist und ungeschickt, von sich
selber auss einem Ort in den andern zu wandern und miissen derhalben von einem
Leben, oder sonsten von aussen hero gezogen und getrieben werden. Ib.: Auf diese
Weise sage auch ich, nit nur von dem mittelen sondern von eim jedem Ort, wann etwas
drein gesetzt werde, das da ein toder Kérper ist wann es nit von dannen durch etwas
anderes ausserhalb seiner gezogen werde, so koennt es auch von sich selbst mit von
dannen kommen, darum dieweil es tod 1st oder trag und unartig.

Under these conditions evidently the persistent motions of celestial
bodies need persistent causes in order to overcome the inertia which continu-
ally tends to suppress them. As to what concerns revolution, Kepler sees
the cause for that in a magnetic fluid emanating from the sun, as is indicated
by the passage which we first cited (cf. also amongst others, 15., Vol. VI,
PP. 311, 342, 343). As to the rotation of the earth, he supposes many causes
for it (2b., pp. 175-177), the principal one consisting, it would seem,
in a particular property of circular fibres placed around the terrestrial
axis. But he also takes the example of the top, and the expressions which he
employs on this occasion are somewhat like those we use in cases of this kind
(as, for instance, quantum vero materialem inertiam altinet, subjecti loco sit ad
concipiendum impetum continuandamque rotationem). However, it must be
remembered that this particular manner of considering bodies in rotation
had been current since the days of antiquity (cf. p. 115). Cusa had even
gone farther than Kepler, since he had conceived the perpetuity of this
motion of rotation by purely mechanical causes (p. 117f.), whereas it seemed
to Kepler that it must diminish of itself with time (lemporis diuturnitate
debilitata paulatim emoriatur). This is why this species motus cannot be exactly
the same for the earth as for the top: non jam hospes amplius in Terra ut illa
in turbine sed inquilina plane seu materiae suae victrix et domitrix existens.

Let us note, nevertheless, that Kepler drew from these considerations
a very important conclusion, which, in the opinion of physicists of to-day,
appears related also to the concept of inertia. We saw that Copernicus
believed that he must assume a particular motion of the terrestrial axis,
destined to preserve its direction in space. Kepler regards this assumption
as useless. This correction is ordinarily attributed to Gassendi (cf., for
instance, Ds revolutionibus, Thorn, 1873, Notes p. 10), but it is already


APPENDICES __ 463


clearly indicated in Kepler’s youthful work, the Mysterium cosmographicum
(ed. Frisch, Vol. I, p. 121): Secundum motum in meram axis quictem redegimus,
tertius jam ad secundum est reducendus et cum eo in unum conflandus. Kepler secks
for the cause of this parallel position of the terrestrial axis, in “a natural
and magnetic inclination of its fibres at rest,’ and this inclinatio (as is
seen in a passage from the Epitome, p. 176) appeared to him under the
aspect of a forma analogous to the properties of circular fibres in the motion
of rotation of which we have just spoken. Yet he adds immediately: vel
ettam propter continuitatem diurnae convolutionis circa hanc axem quae illum tenet
erectum, ut fit in turbine incitato et discursitante. In the Epitome astronomiae, he
even uses, referring to the maintenance of the direction of the terrestrial
axis, the term inertia; this is the passage which we quoted before in which
the latter is defined as the causa privativa motus.

Concerning bodies which are on the earth, Kepler, like his illustrious
predecessor, makes use of the implicit statement, which we have called
the “principle of relative motion,” in order to shake the direct evidence
of the senses: Motus enim non est proprium visus objectum, nec habet peculiarem
sSensum quo percipiatur, sed senso communi dejudictatur (Vol. VI, p. 181).
He also quotes the motion of the ship and cites to this effect the same
verse from Virgil. But, like Copernicus, he undoubtedly feels that this is
not enough, and, having no longer at his disposal the resource of ‘‘natural
motion,’’ he invents a special theory. If terrestrial objects are carried along
influenced by the motion of the globe, it is because of the action which the
earth exerts on them. This action is not simply attractive, or at least not
solely so: the earth also carries the object along in its circular motion,
and Kepler seems to believe that this influence can be explained by
attraction alone: Cum autem gravia petant terrae corpus per se petanturque ab
illo, fortius itaque movebuntur versus partes vicintores Terrae, quam versus remotiores.
Quare transeuntibus illis partibus vicinis perpendiculariter subjectis, gravia inter
decidendum versus superficiem transeuntem illam insuper etiam circulariter sequentur,
perinde ac si essent alligata loco, cui imminent, per ipsam perpendicularem, adeoque
per infinitas circum lineas, seu nervos quosdam obliquos minus tlla fortes, qui omnes
in sese paulatim contrahi soleant. It is evidently rather difficult to depict the
mechanism of this action and to understand how these “‘oblique nerves”
could exert a horizontal push upon a body projected in the air, in order to
force it to follow the motion of the earth, whereas it should have, in virtue
of its inertia, remained at least behind the terrestrial motion. At first sight
it seems strange that Kepler could have been content with a conception
of this kind. But it must not be forgotten that this latter corresponds to his
theory of the revolution of the solar system: the earth makes neighbouring
bodies rotate, just as the sun, because of its rotation, makes the planets
move. If we wish to know to what extent Kepler’s theory differs from ours,
not only in regard to the causes which both invoke, but also in regard to
the phenomena which must result from them, we have only to refer to the
example given by Kepler himself; that of the stone which would arrive on
the earth from the depths of space (Kepler, in this case, as in many others,
is solely occupied with the terrestrial rotation, neglecting revolution).
The assumed motion is very strange from our modern point of view: the


464 IDENTITY AND REALITY


stone which moves at first in a straight line toward the centre of the earth
undergoes in approaching it a greater and greater deviation in the direction
of the rotation, until at a given moment it is completely absorbed in this
latter and ends by falling vertically upon a point of the terrestrial surface
(cf. the diagram, 1d., p. 182).

In the presence of these conceptions one cannot but feel that it was high
time for Galileo and Descartes to extricate the Copernicans from embarrass-
ment. Admiration increases for the authors of the heliocentric theory, who
knew how, in the midst of obscurity, to distinguish truth, and for their
adherents, on whose minds arguments, principally astronomical—that is, in
a word, based on considerations of simplicity—were powerful enough to
make them overlook grave physical difficulties (an excellent summary of
these arguments will be found in Lecnaras, Etudes sur l'espace et le temps,
and ed., Paris, 1910, p. 143 and ff.). But one is inclined also to show a
little more indulgence toward the attitude of those who did not have the
courage to adopt these novelties.

Let us state, moreover, that Kepler seems in no way to have been
influenced by Galileo, which is strange if we compare dates.

The Epitome astronomiae copernicanae from which we have taken our quota-
tions dates from 1618 and 1621. Galileo seems to have conceived the
resolution of the motion of the horizontal throw as carly as 1610; the theory
is indicated, at least partially, in the treatise bearing the title Jstoria ¢ dimo-~
straziont intorno alle macchie solari, published in 1613, and other communica-
tions seem to have circulated amongst scientists at about that ume or a little
after (cf. Wohlwill, lc., XV, p. 267). Now Kepler had certainly followed
the writings and discoveries of Galileo with great care. As early as 1597 he
had corresponded with him (ed. Frisch, Vol. 1, pp. 40-41), and we have
five letters of Kepler’s dating from the years 1610 and 1611, as well as
Galileo’s replies (16., Vol. I, p. 454 and ff.). Can it be possible that he was
unaware that the latter, in the treatise which we have mentioned, had
clearly explained that a body would preserve its motion indefinitely in
any direction upon a spherical surface concentric to the carth? (GALILEO,
Opere. Florence, 1842, Vol. III, p. 418.)

Evidently, if Kepler had adopted these ideas, there would have been no
need for the strange theories of the Epitome. Must we suppose, therefore, that
these latter had acquired such power over his mind that it had become
inaccessible to considerations which appear to us to-day so manifestly
evident? What is certain is that even in Kepler's writings posterior to the
Epitome nothing permits us to conclude that at any moment he had changed
his mind about the phenomena of motion. It is true that the last part of his
life was particularly troubled by external circumstances; he died in 1630—
that is, before the publication of Galileo’s Discorst.

Auguste Comte habitually designated the principle of inertia as ‘‘Kepler’s
law’’ (cf., for example, Cours, Vol. VI, p. 682), and this attribution has not
yet completely disappeared from the history of physics. The error has been

due in great part to the fact that the terms used by Kepler (inertia, Traeghett
in German) have become established in science, thanks very probably to
Newton. But this inertia, which is the property of matter to remain in the


APPENDICES 465


place where it is, a tendency to remain at rest, requiring constantly renewed
forces in order to be overcome, was a conception very different from our
modern ideas.

The confusion has doubtless been furthered by the fact that Leibniz has
declared several times that the concept of inertia was due to Kepler and
that Descartes had borrowed it from the latter. As Leibniz certainly had a
very clear notion of what to-day we call the principle of inertia, it seemed
logical to conclude that he had found it in Kepler’s writings. But he really
meant something quite different. This is evident from the most explicit of the
declarations which refer to this attribution: Duae insunt Resistentiae sive
Massae: primum Antitypia ut vocant seu impenetrabilitas, deinde resistentia seu
guod Keplerus vocat corporum inertiam naturalem quam et Cartesius in Epistolis
alicubi ex eo agnovit, ut scilicet novum motum non nisi per vim recipiant corpora
adeoque imprimenti resistant et vim ejus infringant. Quod non fieret, si in corpore
praeter exlenstonem non inesset 16 OvvraptKdy seu principium legum motus quo fit
ut virium quantitas augeri non possit neque adeo corpus ab alio nisi refracta ejus vi
queat impelli (Supplément a la lettre a Fabri. Mathematische Schriften, ed. Gerhardt,
Vol. VI, p. 100).

Thus what Leibniz means to attribute to Kepler is the notion of inertia
in so far as it is a synonym of mass. This affirmation is certainly justified
in great part. Kepler frequently stated that, as a result of its inertia, matter
resisted the force (virtus) which attempted to displace it, and that the motion
which resulted from it must be regulated in proportion to this inertia and
the moving force. This meant attributing to matter, as we should say to-day,
a numerical coefficient which is really the essential part of our notion of
mass. Kepler knew that the concept thus created was analogous to that of
weight, without being entirely identical with it: quae sit et velut pondus,
he says, in speaking of the necessity of attributing imertia to a celestial body
(/.c., Vol. VI, p. 342). This opinion seems to have come to him from the
theorists, who toward the end of the Middle Ages had developed the theory
of impetus (cf. p. 117). We still occasionally use the word inertia in the same
sense as Leibniz. Thus, when one speaks of explaining the inertia of bodies
by electric theories, one is thinking especially of their mass. However the
two ideas may certainly be separated. When we state the principle of tnertia,
we are not occupied with the setting of the body in motion nor with the
numerical coefficient which it manifests on this occasion, we imagine it to
be already in acertain state and we stipulate the persistency of this latter.
Yet the two ideas are connected, and that is why the concept of mass cannot
be entirely attributed to Kepler. Descartes may have received the idea from
him, but he understood its contents better since he connected it with the
principle of inertia.


GG


IV
THE IJANTA PET OF HERACLITUS


Even in Greek antiquity Heraclitus was called obscure; it is, therefore, not
surprising that moderns dispute about the real meaning of his doctrine.
And yet in the end it seems to us that Scnuster (Heraklit von Ephesus, Acta
Soc. phtlologae Lipsiensis, Vol. IIT. Leipzig, 1873, p. 8) is right and that the
importance of the passages on the mdyra pei have been exaggerated. The
conception according to which Heraclitus considered that the only thing
permanent was an order of things, an order which he symbolized by fire, was
first asserted by FERDINAND LassaLLe. ZELLER secms to reject this (Philosophie
der Grich, trans. Boutroux. Paris, 1887, p. 120); and yet in numerous
passages he so nearly approaches it (cf, for instance, pp. 121, 136, 145,
188—189) that one hardly perceives the difference. Consequently this way
of understanding the doctrine of Heraclitus has become almost current.
It, however, seems evident to us in the great number of passages where
Aristotle counts Heraclitus amongst those who deduced the whole of reality
from one single substance, a substance conceived evidently as material
(cf., for instance, De Caelo, Book HI, Chap. I, 3; Metaphysics, Book I,
Chap. III, § 7, 9, 10, 11, 18, 22 ; Chap. V, 18; Chap. VII, §§ 1, 6; ef.;
also, on this subject, TANNERY, Pour l’histotre de la science helléne, p. 193 ff,
fragm. 26, 28, 31, 46, 49, equivalent to ScHUSTER, 12, 44, 47, 57, 59, and
to Drers, Die Fragmente der Vorsokratiker. Berlin, 1903, p. 66 ff., fragm. 7,
31, 88, 90) that Heraclitus assumed at least the persistence of something,
a substratum, a support, like that which he attributed to the sun renewing
itself every day (ZeLiER, /.c., p. 147, note). It is thus, it seems, that the
doctrine was understood in ancient times, as Lucretius witnesses, who,
although he thought it mad (perdelirum), summarizes it and discusses it at
length (Book I, lines 646~693). One cannot doubt that Lucretius conceived
Heraclitus’s fire as material. The passages like those from Plato’s Cratylus
(Dialogi, ed. Woblrab. Leipzig, 1887, Vol. I, p. 204), which we cited in
the text, do not necessarily contradict this opinion. They must be understood
as the affirmation that nothing persists as it is—that is, that fire, the sub-
stratum and eternal substance, carries in itself the principle of its change.
This would be something like Ostwald’s energy, both ‘“‘the most general
of substances and the most general of accidents” (cf. p. 347). It is to be
noted that Aristotle affirms that Heraclitus supposes that all sensible
objects are in a state of perpetual flow and that “there is no science possible
for things thus made” (Metaph. Book II, Chap. VI, 1). It may be that the
term science is here taken in its narrow sense of science of the cause, of the
persistent. However, the fact that immediately after Heraclitus, his doctrine
had turned into a sort of absolute scepticism (Cratylus blaming his master
for having said that one did not enter twice into the same river ;

to him one did not even enter once), seems to show that in spite of the
statement frequently cited about the world which “had not been made by
any god nor by any man, it has always been and always will be eternally
living fire, lighting itself and extinguishing itself regularly” (Tannery,


APPENDICES 467


fragm. 27; ScHusrer, fragm. 46; Dres, fragm. 30), Heraclitus insisted
much less upon the universal order than is generally supposed. One may
also compare with the doctrine of Cratylus certain statements of Heraclitus
himself, such as that quoted by Aristotle, Metaph., Book IV, Chap. III, 10:
“A thing may, at the same time, both be and not be.”

As to the doctrine of the eternal return in Heraclitus, cf. Tannery,
fragm. 44, 46, 49, 59, 86-87, equivalent to Schuster, 49, 59, 57, 89, 67, and
to Diets, 46, 52, 67, 88, go. Observe the fragment TANNERY, 91 (SCHUSTER,
88 ; Drers, 59-60): ‘“The straight and winding path are one and the same,
the path up and down is one and the same” (Schuster translates the path
upward and downward, which seems to show that Heraclitus did not have
a very clear sense of the irreversibility of the particular phenomenon).

Regarding the great year of Heraclitus, cf. ScHusrER, /.c., p. 375; ZELLER,
l.c., p. 164.


INDEX


Asout, E., ? Homme a Voreille cassée, 59
Nn. 54
Asaia, heat and light, 319 n. 12
Acapemy or Scrences, see Perpetual
Motion
ACTION AT A DISTANCE—
objections:
contemporaries of Newton, 77, 78
later physicists, 79
Le Sage, 80
acceptance by philosophers, 80, 81
anti-spatial character, 82, 83
probabie abandonment, 84, 408
incomprehensibility, 97, 139
and mass, 190
and the atom, 246-247
(see Appendix I, Leibniz, Newton, and
action af a distance)
Action (Principle of least,) appearance
of teleology, 317
AzPINUS, against action at a distance, 79
ALBERT OF SAXONY—
attitude toward atomism, 87
development of ideas of Hipparchus,
117, 11g
system of Ptolemy, 117
impetus, 150 n. 20, 150 n. 27, 162
Acaertus Macnus—
the arguments of Ptolemy, 117
mixture of elements, 327
At Brrract (Alpetragius), summary
of Hipparchus, 117
Amprose, Saint, and Lucretius, 86
Ames, The mechanical equivalent of heat,
211 N. 33
Amptre, A. M.—
heat and light, 293
concretion, 354
kinematics, 401
ANAXAGORAS—
formula of causality, 29
atomism, 85
change, 93
infinity of elements, 243
uniformity, 267
analogy between intelligence and
nature, 416
ANDRADE—
and Newton, 153 n. 66
definition of mass, 180


ANSELM, SAINT, causa sui, 253

APPURN, and Haller, 443 n. 61

Artks, method of thermodynamics,
262


ARISTARCHUS OF Samos, and Coper-
nicus, 150 n. 14
ARISTOTLE—
causality, 29
causality and time, 38
desire for knowledge, 42
mathematics, 42
““tendencies”’ of the elements, 78
intelligible change, 93
atomism, 95, 234, 245, 438
refutation of Democritus, 113
circular motion, 113, 116, 118, I19,
138
against the persistence of rectilinear
motion, 115
composition of a curved motion, 120
against the possibility of inertia, 123-
124, 143, 145
opinions of Tannery and Duhem,
125, 415
motion and change, 137-138
motion of atoms, 148 n. 2
mass, 159
weight, accidental quality of, 165
absolute lightness, 172
reflections on the lever, 190
unity of matter, 234
elements, 236
cause, 248
space, 252
irreversibility of phenomena, 267
substance and accident, 325
qualities—celements, 326, 331, 340,
343, 346, 375
followers, 327
quality of potentiality, 360
analogy between intelligence and
nature, 416
(see Appendices II and IV)
ARRHENIUS, SVANTE-—
theory of ions, 64, 67, 89, 337, 352
n. 39, 392
conservation of energy, 292 n. 3
against Carnot’s principle, 269
analogy to Rankine, 288 n. 30
cyclic return, 289 n. 37


470


ArTromnmM-—
Dalton and Avogadro, 64
Arrhenius, 64
Ostwald's attacks, 64, 91, 337
corpuscular representation, 67
Kelvin and Hertz, 68
dynamics, 74
less absolute solutions, 77
difficulties, 85, 96
history, 85-88
characteristics common to successive
theories, 88, 96, 253
perennial character, 89
present triumph, 90, 392
deduced from causality, 92-94, 215
stated by Aristotle, 95
explanatory force, 96
electronic theory, 97
mass, electric phenomenon, 99-100
Rutherford, Bohr, and Sommerfeld,
103 n. 8
ancient atomism and principle of
inertia, 113
Spir, 155 n. 109
and conservation of matter, 163-
165, 171-173
confusion between mass and weight,
180, 182
unity of matter, 234-235, 243, 244,
245, 430
and sensation, 291, 306, 323, 324
atom-qualities of Berigard, 329-330
and objects of common sense, 377
and Comte, 390
historical importance and perman-
ency, 392-396
reservations made by scientists, 405 f.
tendency toward a universal atom-
ism, 410
fundamental objection, 414-415
and mathematics, 438
AvRELIANUS, CAELIUS—
atomism in medicine, 86
influence, 88
Avutricurnia, NIcoias of, atomism, 87
AVERROES, mixture of elements, 327
AVICENNA, mixture of elements, 327
AVoGADRO—
atomic theory, 64
law of equivalents, 238


atomism, 87


IDENTITY AND REALITY


BACON —
matter and weight, 161
tendency to the constant, 286
réle of the hypothesis, 390 f.
and Duhem, 992
merit, 403
and scientific discoveries, 441 n. 14,
441 n. 15, 406
Bain, primacy of touch, 303
Barrour, A., “irresistible”? tendency
to unity of matter, 244
Basser, A. B., Newton's influence,
153 n. 66
Basso, S., atomism, 87
Batauct, G., 289 n. 38
BaYLE, 112 n. 133
BECHER—
phlogiston, 167
transmutation, 235
the elements, 296
BenEpetri—
composition of motions, 120, 125, 126
precursor of Galileo, 120, 143
diminishing motion, 143
Benorr, exactitude of modern scien-
tific methods, 57 n. 16
BenTiey, see Appendix I
Bercson, Henri—
motion, 131
and Newton, 153 n. 66
matter and ether, 257 n. 68
soundings cast into pure duration,
286
materialism and relativity of sen-
sation, 292 f.
electric excitation, 295-296
atom and vision or touch, 307
memory, 354-355
“immediate data,”” 355, 366, 379,
384, 433
“segmentation of reality,” 356-357
light-sensation, 361
constant and variable, 436 f.
Bericarp—
atom-qualities, 329-330
analogy with Newton's corpuscles,
334
BerxeLey—
scientific explanation, 1, 48, 990-400
analogy between mathematical and
physical concepts, 61 n. 92
physical space, 131


matter and motion, 199


INDEX


Berxerry (continued) —
gravity of fire, 167
vision, 243
and Russell, 257 n. 72
primacy of touch, 303 f.
objections, 304, 308
Bernarp, CLaupe, mechanism, 63
BeRNAys, concerning Lucian, 183 n. 6
Bernou.tu, Daniex, kinetic theory of
gases, 68
BerRnoutyy, JEAN—
assimilation of ‘“‘law”’ and ‘“‘cause,”’
18
conception of causality, 2g f.
conservation of vis viva, 191-192
and Colding, 200
BERTHELOT, MARCELIN—
the “chemical revolution,” 157, 169,


332
and Scheele, 185 n. 59
the permeability of solids, 196
chemists and unity of matter, 240,
256 n. 39
the alchemists, 254 n. 5, 952 n. 18
Lavoisier and oxygen-quality, 333
true chemical combination, 335,
339
BertTHeLor, Rent—
antiquity of the principle of inertia,
148 n. 1
epigenetic notion of evolution, 321
n. 62
BerTHOLLET—
phiogiston, 185 n. 46
theory of chemical reaction, 225
necessity of hypothesis, 391
slight influence, 393, 429
Berzecivs—
formula of combinations, 238
and Comte, 441 n. 13
BrsseMeER, converter, 371
BRTOLAUD, see Appendix II
Binet, theory of J. Miller, 319 n. 8
Biot, Rumford's experiment, 210 n. 18
BLack—
conservation of heat, 145, 206, 403
combustion, 170-171
heat-matter, 192, 206, 338, 340
theory of alkalis, 932
BorrnaAave, organs of the human
body, 396
Bonn, and Fresnel, 210 n. 19
Bour, theory of the atom, 109 n. 8


47%
Bow-Reywonp, E. pu—
explanation by mechanism, 91, 94
the ether, 250
BOLTzMANN—


elasticity, 71
hypothesis, 274, 288 n. 30, 407
and Rankine, Spencer, 274
mechanical theory of irreversibility,
275 f., 277-278
mechanical theory of heat, 394
changing atoms, 410
and Gibbs, 444 n. 86
Botyat, non-Euclidean geometry, 39
Booth, Prout’s theory, 255 n. 28
Bore, celestial bodies and inertia,
142, 154 n. 8g
Bose, JAGApis-CHUNDER, 63
Boscovicn—
Duhem’s opinion, 53
theory of dynamics, 73 f., 82, 96
followed by Faraday, 79
processes of thought, 388
Bovasse, H.—
difficulties of the ether, 1ro4 n. 14
Lavoisier, 255 n. 1 and 2
Boucuer, M., 83
Boussinesg, association of mass and
weight, 181
Boutroux, Emme—
a “mould” of laws, 147
specific energy of the nerves, 295
the limit of causality, 310
Bore, Ropertr—
corpuscular theory, 67, 96
conservation of weight, 166-167
unity of matter, 235
influence, 235
and Spinoza, 253-254
transmutation, 331
processes of thought, 388
form of particles, 396
and Bacon, 441 n. 15
(see Appendix 7)
Braptey, theory of aberration, 65
Bri.tourn, Marcer, Galileo’s experi-
ments, 185 n. 43
Brown agitation of particles, 276
Bruno, G., atomism, 87
Bucuwner, distinction between atomic
systems, 85
Burron, primacy of touch, 903
Bunsen, permeability of solids, 196
Byron, Lorn, the ego and the real, 417


472 IDENTITY AND REALITY


Canet, and Lavoisier, 171
Campanus oF Novara, and Ptolemy,
“W179


impatuosity, 119-120, 145
impossibility of perpetual motion,
202, 205
tendency to repose, 267
Carnot, Lazare, force rive laiente,


193
Carnor’s principle—
negative formula, 203
history, 259-260
statement, 260-261
independent of mechanism, 26:
heat which “‘fades,”’ 261
factual truth, 262
heat and energy, 263-264
inherent nature of its external form,
264-265
a statement of change, 265
not “plausible,” 266-267
remote analogies and late appear-
ance, 266-267
long oblivion, 267
prudence of Poincaré’s demonstra-
tions, 268
resistance, 268-269
bypotheses on radiation, 269-270
“eternal return,” 270-272
objections, 272-273
explanations by concept of the
immense, 273-274
by mechanism, 274-277
difficulties, 277-278, 344
and conservation of energy, 279-
281, 349
eminent rdéle in science, 284
and concept of time, 285-286
general statement by Perrin, 285
precise rendering of notions of time,
286
expression of the resistance of nature
to causality, 286, 418-419, 436
and evolution, 312-313
appearance of teleology, 317, 433
Lalande’s theory, 317
aie paies 317
and conservation of mass, 349
and Ostwald’s theory, 350
Cannot, SADI—~
conservation of energy, 194, 202


equivalent of beat, 195, 200


Carnor, Sap:


impensibility of perpetual motion,
209

and Clapeyron, 257, 267

and Clausius, 259, 260, 262-263, 266
and Rey, Mayer, 267

and Helmholtz, 288 n. 26

and “‘heat-fluid,”’ $44

(see above, Carnot’s principle)


CARPENTARIUS—


misunderstanding of inertia, 119
gravity of air, 163


gravity of fire, 167
CASSIRER.


commentary on Leibniz, 60 n. 76

Galileo, 109 n. 103

Greek atomism, 112 n. 130

space according to Descartes, 256
n. 55

Spinoza’s ‘“‘acosmism,’’ 258 n. 75

science and the mathematical func-
tion, 388

the réle of the function, 445 n. 97

(see Appendix I)


Causariry, eficient-—


concept intermediary between scien-
tific and theological causality,


309
applies to the irrational, 309, 400
(see below)


Causarrry, scientiic—


reduced to law, Berkeley, 17, 18

Hume, Taine, Helmholtz, Hanne-
quin, Ostwald, 17-18

law reduced to causality: Lucretius,
18, 158; Jean Bernoulli, 18;
opinions of Kozlowski and Kro-
man, 56 n. 8 and n. 9; opinions
of Spir, Kroman, Tannery, 154
n. 109; Spir, 981 n. 27

definition of Leibniz (principle of
determining reason), 28f., 241,
245-246, 247; of Plato, Aristotle,
Schopenhauer and Wolf, 29

conception of Jean Bernoulli, Lucre-
tius, and Anaxagoras, 29

application to time, 38-39

opposition to lawful conception, 41,
432-433

origin of causal postulate, 41

conception of Leibniz, 41, 43

origin of confusion with conformity


INDEX


Causarrry, scientific _
differences from theological causality,
oan 47, 308
relation to volition, 47
ia rea theories, 48, 49, 227-
22
causal tendency, 53, 54, 250f., 275,


337-338, 340, 364, 387, 393-394
deduction of mec theories,


92 f., 297, 346, 424-431
dominion over science, 102,

a15f., 218, 424-433

influence on concept of inertia, 146 f.,
286

and conservation of matter, 157,
175,177, 178 £., 206, 491 f.

and conservation of energy, 199-201,
349, 402

the sphere of Parmenides and the
nebula of Laplace, 231

and being, 246-250

and perpetual motion, 261

and scientific statements, 264

and Carnot's principle, 274, 286

causal illusion and persistency, 278,
281-282

opinion of Boutroux, 283 f.

the limit of the errational, 297-303

the limit in relation to conformity
to law, 310, 422 f.

explanation of the organic world,
314 f.

retreat of teleology, 315 f.

limits of causal explanation, 318

and general tendencies of chemistry,
397 f.

identical tendency of common sense
and science, 362

close collaboration of causality and
conformity to law in common
sense and science, 363, 374

Painlevé, 381 n. 15

and irreversible phenomena, 392

double confusion with efficient caus-
ality, 400

causal errors, 403-404

conformity to law, abridged caus-


ality, 439-440
(see paren theological; causality, ofi-
law, conformity to; teleology)
ie theological—


differs from scientific causality, 46,
47; 310


473


Causs—
identical with effect, 29 f., 154 n. 109,
199, 201 f., 205, 216, 218, aaa,
227, 280, 360
multiplicity of causes, 44-45, 253
lack of precision in term, 46
cause and time, 230
causality and climination of the
cause, 230
the ultimate cause, 253
in J. R. Mayer, 280
reasoning by Boutroux, 283-284
antecedent and consequent, 284
fundamental inequality of cause and
effect, 285
and end, 315
(see causality)
CAVENDISH, against Lavoisier, 168-169,
tz!
CHALLIS, against action at a distance,
80


Cuancourtors, <A., periodicity of
atomic weights, 239

Ciapgeyron, deformation of Carnot’s
ideas, 259, 267

Crarke, F. W., atomic weights, 186


n. 77

(see Appendix IT)

CLaustus—

kinetic theory of gas, 105 n. 23

Carnot’s principle, 259-260, 266 f.,
279; heat, 262

and Sadi Carnot, 263

constant direction of state of uni-


verse, 265-266, 279; and Arr-
henius, 269

and Rankine, 270

Mayer’s principle and Carnot’s


principle, 280
CouEN, HERMANN—
Greek atomism, 111 n. 190
inertia and motion, 229
matter and ether, 281 n. 15
epigenetic notion of evolution, 321
n.
CoLtpinc—
Planck’s opinion, 154 n. 109
conservation of energy, 194, 200~20!
Cotonna, Eorprvus, atomism, 87
Common SENSE—
velocity and matter, 176
on 178-179, 242-243, 303, 361-
a


474


Cosson Sense (continued) —
weight, 181
the object and its qualities, 925
peripateticism and quality, $25
and languages, 343
complexity of perception, 354-355
réle of memory, 355-356
“‘segmentation of reality,” $56
an ontology, 357
and sensation, 358 f.
permanency of objects, 359-360
and science: identical process, 962,
366f., 378-379; and physical
theory, 367-368 ; reality, 370, 435;
science supplements common sense,
371; persistency of scientific object,
375; the “ontological’’ need, 376;
vivere est pin 1, 377; con-
tinuity of brute fact and scientific
fact, 378; distinction: common
sense acts unconsciously, 378-380
genesis, 363; social influence
(d’leAmbert), 363
sketch of a scientific principle, 364
and mechanism, 365
and concept of object, 433
science, common sense and reality,
435~436
Comte, AUGUSTE—
conformity to law, 19
prohibition of research,
n. 15, 366, 406, 412
another limit, 29 f.
economy resulting from laws, 25
desire to know, 42
condemnation of explanation, 48f.,
51, 54, 102, 400
Fresnel, 49
influence, 53
limit to conformity to law, 56 n. 12,
20 f.
gravitation, 81
and Maxwell, 92
opinion on Greek science, 10g n. 105
corpuscular hypothesis and principle
of i inertia, 418 D. 127


20-21, 56


IDENTITY AND REALITY


Cours, Aucustr |
his condemnations without influence
on progress of science, 390-39!
idea of “‘order’’ (Milhaud), 412
@ posteriori method of research, 439
(see Appendix IIT)
ConpILLac—
the principle of identity, 43 f.
sensation and the external world, 294
primacy of touch, 303
substantial qualities and accidental!
qualities, 326
Conporcer, utilization of remote dis-
coverics, 24
CONSERVATION, PRINCIPLES OF —
ambiguity of essence, 102
genesis, 103, 154 n. 109
ideas of Poinsot, 154 n. 109, 226;
of Spir, Tannery, Milhaud, La-
lande, Wilbois, Kozlowski, 154
n. 109; of Bacon, 286
‘‘plausible” character, 205, 266, 267~-
268, 421
typical formula, 209
role of causal tendency, 215, 265,
393, 402, 416
prestige, 215-216
and mechanism, 228
and destruction of external world,
252-253, 297
and Carnot’s principle, 266-269, 317
regulation of the world, 281
and principle of evolution, 314
deductions of physical phenomena,


397
and orientation of science of to-day,


410
not deducible from conformity to
law, 431 f.
Copernicus—
precursors, 117
circular motion, 121, 138, 412
relativity of motion, 142
and Aristarchus of Samos, 150 n. 14
relativity of space, 152 1. 52
and Bacon, 440 n. 15
(see Appendix Ill, The Copernicans and


occasion, 302


of positivist Connu, réle of hypothesis, §1


gravitation and matter, 73
and Newton, 389, and Appendix J, ;


INDEX


CovLoms—
gravitation, 73
against action at a distance, 79
Cournor—
causality and time, 38, 219
value and perennial character of
atomism, 91, 394
non-quantitative character of sen-
sation, 204
impenetrability, 300
substance, 394
conformity to law and_ persistence
of bodies, 433
Couturat, concerning Leibniz, 43,
245, 320 n. 25, 443 n. 60, 445 n. 9!
Craty.us, see Appendix 1V
Crooxrs—
and Réntgen, 197
atomic weights, 429
Curm, Mapame—
concerning the measure of time, 58
n. 47
atomism, 110 n. 112
Curie, Prerre, concerning the measure
of tume, 33
Cusa, NicoLas or—
relativity of motion, 117-119, 126,
142
influence upon Galileo, 121, 143
conservation of weight, 161
Cuvier, and Geoffroy St. Hilaire, 312
Czo.se, waves endowed with qualities,


295


D’ALEMBERT—

measure of time, 33, 34, 285 f.

against the concept of force, 79

principle of inertia, statement, 121-
122, 127, 132, 141; demonstration,
121-124, 125-126, 140, 147;
Aristotelian formula, 123

and Lotze, 123

contradictions, 132

and Maxwell, 140

universe, determined, 315

social element and common sense,


363

DALTON, atomic theory, 64

Darwin—

explanation of biological pheno-
mena, 63


attempt to explain evolution, $13


475


DASTRE, 211 n. 37, 287 n. 4, 442 N. 34,
443 n. 62
Davy, Humpury—
transformation of motion into heat,
193
murium, 352 n. 37
necessity of theories, 391
Devucrion, (Knowledge of nature by)
Descartes, 396 f.
Spinoza, 397
Leibniz, 397
Hegel, 397
its check, 398
the Naturphilosophen, 398
partial agreement: Kant, 400-401 ;
Whewell, 401
DeLtuc—
heat-matter, 192, 206
Democritus—
atomism, 85 f., 87, 88, 95, 395, 438
unacquainted with principle of in-


ertia, 113

affirmation of Diogenes Laertius,
149 Nn. 3

conservation of mass, 158

unity of matter, 234, 243, 244

agitation of atoms, 245

and Descartes, 248

sensation, 292, 297, 417

DESCARTES—


the animal, 19

scientific and metaphysical! theories,
53

mechanism, 63, 72, 88, 91, 292, 31!

gravitation, 78 f.

and Galileo, 121

inertia, 121 f., 128 f., 146 Ff.

Wundt’s opinion, 152 n. 54

rotation, 128

opposition to Newton, 129-130, 152
n. 62

motion, 137

Copernican, 142

true foundation of principle of
inertia, 146-147

Planck’s opinion, 154 n. 109

mass, 162-166, 179

distinction between mass and weight,
163, 182

weight, accidental quality of matter,
165

influence of these ideas, 165 f., 182

common origin of elements, 181


@ ONn


476


conservation of motion, 190 f., 199,


that which is conserved, 206

unity of matter, 294 f.

intelligible change, 241

space and matter, 246, 247, 248,


explanation of being, 256 n. 47, 247
anticipation of conservation of energy,
266
motion of bodies, 267
teleology, 322 n. 67
two ideas about the sun, 371
processes of thought, 388 f.
universal intelligibility, 396 f., 400
prevalence of deduction, 416
(see Appendices I and IT)
Dmwrror—
gravity of fire, 168
determination of universe; 315
Dies, see Appendix It
Dieseacu, augmentation of weight, 161
Drocents Lazetrus, Democritus and
motion of atoms, 149 1. 3
Dassscn—
potential energy, 210 n. 16
against Ostwald, 253 n. 64
Duc os, gravity of fire, 168
Duesner, see Appendix IT
Duxurino, paradox of inertia, 139
Duname., acceleration, 138


scientific law, 31

disagreement between laws and
facts, 32

physical theory, 52 f.

subordination of law to hypothesis, 53

illusion of explanation, 54

medieval atomism, 87

return to peripateticiam, Qt, 415

Fang eaie opinions, 106 n. 38

the Renaissance and science,

n. 105

theory of Pappus concerning motion,
149 n. 6; of Hipparchus and
Albert of Saxony, 117; of Leon-
ardo, 150 n. 27; of Aristotle, 125

Borelli, 154 n. 89

indetermination of notion of mass,
188 n. 103


formula of conservation of energy,
18g |


109


IDENTITY AND REALITY
Dunem (continued) —_


heat-motion, 192

seekers for perpetual motion, 205

Leonardo and conservation of energy,
210 N. 4, 219 n. §9, 267, 276

Cardanus, 213 n. 60, 267

Stevinus, 219 n. 61, 205

and Sainte-Claire Deville, 237

reduction of matter to space, 248

the ether, 250

and Boyle, 255 n. 17, 442 n. 32, and
Lavoisier, 255 n. 20

Carnot's principle, 260, 261

and Maxwell’s demon, 276

continuity of commen sense and
science, 366 f.

experiment in physics, 367-970, 373,


379
impossibility of the experimentwn
crwcis, 392
and Fresnel, 992
reservations concerning mechanical
physics and logic, 409
simplicity, 413
analogous reasoning, 415
and Lémery, 442 n. 32
(ste Appendix I)
Durraert, J., follower of Albert of
Saxony, 117
Dumas, J. B.—
constitution of atoms, 93
Prout’s theory, 239
deduction, 399
Dunan, C.—
spatial sensation of the blind, 303
against the primacy of touch, 303-
305
primacy of touch (history), 320 n, 40
Duns, Scorus, and atomism, 87


Epp.eston, see Appendix I
V.isrem—
relativity and gravitation, 108 n. 87
“local time,” 136
and space, 152 n. 52
influence of Mach, 152 n. 61
ELEaTICS—
influence upon the genesis of Greek
atomism, 95
paradoxes of motion, 229
war or discord, 231
sorsty of being, $17


INDEX


Exzcrrnon—
J. J. Thomson's theory, 97 f.
and the ether, 249
3 not “tangible” matter, 307
and reality, 369-370
and objects of common sense, 377


change, 93
the “cycles,” 271
Engroy, principle of conservation of—
origins, 69, 70
ent with mechanistic ex-
planation of gravitation, 80
Planck's ideas, 156 n. 109
general formula, 189
and conservation of matter, 189
history, 190-194
experimental data, 194-195
true experimental demonstration,


certainty of principle surpasses ex-
periment, 198, 402

direct @ priori deductions, 199-201

demonstration by central forces, 201

by impossibility of perpetual motion,
202-205

“plausibility,” 206

energy and mass, 207

energy, a property of a system, 207-
208


simple integral, 208-209, 280, 372
three terms, 208, 209
Poincaré’s statement, 208-209
dara! of formula, 209
and mechanics, 228-229
and Carnot’s principle, 259, 266,
278, 28:
two definitions of energy, 280
and quantity, 342
Ostwald’s theory, 347-35!
Encetmayer, C. de, obscurity of con-
cept of mass, 180
Enrropy—
notion, 260
and Hacckel, 269
constant increase, 275
and heat, 281
Ostwald’s theory, 349
Epicurus—
atomism, 86, 87
unacquainted with principle of in-
ertia, 13
master of Lucretius, 158


477


Exicena, Scorvus, 327, 328

Erarp—
triumph of atomism, 89
against Mendeleef, 225 n. 31
constancy of elements, 236
solidarity of concepts of matter and


difficulties, 65 f., 407
displacement of the earth, 135-140
and mass, 181-182
reduction of matter to ether, 248 f.
its nature, 249-250, 429-430
Rankine’s theory, 270
Eucuip, homogencity of space, 37
EvLer—
against action at a distance, 79, 8o
and Newton, 132
relativity of motion, 133
and Neumann, 134
movement and change, 138
Evrirwes, diversity, 363
EVOLUTION, principle of—
double character, 311-313
principle of change, 312
adaptation to the causal explanation,
313, 314, 316
Ewa np, Oscar, Nietzsche and the eter-
nal return, 289 n. 38
EXPLANATIons, scientific—
conceptions of Berkeley, Hume,
Taine, Helmholtz, Hannequin,
Ostwald, 1
explanatory theories, 48, 396, 403
rejected by Comte, 48 f
true nature : Spir, Tannery, Milhaud,
Lalande, 154 n. 109; Poinsot, 226
of being, 244 f., 250-251; Descartes,
247 £.
model causal explanations of Max-
well, Gibbs, Boltzmann, 275 f.
by umnmensity, 288 n. 30, 273 f.
sensation, limit for the causal exe
planation, 297
efficient causality, 309
Comte’s instinctive need of explana-
tion, 336
Ostwald’s theory, 950
ontological character, 385
no phenomenon is completely ex-
plainable, 399-400
(See causality, scientific; deduction, tele


478


FaRaDay—
against action at a distance, 79, 108
n. 79
conservation of energy, 201
against Rankine, 210 n. 16
and Tait, 213 n. 58
FatTio pe DvILurER, against action at
a distance, 80
Favaro, Galileo’s publisher, 185 n. 48
FERNEL, atomism, 87
Fiscuer, E., influence of  stereo-
chemistry, 442 n. 22
Foucautr, the pendulum, 130, 133
Four.L£&e—
action, 22
the will, 26
Secchi’s influence, 105 n. 28
prestige of the principles of conser-
vation, 215
L’abus de Pinconnaissable, 320 n. 23
deductions of scientists, 399
Fourcroy bez, phlogiston, 185 n. 46
FourrigER, and Comte, 390
Free Witt—
its limits, 25 f.
free will and causality, 46-47
Spinoza’s argument, 308
Malebranche, 309
and teleology, 315
FRESNEL—
Comte’s opinion, 49
utilization of the hypothesis, 50
interference fringes, 54
theory of undulation, 64, 65
Poincaré's opinion, 89
heat, 193
realized previsions, 392
nature and difficulties of analysis, 413
Mach’s opinion, 443 n. 68
FREYCINET, proportionality between
mass and weight, 181
Frieve., chemical valence, 240, 244


GAETAN OF TrenE—
continuation of Albert of Saxony, 117
accidental gravity, 162
GALENUS, unity of matter according to
the atomists, 234
Ga.iant, Asaf, teleology, 911, 314


precursors, 115, 118, 120, 121


IDENTITY AND REALITY


GaALILz0 (continued) —
compound motion, 120
inertia, 121, 126
motion, 137
demonstration of principle, 142 f.
and Copernicus, 142; and Aristotle,
18g n. 11
experiments, 166
gravity of fire, 167
circular motion, 183 n. 11
conservation of energy, 190
perpetual motion, 202
fall of bodies, 232 n. 9
(See Appendix III, The Copernicans and
the principle of inertia)
Gat, and Comte, 441 n. 13
GassENDI—
atomic theory, 87, 96
hot matter and cold matter, 353 n. 50
and Newton, 445 n. 98
Gauss, against action at a distance, 79
Gavurier, A.—
measure of matter, 179
constancy of elements, 236
Gay-Lussac, law of equivalents, 238,
412, 414
GEBER, transmutation, 160
GEHLER, 213 n. 76
Grometry (non-Euclidean), 39
GERHARDT, theory of types, 441 n. 13
GisRs—
possibility of transmutation, 240
explanation of irreversibility, 275 f.
and Aristotelian physics, 415-416
GiLBERT—
works on electricity, 197
and Bacon, 44! n. 14
Gos.or, provisional value of teleo-
logical explanation, 322 n. 69
GOETHE, primacy of action, 19
Gonzacez, Ho.xotr, and Hume, 320
n. 37
GorLagus—
atomism, 87
gravity of air, 163
Gouy—
Brownian movement, §4, 140, 276-
277, 292, 394
opposition to Carnot's principle, 277
GraviraTion—
mechanical theory, 50, 78
resistance of contemporaries, 78
search for an explanation, 79


INDEX


GRAVITATION (continusd)—
Le Sage’s theories, 80
opinions of philosophers, 80 f., 176
evolution of concept, 84 f.
mysterious character, 141, 181-182
familiar notion, 301
Grimaux, Scheele and Lavoisier, 170
GutLiaume, C. E.—
theory of Boussinesg, 188 n. 107
permeability of glass, 196
the spectrum, 197
GUTHRIE, against action at a distance,


GvuyYoT, against action at a distance, 80


Haecxe., E.—
mechanism, 63
against Carnot's principle, 269, 28:
organs of animals, 319 n. 18
and Kant, 321 n. 57
Haver, A. pE—
conservation of cis viva, 192
preformation of germs, 404
HAMILTON, against primacy of touch,
304
HANNEQUIN—
assimilation of causality
formity to law, 17
measure of time, 33
influence, 53, 54
difficulties of the ether, 66, 104 n. 14
theory of collision, 105 n. 24
mathematical conceptions of phy-
sical theories, 111.n. 127 and n. 128
unity of matter, 240
science and “‘real becoming,” 284
Carnot’s principle, 287 n. 7
misunderstands manner of grouping,
445 n. 102
HartMann, CoLone_, theory of inertial
motion, 151 n. 46
HartTMANN, E. von—
difficulties of mechanism, 63
action at a distance, 81
restriction concerning importance of
touch, 320 n. 42
unreal concepts, 967
‘“‘nalve realism”’ of idealists, 382 n. 42
“naive realism'’ of positivists, 382
n. 48
transcendental realism, 417
objections, 417-418
conformity to law and causality, 423


to cOob-


479


Hreort—
motion of celestial bodies, 141
and Spinoza, 258 n. 75, 397, 410
deduction of physical phenomena,
397
and Taine, 397
Herm—
conservation of energy, 212 n. 43;
214 n. 80, 214 n. 83 and n. 84,


402
phlogiston and energy, 232 n. 1
thermo-dynamic principle, 263, 265
concept of tendency, 281
resistance to Carnot’s principle, 368
rejection of causality, 402
He_mont, Van—
constancy of weight, 184 n. 19
refutation of palingenesis, 404
HELMHOLTz—
assimilation of causality to con-
formity to law, 17 f., 48, 201
final aim of science, 39
relations between object and space,
39
gravitation, 79
conservation of energy, 194, 196,
201-202, 443 n. 67
demonstration of principle, 202-205
unalterability of substances, 236
vortex atoms, 249
cther, hypostatized space, 250
rings of ether, 250
hypothesis of hidden masses, 275
Muller's theory, 292-293
identification between laws and pro-
perties of bodies, 366
impossibility of return to primitive
perception, 382 n. 47
and Maxwell (Planck’s opinion), 408
HERACLITUS—
the daily sun, 37!
conception of the world, 434
the warta pei, 466
(see Appendix IV, the wdvta pei of
Heraclitus)
HERMOTIMUS, agreement between in-
telligence and nature, 416, 421
HERON oF ALEXANDRIA, atomism, 86
Herrera, A. L., 63
Hertz—
utilization of hypothesis, 51
electro-magnetic theories, 64, 98
rejects concept of force, 68


480


elasticity, 71
evolution of i gotirven 8&4
principles of mechanics, 102, 232
A. §, 219
difficulties of the ether, 104 n. 14
Hertzian waves, 197, 294
Kelvin's total intrinsic energy, 208
prestige of principles of conservation,
232 n.1
matter and ether, 249
conception of energy, 949
metaphysical exigencies, 364
identification between laws and pro-
perties of bodies, 366
concordance between nature and
our minds, 394
Lange’s opinion, 408
, A., sensation, 291, 296
Heyvpweirer, Landolt’s experiments,
186 n. 78
Hreronyauus, SAnt, 86
Hirrarcnaus, theory of thrown object,
135, 117, 125
(see Appendix If)
Hippocrates, substantial qualities, 326,
340
Hirn-—
reality of atoms, 112 n. 192
mechanical equivalent of heat, 195
Hosses, against conservation of weight,
165
Hoer rer, against Ostwald, 348
Ho.xor, Rosert—
atomism, 87
communication between substances,


302
and Hume, 302
Homurro—
gravity of fire, 167
elements and bodies, 330
Hooxe, against action at a distance, 80
Houssay, F., and Haller, 443 n. 61
Huet, common sense and action, 376
Hum—
assimilation of causality to con-
formity to law, 17
familias amd unintelligible character
of action by contact, 302 f.
and Holkot, 302
quality, $07, ‘341
—— and existence of eee


IDENTITY AND REALITY


properties of matter and component
elements, 335, 398, 939
matter, u cause of states of
consciousness, 959
Hvuycens—
mechanical theory of gravitation, 50,
78


impact, 68
conservation of vis viva, 70, 190, 266,


394
Papin’s letter, 72
against action at a distance, 80
mechanism, 91, 407
weight, 166
impossibility of perpetual motion,
202-203, 204, 205
Hypornesis—
Newton’s opinions, 49
frequency in science, 50
figurative representation, §2 f.
subordination of law, 53
necessity in all research, 991, 392
instrument of research, 991, 392-393
great value, 395
without hypothesis, science siatique,


ultimate contradictions, 407

ultimate end 1s unattainable, 408

the basis of hypotheses is immutable,
409


IDENTITY, PRINCIPLE OF-—
disagreement with reality, 41, 154
n. 109, 298, 399
and principle of causality, 43
true nature, 43


Condillac’s opinion, 43 f.
and displacement, 93
application in time, 94, 209, 215,
227, 233, 244
explanatory force, 102, 286, 415
genesis of principles of conservation,
103, 147, 154 0. 109, 199, Or
plausibslity, 148
Spir's conception, 154 0. 109
reversibility, 216
and apparent diversity, 240-25!
and space, 250-251, #52
/ over 254, 284
reaction of science,


INDEX


IDENTITY, PRINCIPLE OF (continued) —
attempts at conciliation with Carnot’s
principle, 274-275
illusion of identity, 282
phenomenon is change, 283
eternal framework of the mind, 284
supposititious identity, 286
action of atoms, 300
tendencies of chemistry, $37
eternal subterfuge, 338, 360
qualitative conceptions, 344
hypothesis of identity, auxiliary con-
struction, 437
hypothesis of conformity to law
deduced from principle of identity,
439
INERTIA, PRINCIPLE OF—
compared by Comte to atomic hypo-
thesis, ri1on. 127
history, 113-121
demonstration ; d’Alembert, 121-124
Aristotle's opinion, 123 f.
Spencer, 124 f.
demonstration by relativity: Kant,
126 f; Maxwell, 127 f.
opinions of Descartes, 128-129; of
Newton, 128-132
Mach’s argument, 131 f.
systems, 133 f.
Neumann, 134-135
local time, 136
inadmissableness of a priori demon-
strations, 137
paradoxical character, 137-141, 266,
300
experimental character, 140-141
experimental demonstration, 141
Borelli, 142
Galileo, 142-144
argument of Descartes, 144-147
plausibility, 147-148
inertia and notion of velocity, 148,
229-230
influence of infinitesimal calculus,
148, 229-230
ifferences in manner of treatment
of conservation of matter, 176
analogy, 182-183, 199
and conservation of energy, 198-202,
206, 207
and mechanics, 228
purely ideal, 278
belongs to causal conception, 286


481
INERTIA, PRINCIPLE OF (confinusd)—
(see Appendix III, The Copernicans and
the principle of inertia)
Toteko, 319 n. 8
Irrational—
character, 297 f.
limit of mechanical explanation, 297-


2
irreducibility of sensation, 298 f., $39,


400

irreducibility of transitive action,
300 f., 307-308, 400, 409

familiar and unintelligible character,
302-308

unique rational, 308 f.

and teleology, 318

(see mechanism)

Isoropss, 186 n. 77


Jamas, atomic theory, 85, 108 n. 91,
88, 234, 395
James, WitiiaMm, plasticity of nature, 403
jJovute—
conservation of energy, 70, 194, 206,
407
and Planck, 154 n. 109
experimental data, 194~195
deduction of principle, 200-201
and Tait, 213 n. 58
and Carnot’s principle, 259
Juscxer, confusion of specific gravity
and absolute gravity, 160


KR ANADA—
atomism, 85, 88
diversity of atoms, 234
Kant—
analytical and synthetical judgments,


concept of experience, 57 n. 17

free will, §7 n. 24

dynamic theory, 79

action at a distance, 8o f.

action of matter, 82

relativity of motion, 126 f.

and Maxwell, 127

and Newton’s demonstration, 129

demonstration of principle of inertia,
140

Cartesian influence, 146

scientific statements, 154 n. 109

a priori demonstration of conservation
of matter, 176 f.

followed by Schopenhauer, 177


HH


IDENTITY AND REALITY


Kant (continued) —
influence upon Helmholtz, 212 n. 57
“caloric fluid,” 250
organisms and teleology, 311
objection, 314
perdurability, 360
deduction and experience, 398
partially intelligible reality, 400, 421
pure science, 401 f., impossibility, 402
conformity to law and causality, 423
KAUFMANN, ¢xperience, 100
Kexuzé, formula of structure, 992
Kertvin, Lornp—
utilization of hypothesis, 51
ether, 67
mechanistic theory, 68
elasticity, 71
against action at a distance, 79, 84


kinetic theory of gases, 105 n. 23
mass and weight, 187 n. 99
total instrinsic energy, 208
and Carnot, 259
Kepter—
appetence, 78 f.
laws applied to electrons, 99
action at a distance, 107 n. 76
misunderstanding of inertia, 119
mass and weight, 162
processes of thought, 388 f.
elliptical motion of celestial bodies,
412
and Newtonian simplification, 435-


436
(see Appendices I and I{I)
K irncHHoFrr—
mechanics and experience, 103
descriptive science, 406
Kirwan, phlogiston, 167, 333, 352 n. 32
KLEINPETER, analogy with Mach, 1:53
n. 76
Koutrauscn, chemical energy, 273
Kopr, Hermann—
research in chemistry prior to
Lavoisier, 160, 168, 184 n. 14, 185
N. 44, 235, 254 1. 9-15, 351 D. 8,
351 n. 15, 351 B. 17, 352 n, 18,
352 . 23, 442 N-. 32, 443 1. §9
phlogiston, $32, 352 n. 26, 952 n. 94
KozLowsxi—


opinion concerning causality, 56 n. 8
and


Koziowsx: | ;
agreement between Comte, Kirch-
hoff, and Mach, 61 n. 85
theory of Lasswitz, 105 n. 24
foundation of atomiam, 112 n. 134
analogy with Milhaud, Lalande,
154 n. 109
unity of matter, 255 n. 3!
hearing and sight, 319 n. 16
spatia] sensation, 920 n. 47
and Lucretius, 423
Kroent, theory of gases, 105 n. 23
Kroman— |
causality, 56 n. 9, 154 n. 109
theory of Lasswitz, 105 n. 24
analogy with Spir, 154 n. 109
KuNncKEL—
confusion of specific and absolute
weight, 160
transmutation, 352 n. 20


refutation of palingenesis, 404


Larrrre, and Regnault, 56 n. 15
La FontTamne, reason corrects sensation,


LacRrance—
utilization of hypothesis, 50
matter and gravitation, 73
against action at a distance, 79
time, fourth dimension of space, 218
LaLtanveg, A.—
foundation of explanation, 154 n. 109
comparison with Kozlowski and
Milhaud, 154 n. 109
Nollet’s caloric fluid, 257 n. 67
against primacy of touch, 304, 320


n. 40
Carnot's principle and tendency to
equality, 317
social element and common sense,
381 n. 17
Ck~~-
explanation of biological pheno-
menon, 63
and Galiani, 311
evolution, 313
and Comte, 441 1. 19
LANDOLT—
conservation of matter and experi-


INDEX


Lanaz, F. A. (continued) —
research in theories, 54
atomism, 85, 109 n. 104
critic of teleology, 316
and Czolbe, 319 n. 19
progress of science, 411
Lanaz, Luowic—
measure of time, $3
relativity of motion, 133 f.
empty space, 152 n. 57
and Hertz, 408
Lanogvin, Pavit—
local time, 59 n. 54, 196 f., 257 n. 73
electric phenomenon concrived as
ultimate, 100
LapLace—
utilization of hypothesis, 50
gravitation, Bo, 84
double character of principle of
inertia, 138
mass, quantity of matter, 179
phliogiston, 185 n. 46
heat, 193
nebula and immutability, 291, 317
and Parmenides, 231
Wilbois’s remark, 231
nebula and evolution, 314
receding of teleology, 315
Larmor—
triumph of atomism, 89
electron and cther, 250, Pu n. 64
LASBaALLE, F., see Appendix Ib
Lasswrrz-—
rigid atom, 72
kinetic theory, 105 n. 24
history of atomism, 109 n. 104, 254
n.4; of principle of inertia, 151 n. 38
conservation of cncergy, 199
atom, mobile portion of space, 246
Helm's principle, 263
Berigard’s system, 329
the elements and their particles, 315
n. 3, 326, 327
quality and quantity, 353 n. 48
Lavoister—
and Anaxagoras, 29
utilization of hypothesis, 50
chemical “revolution,” 157, 160, 167,


against clement of quality, 165

principle of conservation of matter,
165, 169 f., 194

imponderables,


483


LAVOIsIER (continued) —
Black and Meyer, 170, 332
combustion, 171
statements of principle, 173
attitude in regard to principle, 173-
174
opposition of chemists, 177-178
influence of causal tendency, 182
heat, 193
equation of phlogisticians, 222-225
Lavoisier’s equation, 226, 282-283
the elements, 236, 238
phlogiston and quality, 332-334
science and nomenclature, 382 n. 35
Law, CONFORMITY TO—
definition by Helmholtz, 17, 18
foundation, 18
Comte’s opinion, 18, 389
Comte's limit for conformity to law,
20 f., 412
method of scientists, 21, 335
economy of effort (Mach), 25
conformity to law and miracle, 27
law, ideal construction, 29-32, 413
conformity to law and time, 32
and measure of time, 34 f.
and space, 36 f.
object and conformity to law, 39-40,
377
and hypothesis, 51 f.
subordination to hypothesis, 53
opinions of Spir, Kroman, 154 n. 109
characteristics, 251-252
characteristic domain, 310
and teleology, 318
and substitution of quantity for
quality, 346
agreement between mind and pheno-
mena, 394
and causality, 421 f.
theory of Lucretius, 422
principles of conservation and con-
formity to law, 491 f.
characteristics of science not dedu-
cible from conformity to law, 437
and identity, 439
connection and distinction between
the two principles, 440
(see causality, scientific)
LAWFULNESS—
(see above, law, conformity to)
Lx Bex, atom of dissymetric carbon, 392
Lz Banc, M., Volta, 213 n. 75


484


Lz Buanc, R., translation of Cardanus,
150 n. 26
Lz Bon, G., fortuitous discoveries, 197
LécuHa.as, universality of belief in
conformity to law, 21
(see Appendix ITT)
Lz Cnrare mer, law of phases, 256 1. 33
Lz Danrszc, F.—
limit traced for science by Comte, 23
organs of animals, 319 n. 18
and Haller, 443 n. 61
Lepuc, STapHane, 63
Lx Fivars, N., 951 n. 8
Larni—


“sufficient’’ or determining reason,
28f., 41, 43, 241, 245-246, 397

Couturat’s comments, 43, 245

gravitation, 50, 78, 79

Cassirer, 60 n. 76

mechanism, 63, 68, 91, 921 n. 57

elasticity, 68, 70, 407

vis viva, 70, 189-192, 199, 202, 205,
206, 279

active principle, 72, 279, 309

and Kanada, 85

atomism, 9!

action at a distance, 108 n. 80

infinitesimal calculus, 148

mass, 165-166

and Descartes, 190

and Huygens, 190-191

and J. Bernoulli, 191

influence, 193

impossibility of perpetual motion,
202 f., 204

reversibility, 216, 218, 279, 285

space and matter, 245-246, 248-249,
250-251

and Spinoza, 253-254

terminology, 260

conservation of energy, 266, 394

conception of universe, 279, 915, 421

the mill, 291-292, 296, 395, 361


IDENTITY AND REALITY


Liuzrny—
and Stahl, 168
the pointed particles, 996, 430
Lzonarpvo ba Vinci—
follower of Albert of Saxony, 150
n. 27
accidental gravity, 162, 190
impossibility of perpetual motion,
202


tendency to repose, 267
Le Roy, E.—
measure of time, $3
theory of evolution, 312
science corresponds to the same
attitude as common sense, 378
brute fact and scientific fact, 378, 420
vague zone between common sense
and science, 379
rationalization of reality, 384
simplicity and habits of mind, 413
Leroy, and Lavoisier, 171
Le Sace—
theory, Bo
Maxwell’s opinion, 80
WTitings previous to his theory, 107
n. 64
Levuciprus—
atomism, 85, 88, 95
change, 93
conservation of mass, 158 f.
unity of matter, 234
and Descartes, 248
Lévy-Brunt, Comte, 56 n. 15; 57
nN. 213 444 0. 77
LiBavivs, transmutation, 361 n. 7
Lresic, against Bacon, 39!
LippMaNn—
conservation of energy, 195
mechanical equivalent of heat, 198
and Carnot, 259
against Maxwell, 276
Larrag£, empirical origin of principle
of conservation of matter, 172 f.
LosatTcHewsky, non-Euclidean geo-
metry, 39


conservation of matter, 179
primary and secondary qualitics,
242, 247
tion of motion, 302
spatial sensation in the blind, 303


mechanical theory of electricity, 65


INDEX


Lopasg, O. (continued) —
the electron, 99
the electric phenomenon conceived
as ultimate, 101
inertia, 153 n. 66
Logs, JAcQuEs, cpigenetic notion of
evolution, 321 n. 62, 358


Lorentz, H. A.
gravitation, 84
ether, 135


variation of mass, 182
Lo Surpo, and Landolt, 187 n. 79
Lorzze—
homogeneity of space, 60 n. 63
action at a distance, 81, 83, 108
n. 84
principle of inertia, 123
paradoxical character of this prin-
ciple, 139
a priori demonstration, 140
against unity of matter, 240-241, 244
against kinematic conception of sen-
sation, 295
motion-substance, jo!
conception of external world, 305
things and sensation, 361
Lucian—
conservation of mass, 158
and Kant, 176
Lucretius—
comparison of conformity to law
with causality, 18
conception of causality, 29, 427, 428
causality and time, 38, 59 n. 48
materiality of air, 58 n. 26
influence of Epicurus, 86
corpuscle, 96, 424 Ff.
metaphor of change, 11t n. 125
motion of atoms, 113
conservation of matter, 158 f., 179
and Jean Rey, 164
against absolute lightness, 172 f.
materiality, 179, 306
infinite number of atoms, 287 n. 7
touch, 306
forms of atoms, 395
and the chemical theory, 427-428
“the trees and the fruits,” 427, 435
(see Appendix IV)
Lyz.1, analogy with Rankine, 288 n. 30


Masi.veau, 85 f., 109 n. 104, 148 n. 2,
183 n. 7, 254 n. 6


485


Macu—

and Joule, 20

economy of thought, 25

science at an end, 42

aim of science, 49

prohibition of explanation, 51, 53,
102, 366, 390

comparison with Maxwell, 92

against Newton, 131 f.

relativity of motion, 134

influence over Einstein, 152 n. 61

against quantity of matter, 179

indetermination of notion of mass,
180

against Maxwell, 276

groups of sensations, 363

real elements of the world, 366

science and common sense, 366, 369

cerebral deafness or blindness, 380


n.5
réle of the hypothesis, 443 n. 68
MacQuER—
weight, accidental property, 168
and Lavoisier, 171
hardenng of mercury, 33!
MAGENDIE, 399
Masic, relations to religion, 27
3s, the Motekallim, 86
E DE BIrRAN, primacy of touch, 30
MALEBRANCHE—
space and matter, 249
occasionalism, 302
and causality, 302
divinity and free will, 309-310
and Aristotle, 325
measure of sensations, 385
MAQUEDUs, atomism, 87
MARBURG, school of philosophy—
identity, instrument of knowledge,423
réle of the function, 423, 437
MARIOTTE—
percussion, 299-300
his law, 412, 441 n. 15
MARSILE OF INGEN, propagation of
doctrine of Albert of Saxony, 117
Mass—
definition, 157, 306, 372
constancy, 157 f., 182-183, 431
and substance, 162
Descartes, 162-163
Rey, 164-165
Leibniz, 166
Newton, 166


486 IDENTITY AND REALITY
Mass Matter, unity of (continued) —


measure of quantity of matter, 179 f.

substratum of matter, 179, 180, 207

obscurity of concept, 180

source of this obscurity, 180

confusion with weight, 181 f., 179-
180

difference with weight, 181

conservation of mass is “plausible,’’
183

Einstein's theory, 188 n. 109

and energy, 207

, the mechanics of Hertz, 219

Ostwald, 219-220

genesis of concept, 306, 342-343

Ostwald's theory, 347 f.

(see Appendix I11)

MATHEMATICS—-

nature, according to Aristotle, 42

difference from physical theories, 94

principle of inertia, 148

and argument of Zeno, 229-230

and the physical discrete, 344-345,
438-439

function, incomplete image of the
world, 436

Marrezs, principle of the conservation

statements, 157

conservation of mass, 157-158

history, 158-169

first studies of Lavoisier, 169 f.

final triumph, 171

empirical origin, Mill, Littré, 172

G priort origin, 175

Kant’s demonstration, 176-177, 400

historical difficulties (Spencer), 177

true content of principle, 178 [.

mass, 179-183

plausibility, 183

comervation of energy, 189, 195,
198 f., 206

Jj. Perrin, 211 n. 35


simplicity, 266
Ostwald’s theory, 347 f.
Marrerg, unity of—
history, 234-235
the concept of element, 235-239
tendency of chemists, 299-240, 337
testimony of philosophers, 240-243
and causality, 241
primary and secondary qualities,
RAB-BSY


matter, complex concept, 242, 961
“irresistible” character of tendency,


244

tendency parallel to reduction of
space, 246-254

ether, 250-251

disappearance of reality, 252, 385

non-existence, 252

reaction of science, 253

and Newton, 430


Maupertius, and Moleschott, 154 n. 95
MAaxwELt—


frequent use of hypothesis, 51

electromagnetic theory of light, 64,
98, 407

mechanical theory of electricity, 65

its conception and Michelson's ex-
periment, 65-66

central forces, 76

research for an explanation of gravi-
tation, 79

Le Sage’s opinion, 80

mechanism, ultimate explanation, 92

difficulties concerning the ether, 104
n. 14

theory of gases, 105 n. 23

action by contact, 106 n. 36

principle of inertia, 127

demonstration of principle, 140

conservation of matter, 175, 187
n. g2

weight and mass, 18:

non-evidence of conservation of
energy, 213 n. 70

vision, 242-243

ether, 249-250

non-existence, 252

the demon, 275-276, 313, 405

Poincaré’s opinion, 276-277, 405

reservation concerning kinetic theory


405
and Planck, 408, 443 n. 69
incongruous models, 409


Mayer, J. R.—


conservation of energy, 70, 194, 206,
280

Planck's opinion, 154 0. 109

equivalent of heat, 195

deduction of the principle, 199~201,
202

and irreversibility, 259, 267, 280

(ser energy, principle of conservation of)


INDEX


Mayer, floating magnets, 99
MacHantsm—
theories, 55, 291, 323
unfinished character, 63
difficulties: organic matter, 64 (see
also sensation)
chemical theories,64; electric theories,
64-65; ether, 65
relative character of these difficulties,


66
corpuscular theories, 67-68
tentative explanations, 68 f.
dynamic theories, 74 f.
objections, 75 f., goo
less absolute solutions, 77 f.
perennial character of idea, 85 f.
common characteristics, 88
present success, 86 f.
satisfactory character, 91, 347, 406-


407

deduction from causality .g2 f., 227-
228, 387, 408

mechanical atom and electric cor-
puscle, 99-100

electric phenomenon conceived as
ultimate, 101

necessary form of our understanding,
102, 253-254, 298

unity of matter, 234, 241, 252

Poincaré, 248

Carnot’s principle, 261, 365

irreducibility of sensation, 291-318,
339, 399-400

objections of philosophers, 295-296

sensation as epiphenomenon, 297

the limit of mechanism or the irra-
tional, 297-319

and organic life, 313-319

and chemical theories, 337 f., 339 f.

and common sense, 365

reservations of scientists, 405-406

guiding principle of science, 410-412

(see atomism, irrational)

Meussus, Tannery's comments, 154


n. 109
Maxton, heat and light, 293
Mzmory—
réle in perception, 354-355, 378
sensation and recollection, 3955-366
Manpevezr, periodic classification of
elements, 239
Mursenne, FaATHER—
and Jean Rey, 165


487


MERSENNE, FATHER (continued) —
_ and Stevinus, 205

concept of conservation, 206

and Descartes, 256 n. 47
Meyver—

combustion, 170

aciduum pingue, 332
MICHELL, dynamic theory, 106 n. 40
MICHELSON—


experiment of, 65
ether, 135
MILHAUD—
Comte and Greek science, 109
n. 105


Poinsot, Tannery, 154 n. 109

principles of conservation, 154 n. 109

Comte’s dogma, 412

conformity to law and causality, 423,
431; objections to this conception,
431-437, 438

Miz, Joun Struart—

the real cause, 45

action at a distance, 81

paradoxical character of inertia, 140-
14!

empirical origin of conservation of
matter, 172-175

primacy of touch, 303


the perdurability of Kant, 360
persistence of “‘groups of sensations,”’
363
Minxowsx!, local time, 136, 237
n. 73


MIRACLE, relation to science, 26-28

Mositty, free, opposition between
space and time in this respect,
according to Russell, 37

MOLESCHOTT, matter and motion,
analogy with Maupertius, 140,
154 n. 95

Mo.yneux, spatial sensation of the
blind, 303

Monosg, phlogiston, 185 n. 46

More, Henry, influence on Newton,
152 n. 57, 389

(see Appendix 1)

More ter, Assé, Galiani, 321 n. 56

Morey, experiment of Michelson and,
65

Morveav, G. pg, phiogiston, 185 n. 46,
185 n. 62

Morexauum (or Motekallemin), atom-

ism, 86, 88


IDENTITY AND REALITY


Morwion, PERPETUAL—
impossibility: basis of the demon-
stration of conservation of energy,
202 f.
history, 202
Helmholtz, 202-203
seekers, 209
non-evident character, 203
decision of the Academy of Science,
204; its basis, 205
demonstration of Stevinus, 205
and causality, 262
Mouret, 287 n. 4
method in thermo-dynamics, 262
Carnot, Clausius, 263


specific energy of the nerve, 292-293
abstract reasoning, 399
MuncxeE, perpetual physical motion,205
MusscHENBROEK—
the hypothesis, 49
gravity of fire, 185 n. 50


NaGEOTTE, J., 371, 282 n. 37
NAaTorP, 445 1. 97
Natur pha.
concept of force, 81
and theories of quality, 346
failure of their attempts at scientific
deduction, 398
NEwTox—
unique independent variable, 32
hypotheses non fingo, 49
law of gravitation, 50, §2, 73, 181;
and simplicity, 412; and causality,
421, 437
the rings, 54, 73
conservation of energy, 70 f.
the ngid atom, 7: f.
action by contact, 73
previous hypotheses, 77-78, 142
adversaries, 7
principle of inertia, 128 f.
absolute space, 129 f.
Mach’s argument, 131 f.
Euler, Poinsot, Neumann, 132
absolute motion, 134, 135
the infinitesimal calculus, 148
and Painlevé, etc., 153 0. 66
weight proportional to mass, 166
mass, quantity of weight, 179, 180
oscillations of a column of water, 264
and Kant, 311


NEWTON (continued) —
analogy with Berigard, 334
processes of thought, 388 f,
metaphysical necessity and diversity,


399
conformity to law and causality, 423
atomic theory, 424-426, 435
and chemical theory, 428
and unity of matter, 430
(see Appendix I, Leibniz, Newton, and
action ata distance ; and Appendix III,
the Copernicans and the principle of
inertia)
Neumann, C.—
on the measure of time, 33, 285-286
and Newton, 1:32
relativity of rectilinear motion, 132
absolute motion, 134
Nietzscue, F., the “eternal return,” 272
Nouzet, Asng, caloric fluid, 257 n. 67


Occam—
and atomism, 87
maxim, 134, 136
Opon, GERARD, and atomism, 87
Orrstenp, influence of the Naturphilo-
sophen, 346, 415
OstwaLp—


assimilation of causality with con-
formity to law, 17-18

tame, 35

against mechanism, 64, 103 n. 9, 91,
337, 353 n. 46

quantitative analysis, 174

Boussinesq, 181

and Landolt, 187 n. 8, 949

and Schopenhauer, 187 n. 89

the “‘invariants,"”’ 219

the chemical equation, 225

combination of elements, 237-238

Helm’s principle, 263

properties and the chemical formula,
336

theory of energy, 347-351, 415

intensities and capacities, 348-349

objections: concept of energy, 348;
entropy, 349; energy, ‘‘thing in
itself," 950, 421; entropy should
be conserved, 350

permanency of objects, 360

energy and sensation, 363

programme of science, 410

(sea .


INDEX 489
PAINLEVE— PLANCK (continued)—
homogeneity of time, 59 n. 49 reversible and irreversible pheno-
principle of inertia, 153 n. 66 mena, 290 n. 60


continuity of common sense and
science, 3813 n. 15
(see Appendix IIT)
Papin, Denis, hardness of particles, 72
Parrus, horizontal motion, 114, 115,
143
Parmacetsus, 167; chemical clements,
235, 928
PARMENIDES-—~
universal substance, 95
the immutable sphere, 231, 253, 317
unity of matter, 234
and atomism, 438
Pasteur, abstract reasoning and error,
399
Penjon, Spi, 320 n. 27
Perain, J.—
triumph of atomism, 89, 90
conservation of elements, 211 n. 35
conservation of energy and impossi-
bility of perpetual motion, 213 n.


77
chemical and physical phenomenon,
233 n. 23
Carnot’s principle, 285
and evolution, 312-313
PHLOGISTON—
notion, 167
and weight, 168
Macquer’s declaration, 168
Scheele, 169
equation of phlogisticians, 222-223
Becher, 235
and elements, 332-333
opposition to theory of Lavoisier,
333 f.
reasons for this opposition, 334
metallicity, 339
theory of quality, 340
Pui.opon, J., ideas of Hipparchus, 117
Picaver, F., Aristotelian philosophy of
the Middle Ages, 183 n. 12
PLancKx—
belief in physical reality, 62 n. 96,
and n. 98
subordination of law to hypothesis,
62 n. 98
mechanism, 103 n. 10
conservation of energy, 154 n. 109,
210 n. 16


anthropomorphic considerations, 382


n. 39
Maxwell-Helmholtz, 408
PLATNER, touch, 304
PLaTo—
causality, 29
geometry and its aim, 60 n. 72
transformation of elements, 159
(see Appendix IV)
PLotinus, Aristotle’s influence, 183 0.12
PLUTARCH, the motion of the moon, 114
(see Appendix II, The passages from Plu-
tarch and Simplicius)
Powncart, H.—
science, the rule of action, 20
advantage of insufficient means, 31
foundations of geometry, 37
argument against hypothesis denying
homogeneity to space, 39; failure
of this argument, 69 n. 63
the desire for knowledge, 42
use of hypotheses, 51, 391
aim of mathematical theories, 42
concerning conformity to law and
time, 59 Nn. 50
the term ‘“‘existence,”’ 62 n. 98
and Maxwell, 65, 405
gravitation, 73, 42!
persistency of atomism, 89
Kaufmann’s experiment, 100
principles of conservation and experi-
ence, 102, 112 n. 143
difficulties concerning the ether, 104
n. 14
absolute velocity of the earth, 135,
1563 n. 81
relativity of space, 153 n. 67
and Newton, 187 n. 100
indetermination of notion of mass,
188 n. 103, 188 n. 110
and Galileo, 190
conservation of energy, 194, 215;.
privileged position of the principle,.
198, 402; generality of the state-
ment, 209
and Rumford, 210 n. 18
and Carnot, 211 n. 23, 221 n. 9!
influence of celestial mechanics, 218
mechanistic exaggerations, 248
the electron, 249


490


Poucaré, H. -
ether and space, 249
Carnot’s principle, 260;

268


equality of temperature, 262

explanations by mechanism, 275 f.;
Maxwell’s demon, 276, 277

Gouy's phenomenon, 277

against Rankine, 288 n. 30

the physical world, a game of
billiards, 291 and 919 n. 1

nature and teleology, 315-316

*#ensations united by an indestructible
cement, 365

irreversible phenomena, 992, 442


Nn. 23, 394
electric i and motion of
the pendulum, 394
nature and simplicity, 411-412, 413
the “manner of grouping,’’ 445 D. 102
Pomcarst, Lucren—
triumph of kinetic hypotheses, 8g—go
mass and weight, 187 n. 99
reduction of matter to ether, 248
Pomsor—
elasticity, 71!
principle of inertia, 192
law of constancy and uniformity,
154 2. 109, 226-227
‘Pomon—
the measure of time, 33, 285
double character of principle of
inertia, 138
mass, quantity of matter, 179
Ponceer, available work, 193
Porruyry, Plotinus and Aristotle, 185
mn. 12
Patmonrvalr—
action at a distance, 83
relation to idealism, 83
Patvosr, 399
Paxzyer, law of the constancy of
Boscovich and Michell, 104 n. 40
against Lavoisier, 168-169, 171
discovery of oxygen, 171, 222
Provur—


hydrogen, primitive element, 98, 239
_ fate of this theory, 299


square of the hypotenuse, |
and Democritus, 493


IDENTITY AND REALITY


Quaurry, theories of—
eso ce mechanical theories,
ao ee f.
the object fe its qualities, $29
accidental qualities, 323
substantial qualities, 325 f.
history, $25~-334
reasons for their success, 934
tendency derived from causality, $37
basis, 940-941
acience purely qualitative, 340-94!
reduction to quantity, 941-942
advantages of quantitative concep-
tion, 343; the qualitative con-
ception diluted, $44
they admit continuity, 944-945
inconveniences, 345-346
progressive reduction to quantity,
346-947
Queaceranus, (Du Cimns), palingenesis,
404


Ragpanus Mavurus, atomism, 96, 87
Raname, M.—
potential energy, 210 n. 16
reconcentration of mechanical energy,


269-270
and Maxwell, 269; kinship with
ancient conceptions, 271
difference from Boltzmann, 274
Rationat, the, and the persistent


REGNAULT, attacks of positivists, 56
n. 15
Rew, T., 187 n. 94
reality of external world, 376
Recativiry, (Einstein's)—
local time, 59 n. 54, 196 f., 257 n. 79
space, 152 n. 52
matter transformed into space, 257
n. §9
transitive action of matter, 921 n. §2


Reuicion, differences from magic,
26-28
absolute beginning, 27
multiplicity of causes, 44
causality and elimina ', 490


inert matter, 25%


INDEX


Renovuvier (continued) —
the cycles, 271, 288 n. 34
and Spencer, 272
and Kant, 321 n. 57
mechanism, scientific common sense,
365
the absolute phenomenon, 366
Return, Erernar—
Rankine’s theory, 269, 317
Poincaré’s objections, 288 n. 30
ancient theories, 271-272
Nietzsche, 272
difference from Boltzmann's hypo-
thesis, 274
Reussinc, belief in the increase of
weight, 161
Rey, Jzan—
conservation of weight, 164-165,
167, 178, 184 n. 15,
reasons for its lack of success, 165,
182, 333
the true meaning of his experiments,
172
attitude toward the principle of con-
servation of matter, 173
and Carnot, 267
Reynotps, ©., structure of gases, 442
n. 25
Riemann, non-Euclidean geometry, 39
Rénrozn—
and Crookes, 197
rays, 197, 294
Rosenspercer—
Coulomb’s influence, 106 n. 39
quotations from Zpinus, 107 n. 56
from Gauss, 5107 n. 59
from Anaxagoras and Empedocies,
tin. 126
history of the principle of inertia,
149 N. Ig, 190 n. go, 151 n. 38,
154 n. 89
history of the principle of the con-
servation of matter, 184 n. 19,
187 n. 88
history of the principle of the con-
servation of energy, 210 n. 15,
214 n. 81
caloric-fluid, 257 n. 67
percussion, 299
Gassendi, 353 n. 50
Newton, 440 n. 6
Bacon, 441 n. 15
(see Appendix Iil)


491


Rusens—
precision of modern scientific
methods, 57 n. 16
heat and light, 319 n. 11
Rusrorp, transformation of motion
into heat, 193
RusseE.z., B.—
free mobility, 37
space and matter, 251
RuTHERFORD—
measure of time, 58 n. 47
radio-activity, 58 n. 47, 289 n. 40
and n. 4!
atomic theory, 89, 103 n. 8
variation of weight, 188 n. 106


S AADIA—
refutation of atomism, 86
elements, 326, 332, 340
Saint Tuomas AQgumnas—
Ptolemy, 110
mixture of elements, 327
SAINT- VENANT, Boscovich’s system, 74
Samnte-Ciame Deviiie, elements and
combinations, 237, 238
SALA, ANGELO, precipitation of copper
by iron in blue vitriol, 331
SANTBECK, trajectory of a ball, 120
Scaricer, confusion of specific and
absolute weight, 160
SCHEELE—
phlogiston and heat, 169
transmutation of water into earth,
170
against Lavoisier, 171-173
chemical reaction, 222
SCHELLBACH, against action at a dis-
tance, 80
SCHELLING—
failure of his scientific deductions, 399
identity of thought and being, 410
Scuencx, R., the measure of time,
58 n. 46
SCHOPENHAUER—
same definition as Leibniz and Wolf
for causality, 29, 246
the act of volition, 47, 308
force, 81
matter, 82, 299, 359
the a priors principle of inertia, 146-


147
and Kant, 177
confusion-of mass and weight, 180


492


ScHOPENRAUVER
occult qualities, 245
Leibniz’s angel, 298
impenetrability, 300
the external world and represen-
tation, 362
and Byron, 417
(see Appendix I)
ScHUSTER, see Appendix IV
ScHUTZENBERGER, atomic theories, 112
N. 131, 255 n. 30
ScHwann, presumed influence, 56 n. 15
ScIENCE—
rule of action, 21, 22
real advance, 21, 384
its domain, 23-24
progressive evolution, 24 f.
and free will, 25, 308
the miracle, 27 f.
science as an end in itself, 41 f.
science purely that of law, 226-227
and mechanism, 253, 297
and reduction to non-existence, 254
importance of Carnot’s principle,
278, 284, 286
disagreement with reality, 282-283
domination of identity, 284
re-establishment of reality, 284-285,
286
relation between conformity to law
and the three concepts of causality,
309-310
and teleology, 311-319
qualitative conceptions, 334
reduction to quantity, 346
continuity of common sense and
science, 361-383
vanity of tendency toward elimina-
tion of causality, 366
science creates objects, 368
supplements common sense, 37!
does not return toward sensation, 373
and metaphysics, 377-378, 416-419
transformation of perception, 379
distinction: common sense acts un-
consciously, 379-380
and positivism, 384 f.
scientist's state of mind, 386 f.


IDENTITY AND REALITY


Scrence (continued)—
réle of empiricism, 403
method of science, 403 f.
dynamism, 406
use of kinetic theories, 406-407
perpetual flux, 410
tendency towards universal mechan-
ism or atomism, 410-41!
and ‘‘simplicity,”” 411-414
analogous reasoning, 414-415
perennial character of mechanism,
415-416
theories and causal principle, 420
causal manifestations, 424-433
(see Appendix IV)
Scor, M., translation of Al Bitragi
(Alpetragius), 117
Seccui, A., elasticity of molecules, 71


anticipates the principle of conser-
vation of energy, 193, 202
impossibility of perpetual motion,
202
Tait’s attacks, 213 n. 58
SENNERT, atomism, 87
Sextus Epiicus—
motion, 116
relativity of motion, 127 f., 130
Democritus, 292
Sremans, analogy with Rankine, 288
n. 30
Surpuicius, persistency of rectilinear
motion, 115, 117
(see Appendix If, The passages from
Plutarch and Simplicius)
Surry, Apa, restriction of conformity
to law, 20
SOMMERFELD, atomic theory, 103 n. 8
Spencer, HeERBERT—
concept of force, 81
inertia, 124 f.
conservation of matter, 177-178; of
energy, 198
unity of matter, 240
the “‘half-periods,”” 270; related to
ancient conceptions, 271-272; dis-
tinguished from Boltzmann's hypo-
thesis, 274
primacy of touch, 303
Spmoza—
understanding, 42
ultimate cause, 253
mechanism, 253-254, 292


INDEX


Semoza (continued) —
Boyle, Leibniz, 253, 254, 388
against free will, 308
postulate of intelligibility, 397, 399,
400, 403, 410


double nature of concept of identity,
43, 154 n. 109
space and time, 59 n. 55
disagreement between identity and
reality, 60 n. 66
anti-mechanistic exaggeration, 66
dynamic theory, 77
atomism deduced from causality,
tiin. 127
inertia deduced from identity, 147
conservation of energy, 199
fundamental contradiction between
intellect and nature, 298
distinction between sensation and
memory, 359
science and object, 381 n. 27
immutable order of phenomena, 395
“organized deception,” 416
identity and causality, 446 n. 105
Spainc,W., properties of solids, 211 n.37
STAHL—
belief in increase of weight, 161
phlogiston, 167, 168, 340
transmutation, 235
inflammability, 332, 333, 340
SraLto—
influence, 53
studies in scientific theories, 54
action at a distance, 79, 8:
persistency of atomism, 88
difficulties concerning the ether, 104
n. 14
kinetic theory of gases, 105 n 23
Secchi’s theory, 105 n. 27
conservation of energy, 198
and Friedal, 256 n. 34
impenetrability, 300
objections to atomism, 414
Stas, minutia of his work, 57 n. 16, 30,
174, 429
STEFANOWSKA, 319 n. 8
STEvinus—
impossibility of perpetual motion, 202
demonstration, 205
Stewart, difficulties of the ether, 104
n. 14
Sroxes, Grorcz, formula, 98


493
Sraauss, D. F., materialism and
mechanism, 291
Streintz—
measure of time, 58 n. 45
relativity of motion, 139 f.
Sutiy-PrupHomMa—
retreat of teleology, 315
tendency of chemistry toward
mechanical explanation, 337
SuNCZEL, propagation of Albert of
Saxony’s doctrine, 117
Sy.vius, De La Boz, and Lémery, 445
n. 101


TaInE—
comparison of causality and con-
formity to law, 17, 48
Hegel's influence, 397
Tarr—
experimental verification of non-
Euclidean geometry, 39
difficulties concerning the ether, 104
n. 14
Hegel, 154 n. 99
ether rings, 182, 249
against Mayer, Séguin, 213 n. 58
TANNERY, PAUL—
Aristotle, 125, 368
antiquity and principle of inertia,
148 n. 1
Galileo, 151 n. 38, 142
principles of conservation, 154 n. 109


(see Appendix IV)
TARTAGLIA, negation of compound
motion, 120
TeExestus, follows Copernicus, 119
‘THEMIsTius—
motion, 115, 145
adopted by Cardanus, 119
Tuoxson, J. J.—
against action at a distance, 80, 108
n. 79
electronic theory, 97 f.
atomism, 110 n. 112
proportionality of weight and mass,
182, 188 n. 106
THomson, Wituiam, see Kelvin, Lord
Tawe—
and conformity to law, g2 f., 220-
222
measure, 32 f., 285


494


Tow (continued )—
homogencity, 33
relations with object, 35, 41, 240;
with space, 37, 218
time and direction, 38
time and causality, 38
“Jocal time,” 59 n. 54, 136f., 257
n. 65
continuity, 83
time and identity, 94, 209, 215,
231
irreversibility, 217 |
and rational mechanics: reversibility,
218
elimination, 222, 284-285
example of ‘“‘chemical equations,”
222-227
suppression of variation in time by
rational science, 230
and cause, 230
evolution of concept, 251-253
the reversible is only ideal, 284-285
influence of Carnot's principle, 285-
286
and theoretical science, 418
Toucn—
Berkeley’s theory, 303 f.
objections, 303-304, 37!
Trause, biological studies, 63
Trupaing, and Lavoisier, 171
TYNDALL—
variation in intensity of sensation,
293
vibrating multiple proportion, 367


Variati, see Appendix I]
Van't Horr—
the two arrows, 225, 393
properties and the chemical! formula,
336
atom of asymmetric carbon, 392
reserves concerning molecular con-
ception, 405
VARIGNON, against action at a distance,
80
Verpert, and Clausius, 288 n. 33
Vinci, the eternal return, 271-272
(see Appendix LT)
Virrvuvius, atomism, 86
Votta, possibility of an indefinite
creation of electric energy, 205
VoLTamg, conservation of ots viva,


IDENTITY AND REALITY


WALLACE, attempt to explain evolu-
tion, 313
Warsure, permeability of glass, 196
Watt, steam engine, 193
Weser, W., chemical energy, 273
Weuis, H. G.—
difficulties regarding experiments,
58 n. 98
Sleeper, 59 D. 54
The Time Machine, 216~217
WHEWELL—
and Kant, 154 n. 109, 401-402
conservation of weight, 177
confusion between mass and weight,
180
deduction and empiricism, 401-402
Wien, gravitation, 84
Wi.a01s, J.—
principles of conservation, 154 n.
109
apparent evolution and real persis-
tency, 231, 314
Wixg, heat-matter, 192, 206
Winttam or Concues, particles-cle-
ments, 327
Wrson, C. T. R., ions, g8
Wis.icenus, transmutation and weight,
161
Wrrrz, Hans, mechanical theory of
electricity, 104 n. 13
WorHLER—
synthesis of urca, 336
and Comte, 441 n. 13


WowxLwiLt—
Galileo and inertia, 121, 151 n. 38,
232n.9
guotation from Themistius, 149 n.
10
Descartes, 151 n. 38
{see Appendices I and 11)


Wotr, definition of causality, 29, 246
Wut, definition of mass, 180


disagreement between the postulate
of identity and reality, 60 n. 66

belief in reality, 62 n. 96

astronomy and relative motion, 116

Descartes, 152 n. 54

cause and effect, 154 n. 109

unity of matter, 240

overthrow of energetic conception,
382 n. 99

Wurtz, and Comte, 441 n. 13


INDEX 495


Younc— ZELLER—
interfere fringes, 54 atomism of the Eleatics, 3111 :
Mach’s opinions, 443 n. 68 130


Parmenides, 254 n. !
ZzunpeR, analogy with Rankine, 288 (see Appendix IV)
n. 30 ZOELLNER, the fourth dimension, 83


GEORGE ALLEN & UNWIN LTD
Loxpon: 40 Muszum Srreetr, W.C.1
Cape Town: 73 Str. GEonGE’s STREET
SYDNEY, N.S.W.: WyNnvarpD SQuARE
AUCKLAND, N.Z.: 41 ALRERT STREET
WELLINGTON, N.Z.: 4 WILLts STREET
TORONTO: 77 WELLINGTON STREET, WeEsr


T.


*
