Political Parties (Robert Michels (Eden and Cedar Paul, trans.), 1915)
==========================================================
The iron law of oligarchy: why all organizations, even socialist ones, become oligarchies. Public domain. Internet Archive full text (politicalparties00michuoft).

POLITICAL   PARTIES 


«    *^\  •  ^^\mmJ 


Political  Parties 


A  SOCIOLOGICAL  STUDY  OF  THE 
OLIGARCHICAL  TENDENCIES 
OF    MODERN    DEMOCRACY 


By 
ROBERT  MICHELS 

Professor  of  Political  Economy  and 
Statistics,  University  of  Basle 


TRANSLATED    BT 

EDEN  &  CEDAR  PAUL 


1 

l^s 

f 

^ 

u 

"i^- 

NEW  YORK 

'S  INTERNATIONAL  LIBRARY  CO 

19 

15 

Copyright,  1915,  by 
Hbiaest's  International  Library  Co. 


All  rights  reserved,  including  translation 

into  foreign  languages,  including 

the  Scandinavian 


CONTENTS 

CHAPTBB  PAJJIL. 

I.  Democratic  Aristocracy  and  Aristocratic  Democracy  .     .     (jy 
II.    The  Ethical  Embellishment  of  Social  Struggles      ...      12 

PART  ONE 

Leadership  in  Democratic  Organizations  ;i_: 

A.  Technical  and  Administrative  Causes  of  Leadership 

I.    Introductory — The  Need  for  Organization 21 

II.    Mechanical  and  Technical  Impossibility  of  Direct  Govern- 

ment  by  the  Masses C^ 

III.    The  Modern  Democratic  Party  as  a  Fighting  Party,  Domi- 
nated BY  Militarist  Ideas  and  Methods 41 

B.  Psychological  Causes  of  Leadership 

^  IV.    The  Establishment  of  a  Customary  Right  to  the  Office  op 

Delegate 45 

,\  V.    TriE  Need  for  Leadership  Felt  by  the  Mass C^U 

VI.     The  Political  Gratitude  of  the  Masses ^y 

VII.    The  Cult  of  Veneration  Among  the  Masses C^^) 

>(VIII.    Accessory  Qualities  Requisite  to  Leadership      ....  69 

IX.    Accessory  Peculiarities  of  the  Masses (^) 

C.  Intellectual  Factors 

X.  Superiority  of  the  Professional  Leaders  in  Respect  op 
Culture,  and  Their  Indispens ability;  the  Formal  and 
Real  Incompetence  of  the  Mass 80 

PART  TWO 

Autocratic  Tendencies  of  Leaders 

^  I.    The  Stability  of  Leadership 93 

II.  The  Financial  Power  op  the  Leaders  and  of  the  Party     .  107 
'  III.    The  Leaders  and  the  Press 130 

IV.    The  Position  of  the  Leaders  in  Relation  to  the  Masses  in      ^ 

Actual  Practice Q^J 

'  V.    The  Struggle  Between  the  Leaders  and  the  Masses    .     .  (156^ 
VI.    The  Struggle  Among  the  Leaders  Themselves     ....  164 
-\'VII.    Bureaucracy.      Centralizing    and    Decentralizing    Ten- 
dencies     185 

V 


vi  CONTENTS 

PART  THREE 

The  Exercise  of  Power  and  Its  Psychological  Reaction 
UPON  the  Leaders 

CHAPTER  PAGE 

I.    Psychological  Metamorphosis  of  the  Leaders     ....  205 

II.    Bonapartist  Ideology 215 

III.    Identification  of  the  Party  with  the  Leader  ("Le  Parti 

c'estMoi") 226 

PART  FOUR 

Social  Analysis  of  Leadership 

I.    Introductory — The  Class  Struggle  and  Its  Disintegrating     ^.— ^ 

Influence  upon  the  Bourgeoisie vf235 

II.    Analysis  of  the   Bourgeois  Elements  in  the  Socialist 

Leadership        249 

III.  Social  Changes  Resulting  from  Organization      ....     268 

IV.  The  Need  for  the  Differentiation  of  the  Working  Class  .     289 

V.    Labour  Leaders  of  Proletarian  Origin 297 

VI.    Intellectuals,  and  the  Need  for  Them  in  the  Working- 
class  Parties 316 

PART  FIVE 

Attempts  to  Restrict  the  Influence  of  the  Leaders 

I.  The  Referendum 333 

II.  The  Postulate  of  Renunciation 339 

III.  Syndicalism  as  Prophylactic 345 

IV.  Anarchism  as  Prophylactic 357 

PART  SIX 
Synthesis:  The  Oligarchical  Tendencies  of  Organization 

I.    The  Conservative  Basis  of  Organization 365 

I   II.    Democracy  and  the  Iron  Law  of  Oligarchy    .  "_^".     .     ,     .  /^77 

III.    Party-Life  in  War-Time 393 

.  JV.    Final  Considerations 400 

Index 409 


A 


PREFACE 

Many  of  the  most  important  problems  of  social  life,  though 
their  causes  have  from  the  first  been  inherent  in  human  psy- 
chology, have  originated  during  the  last  hundred  and  fifty  years ; 
and  even  in  so  far  as  they  have  been  handed  down  to  us  from 
an  earlier  epoch,  they  have  of  late  come  to  press  more  urgently, 
have  acquired  a  more  precise  formulation,  and  have  gained  fresh 
significance.  Many  of  our  leading  minds  have  gladly  devoted 
the  best  energies  of  their  lives  to  attempts  towards  solving  these 
problems.  The  so-called  principle  of  nationality  was  discovered 
for  the  solution  of  the  racial  and  linguistic  problem  which,  un- 
solved, has  continually  threatened  Europe  with  war  and  the 
majority  of  individual  states  with  revolution.  In  the  economic 
sphere,  the  social  problem  threatens  the  peace  of  the  world  even 
more  seriously  than  do  questions  of  nationality,  and  here  "the 
labourer's  right  to  the  full  produce  of  his  labour"  has  become 
the  rallying  cry.  Finally,  the  principle  of  self-government,  the 
corner-stone  of  democracy,  has  come  to  be  regarded  as  furnishing 
a  solution  of  the  problem  of  nationality,  for  the  principle  of 
nationality  entails  in  practical  working  the  acceptance  of  the  idea 
of  popular  government.  Now,  experience  has  shown  that  not  one 
of  these  solutions  is  as  far-reaching  in  its  effects  as  the  respective 
discoverers  imagined  in  the  days  of  their  first  enthusiasm.  The 
importance  of  the  principle  of  nationality  is  undeniable,  and 
most  of  the  national  questions  of  Western  Europe  can  be  and 
ought  to  be  solved  in  accordance  with  this  principle ;  but  matters 
are  complicated  by  geographical  and  strategical  considerations, 
such  as  the  difficulty  of  determining  natural  frontiers  and  the 
frequent  need  for  the  establishment  of  strategic  frontiers ;  more- 
over, the  principle  of  nationality  cannot  help  us  where  nation- 
alities can  hardly  be  said  to  exist  or  where  they  are  intertangled 
in  inextricable  confusion.  As  far  as  the  economic  problem  is 
concerned,  we  have  numerous  solutions  offered  by  the  different 
schools  of  socialist  thought,  but  the  formula  of  the  right  to  the 
whole  produce  of  labour  is  one  which  can  be  comprehended  more 
readily  in  the  synthetic  than  in  the  analytic  field ;  it  is  easy  to 
formulate  as  a  general  principle  and  likely  as  such  to  command 

vii 


viii  PREFACE 

widespread  sympathy,  but  it  is  exceedingly  difficult  to  apply  in 
actual  practice.  The  present  work  aims  at  a  critical  discussion  of 
the  third  question,  the  problem  of  democracy.  It  is  the  writer 's 
opinion  that  democracy,  at  once  as  an  intellectual  theory  and  as 
a  practical  movement,  has  to-day  entered  upon  a  critical  phase 
from  which  it  will  be  extremely  difficult  to  discover  an  exit. 
Democracy  has  encountered  obstacles,  not  merely  imposed  from 
without,  but  spontaneously  surgent  from  within.  Only  to  a  cer- 
tain degree,  perhaps,  can  these  obstacles  be  surpassed  or  removed. 

The  present  study  makes  no  attempt  to  offer  a  '  *  new  system. ' ' 
It  is  not  the  principal  aim  of  science  to  create  systems,  but 
rather  to  promote  understanding.  It  is  not  the  purpose  of 
sociological  science  to  discover,  or  rediscover,  solutions,  since 
numerous  problems  of  the  individual  life  and  the  life  of  social 
groups  are  not  capable  of  "solution"  at  all,  but  must  ever  remain 
"open."  The  sociologist  should  aim  rather  at  the  dispas- 
sionate exposition  of  tendencies  and  counter-operating  forces,  of 
reasons  and  opposing  reasons,  at  the  display,  in  a  word,  of  the 
warp  and  the  woof  of  social  life.  Precise  diagnosis  is  the  logical 
and  indispensable  preliminary  to  any  possible  prognosis. 

The  unravelment  and  the  detailed  formulation  of  the  complex 
of  tendencies  which  oppose  the  realization  of  democracy  are  mat- 
ters of  exceeding  difficulty.  A  preliminary  analysis  of  these  ten- 
dencies may,  however,  be  attempted.  They  will  be  found  to  be 
classifiable  as  tendencies  dependent  (1)  upon  the  nature  of  the 
human  individual;  (2)  upon  the  nature  of  the  political  struggle ; 
and  (3)  upon  the  nature  of  organization.  Democracy  leads  to 
oligarchy,  and  necessarily  contains  an  oligarchical  nucleus.  In 
making  this  assertion  it  is  far  from  the  author's  intention  to 
pass  a  moral  judgment  upon  any  political  party  or  any  system 
of  government,  to  level  an  accusation  of  hypocrisy.  The  law  that 
I  it  is  an  essential  characteristic  of  all  human  aggregates  to  con- 
/  stitute  cliques  and  sub-classes  is,  like  every  other  sociological  law, 
\  beyond  good  and  evil. 

The  study  and  analysis  of  political  parties  constitutes  a  new 
branch  of  science.  It  occupies  an  intermediate  field  between 
the  social,  the  philosophico-psychological,  and  the  historical  dis- 
ciplines, and  may  be  termed  a  branch  of  applied  sociology.  In 
view  of  the  present  development  of  political  parties,  the  historical 
aspect  of  this  new  branch  of  science  has  received  considerable 
attention.  Works  have  been  written  upon  the  history  of  almost 
every  political  party  in  the  Western  world.    But  when  we  come 


PREFACE  ix 

to  consider  the  analysis  of  the  nature  of  party,  we  find  that  the 
field  has  hardly  been  touched.  To  fill  this  gap  in  sociological 
science  is  the  aim  of  the  present  work. 

The  task  has  been  by  no  means  easy.  So  great  was  the  extent 
of  the  material  which  had  to  be  discussed  that  the  difficulties  of 
concise  presentation  might  well  seem  almost  insuperable.  The 
author  has  had  to  renounce  the  attempt  to  deal  with  the  problem 
in  all  its  extension  and  all  its  complexity,  and  has  confined 
himself  to  the  consideration  of  salient  features.  In  the  execution 
of  this  design  he  has  received  the  unwearied  and  invaluable  help 
of  his  wife,  Gisela  Michels. 

This  English  translation  is  from  the  Italian  edition,  in  the 
preparation  of  which  I  had  at  my  disposal  the  reviews  of  the 
earlier  German  version.  Opportunities  for  further  emendation 
of  the  present  volume  have  also  been  afforded  by  the  criticisms 
of  the  recently  published  French  and  Japanese  translations.  But 
the  only  event  of  outstanding  importance  in  the  political  world 
since  my  Political  Parties  was  first  drafted  has  been  the  out- 
break of  the  war  which  still  rages.  The  author's  general  con- 
clusions as  to  the  inevitability  of  oligarchy  in  party  life,  and 
as  to  the  difficulties  which  the  growth  of  this  oligarchy  imposes 
upon  the  realization  of  democracy,  have  been  strikingly  confirmed 
in  the  political  life  of  all  the  leading  belligerent  nations  imme- 
diately before  the  outbreak  of  the  war  and  during  the  progress 
of  the  struggle.  The  penultimate  chapter  of  the  present  volume, 
specially  written  for  the  English  edition,  deals  with  Party  Life  in 
War-time.  It  will  be  obvious  that  the  writer  has  been  com- 
pelled, in  this  new  chapter,  to  confine  himself  to  the  discussion 
of  broad  outlines,  for  we  are  still  too  near  to  the  events  under 
consideration  for  accurate  judgment  to  be  possible.  Moreover, 
the  flames  of  war,  while  throwing  their  sinister  illumination  upon 
the  military  and  economic  organization  of  the  states  concerned, 
leave  political  parties  in  the  shadow.  For  the  time  being  parties 
are  eclipsed  by  nations.  It  need  hardly  be  said,  however,  that  as 
soon  as  the  war  is  over  party  life  will  be  resumed,  and  that  the 
war  will  be  found  to  have  effected  a  reinforcement  of  the  tend- 
encies characteristic  of  party. 

EGBERT  MICHELS. 

Basle,  1915. 


POLITICAL  PARTIES 


CHAPTER  I 

DEMOCRATIC  ARISTOCRACY  AND  ARISTOCRATIC 

DEMOCRACY 

The  most  restricted  form  of  oligarchy,  absolute  monarchy,  is 
founded  upon  the  will  of  a  single  individual.  Sic  volo  sic  juheo. 
Tel  est  ynon  hon  plaisir.  One  commands,  all  others  obey.  The 
will  of  one  single  person  can  countervail  the  will  of  the  nation, 
and  even  to-day  we  have  a  relic  of  this  in  the  constitutional 
monarch's  right  of  veto.  The  legal  justification  of  this  regime 
derives  its  motives  from  transcendental  metaphysics.  The  logical 
basis  of  every  monarchy  resides  in  an  appeal  to  God.  God  is 
brought  down  from  heaven  to  serve  as  a  buttress  to  the  monar- 
chical stronghold,  furnishing  it  with  its  foundation  of  con- 
stitutional law — the  grace  of  God.  Hence,  inasmuch  as  it  rests 
upon  a  supra-terrestrial  element,  the  monarchical  system,  con- 
sidered from  the  outlook  of  constitutional  law,  is  eternal  and 
immutable,  and  cannot  be  affected  by  human  laws  or  by  the 
human  will.  It  follows  that  the  legal,  juridical,  legitimate  aboli- 
tion of  the  monarchy  is  impossible,  a  fable  of  a  foolish  political 
dreamer.  Lawfully,  the  monarchy  can  be  abolished  by  God  alone 
— and  God's  will  is  inscrutable. 

At  the  antipodes  of  the   monarchical   principle,   in  theory,! 
stands  democracy,  denying  the  right  of  one  over  others.    In  ab-l 
stracto,  it  makes  all  citizens  equal  before  the  law.     It  gives  to\ 
each  one  of  them  the  possibility  of  ascending  to  the  top  of  the 
social  scale,  and  thus  facilitates  the  way  for  the  rights  of  the 
community,  annulling  before  the  law  all  privileges  of  birth,  and 
desiring  that  in  human  society  the  struggle  for  preeminence 
should  be  decided  solely  in  accordance  with  individual  capacity. 
Whereas  the  principle  of  monarchy  stakes  everything  upon  the 
character  of  a  single  individual,  whence  it  results  that  the  best 
possible  monarchical  government  offers  to  the  people  as  a  whole 
no  guarantee  for  permanently  benevolent  and  technically  efficient 
rule,^  democracy  is,  on  principle,  responsible  to  the  community 

*At  the  end  of  the  eighteenth  century  this  was  far  more  clearly  and 


2  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

at  large  for  the  prevailing  conditions  of  rule,  of  which  it  is  the 

sole  arbiter. 

We  know  to-day  that  in  the  life  of  the  nations  the  two  theo- 
retical principles  of  the  ordering  of  the  state  are  so  elastic  that 
they  often  come  into  reciprocal  contact,  "car  la  democratic  pent 
emhrasser  tout  le  peuple,  ou  se  resserrer  jusqu'a  la  moitie; 
1 'aristocratic,  a  son  tour,  pent  de  la  moitie  du  peuple  se  resserrer 
jusqu'au  plus  petit  nombre  indeterminement. "  ^  Thus  the  two 
forms  of  government  do  not  exhibit  an  absolute  antithesis,  but 
meet  at  that  point  where  the  participants  in  power  number  fifty 

per  cent. 

(I  Our  age  has  destroyed  once  for  all  the  ancient  and  rigid  forms 
of  aristocracy,  has  destroyed  them,  at  least,  in  certain  important 
regions  of  political  constitutional  life.  Even  conservatism  as- 
sumes at  times  a  democratic  form.  Before  the  assaults  of  the 
democratic  masses  it  has  long  since  abandoned  its  primitive 
aspect,  and  loves  to  change  its  disguise.  To-day  we  find  it 
absolutist,  to-morrow  constitutional,  the  next  day  parliamentary. 
Where  its  power  is  still  comparatively  unrestricted,  as  in  Ger- 
many, it  appeals  exclusively  to  the  grace  of  God.  But  when,  as 
in  Italy,  it  feels  insecure,  it  adds  to  the  appeal  to  the  deity  an 
appeal  to  the  popular  will.  In  its  outward  forms  it  is  capable 
I  of  the  most  extensive  modifications.  In  monarchical  France  the 
\Franciae  et  Navarrae  Bex  becomes  the  Roy  de  France,  and  the 
1  Roy  de  France  becomes  the  Boi  des  Franqais. 
I  The  life  of  political  parties,  whether  these  are  concerned  chiefly 
I  with  national  or  with  local  politics,  must,  in  theory,  necessarily 

expressly  recognized  than  it  is  to-day,  when  the  constitutional  monarchy 
has  destroyed  the  essence  of  every  political  principle  of  government: — 

* '  Servile  dread,  dependent  upon  the  dazzling  splendour  of  an  inaccessible 
throne,  upon  myriads  of  satellites,  upon  innumerable  armies,  and  upon 
the  ever  uplifted  sword  of  vengeance,  dependent  in  a  word  upon  irresistible 
power,  is  the  only  thing  that  holds  these  monarchies  together  and  secures 
the  safety  of  the  despots  and  their  satraps.  At  times,  indeed,  fate  sends 
a  liberator  to  the  unfortunate,  a  Cyrus  who  breaks  the  old  fetters,  and  who 
rules  a  reconstituted  kingdom  with  wisdom  and  a  truly  paternal  spirit:  but 
this  rarely  happens,  and  the  good  thus  effected  is  for  the  most  part  per- 
sonal and  transient;  for  the  prime  source  of  the  evil,  the  political  struc- 
ture, remains,  and  a  succession  of  stupid  or  vicious  monarchs  will  speedily 
destroy  all  that  has  been  built  up  by  the  one  benevolent  sovereign"  (C.  M. 
Wieland,  Sine  Lustreise  ins  Elysium,  Complete  Works,  Shrambl,  Vienna, 
1803,  vol.  i,  p.  209). 

'  J.  J.  Eousseau,  Le  Control  social,  Bibliotheque  Nationale,  6th  ed.,  Paris, 
1871,  p.  91. 


DEMOCRACY  AND  ARISTOCRACY   3 

exhibit  an  even  stronger  tendency  towards  democracy  than  thati 
which  is  manifested  by  the  state.    The  political  party  is  founded! 
in  most  cases  on  the  principle  of  the  majority,  and  is  founded! 
always  on  the  principle  of  the  mass.    The  result  of  this  is  that! 
the  parties  of  the  aristocracy  have  irrevocably  lost  the  aristo-| 
cratic  purity  of  their  principles.     While  remaining  essentially 
anti-democratic  in  nature,  they  find  themselves  compelled,  at  any 
rate  in  certain  periods  of  political  life,  to  make  profession  of  the 
democratic  faith,  or  at  least  to  assume  the  democratic  mask. 
Whereas  the  democratic  principle,  from  its  very  nature,   by 
reason  of  the  mutability  of  the  popular  will  and  of  the  fluc- 
tuating character  of  the  majority,  tends  in  theory  to  transform 
the  irai/Tapct  of    Heraclitus   into   the    reality    of   national   and 
popular  life,  the  conservative  principle  erects  its  edifice  upon 
certain  bases  or  norms  which  are  immutable  in  their  nature, 
determined  by  the  test  of  experience  to  be  the  best  or  at  any  rate  ^ 
the  least  bad,  and  consequently  claimed  as  valid  suh  specie  ceter-  < 
nitatis.     Nevertheless,  the  conservative  principle  must  not  be 
understood  in  the  sense  of  an  unconditional  maintenance  of  the 
itatus  quo.    If  that  principle  consisted  merely  in  the  recognition 
of  what  already  exists,  above  all  in  the  matter  of  the  legal  forms 
prevailing  in  a  given  country  or  period,  conservatism  would  lead 
to  its  own  destruction.^    In  periods  and  among  nations  where  the 
old  conservative  elements  have  been  expelled  from  direct  par- 
ticipation in  power,  and  have  been  replaced  by  innovators  fight- 
ing under  the  banner  of  democracy,  the  conservative  party  as- 
sumes an  aspect  hostile  to  the  existing  order  of  the  state,  and 
sometimes  even  a  revolutionary  character.*     Thus,  however,  is 

'  Concerning  the  nature  of  conservatism,  consult  the  interesting  study  of 
Oskar  Stillich,  Die  Politisclien  Parteien  in  Beutschland,,  vol.  i,  Die  Konser- 
vativen,  Klinkhardt,  Leipzig,  1909,  pp.  18  et  seq. 

*0r  counter  revolutionary?  A  definite  historical  signification  is  often 
associated  with  the  VFord  revolution,  and  the  prototype  of  revolution  in  this 
sense  is  the  great  French  Eevolution.  Thus  the  expression  revolutionary 
is  frequently  applied  simply  to  the  struggle  for  liberty  conducted  by  in- 
ferior classes  of  the  population  against  superior,  if  this  struggle  assumes 
a  violent  form,  whereas  logically  revolution  implies  nothing  but  a  funda- 
mental transformation,  and  the  use  of  the  term  cannot  be  restricted  to  de- 
scribe the  acts  of  any  particular  class,  nor  should  it  be  associated  with 
any  definite  external  form  of  violence.  Consequently  every  class  is  revo- 
lutionary which,  whether  from  above  or  from  below,  whether  by  force  of 
arms,  by  legal  means,  or  by  economic  methods,  endeavours  to  bring  about 
a  radical  change  in  the  existing  state  of  affairs.  From  this  outlook,  the 
concepts  revolutionary   and  reactionary    {reactionary   as   contrasted   with. 


4  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

leffected  a  metamorphosis  of  the  conservative  party,  which,  from 
,ja  clique  cherishing  an  aristocratic  exclusivism  at  once  by  instinct 
jtend  by  conviction,  now  becomes  a  popular  party.  The  recognition 
(that  only  the  masses  can  help  to  reintroduce  the  ancient  aristoc- 
'  racy  in  its  pristine  purity,  and  to  make  an  end  of  the  democratic 
regime,  transforms  the  very  advocates  of  the  conservative  view 
into  democrats.  They  recognize  unreservedly  the  sufferings  of 
the  common  people;  they  endeavour,  as  did  very  recently  the 
royalists  in  the  French  Republic,  to  ally  themselves  with  the 
revolutionary  proletariat,  promising  to  defend  this  against  the 
exploitation  of  democratic  capitalism  and  to  support  and  even  to 
extend  labour  organizations — all  this  in  the  hope  of  destroying 
the  Republic  and  restoring  the  Monarchy,  the  ultimate  fruit  of 
the  aristocratic  principle.^  Le  Roy  et  les  camelots  du  Roy — the 
king  and  the  king's  poor — are  to  destroy  the  oligarchy  of  the 
bloated  plutocrats.  Democracy  must  be  eliminated  by  the  demo- 
cratic way  of  the  popular  will.  The  democratic  method  is  the 
sole  one  practicable  by  which  an  old  aristocracy  can  attain  to  a 
renewed  dominion.  Moreover,  the  conservatives  do  not  usually 
wait  until  they  have  been  actually  driven  from  power  before 

conservative),  revolution  and  counter-revolution,  fuse  into  a  single  whole. 
It  is  moreover  utterly  unscientific  to  associate  with  these  terms  moral  ideas 
whose  theoretical  bearing  is  purely  evolutionary.  For  example,  Kaumer, 
writing  from  Paris  in  1830,  expressed  the  matter  very  well  as  follows: 
"All  these  men  [the  liberals]  regard  as  revolutionary  the  abolition  of 
anciently  established  institutions  and  evils,  whereas  by  counter-revolution 
they  understand  the  restoration  of  these  or  of  other  abuses.  Their  ad- 
versaries, on  the  other  hand,  understand  by  revolution  the  aggregate  of  all 
the  follies  and  crimes  that  have  ever  been  committed,  whereas  by  counter- 
revolution they  mean  the  re-establishment  of  order,  of  authority,  of  re- 
ligion, and  so  on"  (Friedrich  von  Eaumer,  Brief e  aus  Paris  und  Franlcreich 
im  Jahre  1830,  F.  A.  Brockhaus,  Leipzig,  1831,  Part  II,  p.  26).— Cf.  also 
Wilhelm  Koscher,  PolitiJc,  GeschichtlicJie  Naturlehre  der  Monarchic,  Aris- 
tokratie  und  Demokratie,  Cotta,  Stuttgart-Berlin,  1908,  3rd  ed.,  p.  14. — Yet 
we  have  to  remember  that  in  political  matters  such  judgments  of  value  may 
be  effective  means  of  struggle  towards  political  and  sometimes  also  towards 
moral  ends;  but  they  are  apt  to  lead  us  astray  if  we  use  them  to  aid  us  in 
defining  historical  tendencies  or  conceptions. 

"  Cf .  the  royalist  propagandist  work  by  Georges  Valois,  a  trade  unionist, 
La  Monarchic  et  la  Classe  ouvricre,  Nouvelle  Librairie  Nationale,  Paris, 
1909,  pp.  45  et  seq.  Valois  pays  ardent  court  to  French  syndicalism  as  the 
one  great  movement  which  now  has  the  support  of  the  masses.  His  conser- 
vatism is  quite  undisturbed  by  the  contemplation  of  the  idea  that  his  king 
can  be  established  on  the  throne  only  by  means  of  a  revolution,  becoming 
king  no  longer  by  the  grace  of  God,  but  by  the  grace  of  the  revolutionary 
socialists. 


DEMOCRACY  AND  ARISTOCRACY   5 

appealing  to  the  masses.  In  countries  where  a  democratic  regime  /  \ 
prevails,  as  in  England,  they  spontaneously  turn  to  the  working  /  I 
class  wherever  this  forms  the  most  conspicuous  constituent  of 
the  masses.*^  In  other  countries,  also,  where  parliamentary  gov- 
ernment is  unknown,  but  where  there  exists  universal  and  equal 
suffrage,  the  parties  of  the  aristocracy  owe  their  political  exist- 
ence to  the  charity  of  the  masses  to  whom  in  theory  they  deny 
political  rights  and  political  capacity.'^  The  very  instinct  of  self- 
preservation  forces  the  old  groups  of  rulers  to  descend,  during 
the  elections,  from  their  lofty  seats,  and  to  avail  themselves  of 
the  same  democratic  and  demagogic  methods  as  are  employed 
by  the  youngest,  the  widest,  and  the  most  uncultured  of  our 
social  classes,  the  proletariat. 

The  aristocracy  to-day  maintains  itself  in  power  by  other 
means  than  parliamentary ;  at  any  rate  in  most  of  the  monarchies 

®In  the  violent  electoral  struggles  in  England  in  January  1910,  it  may// 
be  said  that  both  parties,  liberals  and  conser\-atives  alike,  in  view  of  the'' 
manner  in  which  they  fought  one  another,  were  essentially  working  for 
socialist  ideas  and  for  the  victory  of  the  proletariat.  The  liberals  did  this 
by  unfurling  the  flag  of  democracy,  by  working  for  the  suppression  of  the 
House  of  Lords,  and  by  advocating  an  extensive  programme  of  far-reaching 
social  reforms;  while  the  conservatives  displayed  before  the  eyes  of  the 
workers  all  the  misery  of  their  existence  in  capitalist  society;  both  parties 
did  this  by  promising  more  than  they  could  perform,  and  by  recognizing  in 
the  whole  conduct  of  their  political  agitation  that  the  working  class  has 
become  the  decisive  force  in  politics.  The  comments  made  at  the  time  in 
the  socialist  papers  of  Germany  were  extremely  apt:  "The  English  con- 
servatives do  not  preach  resignation  to  the  workers,  but  discontent.  Whereas 
the  Prussian  conservatives,  for  example,  are  in  the  habit  of  telling  the 
working  classes  that  nowhere  in  the  world  are  they  so  well  off  as  in  Ger- 
many, the  English  conservatives  assure  their  constituents  that  nowhere 
in  the  world  are  the  workers  worse  off  than  in  England."  Naturally  the 
aim  of  these  assurances  was  to  persuade  the  electorate  to  accept  the  aboli- 
tion of  the  detested  system  of  free  trade,  and  to  establish  a  protectionist 
system  which  would  redound  to  their  advantage.  This  idea  has  long  been 
cherished  by  the  English  conservatives,  but  they  cannot  put  it  into  practice 
except  with  the  aid  of  the  revolutionary  labouring  class. 

'  The  merit  of  having  recognized  this  truth  with  precision  and  of  having 
applied  it  to  the  practice  of  the  conservative  party  belongs  especially  to  the 
great  political  leaders  of  ultra-conservative  elements  in  Germany,  Ham- 
merstein  and  Stocker.  Hammerstein,  from  1881  to  1895  editor  of  the 
* '  Kreuzzeitung, ' '  was  the  first  who  clearly  perceived  the  necessity,  in  order 
to  save  the  life  of  his  party,  of  acquiring  the  "confidence  of  the  masses" 
(cf.  Hans  Leuss,  Wilhelm  Freiherr  von  Hammerstein,  Walther,  Berlin, 
1905,  p.  109).  At  the  party  congress  held  in  Berlin  in  1892,  the  proposal 
by  a  delegate  from  Chemnitz  that  the  conservatives  should  become  more 
"demagogic"  received  universal  approval. 


6  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

it  does  not  need  a  parliamentary  majority  in  order  to  be  able  to 
hold  the  reins  by  which  is  guided  the  political  life  of  the  state. 
But  it  does  need,  were  it  merely  for  decorative  purposes  and  in 
order  to  influence  public  opinion  in  its  favour,  a  respectable 
measure  of  parliamentary  representation.  It  does  not  obtain  this 
representation  by  divulging  its  true  principles,  or  by  making 
appeal  to  those  who  are  truly  of  like  mind  with  itself.  A  party 
of  the  landed  gentry  which  should  appeal  only  to  the  members 
of  its  own  class  and  to  those  of  identical  economic  interests, 
would  not  win  a  single  seat,  would  not  send  a  single  representa- 
tive to  parliament.  A  conservative  candidate  who  should  present 
himself  to  his  electors  by  declaring  to  them  that  he  did  not 
regard  them  as  capable  of  playing  an  active  part  in  influencing 
the  destinies  of  the  country,  and  should  tell  them  that  for  this 
reason  they  ought  to  be  deprived  of  the  suffrage,  would  be  a  man 
of  incomparable  sincerity,  but  politically  insane.  If  he  is  to  find 
his  way  into  parliament  he  can  do  so  by  one  method  only.  With 
democratic  mien  he  must  descend  into  the  electoral  arena,  must 
hail  the  farmers  and  agricultural  labourers  as  professional  col- 
leagues, and  must  seek  to  convince  them  that  their  economic 
and  social  interests  are  identical  with  his  own.  Thus  the  aristo- 
crat is  constrained  to  secure  his  election  in  virtue  of  a  principle 
which  he  does  not  himself  accept,  and  which  in  his  soul  he 
abhors.  His  whole  being  demands  authority,  the  maintenance 
of  a  restricted  suffrage,  the  suppression  of  universal  suffrage 
wherever  it  exists,  since  it  touches  his  traditional  privileges. 
Nevertheless,  since  he  recognizes  that  in  the  democratic  epoch 
by  which  he  has  been  overwhelmed  he  stands  alone  with  this 
political  principle,  and  that  by  its  open  advocacy  he  could  never 
hope  to  maintain  a  political  party,  he  dissembles  his  true 
thoughts,  and  howls  with  the  democratic  wolves  in  order  to 
secure  the  coveted  majority.^ 


^Naumann  writes  very  aptly:  "We  can  readily  understand  that  con- 
servatives have  no  love  for  universal  suffrage.  It  has  an  injurious  influ- 
ence upon  their  character,  for  no  one  can  very  well  stand  up  before  an 
electoral  meeting  and  frankly  enunciate  the  principle,  Authority,  not  Ma- 
jority. .  ,  .  It  is  only  in  certain  privileged  bodies,  such  as  the  Prussian 
Upper  House,  or  the  First  Chamber  of  Saxony,  that  the  conservative  can 
show  himself  in  his  true  colours.  The  modern  conservative  is  a  living  com- 
promise, an  authoritarian  in  democratic  gloves.  ...  An  aristocracy  en- 
gaged in  political  agitation!  If  in  this  alone,  we  see  the  influence  of  the 
democratic  tendency"  (Friedrich  Naumann,  Demolcratie  und  Kaisertum, 
ein  Eancbuch  fiir  innere  Politik,  Buchverlag  der  ' '  Hilf e, ' '  Berlin-Schone- 


DEMOCRACY  AND  ARISTOCRACY   7 

The  influence  of  popular  suffrage  upon  the  outward  behaviour 
of  conservative  candidates  is  so  extensive  that  when  two  can- 
didates of  the  same  political  views  present  themselves  in  a  single 
constituency,  each  of  them  is  forced  to  attempt  to  distinguish 
himself  from  his  rival  by  a  movement  to  the  left,  that  is  to 
say,  by  laying  great  stress  upon  his  reputedly  democratic  prin- 
ciples.^ 

Such  occurrences  serve  to  confirm  the  experience  that  the  con- 
servatives also  endeavour  to  regulate  their  actions  in  conformity 
with  the  fundamental  principle  of  modern  politics,  a  principle 
destined  to  replace  the  religious  dictum  that  many  are  called 
but  few  are  chosen,  and  to  replace  also  the  psychological  theory 
that  ideals  are  accessible  solely  to  a  minority  of  choice  spirits; 
this  principle  may  be  summed  up  in  the  terms  of  Curtius,  who 
said  that  the  conservative  cannot  gain  his  ends  with  the  aid  of 
a  small  and  select  body  of  troops,  but  must  control  the  masses 
and  rule  through  the  masses.^"  The  conservative  spirit  of  the 
old  master-caste,  however  deeply  rooted  it  may  be,  is  forced  to 
assume,  at  least  during  times  of  election,  a  specious  democratic 
mask. 

Nor  does  the  theory  of  liberalism  primarily  base  its  aspirations 
upon  the  masses.  It  appeals  for  support  to  certain  definite 
classes,  which  in  other  fields  of  activity  have  already  ripened  for 
mastery,  but  which  do  not  yet  possess  political  privileges — ap- 
peals, that  is  to  say,  to  the  cultured  and  possessing  classes.  For 
the  liberals  also,  the  masses  pure  and  simple  are  no  more  than  a 
necessary  evil,  whose  only  use  is  to  help  others  to  the  attainment 
of  ends  to  which  they  themselves  are  strangers.  The  first  great 
liberal  writer  of  Germany,  Rotteck,  reproaches  the  Queen  of 
France  for  having,  during  the  Revolution,  forced  the  bourgeoisie 
to  appeal  to  the  common  people  for  aid.     He  distinguishes  be- 

berg,  1904,  p.  92).  Cf.  also  Ludwig  Gumplowicz  (Sosialphilosophie  im 
Umriss,  Wagner,  Innsbruck,  1910,  p.  113),  who  regards  the  tendencies  and 
the  natural  needs  of  landed  property  as  one  of  the  most  essential  props 
of  conservatism. 

'  This  applies  equally  to  France.  Cf .  Aime  Berthod  (Sous-chef  de  cabinet 
au  Ministere  des  Affaires  Etrangeres),  in  a  discussion  upon  Electoral  Re- 
form which  took  place  at  the  society  "Union  pour  la  verite,"  and  was 
published  in  the  society's  organ  "Libres  Entretiens, "  6th  series,  iv,  La 
Representation  proportionnelle  et  la  Constitution  des  Partis  politiques, 
Paris,  January  23,  1910,  p.  212. 

"Friedrich  Curtius,  Ueber  Gerechtigkeit  und  Politik,  ''Deutsche  Eund- 
schau,"  xxiii;  1897,  fasc.  4,  p.  46. 


8  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

tween  two  kinds  of  democracy,  the  rule  of  representatives  and 
the  rule  of  the  masses."  During  the  revolution  of  June  1830, 
Eaumer,  who  was  in  Paris,  broke  into  vigorous  lamentation  be- 
cause the  masses  possessed  pow^r,  and  said  that  it  would  be 
extremely  difficult  "to  deprive  them  of  this  power  without  giving 
them  offence  and  without  provoking  them  to  a  fresh  revolt 
against  their  new  chiefs";  ^^  at  the  same  time,  in  words  express- 
ing the  dithyrambic  spirit  of  romanticism,  he  refers  to  the  con- 
ditions that  obtain  in  his  Prussian  fatherland,  where  king  and 
people  "truly  live  in  a  higher  and  purer  atmosphere,"  and  where 
the  contented  bourgeoisie  is  not  endeavouring  to  secure  additional 
rights.  From  the  history  of  the  origin  of  the  North  German 
Eeichstag  we  learn  that  another  eminent  liberal  leader  and 
advocate  of  liberal  views,  the  historian  Heinrich  von  Sybel,  de- 
clared himself  opposed  to  universal,  equal,  and  direct  suffrage, 
on  the  ground  (which  can  be  understood  solely  with  reference 
to  the  explanations  given  above  regarding  the  peculiar  concep-^ 
tions  the  liberals  have  of  the  masses)  that  such  a  right  must 
signify  "the  beginning  of  the  end  for  every  kind  of  parlia- 
mentarism"; such  a  right,  he  said,  was  eminently  a  right  of 
dominion;  and  he  was  impelled  to  utter  an  urgent  warning  to 
the  German  monarchy  not  to  introduce  these  dangerous  elements 
of  democratic  dictatorship  into  the  new  federal  state.^^  The 
inward  dislike  of  liberalism  for  the  masses  is  also  apparent  in 
the  attitude  of  the  liberal  leaders  to  the  principles  and  institu- 
tions of  aristocracy.  Since  the  inauguration  of  universal  suf-! 
frage  and  the  consequent  prospect  that  there  will  in  the  near 
future  be  a  majority  of  socialist  tendencies  among  the  electorate 
or  in  the  Lower  House,  many  liberals,  so  Roscher  affirms,  have 

" "  It  was  this  opposition  [of  the  ultra-monarchical  friends  of  Louis 
XVI  to  the  well-disposed  liberals]  which  set  itself  against  the  idea  of 
bourgeois  and  political  freedom  that  was  spreading,  not  in  France  alone, 
but  in  aU  the  other  civilized  countries  of  Europe,  that  forced  upon  the 
Eevolution  (which  otherwise  might  have  been  purely  beneficial)  its  evil 
and  destructive  character.  It  was  this  which  led  the  representatives  of 
the  people  to  endeavour  to  avoid  the  threatened  ruin  by  calling  the  masses 
to  their  aid;  it  was  this  which  led  to  the  unchaining  of  the  rough  and 
lawless  force  of  the  mob,  and  thus  threw  open  the  box  of  Pandora"  (Carl 
von  Eotteck,  Allgemeine  GescMchte  vom  Anfang  der  Jiistorischen  Kenntniss 
his  auf  wiser e  Zeiten,  Herdersche  Buchhandlung,  Freiburg,  1826,  vol.  ix,  p. 
oo). 

"Friedrich  von  Eaumer,  Brief e  aus  Paris,  etc.     Op.  cit.,  vol.  i,  p.  176. 
"Cf.  Otto  von  Diest-Daber,  Geldmacht  und  Sosialismus,  Puttkammer  u. 
Miihibrecht,  Berlin,  1875,  p.  13. 


DEMOCRACY  AND  ARISTOCRACY       9 

come  to  take  a  different  view  of  the  powers  of  the  Crown  and 
of  the  Upper  House/*  as  means  by  which  it  is  possible  to  prevent 
decisions  of  the  Lower  House  being  immediately  realized  in  legis- 
lative measures.  The  same  author  contends  that  an  extension 
of  the  suffrage  is  undesirable  "in  the  absence  of  a  profound 
statistical  inquiry,"  that  is  to  say,  in  the  absence  of  a  laborious 
analysis  of  the  numerical  relationships  that  obtain  among  the 
various  classes  of  the  population.  Recently,  even  in  that  liberal 
group  which  in  Germany  stands  nearest  to  the  socialists,  the 
group  of  "national  socialists,"  there  has  been  evidence  of  a  tend- 
ency to  consider  that  it  is  by  no  means  a  bad  thing  "for 
obstacles  to  be  imposed  upon  the  influence  in  political  affairs  of 
the  mutable  and  incalculable  popular  will  which  finds  expression 
in  the  Reichstag,  for  the  national  socialists  consider  it  desirable 
that  there  should  exist  also  aristocratic  elements,  independent  of 
the  popular  will,  ever  vigilant,  armed  with  the  right  of  veto,  to 
constitute  a  permanent  moderating  element. ' '  ^^ 

For  an  entire  century,  from  the  days  of  Rotteck  to  those  of 
Naumann,  German  writers  have  laboured  in  the  sweat  of  their 

-■■--—  -  -  -  ■  ■■ 

"Eoscher,  op.  cit.,  p.  321. 

"Martin  Bade,  in  a  leading  article  {Bos  Allgemeine  WaJilrecM  ein  Kd- 
nigliches  Becht,  "Hessische  Landeszeitung, "  xxiii,  No.  25,  1907)  favouring 
the  election  of  the  national-socialist  Helmuth  von  Gerlach  at  Marburg, 
wrote  as  follows  in  order  to  still  the  alarms  of  the  adversaries  of  universal 
suffrage:  "The  case  would  be  very  different  if  our  Reichstag  were  the 
actual  director  of  the  government,  if  it  alone  could  decide  the  internal  and 
external  destinies  of  our  people!  But  it  is  merely  one  among  the  elements 
of  our  constitution!  Beside  it,  or  rather  above  it,  stands  the  Bundesrat 
(Federal  Council),  and  not  the  most  trifling  proposition  can  become  law 
unless  with  the  assent  of  the  Imperial  Chancellor,  the  Emperor,  and  the 
Princes.  Certainly  the  Federal  Council  will  not  permanently  oppose  a 
strong  and  reasonable  expression  of  the  popular  will  which  is  manifested 
in  a  constitutional  manner  in  the  Eeichstag;  but  such  resolutions  of  the 
Eeichstag  as  it  regards  as  injudicious  it  will  reject,  and  often  has  rejected. 
By  this  means,  precautions  are  taken  to  limit  the  power  of  universal  suf- 
frage, just  as  nature  takes  care  that  trees  do  not  grow  to  touch  the  skies.  It 
is  well  for  our  legislation  that  we  have  these  two  Chambers,  and  not  the 
Eeichstag  alone. ' '  Such  considerations  run  like  a  red  thread  through  the 
entire  history  of  bourgeois  liberalism,  of  which  they  are,  in  fact,  a  con- 
genital defect.  Already  in  the  work  of  Guizot,  which  in  the  literature  of 
the  young  bourgeoisie  occupies  the  place  taken  in  socialist  literature  by  the 
Communist  Manifesto  of  Karl  Marx,  we  read  this  praise  of  the  French 
House  of  Peers,  that  its  significance  is  to  be  "un  privilege  place  la  ou  il 
pent  servir"  (F.  Guizot,  Du  Gouvernement  de  la  France  depuis  la  Eestaura- 
tion,  et  du  Ministere  actuel,  Librairie  Frangaise  de  Ladvocat,  Paris,  1820, 
p.  14). 


/// 


10  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

brow  to  effect  a  theoretical  conciliation  between  democracy  and 
military  monarchy,  and  to  unite  these  natural  opposites  in  a 
higher  unity.  Hand  in  hand  with  their  honourable  endeavours 
on  behalf  of  this  loftier  aim  have  proceeded  their  attempts  to 
defeudalize  the  monarchy  to  the  utmost,  with  the  sole  purpose 
of  substituting  for  the  aristocratic  guardians  of  the  throne  guar- 
dians speaking  with  professional  authority.  The  task  they  set 
themselves  was  to  lay  the  theoretical  foundations,  if  not  of  the 
so-called  social  monarchy,  at  least  of  the  popular  monarchy.  It 
is  evident  that  such  an  objective  involves  a  political  tendency 
which  has  nothing  in  common  with  science,  but  which  is  not  iu 
necessary  opposition  to  or  in  contradiction  with  science  (it  is  the 
method  which  must  decide  this),  being  a  political  tendency  which 
is,  qua  political,  outside  the  domain  of  science.  It  cannot  be 
made  a  reason  for  blaming  German  men  of  science  that  there 
exists  in  Germany  a  tendency  towards  the  construction  of  some- 
thing resembling  the  July  Monarchy,  for  this  tendency  rests 
within  the  orbit  of  politics.  But  it  is  plainly  a  matter  for  his- 
torical censure  when  we  find  an  attempt  to  identify  the  monar- 
chical principle  which  has  for  some  decades  been  dominant  in 
Prussianized  Germany  with  the  cherished  idea  of  the  popular  (or 
social)  monarchy.  In  committing  such  an  error,  the  majority  of 
German  liberal  theorists  and  historians  mistake  dreams  for  real- 
ity. In  this  confusion  rests  the  organic  defect  of  all  German 
liberalism,  which  since  1866  has  continually  endeavoured  to  dis- 
guise its  change  of  front  (that  is  to  say,  its  partisan  struggle 
against  socialism  and  its  simultaneous  and  voluntary  renuncia- 
tion of  all  attempts  to  complete  the  political  emancipation  of 
the  German  bourgeoisie),  by  the  fallacious  assertion  that  with 
the  unification  of  Germany  and  the  establishment  of  the  empire 
of  the  Hohenzollerns  all  or  almost  all  the  aspirations  of  its  demo- 
cratic youth  have  been  realized.  The  fundamental  principle  of 
modern  monarchy  (hereditary  monarchy)  is  absolutely  irrecon- 
cilable with  the  principles  of  democracy,  even  when  these  are 
understood  in  the  most  elastic  sense.  Caesarism  is  still  democracy, 
or  may  at  least  still  claim  the  name,  when  it  is  based  upon  the 
popular  will;  but  automatic  monarchy,  never. 

We  may  sum  up  the  argument  by  saying  that  in  modern  party 
life  aristocracy  gladly  presents  itself  in  democratic  guise,  whilst 
the  substance  of  democracy  is  permeated  with  aristocratic  ele- 
ments. On  the  one  side  we  have  aristocracy  in  a  democratic 
form,  and  on  the  other  democracy  with  an  aristocratic  content. 


DEMOCRACY  AND  ARISTOCRACY     11 

The  democratic  external  form  which  characterizes  the  life  of  I 
political  parties  may  readily  veil  from  superficial  observers  the/' 
tendency  towards  aristocracy,  or  rather  towards  oligarchy,  which! 
is  inherent  in  all  party  organization.    If  we  wish  to  obtain  light  * 
upon  this  tendency,  the  best  field  of  observation  is  offered  by  the 
intimate  structure  of  the  democratic  parties,  and,  among  these, 
of  the  socialist  and  revolutionary  labour  party.    In  the  conserva- 
tive parties,  except  during  elections,  the  tendency  to  oligarchy 
manifests  itself  with  that  spontaneous  vigour  and  clearness  which 
corresponds  with  the  essentially  oligarchical  character  of  these 
parties.    But  the  parties  which  are  subversive  in  their  aims  ex- 
hibit the  like  phenomena  no  less  markedly.     The  study  of  theT 
oligarchical  manifestations  in  party  life  is  most  valuable  and 
most  decisive  in  its  results  when  undertaken  in  relation  to  the 
revolutionary  parties,  for  the  reason  that  these  parties,  in  respect 
of  origin  and  of  programme,  represent  the  negation  of  any  such 
tendency,  and  have  actually  come  into  existence  out  of  opposition 
thereto.    Thus  the  appearance  of  oligarchical  phenomena  in  the 
very  bosom  of  the  revolutionary  parties  is  a  conclusive  proof  of 
the  existence  of  immanent  oligarchical  tendencies  in  every  kind 
of  human  organization   which  strives  for  the   attainment  of 
definite  ends. 

In  theory,  the  principle  of  social  and  democratic  parties  is 
the  struggle  against  oligarchy  in  all  its  forms.  The  question 
therefore  arises  how  we  are  to  explain  the  development  in  such 
parties  of  the  very  tendencies  against  which  they  have  declared 
war.  To  furnish  an  unprejudiced  analytical  answer  to  this  ques- 
tion constitutes  an  important  part  of  the  task  the  author  has 
undertaken. 

In  the  society  of  to-day,  the  state  of  dependence  that  results 
from  the  existing  economic  and  social  conditions  renders  an  ideal 
democracy  impossible.  This  must  be  admitted  without  reserve. 
But  the  further  question  ensues,  whether,  and  if  so  how  far, 
within  the  contemporary  social  order,  among  the  elements  which 
are  endeavouring  to  overthrow  that  order  and  to  replace  it  by 
a  new  one,  there  may  exist  in  the  germ  energies  tending  to  ap- 
proximate towards  ideal  democracy,  to  find  outlet  in  that  direc-  V 
tion,  or  at  least  to  work  towards  it  as  a  necessary  issue. 


CHAPTER  II 

THE  ETHICAL  EMBELLISHMENT  OF  SOCIAL 

STRUGGLES 

No  one  seriously  engaged  in  historical  studies  can  have  failed 
to  perceive  that  all  classes  which  have  ever  attained  to  dominion 
have  earnestly  endeavoured  to  transmit  to  their  descendants  such 
political  power  as  they  have  been  able  to  acquire.  The  hereditary 
transmission  of  political  power  has  always  been  the  most  effica- 
cious means  of  maintaining  class  rule.  Thus  there  is  displayed 
in  this  field  the  same  historical  process  which  in  the  domain  of 
the  sexual  life  has  given  rise  to  the  bourgeois  family-order  and 
its  accessories,  the  indissolubility  of  marriage,  the  severe  penal- 
ties inflicted  upon  the  adulterous  wife,  and  the  right  of  primo- 
geniture. In  so  far  as  we  can  draw  sound  conclusions  from  the 
scanty  prehistoric  data  that  are  available,  it  seems  that  the  bour- 
geois family  owes  its  genesis  to  the  innate  tendency  of  man,  as 
soon  as  he  has  attained  a  certain  degree  of  economic  well-being, 
to  transmit  his  possessions  by  inheritance  to  the  legitmate  son 
whom  he  can  with  reasonable  certainty  regard  as  his  own.  The 
same  tendency  prevails  in  the  field  of  politics,  where  it  is  kept 
active  by  all  the  peculiar  and  inherent  instincts  of  mankind,  and 
where  it  is  vigorously  nourished  by  an  economic  order  based 
therefore,  by  a  natural  and  psychological  analogy,  political  po  ver 
comes  also  to  be  considered  as  an  object  of  private  hereditary 
ownership.  In  the  political  field,  as  everywhere  else,  the  paternal 
instinct  to  transmit  this  species  of  property  to  the  son  has  been 
always  strongly  manifest  throughout  historic  time.  This  has 
been  one  of  the  principal  causes  of  the  replacement  of  elective 
monarchy  by  hereditary  monarchy.  The  desire  to  maintain  a 
position  acquired  by  the  family  in  society  has  at  all  times  been 
so  intense  that,  as  Gaetano  Mosca  has  aptly  noted,  whenever 
certain  members  of  the  dominant  class  have  not  been  able  to 
have  sons  of  their  own  (as,  for  example,  was  the  case  with  the 
prelates  of  the  Roman  Church),  there  has  arisen  with  spon- 
taneous a)id  dynamic  force  the  institution  of  nepotism,  as  an 

12 


THE  ETHICAL  SIDE  13 

extreme  manifestation  of  the  impulse  to  self-maintenance  and  to 
hereditary  transmission.^ 

In  a  twofold  manner  aristocracy  has  introduced  itself  quite 
automatically  in  those  states  also  from  which  it  seemed  to  be 
excluded  by  constitutional  principles,  by  historical  considera- 
tions, or  by  reason  of  the  peculiarities  of  national  psychology — 
alike  by  way  of  a  revived  tradition  and  by  way  of  the  birth  of 
new  economic  forces.  The  North  Americans,  democrats,  living 
under  a  republican  regime  and  knowing  nothing  of  titles  of 
nobility,  by  no  means  delivered  themselves  from  aristocracy  when 
they  shook  off  the  power  of  the  English  crown.  This  phenome- 
non is  in  part  the  simple  effect  of  causes  that  have  come  into 
existence  quite  recently,  such  as  capitalist  concentration  (with 
its  associated  heaping-up  of  the  social  power  in  the  hands  of 
the  few  and  consequent  formation  of  privileged  minorities),  and 
the  progressive  reconciliation  of  the  old  and  rigid  republican 
spirit  with  the  ideas,  the  prejudices,  and  the  ambitions  of  ancient 
Europe.  The  existence  of  an  aristocracy  of  millionaires,  railway 
kings,  oil  kings,  cattle  kings,  etc.,  is  now  indisputable.  But  even 
at  a  time  when  the  youthful  democracy  and  the  freedom  of  Amer- 
ica had  only  just  been  sealed  with  the  blood  of  its  citizens,  it 
was  difficult  (so  we  learn  from  Alexis  de  Tocqueville)  to  find  a 
single  American  who  did  not  plume  himself  with  an  idle  vanity 
upon  belonging  to  one  of  the  first  families  which  had  colonized 
American  soil.-  So  lively  was  ''aristocratic  prejudice"  among 
these  primitive  republicans!  Even  at  the  present  day  the  old 
families  which  are  Dutch  by  name  and  origin  constitute  in  the 
State  of  New  York  a  stratum  whose  aristocratic  preeminence  is 
uncontested,  a  class  of  patricians  lacking  the  outward  attributes 
of  nobility. 

When,  in  the  latter  half  of  the  seventeenth  century,  the  French 
bourgeoisie  was  vigorously  pressing  upward,  it  knew  no  better 
how  to  adapt  itself  to  its  changed  environment  than  by  aping 
the  usages,  the  mode  of  life,  the  tastes,  and  even  the  mentality 
of  the  feudal  nobility.  In  1670  Moliere  wrote  his  splendid 
comedy,  Le  Bourgeois  gentilhomme.  The  Abbe  de  Choisy,  who 
belonged  to  the  7whlesse  de  robe,  and  whose  ancestors  had  filled 
the  distinguished  offices  of  Maitre  des  Bequetes  and  Conseiller 

^  Gaetano  Mosca,  II  Principio  aristocratico  e  il  democratico  nel  passato  e 
neV  avvenire  (inaugural  address),  Stamperia  Paravia,  Turin,  1903,  p.  22. 

="  Alexis  de  Tocqueville,  De  la  democratie  en  Amerigue,  Gosseline,  Paris, 
1849,  Part  II,  vol.  ii,  p.  19. 


14  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

d'Etat,  relates  that  his  mother  had  given  him  as  a  maxim  of 
conduct  that  he  should  be  careful  to  frequent  none  but  aristo- 
cratic salons.^  With  the  fervour  of  the  novice,  the  new  arrivals 
assimilated  the  spirit  and  the  principles  of  the  class  hitherto 
dominant,  and  the  distinguished  members  of  the  bourgeoisie  who 
had  entered  the  service  of  the  state,  which  was  still  predomi- 
nantly feudal,  hastened  to  take  new  names.  The  Fouquets,  the 
Le  Telliers,  the  Colberts,  the  Phelippeaux,  and  the  Desmarets, 
became  the  Belle-Isles,  the  de  Louvois,  the  de  Seignelays,  the  de 
Maurepas,  the  de  Maillebois,  and  the  de  Lavrillieres.*  In  modern 
Germany,  under  our  very  eyes,  there  has  for  the  last  forty  years 
been  proceeding  an  absorption  of  the  young  industrial  bour- 
geoisie into  the  old  aristocracy  of  birth,  and  the  process  has  of 
late  been  enormously  accelerated.^  The  German  bourgeoisie  is 
becoming  feudalized.  Here  the  only  result  of  the  emancipation 
of  the  roturier  has  been  to  reinvigorate  his  old  enemy  the  noble 
by  the  provision  of  new  blood  and  new  economic  energy.  The 
enriched  bourgeois  have  no  higher  ambition  than  to  fuse  with 
the  nobility,  in  order  to  derive  from  this  fusion  a  kind  of  legiti- 
mate title  for  their  connection  with  the  dominant  class,  a  title 
which  can  then  be  represented,  not  as  acquired,  but  as  existing 
by  hereditary  right.  Thus  we  see  that  the  hereditary  principle 
(even  when  purely  fictitious)  greatly  accelerates  the  process  of 
social  "training,"  accelerates,  that  is  to  say,  the  adaptation  of 
the  new  social  forces  to  the  old  aristocratic  environment. 

In  the  violent  struggle  between  the  new  class  of  those  who  are 
rising  and  the  old  stratum  of  those  who  are  undergoing  a  deca- 
dence partly  apparent  and  partly  real — a  struggle  at  times 
waged  with  dramatic  greatness,  but  often  proceeding  obscurely, 
so  as  hardly  to  attract  attention — moral  considerations  are  drawn 
into  the  dance,  and  pulled  this  way  and  that  by  the  various  con- 
tending parties,  who  use  them  in  order  to  mask  their  true  aims. 
/  In  an  era  of  democracy,  ethics  constitute  a  weapon  which  every- 
j  one  can  employ.  In  the  old  regime,  the  members  of  the  ruling 
class  and  those  who  desired  to  become  rulers  continually  spoke 


'Abbe  de  Choisy,  Memoires  pour  servir  a  I'Eistoire  de  Louis  XIV,  Van 
De  Water,  Utrecht,  1727,  p.  23. 

*  Pierre  Edouard  Lemontey,  Essai  sur  I'etablissement  monarchique  de 
Louis  XIV,  Appendix  to  Nouveaux  memoires  de  Dangeau,  republished  by 
the  author,  Deterville,  Paris,  1818,  p.  392. 

"Cf.  the  striking  examples  furnished  by  Werner  Sombart,  Die  deutsche 
Vollcmvirtsc'iiaft  im  XIX  Jahrhundert,  Bondi,  Berlin,  1903,  pp.  545,  et  ge^. 


THE  ETHICAL  SIDE  15 

of  their  own  personal  rights.  Democracy  adopts  a  more  diplo- 
matic, a  more  prudent  cours3.  It  has  rejected  such  claims  as 
unethical.  To-day,  all  the  factors  of  public  life  speak  and 
struggle  in  the  name  of  the  people,  of  the  community  at  large. 
The  government  and  rebels  against  the  government,  kings  and 
party-leaders,  tyrants  by  the  grace  of  God  and  usurpers,  rabid 
idealists  and  calculating  self-seekers,  all  are  ''the  people,"  and 
all  declare  that  in  their  actions  they  merely  fulfil  the  will  of  the 
nation. 

Thus,  in  the  modern  life  of  the  classes  and  of  the  nations, 
moral  considerations  have  become  an  accessory,  a  necessary  fic- 
tion. Every  government  endeavours  to  support  its  power  by  a 
general  ethical  principle.  The  political  forms  in  which  the 
various  social  movements  become  crystallized  also  assume  a  phil- 
anthropic mask.  There  is  not  a  single  one  among  the  young  class- 
parties  which  fails,  before  starting  on  its  march  for  the  conquest 
of  power,  to  declare  solemnly  to  the  world  that  its  aim  is  to 
redeem,  not  so  much  itself  as  the  whole  of  humanity,  from  the 
yoke  of  a  tyrannical  minority,  and  to  substitute  for  the  old  and 
inequitable  regime  a  new  reign  of  justice.  Democracies  are 
always  glib  talkers.  Their  terminology  is  often  comparable  to  a 
tissue  of  metaphors.  The  demagogue,  that  spontaneous  fruit  of 
democratic  soil,  overflows  with  sentimentality,  and  is  profoundly 
moved  by  the  sorrows  of  the  people.  "Les  victimes  soignent 
leurs  mots,  les  bourreaux  sont  ivres  de  philosophic  larmoyante, ' ' 
writes  Alphonse  Daudet  in  this  connection.*'  Every  new  social 
class,  when  it  gives  the  signal  for  an  attack  upon  the  privileges 
of  a  class  already  in  possession  of  economic  and  political  power, 
inscribes  upon  its  banners  the  motto:  "The  Liberation  of  the 
entire  Human  Race ! ' '  When  the  young  French  bourgeoisie  was 
girding  its  loins  for  the  great  struggle  against  the  nobles  and  the 
clergy,  it  began  with  the  solemn  Declaration  des  Droits  de 
I'Homme,  and  hurled  itself  into  the  fray  with  the  war-cry 
Liherte,  Egalite,  Fraternite!  To-day  we  can  ourselves  hear  the 
spokesmen  of  another  great  class-movement,  that  of  the  wage- 
earners,  announce  that  they  undertake  the  class-struggle  from  no 
egoistic  motives,  but  on  the  contrary  in  order  to  exclude  such 
-motives  for  ever  from  the  social  process.  For  the  refrain  of  its 
Hymn  of  Progress  modern  socialism  ever  reiterates  the  proud 

'Leon    A,    Daudet,    Alphonse    Daudet,    Bibliotheque    Charpentier.      E. 
Tasquelle,  Paris,  1898,  p.  142. 


16  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

words :  * '  Creation  of  a  humane  and  fraternal  society  in  which 
class  will  be  unknown ! " 

The  victorious  bourgeoisie  of  the  Droits  de  V Homme  did,  in- 
deed, realize  the  republic,  but  not  lemocracy.  The  words  Liberie, 
Egalite,  Fraternite  may  be  read  to  this  day  over  the  portals  of 
all  French  prisons.  The  Commune  was  the  first  attempt, 
crowned  by  a  transient  success,  at  a  proletarian-socialist  govern- 
ment; and  despite  its  communistic  principles,  and  under  the 
pressure  of  extreme  financial  stringency,  the  Commune  respected 
the  Bank  of  France  as  faithfully  as  could  have  done  any  syn- 
dicate of  inexorable  capitalists.  There  have  been  revolutions,  but 
the  world  has  never  witnessed  the  establishment  of  logical  de- 
mocracy. 

Political  parties,  however  much  they  may  be  founded  upon 
narrow  class  interests  and  however  evidently  they  may  work 
against  the  interests  of  the  majority,  love  to  identify  themselves 
with  the  universe,  or  at  least  to  present  themselves  as  co-operat- 
,ing  with  all  the  citizens  of  the  state,  and  to  proclaim  that  they 
[are  fighting  in  the  name  of  all  and  for  the  good  of  all.'  It  is 
only  the  socialist  orators  who  are  sometimes  found  to  proclaim 
that  their  party  is  specifically  a  class  party.  But  they  tone  down 
this  assertion  by  adding  that  in  ultimate  analysis  the  interests  of 
their  party  coincide  with  those  of  the  entire  people.  It  is,  indeed, 
true  that  in  protesting  that  it  enters  the  lists  in  the  interests  of 
the  whole  of  humanity  the  socialist  party,  representing  the  most 
numerous  class  of  the  population,  is  nearer  to  the  truth  than 
are  the  bourgeois  parties  when  these  make  the  same  claim,  for 
they  by  their  very  nature  are  parties  of  the  minority.^    But  the 

^  The  adherents  of  pessimism  in  sociology,  writing  for  the  most  part  in- 
dependently of  one  another,  have  drawn  express  attention  to  the  confu- 
sion, in  part  conscious  and  in  part  unconscious,  characteristic  of  all  revo- 
lutionary and  reforming  movements,  between  the  interests  or  aims  of  class 
and  of  party  and  the  interests  or  aims  of  the  human  race.  Cf.  more  par- 
ticularly Gaetano  Mosca,  Elementi  di  Sciema  politica,  Boeca,  Turin,  1896, 
pp.  75  et  seq. ;  Ludwig  Gumplowicz,  op.  cit.,  pp.  23,  70,  71,  94,  123;  Vilfredo 
Pareto,  Les  Systemes  Socialistes,  Giard  et  Briere,  Paris,  1892,  vol.  i,  p. 
59;  Ludwig  Woltmann,  Politische  Anthropologie,  Thiiringisehe  Verlagsan- 
stalt,  Leipzig,  1903,  pp.  299  et  seq.  Moreover,  this  confusion  is  not  peculiar 
to  democracy.  Aristocracy  also  claims  to  represent  on  principle,  not  the 
interests  of  a  small  social  group,  but  those  of  the  entire  people  without  dis- 
tinction of  class  (as  far  as  the  German  conservatives  are  concerned  cf. 
Oskar  Stillich,  op.  cit.,  p.  3).  But  it  is  here  easier  to  recognize  the  true 
nature  of  ihe  democratic  mask. 

*An  extremely  elaborate  and  able  description  of  the  intimate  relation- 


THE  ETHICAL  SIDE  17 

socialist  claim  is  also  far  from  the  truth,  seeing  that  the  two 
terms  humanity  and  party  are  far  from  being  identical  in  exten- 
sion, even  if  the  party  under  consideration  should  embrace,  or 
believe  itself  to  embrace,  the  great  majority  of  humanity.  When 
for  opportunist  reasons  the  socialist  party  declares  to  the  electors 
that  socialism  proposes  to  give  to  all,  but  to  take  nothing  from 
any,  it  suffices  to  point  out  that  the  enormous  differences  of 
wealth  which  exist  in  society  render  it  impossible  to  keep  any  such 
promise.  The  giving  presupposes  a  taking  away,  and  if  the 
proletarians  wish  to  bring  about  an  equality  of  economic  status 
between  themselves  on  the  one  hand  and  the  Eothschilds,  Vander- 
bilts,  and  Rockefellers  on  the  other,  which  could  be  done  only  by 
socializing  the  means  of  production  and  exchange  to-day  owned 
by  these  various  millionaires,  it  is  obvious  that  the  wealth  and 
power  of  these  great  bourgeois  princes  would  be  considerably 
diminished.  To  the  same  opportunist  party  tendency  we  must 
ascribe  the  formulation  of  the  socialist  theory  which,  in  apparent 
accordance  with  the  fundamental  principle  of  the  Marxist 
political  economy,  divides  the  population  into  owners  of  the 
means  of  production  and  non-owners  dependent  upon  these,  pro- 
ceeding to  the  contention  that  all  the  owners  must  be  capitalist  in 
sentiment  while  all  the  dependents  must  be  socialists,  that  is  to 
say,  must  desire  the  triumph  of  socialism.  This  view  is  utterly 
fallacious,  for  it  regards  as  the  unique  or  most  certain  criterion 
for  determining  the  class  to  which  an  individual  belongs  the 
amount  of  his  income,  which  is  a  purely  external  characteristic, 
and  then  proceeds  (in  a  manner  which  is  perhaps  effective  in 
political  life,  but  which  is  eminently  contestable  on  theoretical 
grounds)  to  enlarge  the  concept  of  the  proletariat  so  that  all 
employees,  governmental  or  private,  may  be  claimed  for  the 
party  of  labour.  According  to  this  theory  the  directors  of 
Krupp  or  the  Minister-Presidents  of  Russia,  since  as  such  they 
are  non-owners  and  employees,  are  dependents  upon  the  means  of 
production,  ought  to  espouse  with  enthusiasm  the  cause  of  social- 
ships  between  party  and  collectivity  will  be  found  in  an  essay  by  Karl 
Kautsky,  Klasseninteresse,  Sonder  inter  esse,  Parteiinteresse,  "Neue  Zeit" 
xxi,  vol.  ii,  Nos.  34  and  35.  I  may  also  refer  those  who  care  to  study  the 
relationship  between  the  interests  of  humanity  as  a  whole  and  the  interests 
of  the  proletariat  as  a  social  class,  to  the  consideration  put  forward  in  my 
own  Das  Proletariat  in  der  Wissenschaft  und  die  OeTconomiscli-Anthropolo- 
giscJie  Synthese,  published  as  preface  to  the  German  translation  of  Nice- 
foro's  work  Anthropologic  der  nicMhesitsenden  Klassen,  Studien  und  TJn- 
tersuchungen,  Maas  und  van  Suchtelen,  Leipzig-Amsterdam,  1909. 


18  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

ism — ought  to  do  so,  at  least,  in  so  far  as  they  understand  their 
true  position  in  society,  in  so  far  as  they  have  become  what 
the  socialists  term  "class-conscious."^ 

The  ideal  impetuosity  of  youthful  movements  aiming  at  eman- 
cipation is  depicted  by  anti-democratic  writers  as  a  pious  illusion, 
as  the  pursuit  of  a  will-o'-the-wisp,  arising  from  the  need  to 
make  the  particular  good  assume  the  aspect  of  the  general 
good.^°  In  the  world  of  hard  fact,  every  class-movement  which 
professes  to  aim  at  the  good  of  the  entire  community  is  stamped 
inevitably  as  self-contradictory.  Humanity  cannot  dispense  with 
"political  classes,"  but  from  their  very  nature  these  classes  are 
but  fractions  of  society. 

^  The  relationships  between  socialism  and  industrial  bureaucracy  were 
discussed  by  the  present  writer  at  considerable  length  in  a  paper  read  at 
the  Italian  Congress  of  the  Sciences  held  at  Florence  in  1908,  Sulla  deca- 
densa  della  Classe  media  industriale  antica  e  sul  sorgere  di  una  Classe  media 
industriale  moderna  nei  Paesi  di  economia  spiccatamente  capitalista.  This 
paper  was  published  in  the  ' '  Giornale  degli  Economisti, ' '  vol.  xxxvii,  Series 
2,  1909. 

"  Cf .  Gaetano  Mosca,  op.  cit.,  p.  75. 


PAET  ONE 

LEADERSHIP  IN  DEMOCRATIC 
ORGANIZATIONS 


i 
J 


\ 


A.    TECHNICAL    AND    ADMINISTRATIVE    CAUSES 

OF  LEADERSHIP 


CHAPTER   I 

INTRODUCTORY— THE  NEED  FOR  ORGANIZATION 

Democracy  is  inconceivable  without  organization.    A  few  words 
will  suffice  to  demonstrate  this  proposition.^ 

A  class  which  unfurls  in  face  of  society  the  banner  of  certain 
definite  claims,  and  which  aspires  to  be  the  realization  of  a  com- 
plex of  ideal  aims  deriving  from  the  economic  functions  which 
that  class  fulfils,  needs  an  organization.  Be  the  claims  economic: 
or  be  they  political,  organization  appears  the  only  means  for  the 
creation  of  a  collective  will.  Organization,  based  as  it  is  upon' 
the  principle  of  least  effort,  that  is  to  say,  upon  the  greatest 
possible  economy  of  energy,  is  the  weapon  of  the  weak  in  their 
struggle  with  the  strong.^ 

The  chances  of  success  in  any  struggle  will  depend  upon  the 
degree  to  which  this  struggle  is  carried  out  upon  a  basis  of  soli- 
darity between  individuals  whose  interests  are  identical.  In  ob- 
jecting, therefore,  to  the  theories  of  the  individualist  anarchists 
that  nothing  could  please  the  employers  better  than  the  disper- 
sion and  disaggregation  of  the  forces  of  the  workers,  the  social- 
ists, the  most  fanatical  of  all  the  partisans  of  the  idea  of  or- 
ganization, enunciate  an  argument  which  harmonizes  well  with 
the  results  of  scientific  study  of  the  nature  of  parties. 

We  live  in  a  time  in  which  the  idea   of  cooperation  has 

*  Moreover,  the  literature  of  this  subject  is  exhaustive.  Here  we  will 
refer  merely  to  the  following:  Victor  Griff ueDies,  L' Action  syndicaliste, 
Riviere,  Paris,  1908,  p.  8.  Henriette  Roland-Hoist,  Generalstreik  und  So- 
cialdemoTcratie,  Kaden  u.  Co.,  Dresden,  2nd  ed.,  1906,  pp.  114  et  seq.  Attilio 
Cabiati,  Le  Basi  teoricJie  dell'  organizsazione  operaia,  Office  of  the  "Critica 
Soeiale, ' '  Milan,  1908,  p.  19. 

'A  detailed  study  of  the  relations  between  the  various  aspects  of  cooper- 
ation and  of  the  law  of  the  minimal  expenditure  of  effort  will  be  found 
in  an  essay  by  the  present  writer,  L'Uomo  economico  e  la  Cooperazione, 
Societa  Tip.  Editr.  Naz.,  Turin,  1909. 

21 


22  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

become  so  firmly  established  that  even  millionaires  perceive  tbe 
necessity  of  common  action.  It  is  easy  to  understand,  then,  that 
organization  has  become  a  vital  principle  in  the  working  class, 
for  in  default  of  it  their  success  is  a  priori  impossible.  The 
refusal  of  the  worker  to  participate  in  the  collective  life  of  his 
class  cannot  fail  to  entail  disastrous  consequences.  In  respect  of 
culture  and  of  economic,  physical,  and  physiological  conditions, 
the  proletarian  is  the  weakest  element  of  our  society.^  In  fact, 
the  isolated  member  of  the  working  classes  is  defenceless  in  the 
hands  of  those  who  are  economically  stronger.  It  is  only  by  com- 
bination to  form  a  structural  aggregate  that  the  proletarians  can 
acquire  the  faculty  of  political  resistance  and  attain  to  a  social 
dignity.  The  importance  and  the  influence  of  the  working  class 
are  directly  proportional  to  its  numerical  strength.  But  for  the 
representation  of  that  numerical  strength  organization  and  co- 
ordination are  indispensable.  The  principle  of  organization  is 
an  absolutely  essential  condition  for  the  political  struggle  of  the 
masses. 

I  Yet  this  politically  necessary  principle  of  organization,  while 
[it  overcomes  that  disorganization  of  forces  which  would  be 
Ifavourable  to  the  adversary,  brings  other  dangers  in  its  train. 
\We  escape  Scylla  only  to  dash  ourselves  on  Charybdis.  Or- 
Wanization  is,  in  fact,  the  source  from  which  the  conservative 
(currents  flow  over  the  plain  of  democracy,  occasioning  there 
vdisastrous  floods  and  rendering  the  plain  unrecognizable. 


*The  inferiority  of  the  proletarian  alike  in  his  anthropological  and  his 
cultural  aspects  is  displayed  by  Niceforo  in  the  work  mentioned  in  a  pre- 
vious note. 


CHAPTER  II 

MECHANICAL   AND    TECHNICAL   IMPOSSIBILITY   OF 
DIRECT  GOVERNMENT  BY  THE  MASSES 

It  was  a  Rhenish  Democrat,  Moritz  Rittinghausen,  who  first 
made  a  brilliant  attempt  to  give  a  real  basis  for  direct  legislation 
by  the  people.^ 

According  to  this  system  the  entire  population  was  to  be 
divided  into  sections,  each  containing  a  thousand  inhabitants,  as 
w^as  done  temporarily  for  some  days  in  Prussia  during  the  elec- 
tions of  the  years  1848  and  1849.  The  members  of  each  section 
were  to  assemble  in  some  pre-arranged  place — a  school,  a  town- 
hall,  or  other  public  building — and  to  elect  a  president.  Every 
citizen  was  to  have  the  right  of  speech.  In  this  way  the  intelli- 
gence of  every  individual  would  be  placed  at  the  service  of  the 
fatherland.  When  the  discussion  was  finished,  each  one  would 
record  his  vote.  The  president  would  transmit  the  result  to  the 
burgomaster,  who  would  notify  the  higher  authorities.  The  will 
of  the  majority  would  be  decisive. 

No  legislative  proposal  was  to  come  from  above.  The  govern- 
ment should  have  no  further  initiative  than  to  determine  that 
on  a  given  day  all  the  sections  should  discuss  a  given  argument. 
Whenever  a  certain  number  of  the  citizens  demanded  a  new  law 
of  any  kind,  or  the  reform  of  an  existing  law,  the  ministry  con- 
cerned must  invite  the  people  to  exercise  its  sovereignty  wdthin  a 
stated  time,  and  to  pass  for  itself  the  law  in  question.-    The  law 

*  Moritz  Rittinghausen,  TJeher  die  Organisation  der  direJcten  Gesetzgebung 
durcli  das  Folk,  Social.  Demokrat.  Sehriften,  No.  4,  Coin,  1870,  p.  10. 
The  merit  of  having  for  the  first  time  ventured  to  put  forward  practical 
proposals  of  this  nature  for  the  solution  of  the  social  problem  unquestion- 
ably belongs  to  Rittinghausen.  Victor  Considerant,  who  subsequently  re- 
sumed the  attempt  to  establish  direct  popular  government  upon  a  wider 
basis  and  with  a  more  far-reaching  propagandist  effect,  expressly  recognized 
Rittinghausen  as  his  precursor  (Victor  Considerant,  La  Solution  ou  Le 
Gouvernement  Direct  du  Peuple.  Librairie  Phalansterienne,  Paris,  1850,  p. 
61). 

'^  In  the  American  constitution  those  states  only  are  termed  federalist 
^^(the  name  being  here  used  to  imply  a  democratic  character)  in  which  the 

23 


24  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

takes  organic  form  from  the  discussion  itself.  First  of  all,  the 
president  opens  the  debate  upon  the  principal  question.  Subse- 
quently subordinate  points  are  discussed.  Then  comes  the  vote. 
That  proposition  which  has  received  the  majority  of  votes  is 
adopted.  As  soon  as  all  the  returns  of  the  voting  have  been  sent 
to  the  ministry,  a  special  commission  must  edit  a  clear  and  simple 
text  of  the  law,  formulating  it  in  a  manner  which  is  not  open  to 
different  interpretations,  as  is  the  case  with  most  of  the  laws  pre- 
sented to  modern  parliaments,  for  these,  as  Rittinghausen  sarcas- 
tically adds,  would  seem  to  incorporate  a  deliberate  intention  to 
favour  the  tendency  of  lawyers  to  ambiguity  and  hair-splitting. 

The  system  here  sketched  is  clear  and  concise,  and  it  might 
seem  at  the  first  glance  that  its  practical  application  would 
involve  no  serious  difficulties.  But  if  put  to  the  test  it  would 
fail  to  fulfil  the  expectations  of  its  creator. 

The  practical  ideal  of  democracy  consists  in  the  self-govern- 
ment of  the  masses  in  conformity  with  the  decisions  of  popular 
assemblies.     But  while  this  system  limits  the  extension  of  the 
principle  of  delegation,  it  fails  to  provide  any  guarantee  against 
the  formation  of  an  oligarchical  camarilla.    Undoubtedly  it  de- 
prives the  natural  leaders  of  their  quality  as  functionaries,  for 
this  quality  is  transferred  to  the  people  themselves.    The  crowd, 
however,  is  always  subject  to  suggestion,  being  readily  influenced 
by  the  eloquence  of  great  popular  orators ;  moreover,  direct  gov- 
ernment by  the  people,  admitting  of  no  serious  discussions  or 
thoughtful  deliberations,  greatly  facilitates  coups  de  main  of  all 
kinds  by  men  who  are  exceptionally  bold,  energetic,  and  adroit.^ 
I     It  is  easier  to  dominate  a  large  crowd  than  a  small  audience. 
The  adhesion  of  the  crowd  is  tumultuous,  summary,  and  uncon- \ 
ditional.    Once  the  suggestions  have  taken  effect,  the  crowd  does  / 
not  readily  tolerate  contradiction  from  a  small  minority,  and  still  [ 
less  from  isolated  individuals.     A  great  multitude  assembled  1 
within  a  small  area  is  unquestionably  more  accessible  to  panic  ' 

people  assemble  for  such  a  legislative  purpose,  whilst  the  states  with  rep- 
resentative popular  government  are  called  republics. 

^It  often  happens  that  by  such  a  coup  de  main  one  leader  will  surprise 
and  defeat  the  other.  Thus  Arturo  Labriola,  the  well-known  leader  of  the 
Italian  syndicalists,  during  the  general  strike  of  1904  at  Milan  induced 
the  great  meeting  in  the  Arena  to  vote  for  the  continuation  of  the  strike, 
securing  this  by  the  sole  power  of  his  inflammatory  eloquence,  and  in 
opposition  to  the  desire  of  the  representatives  of  the  local  labour  organi- 
zations. (7  Gruppi  Socialisti  Milanesi  al  Congresso  Socialista  Nasionale 
di  Boma,  October  7-9,  1906.    Gruppi  Socialisti,  Milan,  p.  11.) 


GOVERNMENT  BY  THE  MASSES       25 

alarms,  to  unreflective  enthusiasm,  and  the  like,  than  is  a  small 
meeting,  whose  members  can  quietly  discuss  matters  among  them- 
selves (Roscher).* 

It  is  a  fact  of  everyday  experience  that  enormous  public  meet-j 
ings  commonly  carry  resolutions  by  acclamation  or  by  general! 
assent,  whilst  these  same  assemblies,  if  divided  into  small  sec- 
tions, say  of  fifty  persons  each,  would  be  much  more  guarded  in 
their  assent.  Great  party  congresses,  in  which  are  present  the 
elite  of  the  membership,  usually  act  in  this  way.  Words  and 
actions  are  far  less  deliberately  weighed  by  the  crowd  than  by 
the  individuals  or  the  little  groups  of  which  this  crowd  is  com- 
posed. The  fact  is  incontestable — a  manifestation  of  the  pathol- 
ogy of  the  crowd.^  The  individual  disappears  in  the  multitude, 
and  therewith  disappears  also  personality  and  sense  of  responsi- 
bility.^ 

The  most  formidable  argument  against  the  sovereignty  of  the 
masses  is,  however,  derived  from  the  mechanical  and  technical 
impossibility  of  its  realization. 

The  sovereign  masses  are  altogether  incapable  of  undertaking 
the  most  necessary  resolutions.  The  impotence  of  direct  democ- 
racy, like  the  power  of  indirect  democracy,  is  a  direct  outcome 
of  the  influence  of  number.  In  a  polemic  against  Proudhon 
(1849),  Louis  Blanc  asks  whether  it  is  possible  for  thirty-four 
millions  of  human  beings  (the  population  of  France  at  that 
time)  to  carry  on  their  affairs  without  accepting  what  the  pettiest 
man  of  business  finds  necessary,  the  intermediation  of  representa- 
tives. He  answers  his  own  question  by  saying  that  one  who 
declares  direct  action  on  this  scale  to  be  possible  is  a  fool,  and 


*Eoscher,  op.  cit.,  p.  358. 

"*  This  matter  has  been  luminously  discussed  by  French  and  Italian  soci- 
ologists. Cf.  Gabriel  Tarde,  Les  crimes  des  foules,  Storck,  Lyons,  1892; 
Seipio  Sighele,  I  delitti  della  folia,  Fratelli  Bocca,  Turin,  1902.  See  also  a 
discussion  of  the  same  question  conducted  with  especial  reference  to  the 
Chamber  of  Deputies,  Seipio,  Sighele,  Contro  il  parlamentarismo.  Saggio 
di  psicologia  collettiva,  Treves,  Milan,  1905, 

^"It  seems  that  the  simple  fact  of  aggregation  brings  out  the  sheeplike 
character  of  human  beings,  for  wherever  we  observe  great  assemblies, 
whether  in  public  meetings  or  in  parliament,  whether  we  have  to  do  with 
shareholders'  meetings,  corporate  meetings,  or  university  convocations,  we 
everywhere  find  that  the  majority  is  content  to  accept  the  leadership  of 
single  individuals,  acting  no  longer  in  accordance  with  its  own  convictions, 
but  enslaved  by  the  phrases  employed  by  the  leaders"  (Ludwig  Gumplowicz, 
op.  cit.,  p.  124). 


26  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

that  one  who  denies  its  possibility  need  not  be  an  absolute  oppo- 
nent of  the  idea  of  the  stated  The  same  question  and  the  same 
answer  could  be  repeated  to-day  in  respect  of  party  organization. 
Above  all  in  the  great  industrial  centres,  where  the  labour  party 
sometimes  numbers  its  adherents  by  tens  of  thousands,  it  is  im- 
possible to  carry  on  the  affairs  of  this  gigantic  body  without  a 
system  of  representation.  The  great  socialist  organization  of 
Berlin,  which  embraces  the  six  constituencies  of  the  city,  as  well 
,as  the  two  outlying  areas  of  Niederbarnim  and  Teltow-Beeskow- 
Charlottenburg,  has  a  member-roll  of  more  than  ninety  thou- 
sand.^ 

It  is  obvious  that  such  a  gigantic  number  of  persons  belonging 
to  a  unitary  organization  cannot  do  any  practical  work  upon  a 
system  of  direct  discussion.^  The  regular  holding  of  deliberative 
assemblies  of  a  thousand  members  encounters  the  gravest  difficul- 
ties in  respect  of  room  and  distance ;  ^°  while  from  the  topo- 
graphical point  of  view  such  an  assembly  would  become  alto- 
gether impossible  if  the  members  numbered  ten  thousand.  Even 
if  we  imagined  the  means  of  communication  to  become  much 
better  than  those  which  now  exist,  how  would  it  be  possible  to 
assemble  such  a  multitude  in  a  given  place,  at  a  stated  time, 
and  with  the  frequency  demanded  by  the  exigencies  of  party 
life?  In  addition  must  be  considered  the  physiological  impossi- 
bility even  for  the  most  powerful  orator  of  making  himself  heard 

'  Louis  Blanc,  ' '  L  'etat  dans  une  demoeratie, ' '  Questions  d  'aujourd  'hui 
et  de  demain,  Dentu,  Paris,  1880,  vol.  iii,  p.  150. 

*Eduard  Bernstein,  Die  Demokratie  in  der  SozialdemoTcratie,  "Sozialist. 
Monatshef te, "  1908,  fasc.  18-19,  p.  1109. 

^ ' '  Quiconque  voudrait  appliquer  a  une  societe  nombreuse  le  premier  prin- 
cipe  (eelui  de  faire  concourir  les  individus  a  la  formation  des  lois  par  eux- 
memes),  sans  employer  I'intermediare,  la  bouleverserait  inf ailliblement " 
(Benjamin  Constant,  Cours  de  politique  constitutionnelle,  Societe  Typ. 
Beige,  Brussels,  1851,  vol.  iii,  p.  246). 

^"Especially  in  northern  climes,  where  the  weather  makes  it  impossible 
to  hold  open-air  meetings  for  the  greater  part  of  the  year,  and  yet  it  is  in 
these  very  regions  that  political  life  attains  its  highest  development.  In 
some  countries,  again,  as  in  Germany,  the  reactionary  governments  are  most 
unwilling  to  concede  to  the  populace  the  right  of  public  meeting  in  the 
open  air,  and  the  use  of  the  theatres  for  political  purposes  (as  in  Italy), 
or  of  the  town  halls  (as  in  England),  is  forbidden.  Bernstein  is  therefore 
right  when  he  says  that  in  most  towns  it  would  be  impossible,  owing  to  the 
absence  of  a  suflBciently  large  hall,  to  unite  in  a  general  assembly  even  a 
considerable  proportion  of  the  members  of  a  party  or  society  (Eduard 
Bernstein,  Die  Arheiterbewegung,  Eutten  u.  Loening,  Frankfort-on-the- 
Main,  1910,  p.  151). 


GOVERNMENT  BY  THE  MASSES       27 

by  a  crowd  of  ten  thousand  persons.^^  There  are,  however,  other 
reasons  of  a  technical  and  administrative  character  which  render 
impossible  the  direct  self-government  of  large  groups.  If  Peter 
wrongs  Paul,  it  is  out  of  the  question  that  all  the  other  citizens 
should  hasten  to  the  spot  to  undertake  a  personal  examination 
of  the  matter  in  dispute,  and  to  take  the  part  of  Paul  against 
Peter.^^  By  parity  of  reasoning,  in  the  modern  democratic 
party,  it  is  impossible  for  the  collectivity  to  undertake  the  direct 
settlement  of  all  the  controversies  that  may  arise. 

Hence  the  need  for  delegation,  for  the  system  in  which  dele- 
gates represent  the  mass  and  carry  out  its  will.  Even  in  groups 
sincerely  animated  with  the  democratic  spirit,  current  business, 
the  preparation  and  the  carrying  out  of  the  most  important 
actions,  is  necessarily  left  in  the  hands  of  individuals.  It  is 
well  known  that  the  impossibility  for  the  people  to  exercise  a 
legislative  power  directly  in  popular  assemblies  led  the  demo- 
cratic idealists  of  Spain  to  demand,  as  the  least  of  evils,  a  sys- 
tem of  popular  representation  and  a  parliamentary  state.^^ 

Originally  the  chief  is  merely  the  servant  of  the  mass.  The 
organization  is  based  upon  the  absolute  equality  of  all  its  mem- 
bers. Equality  is  here  understood  in  its  most  general  sense,  as 
an  equality  of  like  men.  In  many  countries,  as  in  idealist  Italy 
(and  in  certain  regions  in  Germany  where  the  socialist  move- 
ment is  still  in  its  infancy),  this  equality  is  manifested,  among 
other  ways,  by  the  mutual  use  of  the  familiar  ' '  thou, ' '  which  is 
employed  by  the  most  poorly  paid  wage-labourer  in  addressing 
the  most  distinguished  intellectual.  This  generic  conception  of^ 
equality  is,  however,  gradually  replaced  by  the  idea  of  equality  i 
among  comrades  belonging  to  the  same  organization,  all  of  whose 
members  enjoy  the  same  rights.  The  democratic  principle  aims  ' 
at  guaranteeing  to  all  an  equal  influence  and  an  equal  participa- 
tion in  the  regulation  of  the  common  interests.  All  are  electors, 
and  all  are  eligible  for  office.  The  fundamental  postulate  of  the 
Declaration  des  Droits  de  V Homme  finds  here  its  theoretical 
application.  All  the  offices  are  filled  by  election.  The  officials, 
executive  organs  of  the  general  will,  play  a  merely  subordinate 
part,  are  always  dependent  upon  the  collectivity,  and  can  be 


"  Eoscher,  op.  cit.,  p.  351. 

"Louis  Blanc,  op.  cit.,  p.  144. 

^^  Cf .  the  letter  of  Antonio  Quiroga  to  King  Ferdinand  VII,  dated  Janu- 
ary 7,  1820  (Don  Juan  van  Halen,  Memoires,  Eenouard,  Paris,  1827,  Part 
II,  p.  382). 


28  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

deprived  of  their  office  at  any  moment.    The  mass  of  the  party 
is  omnipotent. 
At  the  outset,  the  attempt  is  made  to  depart  as  little  as  possible 

*^  from  pure  democracy  by  subordinating  the  delegates  altogether 
to  the  will  of  the  mass,  by  tying  them  hand  and  foot.  In  the 
early  days  of  the  movement  of  the  Italian  agricultural  workers, 
the  chief  of  the  league  required  a  majority  of  four-fifths  of  the 
votes  to  secure  election.  When  disputes  arose  with  the  employers 
about  wages,  the  representative  of  the  organization,  before  under- 
taking any  negotiations,  had  to  be  furnished  with  a  written 
authority,  authorized  by  the  signature  of  every  member  of  the 
corporation.  All  the  accounts  of  the  body  were  open  to  the 
examination  of  the  members,  at  any  time.  There  were  two  rea- 
sons for  this.  First  of  all,  the  desire  was  to  avoid  the  spread  of 
mistrust  through  the  mass,  * '  this  poison  which  gradually  destroys 
even  the  strongest  organism."  In  the  second  place,  this  usage 
allowed  each  one  of  the  members  to  learn  bookkeeping,  and  to 
acquire  such  a  general  knowledge  of  the  working  of  the  corpora- 
tion as  to  enable  him  at  any  time  to  take  over  its  leadership.^* 
It  is  obvious  that  democracy  in  this  sense  is  applicable  only  on 
a  very  small  scale.  In  the  infancy  of  the  English  labour  move- 
ment, in  many  of  the  trade-unions,  the  delegates  were  either  ap- 
pointed in  rotation  from  among  all  the  members,  or  were  chosen 
by  lot.^^  Gradually,  however,  the  delegates'  duties  become  more 
complicated ;  some  individual  ability  becomes  essential,  a  certain 
oratorical  gift,  and  a  considerable  amount  of  objective  knowl- 
edge. It  thus  becomes  impossible  to  trust  to  blind  chance,  to  the 
fortune  of  alphabetic  succession,  or  to  the  order  of  priority,  in  the 
choice  of  a  delegation  whose  members  must  possess  certain  pecul- 
iar personal  aptitudes  if  they  are  to  discharge  their  mission  to 

\   the  general  advantage. 

Such  were  the  methods  which  prevailed  in  the  early  days  of 
the  labour  movement  to  enable  the  masses  to  participate  in 
party  and  trade-union  administration.  To-day  they  are  falling 
into  disuse,  and  in  the  development  of  the  modern  political 
aggregate  there  is  a  tendency  to  shorten  and  stereotype  the 
process  which  transforms  the  led  into  a  leader — a  process  which 
has  hitherto  developed  by  the  natural  course  of  events.     Here 

"  Egidio  Bernaroli,  Manuale  per  la  costitusione  e  il  funsionamento  delle 
leghe  del  contadini,  Libreria  Soc.  Ital.,  Eome,  1902,  pp.  20,  26,  27,  52. 

^'Sidney  and  Beatrice  Webb,  Industrial  Democracy  (German  edition), 
Stuttgart,  1898,  vol.  i,  p.  6. 


GOVERNMENT  BY  THE  MASSES       29 

and  there  voices  make  themselves  heard  demanding  a  sort  of 
official  consecration  for  the  leaders,  insisting  that  it  is  necessary 
to  constitute  a  class  of  professional  politicians,  of  approved  and 
registered  experts  in  political  life.  Ferdinand  Tonnies  advo- 
cates that  the  party  should  institute  regular  examinations  for  the 
nomination  of  socialist  parliamentary  candidates,  and  for  the 
appointment  of  party  secretaries.^"  Heinrich  Herkner  goes  even 
farther.  He  contends  that  the  great  trade-unions  cannot  long 
maintain  their  existence  if  they  persist  in  entrusting  the  manage- 
ment of  their  affairs  to  persons  drawn  from  the  rank  and  file, 
who  have  risen  to  command  stage  by  stage  solely  in  consequence 
of  practical  aptitudes  acquired  in  the  service  of  the  organization. 
He  refers,  in  this  connection,  to  the  unions  that  are  controlled 
by  the  employers,  whose  officials  are  for  the  most  part  university 
men.  He  foresees  that  in  the  near  future  all  the  labour  or- 
ganizations will  be  forced  to  abandon  proletarian  exclusiveness, 
and  in  the  choice  of  their  officials  to  give  the  preference  to  per- 
sons of  an  education  that  is  superior  alike  in  economic,  legal, 
technical,  and  commercial  respects.^'^ 

Even  to-day,  the  candidates  for  the  secretaryship  of  a  trade- 
union  are  subject  to  examination  as  to  their  knowledge  of  legal 
matters  and  their  capacity  as  letter-writers.  The  socialist  or- 
ganizations engaged  in  political  action  also  directly  undertake 
the  training  of  their  own  officials.  Everywhere  there  are  coming 
into  existence  "nurseries"  for  the  rapid  supply  of  officials  pos- 
sessing a  certain  amount  of  "scientific  culture."  Since  1906 
there  has  existed  in  Berlin  a  Party-School  in  which  courses  of 
instruction  are  given  for  the  training  of  those  who  wish  to  take 
office  in  the  socialist  party  or  in  the  trade-unions.  The  instruc- 
tors are  paid  out  of  the  funds  of  the  socialist  party,  which  was 
directly  responsible  for  the  foundation  of  the  school.  The 
other  expenses  of  the  undertaking,  including  the  maintenance  of 
the  pupils,  are  furnished  from  a  common  fund  supplied  by  the 
party  and  the  various  trade-unions  interested.  In  addition,  the 
families  of  the  pupils,  in  so  far  as  the  attendance  of  these  at 
the  school  deprives  the  families  of  their  bread-winners,  receive 
an  allowance  from  the  provincial  branch  of  the  party  or  from 
the  local  branch  of  the  union  to  which  each  pupil  belongs.    The 

^*  Ferdinand  Tonnies,  Politih  und  Moral,  Neuer  Frankf .  Veil.,  Frankfort, 
1901,  p.  46. 

"  Heinrich  Herkner,  Die  Arheiterfrage,  Guttentag,  Berlin,  1908,  5th  ed., 
pp.  116,  117. 


30  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

third  course  of  this  school,  from  October  1, 1908,  to  April  3, 1909, 
was  attended  by  twenty-six  pupils,  while  the  first  year  there  had 
been  thirty-one  and  the  second  year  thirty-three.  As  pupils, 
preference  is  given  to  comrades  who  already  hold  office  in  the 
party  or  in  one  of  the  labour  unions.^^  Those  who  do  not  already 
belong  to  the  labour  bureaucracy  make  it  their  aim  to  enter  that 
body,  and  cherish  the  secret  hope  that  attendance  at  the  school 
will  smooth  their  path.  Those  who  fail  to  attain  this  end  are 
apt  to  exhibit  a  certain  discontent  with  the  party  which,  after 
having  encouraged  their  studies,  has  sent  them  back  to  manual 
labour.  Among  the  141  students  of  the  year  1910-11,  three 
classes  were  to  be  distinguished:  one  of  these  consisted  of  old 
and  tried  employees  in  the  different  branches  of  the  labour  move- 
ment (fifty-two  persons)  ;  a  second  consisted  of  those  who  ob- 
tained employment  in  the  party  or  the  trade-unions  directly  the 
course  was  finished  (forty-nine  persons)  ;  the  third  consisted  of 
those  who  had  to  return  to  manual  labour  (forty  persons).^" 

In  Italy,  L'Umamtaria,  a  philanthropic  organization  run  by 
the  socialists,  founded  at  Milan  in  1905  a  ''Practical  School  of 
Social  Legislation,"  whose  aim  it  is  to  give  to  a  certain  number 
of  workers  an  education  which  will  fit  them  for  becoming  factory 
inspectors,  or  for  taking  official  positions  in  the  various  labour 
organizations,  in  the  friendly  societies,  or  in  the  labour  ex- 
changes.'°  The  course  of  instruction  lasts  for  two  years,  and  at 
its  close  the  pupils  receive,  after  examination,  a  diploma  which 
entitles  them  to  the  title  of  "Labour  Expert."  In  1908  there 
were  two  hundred  and  two  pupils,  thirty-seven  of  whom  were 
employees  of  trade  unions  or  of  co-operative  societies,  four  were 
secretaries  of  labour  exchanges,  forty -five  employees  in  or  mem- 
bers of  the  liberal  professions,  and  a  hundred  and  twelve  working 
men.^^  At  the  outset  most  of  the  pupils  came  to  the  school  as  a 
matter  of  personal  taste,  or  with  the  aim  of  obtaining  the 
diploma  in  order  to  secure  some  comparatively  lucrative  private 
employment.  But  quite  recently  the  governing  body  has  deter- 
mined to  suppress  the  diploma,  and  to  institute  a  supplementary 


^^Proiokoll  des  Parteitags  su  Leipzig,  1909,  "Vorwiirts,"  Berlin,  1909, 
p.  48. 

^"Heinrich  Schulz,  Fiinf  Jahre  Parteischule,  "Neue  Zeit,"  Anno  xxix, 
vol.  ii,  fasc.  49,  p.  807. 

'"' Scuola  Prat,  di  Legislas.  Sociale  (Programma  e  Norme),  anno  iii,  Soc. 
Umanitaria,  Milan,  1908. 

="Ibid.,  anno  iv,  Milan,  1909,  p.  5. 


GOVERNMENT  BY  THE  MASSES       31 

course  open  to  those  only  who  are  already  employed  by  some 
labour  organization  or  who  definitely  intend  to  enter  such  em- 
ployment. For  those  engaged  upon  this  special  course  of  study 
there  will  be  provided  scholarships  of  £2  a  week,  the  funds  for 
this  purpose  being  supplied  in  part  by  L'Umanitaria  and  in  part 
by  the  labour  organizations  which  wish  to  send  their  employees 
to  the  school.22  In  the  year  1909,  under  the  auspices  of  the 
Bourse  du  Travail,  there  was  founded  at  Turin  a  similar  school 
(Scuola  Pratica  di  Cultura  e  Legislazione  Sociale),  which,  how- 
ever, soon  succumbed. 

In  England  the  trade-unions  and  co-operative  societies  make 
use  of  Ruskin  College,  Oxford,  sending  thither  those  of  their 
members  who  aspire  to  office  in  the  labour  organizations,  and 
who  have  displayed  special  aptitudes  for  this  career."^  In  Aus- 
tria it  is  proposed  to  found  a  party  school  upon  the  German 
model.^*  s,^^^ 

It  is  undeniable  that  all  these  educational  institutions  for  the 
officials  of  the  party  and  of  the  labour  organizations  tend,  above 
all,  towards  the  artificial  creation  of  an  elite  of  the  working- 
class,  of  a  caste  of  cadets  composed  of  persons  who  aspire  to  the 
command  of  the  proletarian  rank  and  file.  Without  wishing 
it,  there  is  thus  effected  a  continuous  enlargement  of  the  gulf 
which  divides  the  leaders  from  the  masses.  / 

The  technical  specialization  that  inevitably  results  from  all 
extensive  organization  renders  necessary  what  is  called  expert 
leadership.  Consequently  the  power  of  determination  comes  to 
be  considered  one  of  the  specific  attributes  of  leadership,  and  is 
gradually  withdrawn  from  the  masses  to  be  concentrated  in  the 
hands  of  the  leaders  alone.-^    Thus  the  leaders,  who  were  at  first 

"^Einaldo  Eigola,  I  funsionari  delle  organizzazioni,  "Avanti, "  anno  xiv, 
No.  341. 

^'See  the  admirable  description  given  by  Lily  Braun  in  her  Londoner 
Tagehuch,  ''Neue  Gesellschaf t, "  anno  ii,  fasc.  xxix,  1906. — More  recently, 
in  England,  another  body  with  similar  objects  to  Euskin  College,  but  more 
definitely  socialist  in  tendency,  has  come  into  existence,  and  is  known  as  the 
Central  Labour  College,  It  was  founded  in  Oxford  in  1909,  to  some  extent 
in  opposition  to  Euskin  College,  since  the  education  given  at  this  latter  was 
regarded  as  being  unduly  influenced  by  the  Oxford  outlook,  by  the  views 
of  the  dominant  .class.  The  Central  Labour  College  insists  on  the  labour 
point  of  view  in  all  its  educational  work.  Owing  to  the  opposition  of  the 
University  landowners  it  was  removed  to  London  in  1911. 

'^Otto  Bauer,  Eine  Parteischule  fiir  Oesterreich,  "Ber  Kampf,"  Vienna, 
anno  iii,  fasc.  4. 

*^ "  In  intimate  connection  with  these  theoretical  tendencies,  there  results 


32  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

I  no  more  than  the  executive  organs  of  the  collective  will,  soon 
/  emancipate  themselves  from  the  mass  and  become  independent 
(  of  its  control. 

)      Organization  implies  the  tendency  to  oligarchy.    In  every  or- 

K  ganization,  whether  it  be  a  political  party,  a  professional  union, 

/or  any  other  association  of  the  kind,  the  aristocratic  tendency 

manifests  itself  very  clearly.     The  mechanism  of  the  organiza- 

Ition,  while  conferring  a  solidity  of  structure,  induces  serious 

lehanges  in  the  organized  mass,  completely  inverting  the  respec- 

(tive  position  of  the  leaders  and  the  led.    As  a  result  of  organiza- 

ition,  every  party  or  professional  union  becomes  divided  into  a! 

tainority  of  directors  and  a  majority  of  directed. 

X       It  has  been  remarked  that  in  the  lower  stages  of  civilization 

tyranny  is  dominant.     Democracy  cannot  come  into  existence 

until  there  is  attained  a  subsequent  and  more  highly  developed 

stage  of  social  life.    Freedoms  and  privileges,  and  among  these 

latter  the  privilege  of  taking  part  in  the  direction  of  public 


a  change  in  the  relationship  between  the  leaders  and  the  mass.  For  the 
comradely  leadership  of  local  committees  with  all  its  undeniable  defects 
there  is  substituted  the  professional  leadership  of  the  trade-union  officials. 
Initiative  and  capacity  for  decision  thus  become  what  may  be  called  a  pro- 
fessional speciality,  whilst  for  the  rank  and  file  is  left  the  passive  virtue  of 
discipline.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  this  seamy  side  of  officialism  involves 
serious  dangers  for  the  party.  The  latest  innovation  in  this  direction,  in 
the  German  social  democratic  party,  is  the  appointment  of  salaried  secre- 
taries to  the  local  branches.  Unless  the  rank  and  file  of  the  party  keep 
very  much  on  the  alert,  unless  they  are  careful  that  these  secretaries  shall 
be  restricted  to  purely  executive  functions,  the  secretaries  will  come  to  be 
regarded  as  the  natural  and  sole  depositaries  of  all  power  of  initiative,  and 
as  the  exclusive  leaders  of  local  party  life.  In  the  socialist  party,  however, 
by  the  nature  of  things,  by  the  very  character  of  the  political  struggle, 
narrower  limits  are  imposed  upon  bureaucracy  than  in  the  case  of  the  trade- 
unions.  In  these  latter,  the  technical  specialization  of  the  wage-struggle 
(the  need,  for  example,  for  the  drafting  of  complicated  sliding  scales  and 
the  like)  often  leads  the  chiefs  to  deny  that  the  mass  of  organized  workers 
can  possess  "a  general  view  of  the  economic  life  of  the  country  as  a 
whole,"  and  to  deny,  therefore,  their  capacity  of  judgment  in  such  matters. 
The  most  typical  outcome  of  this  conception  is  afforded  by  the  argument 
with  which  the  leaders  are  accustomed  to  forbid  all  theoretical  criticism  of 
the  prospects  and  possibilities  of  practical  trade-unionism,  asserting  that 
such  criticism  involves  a  danger  for  the  spirit  of  organization.  This  reason- 
ing starts  from  the  assumption  that  the  workers  can  be  won  for  organization 
and  can  be  induced  to  remain  faithful  to  their  trade-unions  only  by  a  blind 
and  artless  belief  in  the  saving  efficacy  of  the  trade-union  struggle"  (Eosa 
Luxemburg,  Massenstreik,  Partei  u.  Gewerkschaften,  Erdmann  Dubber, 
Hamburg,  190G,  p.  61). 


GOVERNMENT  BY  THE  MASSES      33 

affairs,  are  at  first  restricted  to  the  few.  Recent  times  have 
been  characterized  by  the  gradual  extension  of  these  privileges 
to  a  widening  circle.  This  is  what  we  know  as  the  era  of 
democracy.  But  if  we  pass  from  the  sphere  of  the  state  to  the 
sphere  of  party,  we  may  observe  that  as  democracy  continues  to 
develop,  a  backwash  sets  in.  With  the  advance  of  organization, 
democracy  tends  to  decline.  Democratic  evolution  has  a  para- 
bolic course.  At  the  present  time,  at  any  rate  as  far  as  party 
life  is  concerned,  democracy  is  in  the  descending  phase.  It  may 
be  enunciated  as  a  general  rule  that  the  increase  in  the  power 
of  the  leaders  is  directly  proportional  with  the  extension  of  the 
organization.  In  the  various  parties  and  labour  organizations 
of  different  countries  the  influence  of  the  leaders  is  mainly  deter- 
mined (apart  from  racial  and  individual  grounds)  by  the  vary- 
ing development  of  organization.  Where  organization  is  stronger, 
we  find  that  there  is  a  lesser  degree  of  applied  democracy. 

Every  solidly  constructed  organization,  whether  it  be  a  demo- 
cratic state,  a  political  party,  or  a  league  of  proletarians  for  the 
resistance  of  economic  oppression,  presents  a  soil  eminently 
favourable  for  the  differentiation  of  organs  and  of  functions. 
The  more  extended  and  the  more  ramified  the  official  apparatus 
of  the  organization,  the  greater  the  number  of  its  members,  the 
fuller  its  treasury,  and  the  more  widely  circulated  its  press,  the 
less  efficient  becomes  the  direct  control  exercised  by  the  rank  and 
file,  and  the  more  is  this  control  replaced  by  the  increasing 
power  of  committees.^*^  Into  all  parties  there  insinuates  itself 
that  indirect  electoral  system  which  in  public  life  the  democratic 
parties  fight  against  with  all  possible  vigour.  Yet  in  party  life 
the  influence  of  this  system  must  be  more  disastrous  than  in  the 
far  more  extensive  life  of  the  state.  Even  in  the  party  con- 
gresses, which  represent  the  party-life  seven  times  sifted,  we 
find  that  it  becomes  more  and  more  general  to  refer  all  important 
questions  to  committees  which  debate  in  camera. 

As  organization  develops,  not  only  do  the  tasks  of  the  admin- 
istration become  more  difficult  and  more  complicated,  but,  fur- 
ther, its  duties  become  enlarged  and  specialized  to  such  a  degree 
that  it  is  no  longer  possible  to  take  them  all  in  at  a  single  glance. 


" ' '  Here  we  see  tlie  beginning  of  a  danger  which  is  imminent  in  all  popu- 
lar administration,  namely,  that  in  place  of  true  democracy  there  should 
develop  an  omnipotent  influence  of  committees"  (Wolfgang  Heine,  Demo- 
Jcratische  Bandiemerkungen  sum  Fall  Gohre,  "  Sozialistische  Monatshef te, " 
viii  (x),  fasc.  4,  p.  254). 


34  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

In  a  rapidly  progressive  movement,  it  is  not  only  the  growth  in 
the  number  of  duties,  but  also  the  higher  quality  of  these,  which 
imposes  a  more  extensive  differentiation  of  function.  Nominally, 
and  according  to  the  letter  of  the  rules,  all  the  acts  of  the  leaders 
are  subject  to  the  ever  vigilant  criticism  of  the  rank  and  file. 
In  theory  the  leader  is  merely  an  employee  bound  by  the  instruc- 
tions he  receives.  He  has  to  carry  out  the  orders  of  the  mass, 
)of  which  he  is  no  more  than  the  executive  organ.  But  in  actual 
fact,  as  the  organization  increases  in  size,  this  control  becomes 
purely  fictitious.  The  members  have  to  give  up  the  idea  of  them- 
selves conducting  or  even  supervising  the  whole  administration, 
and  are  compelled  to  hand  these  tasks  over  to  trustworthy  persons 
specially  nominated  for  the  purpose,  to  salaried  officials.  The 
rank  and  file  must  content  themselves  with  summary  reports,  and 
with  the  appointment  of  occasional  special  committees  of  inquiry. 
Yet  this  does  not  derive  from  any  special  change  in  the  rules  of 
the  organization.  It  is  by  very  necessity  that  a  simple  employee 
gradually  becomes  a  "leader,"  acquiring  a  freedom  of  action 
which  he  ought  not  to  possess.  The  chief  then  becomes  accus- 
tomed to  despatch  important  business  on  his  own  responsibility, 
and  to  decide  various  questions  relating  to  the  life  of  the  party 
without  any  attempt  to  consult  the  rank  and  file.  It  is  obvious 
that  democratic  control  thus  undergoes  a  progressive  diminution, 
and  is  ultimately  reduced  to  an  infinitesimal  minimum.  In  all 
the  socialist  parties  there  is  a  continual  increase  in  the  number 
of  functions  withdrawn  from  the  electoral  assemblies  and  trans- 
ferred to  the  executive  committees.  In  this  way  there  is  con- 
structed a  powerful  and  complicated  edifice.  The  principle  of 
division  of  labour  coming  more  and  more  into  operation,  execu- 
tive authority  undergoes  division  and  subdivision.  There  is  thus 
constituted  a  rigorously  defined  and  hierarchical  bureaucracy.^'^ 
In  the  catechism  of  party  duties,  the  strict  observance  of  hierar- 

*^  Achille  Loria  has  drawn  attention  to  the  numerous  resemblances  be- 
tween administrative  hierarchy  and  economic.  The  chief  point  of  resem- 
blance is  found,  according  to  him,  in  the  echeloned  pyramidal  structure  of 
both.  He  writes:  "Just  as  in  the  executive  we  have  a  limited  number  of 
chiefs  commanding  a  larger  number  of  sub-chiefs,  and  these  a  still  larger 
number  of  subordinates,  down  to  the  lowest  employees  who  exhibit  the 
maximum  numerical  density,  in  the  same  way  a  small  handful  of  the  great- 
est recipients  of  income  rules  a  larger  number  of  less  wealthy  recipients  of 
income,  these  rule  a  still  greater  number  of  recipients  of  more  modest  in- 
comes, and  so  on  down  to  the  incomes  of  the  lowest  degree,  which  are  the 
most  numerous"  (Achille  Loria,  La  Sintesi  economica,  Bocca,  Turin,  1909, 


GOVERNMENT  BY  THE  MASSES       35 

chical  rules  becomes  the  first  article.  This  hierarchy  coraes  into 
existence  as  the  outcome  of  technical  conditions,  and  its  constitu- 
tion is  an  essential  postulate  of  the  regular  functioning  of  the 
party  machine.  ^ 

It  is  indisputable  that  the  oligarchical  and  bureaucratic  ten- 
dency of  party  organization  is  a  matter  of  technical  and  practical 
necessity.  It  is  the  inevitable  product  of  the  very  principle  of 
organization.  Not  even  the  most  radical  wing  of  the  variousl 
socialist  parties  raises  any  objection  to  this  retrogressive  evolu- 
tion, the  contention  being  that  democracy  is  only  a  form  of 
organization  and  that  where  it  ceases  to  be  possible  to  harmonize 
democracy  with  organization,  it  is  better  to  abandon  the  former 
than  the  latter.  Organization,  since  it  is  the  only  means  of  at- 
taining the  ends  of  socialism,  is  considered  to  comprise  within 
itself  the  revolutionary  content  of  the  party,  and  this  essential 
content  must  never  be  sacrificed  for  the  sake  of  form.^^ 

In  all  times,  in  all  phases  of  development,  in  all  branches 
of  human  activity,  there  have  been  leaders.^''  It  is  true  that  cer- 
tain socialists,  above  all  the  orthodox  Marxists  of  Germany,  seek 
to  convince  us  that  socialism  knows  nothing  of  ''leaders,"  that 
the  party  has  ''employees"  merely,  being  a  democratic  party, 
and  the  existence  of  leaders  being  incompatible  with  democracy. 
But  a  false  assertion  such  as  this  cannot  override  a  sociological 
law.  Its  only  result  is,  in  fact,  to  strengthen  the  rule  of  the 
leaders,  for  it  serves  to  conceal  from  the  mass  a  danger  which 
really  threatens  democracy. 

For  technical  and  administrative  reasons,  no  less  than  for 

p.  348. — Eng.  trans.,  T7te  'Economic  SyntJiesis,  Allen,  London,  1914,  p.  317). 
Loria  might  have  added  that  the  two  species  of  hierarchy  differ  in  respect 
of  their  apices,  for  one  terminates  in  a  point,  being  dynastic,  while  in  the 
other  the  apex  is  truncated,  the  hierarchy  being  plutocratic.  The  adminis- 
tration of  political  parties  does  not  come  into  the  scope  of  Loria 's  consid- 
erations. As  far  as  the  pyramid  of  the  party  hierarchy  is  concerned,  its 
apex  is  certainly  less  conspicuously  pointed  than  that  of  a  monarchical 
regime,  but  none  the  less  in  the  political  party  the  administration  is  in  the 
hands  of  chiefs  whose  number  is  comparatively  restricted,  so  that  the  apex 
of  this  pyramid  is  more  acute  than  that  of  the  pyramid  which  represents 
the  hierarchy  of  economic  powers  in  a  country  far  advanced  in  capitalist 
development. 

^  Cf.  Hans  Block,  Ueberspannung  der  DemoTcratie,  "Neue  Zeit,"  xxvi,  No. 
8,  pp.  264  et  seq. 

^°Eben  Mumford  (The  Origins  of  Leadership,  University  Press,  Chicago, 
1909,  pp.  1-12)  has  developed  this  thesis  especially  in  relation  to  primitive 
times. 


\ 


\ 


Se  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

tactical  reasons,  a  strong  organization  needs  an  equally  strong 
leadership.  As  long  as  an  organization  is  loosely  constructed  and 
vague  in  its  outlines,  no  professional  leadership  can  arise.  The 
anarchists,  who  have  a  horror  of  all  fixed  organization,  have  no 
regular  leaders.  In  the  early  days  of  German  socialism,  the 
Vertrauensmann  (homme  de  confiance)  continued  to  exercise  his 
ordinary  occupation.  If  he  received  any  pay  for  his  work  for 
the  party,  the  remuneration  was  on  an  extremely  modest  scale, 
and  was  no  more  than  a  temporary  grant.  His  function  could 
never  be  regarded  by  him  as  a  regular  source  of  income.  The 
employee  of  the  organization  was  still  a  simple  workmate,  sharing 
the  mode  of  life  and  the  Mjial  condition  of  his  fellows.^°  To-day 
he  has  been  replaced  for  the  most  part  by  the  professional 
politician,  Berzirksleiter  (U.S.  ward-boss),  etc.  The  more  solid 
the  structure  of  an  organization  becomes  in  the  course  of  the 
evolution  of  the  modern  political  party,  the  more  marked  be- 
comes the  tendency  to  replace  the  emergency  leader  by  the  pro- 
fessional leader.  Every  party  organization  which  has  attained 
to  a  considerable  degree  of  complication  demands  that  there 
should  be  a  certain  number  of  persons  who  devote  all  their 
activities  to  the  work  of  the  party.  The  mass  provides  these  by 
delegation,  and  the  delegates,  regularly  appointed,  become  per- 
manent representatives  of  the  mass  for  the  direction  of  its  affairs. 
For  democracy,  however,  the  first  appearance  of  professional 
leadership  marks  the  beginning  of  the  end,  and  this,  above  all,  on 
account  of  the  logical  impossibility  of  the  ' '  representative ' '  sys- 
tem, whether  in  parliamentary  life  or  in  party  delegation.  Jean 
Jacques  Eousseau  may  be  considered  as  the  founder  of  this 
aspect  of  the  criticism  of  democracy.  He  defines  popular  govern- 
ment as  "I'exercice  de  la  volonte  generale,"  and  draws  from  this 
the  logical  inference,  "elle  ne  pent  jamais  s'aliener,  et  le 
souverain,  qui  n'est  qu'un  etre  collectif,  ne  pent  etre  represente 
que  par  lui-meme. ' '  Consequently,  "  a  1  'instant  qu  'un  peuple  se 
donne  des  representants,  il  n'est  plus  libre,  il  n'est  plus. "^^  A 
mass  which  delegates  its  sovereignty,  that  is  to  say  transfers  its 
sovereignty  to  the  hands  of  a  few  individuals,  abdicates  its  sov- 

'"•  Cf.  Eduard  Bernstein,  Die  Arheiterhewegung,  Eiitten  u.  Loening,  Frank- 
fort-on-the-Main,  1910,  p.  141.  For  the  historical  counterpart  that  is  of- 
fered by  the  evolution  of  officialdom  within  the  state,  cf.  Gustav  Schmoller, 
Vmrisse  u.  TJntersucliungen  sur  Verfassungs-  Vertvaltungs-  u.  Wirtschaftsge- 
scMchte,  Dunker  u.  Humblot,  Leipzig,  1898,  p.  291. 

'^Jean  Jacques  Eousseau,  Le  Contrat  social    (lib.  cit.,  pp.  40  et  seq.). 


GOVERNMENT  BY  THE  MASSES       37 

ereign  functions.^^  For  the  will  of  the  people  is  not  transferable, 
nor  even  the  will  of  the  single  individual.  However  much  in 
practice,  during  the  confused  years  of  the  Terror,  the  doctrine 
was  abandoned  by  the  disciples  of  the  philosopher  of  Geneva,  it 
was  at  this  time  in  theory  universally  admitted  as  incontro- 
vertible. Robespierre  himself  accepted  it,  making  a  subtle  dis- 
tinction between  the  ' '  representant  du  peuple,"  who  has  no 
right  to  exist,  "parce  que  la  volonte  ne  pent  se  representer, "  and 
"le  mandataire  du  peuple,  a  qui  le  peuple  a  donne  la  premiere 
puissance. ' ' 

The  experience  of  attentive  observers  of  the  working  of  the 
first  attempts  at  a  representative  system,  contributed  to  estab- 
lish more  firmly  the  theory  of  the  limits  of  democracy.  Towards 
the  middle  of  the  nineteenth  century  this  theory,  the  outcome  of 
ipirical  psychology,  was  notably  enlarged,  its  claim  to 
Fal  validity  was  sustained,  and  it  was  formulated  as  the 
?Ts  of  definite  rules  and  precepts.  Carlo  Pisacane,  the  theorist, 
^  too  soon  forgotten,  of  the  national  and  social  revolution  in  Italy, 
expounds  in  his  Saggio  sulla  Bivoliizione  how  the  men  in  whose 
hands  supreme  political  power  is  placed  must,  from  their  very 
nature  as  human  beings,  be  subject  to  passions  and  to  the  phy- 
sical and  mental  imperfections  therefrom  resulting.  For  this 
reason  the  tendency  and  the  acts  of  their  rule  are  in  direct  con- 
trast with  the  tendency  and  the  acts  of  the  mass,  * '  for  the  latter 
represent  the  mean  of  all  individual  judgments  and  determina- 
tions, and  are  therefore  free  from  the  operation  of  such  influ- 
ences." To  maintain  of  a  government  that  it  represents  public 
opinion  and  the  will  of  the  nation  is  simply  to  mistake  a  part 
for  the  whole.^^  He  thus  considers  delegation  to  be  an  absurdity. 
Victor  Considerant,  a  contemporary  of  Pisacane  and  the  repre- 
sentative of  a  similar  tendency,  also  followed  in  the  tracks  of 
Rousseau:  "Si  le  peuple  delegue  sa  souverainete,  il  I'abdique. 
Le  peuple  ne  se  gouverne  plus  lui-meme,  on  le  gouverne.  .  .  . 
Peuple,  delegue  done  ta  souverainete !  Cela  fait,  je  te  garantis, 
a  ta  souverainete  le  sort  inverse  de  celui  de  Saturne :  ta  souve- 
rainete sera  devoree  par  la  Delegation,  ta  fille."'*    The  theorists 


^^  Quite  recently  some  of  the  most  notable  of  the  revisionists  have  come 
to  hold  this  opinion.  Cf.,  for  example,  Eugene  Fourniere,  La  Sociocratie. 
Essai  de  Politique  'positive,  Giard  et  Briere,  Paris,  1910,  pp.  98  et  seq. 

^  Carlo  Pisacane,  Saggio  sulla  Bivolusione,  with  a  preface  by  Napoleone 
Colajanni,  Lib.  Treves  di  Pietro  Virano,  Bologna,  1894,  pp.  121-5. 

°*  Victor  Considerant,  op.  cit.,  pp.  13-15. 


/ 


38  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

of  democracy  are  never  tired  of  asserting  that,  when  voting,  the 
people  is  at  one  and  the  same  time  exercising  its  sovereignty  and 
renouncing  it.  The  great  democrat  Ledru-Rollin,  the  father  of 
universal  and  equal  suffrage  in  France,  goes  so  far  as  to  demand 
the  suppression  of  president  and  parliament,  and  the  recognition 
of  the  general  assembly  of  the  people  as  the  sole  legislative  organ. 
If  people,  he  continues,  find  it  possible  in  the  course  of  the  year 
to  waste  so  much  time  upon  public  entertainments,  holidays,  and 
loafing,  they  could  surely  make  a  better  use  of  their  time  by  de- 
voting it  "  a  cimenter  son  independance,  sa  grandeur  et  sa  pros- 
perite. "  ^^ 

Victor  Considerant  fiercely  opposed  the  theory  that  popular 
sovereignty  is  guaranteed  by  the  representative  system.  Even 
if  we  make  the  theoretical  admission  that  in  ahstracto  parlia- 
mentary government  does  indeed  embody  government  by  the 
masses,  in  practical  life  it  is  nothing  but  a  continuous  fraud  on 
the  part  of  the  dominant  class.  Under  representative  govern- 
ment the  difference  between  democracy  and  monarchy,  which 
are  both  rooted  in  the  representative  system,  is  altogether  insig- 
nificant— a  difference  not  in  substance  but  in  form.  The  sover- 
eign people  elects,  in  place  of  a  king,  a  number  of  kinglets.  Not 
possessing  sufficient  freedom  and  independence  to  direct  the  life 
of  the  state,  it  tamely  allows  itself  to  be  despoiled  of  its  funda- 
mental right.  The  one  right  which  the  people  reserves  is  the 
"  climaterique  et  derisoire"  privilege  of  choosing  from  time  to 
time  a  new  set  of  masters.^^  To  this  criticism  of  the  representa- 
tive system  may  be  appended  the  remark  of  Proudhon,  to  the 
effect  that  the  representatives  of  the  people  have  no  sooner  been 
raised  to  power  than  they  set  to  work  to  consolidate  and  rein- 
force their  influence.  They  continue  unceasingly  to  surround 
their  positions  by  new  lines  of  defence,  until  they  have  succeeded 
in  emancipating  themselves  completely  from  popular  control. 
All  power  thus  proceeds  in  a  natural  cycle:  issuing  from  the 
people,  it  ends  by  raising  itself  above  the  people.^'^  In  the  forties 
of  the  last  century  these  ideas  were  widely  diffused  and  their 
truth  was  almost  universally  admitted,  and  in  France  more  par- 
ticularly by  students  of  social  science  and  by  democratic  states- 


S5 


A.  A.  Ledru-Rollin,  Plus  de  President,  plus  de  Eepresentants,  ed.  de 
"La  Voix  du  Proscrit,"  Paris,  1851,  2nd  ed.,  p.  7. 

^°  Victor  Considerant,  op.  cit.,  pp.  11-12. 

^^Cf.  P.  J.  Proudhon,  Les  Confessions  d'un  Picvolutionnaire.  Pour  servir 
a  la  Eevolution  de  Fevrier,  Verboecklioven,  Paris,  1868,  new  ed.,  p.  286. 


GOVERNMENT  BY  THE  MASSES       39 

men.     Even  the  clericals  mingled  their  voices  with  those  whichl 
condemned    the    representative    system.      Louis    Veuillot,    the] 
Catholic,  said:     "Quand  j'ai  vote,  mon  egalite  tombe  dans  lai 
boite  avee  mon  bulletin;  ils  disparaissent  ensemble. "^^     To-day! 
this  theory  is  the  central  feature  of  the  political  criticism  of  the! 
various  schools  of  anarchists,  who  often  expound  it  eloquentlyj 
and  acutely .^^    Finally  Marx  and  his  followers,  who  in  theory] 
regard  parliamentary  action  as  but  one  weapon  among  many,] 
but  who  in  practice  employ  this  weapon  alone,  do  not  fail  to  rec- 
ognize incidentally  the  perils  of  the  representative  system,  evenj 
when  based  upon  universal  suffrage.     But  the  Marxists  hastei 
to  add  that  the  socialist  party  is  quite  free  from  these  dangers.*" 
Popular  sovereignty  has  recently  been  subjected  to  a  profound 
criticism  by  a  group  of  Italian  writers  conservative  in  their 
tendency.     Gaetano  Mosca  speaks  of  "the  falsity  of  the  parlia- 
mentary legend."    He  says  that  the  idea  of  popular  represen- 
tation as  a  free  and  spontaneous  transference  of  the  sovereignty 
of  the  electors  (collectivity)  to  a  certain  number  of  elected  per- 
sons (minority)  is  based  upon  the  absurd  premise  that  the  mi- 
nority can  be  bound  to  the  collective  will  by  unbreakable  bonds.*'^ 
In  actual  fact,  directly  the  election  is  finished,  the  power  of  the 
mass  of  electors  over  the  delegate  comes  to  an  end.    The  deputy 
regards  himself  as  authorized  arbiter  of  the  situation,  and  really 
is  such.    If  among  the  electors  any  are  to  be  found  who  possess 
some  influence  over  the  representative  of  the  people,  their  num- 
ber is  very  small ;  they  are  the  big  guns  of  the  constituency  or  of 
the  local  branch  of  the  party.    In  other  words,  they  are  persons 
who,  whilst  belonging  by  social  position  to  the  class  of  the  ruled, 
have  in  fact  come  to  form  part  of  the  ruling  oligarchy.*^ 


'^  Louis  Veuillot,  Qa  et  Id,  Caume  Freres  et  Duprey,  Paris,  1860,  2nd  ed., 
vol.  i,  p.  368. 

^'Cf.,  for  example,  Enrico  Malatesta  in  two  pamphlets:  L'anarcUa  (Casa 
ed.  Pensiero,  Eome,  6th  ed.,  1907),  and  La  PoUtica  parlamentare  del  Partito 
socialista  (ediz.  dell'  ''AUarme,"  Turin,  1903).  Cf.  also  Ferdinand  Do- 
mela  Nieuwenhuis,  Eet  Parlamentarisme  in  sijn  Wesen  en  Toepassing,  W. 
Sligting,  Amsterdam,  1906,  pp.  149  et  seq. 

*"  Cf .  Karl  Kautsky,  Eosa  Luxemburg,  and  others.  In  the  works  of  Karl 
Marx  we  find  traces  here  and  there  of  a  theoretical  mistrust  of  the  repre- 
sentative system;  see  especially  this  writer's  BevoluUon  u.  Eontre-Bevolu- 
tion  in  DexitscMand,  Dietz,  Stuttgart,  1S96,  p.  107. 

*^Cf.  Gaetano  Mosca,  Questioni  pratiche  di  Diritto  costituzionale,  Fra- 
telli  Bocca,  Turin,  1898,  pp.  81  et  seq.  Also  Sulla  Teorica  dei  Governi  e 
sul  Governo  parlamentare,  Loescher,  Eome,  1884,  pp.  120  et  seq. 

""An  electional  system  simply  places  power  in  the  hands  of  the  most 


ao  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

This  criticism  of  the  representative  system  is  applicable  above 
all  in  our  own  days,  in  which  political  life  continually  assumes 
more  complex  forms.  As  this  complexity  increases,  it  becomes 
more  and  more  absurd  to  attempt  to  "represent"  a  heterogene- 
ous mass  in  all  the  innumerable  problems  which  arise  out  of  the 
increasing  differentiation  of  our  political  and  economic  life.  To 
represent,  in  this  sense,  comes  to  mean  that  the  purely  individual 
desire  masquerades  and  is  accepted  as  the  will  of  the  mass.*^ 
In  certain  isolated  cases,  where  the  questions  involved  are  ex- 
tremely simple,  and  where  the  delegated  authority  is  of  brief 
duration,  representation  is  possible.  But  permanent  representa- 
tion will  always  be  tantamount  to  the  exercise  of  dominion  by 
the  representatives  over  the  represented. 

skilful  electioneers"  (H.  G.  Wells,  Anticipations  of  the  Beaction  of  Me- 
chanical and  Scientific  Progress  upon  Human  Life  and  Thought,  Chapman 
and  Hall,  London,  1904,  p.  58).  Of  course,  this  applies  only  to  countries 
■with  a  republican-democratic  constitution. 

"  Fouillee  writes  aptly  in  this  connection :  *  *  Si  j  'use  personnellement  de 
mon  droit  civil  d'aller  et  de  venir  pour  me  rendre  de  Marseille  a  Paris, 
je  ne  vous  empeche  pas,  vous,  d'aller  de  Paris  a  Marseille;  I'exercice  de  ma 
liberte  civile  ne  vous  enleve  rien  de  la  votre.  Mais,  quand  j  'envoie  a  la 
Chambre  un  depute  qui  appliquera  a  vos  depens  des  mesures  centre  les- 
quelles  vous  avez  toujours  protest!,  cette  fa^on  de  me  gouverner  implique 
une  faQon  de  vous  gouverner  qui  vous  est  penible  et  qui  pent  etre  in  juste. 
Le  droit  civil  est  une  liberte  pour  soi  et  sur  soi;  le  droit  politique  est  un 
droit  sur  autrui  et  sur  le  tout  en  meme  temps  que  sur  moi-meme"  (Alfred 
Fouillee,  Erreurs  sociologiques  et  morales  de  la  Sociologie,  ' '  Kevue  des  deax 
Mondes,"  liv,  p.  330). 


CHAPTER   III 

THE  MODERN  DEMOCRATIC  PARTY  AS  A  FIGHTING 
PARTY,  DOMINATED  BY  MILITARIST  IDEAS  AND 
METHODS 

Louis  XIV  understood  the  art  of  government  as  have  few  princes 
either  before  or  since,  and  this  was  the  case  above  all  in  the  first 
half  of  his  reign,  when  his  spirit  was  still  young  and  fresh.  In 
his  memoirs  of  the  year  1666,  he  lays  down  for  every  branch 
of  the  administration,  and  more  especially  for  the  conduct  of 
military  affairs,  the  following  essential  rules:  ''que  les  resolu- 
tions doivent  etre  promptes,  la  discipline  exact,  les  commande- 
ments  absolus,  I'obeissance  ponctuelle. "  ^  The  essentials  thus 
enumerated  by  the  Boi  Soleil  (promptness  of  decision,  unity  of 
command,  and  strictness  of  discipline)  are  equally  applicable, 
mutaiis  mutandis,  to  the  various  aggregates  of  modern  political 
life,  for  these  are  in  a  perpetual  condition  of  latent  warfare. 

The  modern  party  is  a  fighting  organization  in  the  political 
sense  of  the  term,  and  must  as  such  conform  to  the  laws  of  tac- 
tics. Now  the  first  article  of  these  laws  is  facility  of  mobiliza- 
tion. Ferdinand  Lassalle,  the  founder  of  a  revolutionary  labour 
party,  recognized  this  long  ago,  contending  that  the  dictatorship 
which  existed  in  fact  in  the  society  over  which  he  presided  was 
as  thoroughly  justified  in  theory  as  it  was  indispensable  in  prac- 
tice. The  rank  and  file,  he  said,  must  follow  their  chief  blindly, 
and  the  whole  organization  must  be  like  a  hammer  in  the  hands 
of  its  president. 

This  view  of  the  matter  was  in  correspondence  with  political 
necessity,  especially  in  Lassalle 's  day,  when  the  labour  move- 
ment was  in  its  infancy,  and  when  it  was  only  by  a  rigorous 
discipline  that  this  movement  could  hope  to  obtain  respect  and 
consideration  from  the  bourgeois  parties.  Centralization  guar- 
anteed, and  always  guarantees,  the  rapid  formation  of  resolu- 
tions.    An  extensive  organization  is  per  se  a  heavy  piece  of 

^Memoires  de  Louis  XIV  pour  V instruction  du  Dauphin,  annotees  par 
Charles  Deyss,  Paris,  1860,  vol.  ii,  p.  123. 

41 


42  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

mechanism,  and  one  difficult  to  put  in  operation.  When  we  have 
to  do  with  a  mass  distributed  over  a  considerable  area,  to  con- 
sult the  rank  and  file  upon  every  question  would  involve  an 
enormous  loss  of  time,  and  the  opinion  thus  obtained  would 
moreover  be  summary  and  vague.  But  the  problems  of  the  hour 
need  a  speedy  decision,  and  this  is  why  democracy  can  no  longer 
function  in  its  primitive  and  genuine  form,  unless  the  policy 
pursued  is  to  be  temporizing,  involving  the  loss  of  the  most  fa- 
vourable opportunities  for  action.  Under  such  guidance,  the 
party  becomes  incapable  of  acting  in  alliance  with  others,  and 
loses  its  political  elasticity.  A  fighting  party  needs  a  hierar-  . 
chical  structure.  In  the  absence  of  such  a  structure,  the  party 
will  be  comparable  to  a  savage  and  shapeless  negro  army,  which 
is  unable  to  withstand  a  single  well-disciplined  and  well-drilled 
battalion  of  European  soldiers. 

In  the  daily  struggle,  nothing  but  a  certain  degree  of  cjEsar- 
ism  will  ensure  the  rapid  transmission  and  the  precise  execution 
of  orders.  The  Dutch  socialist.  Van  Kol,  frankly  declares  that 
true  democracy  cannot  be  installed  until  the  fight  is  over.  Mean- 
while, even  a  socialist  leadership  must  possess  authority,  and 
sufficient  force  to  maintain  itself  in  power.  A  provisional  des- 
potism is,  he  contends,  essential,  and  liberty  itself  must  yield 
to  the  need  for  prompt  action.  Thus  the  submission  of  the 
masses  to  the  will  of  a  few  individuals  comes  to  be  considered 
one  of  the  highest  of  democratic  virtues.  "A  ceux  que  sont 
appeles  a  nous  conduire,  nous  promettons  fidelite  et  soumission 
et  nous  leur  disons :  Hommes  ennoblis  par  le  choix  du  peuple, 
montrez  nous  le  chemin,  nous  vous  suivrons. "  ^  It  is  such  ut- 
terances as  this  which  reveal  to  us  the  true  nature  of  the  mod- 
ern party.  In  a  party,  and  above  all  in  a  fighting  political  party, 
democracy  is  not  for  home  consumption,  but  is  rather  an  article 
made  for  export.  Every  political  organization  has  need  of  "a 
light  equipment  which  will  not  hamper  its  movements."  De- 
mocracy is  utterly  incompatible  with  strategic  promptness,  and 
the  forces  of  democracy  do  not  lend  themselves  to  the  rapid 
opening  of  a  campaign.  This  is  why  political  parties,  even  when 
democratic,  exhibit  so  much  hostility  to  the  referendum  and  to 
all  other  measures  for  the  safeguard  of  real  democracy ;  and  this 
is  why  in  their  constitution  these  parties  exhibit,  if  not  uncondi- 


^Rienzi  [vau  Kol],  Socialisme  et  Liberie,  Giard  et  Briere,  Paris,  1898, 
pp.  243-53. 


MILITARIST  IDEAS  AND  METHODS      43 

tional  cfesarism,  at  least  extremely  strong  centralizing  and  oli- 
garchical tendencies.  Lagardelle  puts  the  finishing  touches  to 
the  picture  in  the  following  words:  **Et  ils  ont  reproduit  a 
1 'usage  des  proletaires  les  moyens  de  domination  des  capitalistes ; 
ils  ont  constitue  un  gouvernement  ouvrier  aussi  dur  que  le  gou- 
vernement  bourgeois,  une  bureaucratic  ouvriere  aussi  lourde  que 
la  bureaucratic  bourgeoise,  un  pouvoir  central  qui  dit  aux 
ouvriers  ce  qu'ils  peuvent  et  ce  qu'ils  ne  pcuvent  pas  faire,  qui 
brisent  dans  les  syndicats  et  chez  les  syndiques  toute  indepen- 
dance  et  toute  initiative  et  qui  doit  parfois  inspirer  a  ses  vic- 
times  le  regret  des  modes  capitalistes  de  I'autorite."^ 

The  close  resemblance  between  a  fighting  democratic  party 
and  a  military  organization  is  reflected  in  socialist  terminology, 
which  is  largely  borrowed,  and  especially  in  Germany,  from  mili- 
tary science.  There  is  hardly  one  expression  of  military  tactics 
and  strategy,  hardly  even  a  phrase  of  barrack  slang,  which  does 
not  recur  again  and  again  in  the  leading  articles  of  the  socialist 
press.*  In  the  daily  practice  of  the  socialist  struggle  it  is  true 
that  preference  is  almost  invariably  given  to  the  temporizing 
tactics  of  Fabius  Cunctator,  but  this  depends  upon  special  cir- 
cumstances, which  will  be  subsequently  discussed  (Part  VI,  chap. 

'Hubert  Lagardelle,  Le  Parti  Socialiste  et  la  Confederation  du  Travail, 
Discussion  avec  J,  Guesde,  Eiviere,  Paris,  1907,  p.  24. 

*As  typical  may  be  instanced  the  expressions  used  by  Kautsky  in  his 
article  Was  nun?,  "Neue  Zeit, "  xxviii.  No.  29,  p.  68.  "Like  all  other 
strategy,  the  Fabian  strategy  is  dependent  upon  certain  conditions  which 
alone  make  it  possible  and  appropriate.  It  would  be  foolish  to  wish  to  apply 
it  in  all  circumstances,  and  the  fact  that  we  have  for  many  years  used  it 
with  brilliant  success  is  no  reason  why  we  should  continue  to  use  it  for  all 
time.  When  circumstances  change,  a  new  strategical  method  may  be  neces- 
sary. In  war,  the  Fabian  strategy  becomes  impossible  or  undesirable  when 
the  enemy  is  threatening  to  cut  us  off  from  our  base  or  even  to  occupy  that 
base.  Direct  attack  then  becomes  a  matter  of  self-preservation.  Similarly 
the  Fabian  strategy  must  be  abandoned  when  it  demoralizes  and  discourages 
our  own  troops,  when  it  threatens  to  induce  cowardice  and  desertion,  and 
when  only  a  policy  of  vigorous  attack  can  hold  the  army  together.  It  also 
becomes  impossible  to  avoid  assuming  the  offensive  when  we  are  caught  in 
a  blind  alley,  where  our  only  choice  is  between  giving  battle  and  a  shameful 
capitulation.  Finally,  the  change  to  an  offensive  strategy  is  indicated  when 
the  enemy  himself  is  in  a  tight  corner,  so  that  the  situation  is  favourable  to 
our  side,  and  by  a  rapid  and  energetic  use  of  our  opportunity  we  can  deliver 
a  vigorous  and  perhaps  fatal  blow.  The  transference  of  these  considerations 
from  the  military  to  the  political  field  does  not  require  lengthy  explana- 
tions." It  is  perhaps  worthy  of  note  that  the  French  socialists  of  anti- 
militarist  tendency  are  in  the  habit  of  referring  to  their  leader  Gustave 
>perve  as  "notre  General." 


44  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

i).    The  intimate  association  between  party  life  and  military  life 

tis  manifested  also  by  the  passionate  interest  which  some  of  the 
most  distinguished  leaders  of  German  socialism  take  in  military 
affairs.  During  his  residence  in  England,  the  German  merchant 
Frederick  Engels,  who  had  once  served  in  the  Guards  as  a 
volunteer,  devoted  his  leisure  to  the  simultaneous  exposition  of 
socialist  and  of  militarist  theory.^  To  Bebel,  the  son  of  a  Prus- 
sian non-commissioned  officer,  the  world  is  indebted  for  a  number 
of  ideas  of  reform  in  matters  of  military  technique  which  have 
nothing  in  common  with  the  theoretical  socialist  anti-militarism.'' 
Bebel  and  Engels,  and  especially  the  latter,  may  even  be  con- 
sidered as  essentially  military  writers.  This  tendency  on  the 
part  of  socialist  leaders  is  not  the  outcome  of  mere  chance,  but 
depends  upon  an  instinct  of  elective  affinity. 

'See  in  particular  Engels'  works:  Po  und  BJiein  (1859) ;  Savoy  en,  Nizza 
und  der  Bhein  (1860);  Die  preussische  Militdrfrage  und  die  deutsche  Ar- 
beiterpartei  (1865)  ;  Der  deutsche  Bauernkrieg  (1875,  Vorwarts-Verlag,  Ber- 
lin, 1909,  3rd  ed.  edited  by  Mehring)  ;  Kann  Europa  dbriisten?  (Nuremberg, 
1893). 

*  Cf .,  for  example,  the  pamphlet  Niclit  steJiendes  Beer,  sondern  VolTcswelir, 
Dietz,  Stuttgart,  1908,  p.  80 ;  also  a  large  number  of  speeches  in  the  Eeichs- 
tag  on  the  military  estimates,  in  which  he  is  never  tired  of  discussing  the 
minutiae  of  army  reform,  and  in  which  in  especial  he  advocates  changes 
in  military  equipment  to  render  the  army  more  efficient. 


B.  PSYCHOLOGICAL  CAUSES  OF  LEADERSHIP    ■ 

CHAPTER   IV 

THE  ESTABLISHMENT  OF  A  CUSTOMARY  RIGHT  TO 
THE  OFFICE  OF  DELEGATE 

One  who  holds  the  office  of  delegate  acquires  a  moral  right  to 
that  office,  and  delegates  remain  in  office  unless  removed  by  ex- 
traordinary circumstances  or  in  obedience  to  rules  observed  with 
exceptional  strictness.  An  election  made  for  a  definite  purpose 
becomes  a  life  incumbency.  Custom  becomes  a  right.  One  who 
has  for  a  certain  time  held  the  office  of  delegate  ends  by  re- 
garding that  office  as  his  own  property.  If  refused  reinstate- 
ment, he  threatens  reprisals  (the  threat  of  resignation  being  the 
least  serious  among  these)  which  will  tend  to  sow  confusion 
among  his  comrades,  and  this  confusion  will  continue  until  he  is 
victorious. 

Resignation  of  office,  in  so  far  as  it  is  not  a  mere  expression, 
of  discouragement  or  protest  (such  as  disinclination  to  accept  af 
candidature  in  an  unpromising  constituency),  is  in  most  cases 
a  means  for  the  retention  and  fortification  of  leadership.  Even 
in  political  organizations  greater  than  party,  the  leaders  often 
employ  this  stratagem,  thus  disarming  their  adversaries  by  a 
deference  which  does  not  lack  a  specious  democratic  colour.  The 
opponent  is  forced  to  exhibit  in  return  an  even  greater  defer- 
ence, and  this  above  all  when  the  leader  who  makes  use  of  the 
method  is  really  indispensable  or  is  considered  indispensable  by 
the  mass.  The  recent  history  of  Germany  affords  numerous 
examples  showing  the  infallibility  of  this  machiavellian  device 
for  the  maintenance  of  leadership.  During  the  troubled  period 
of  transition  from  absolute  to  constitutional  monarchy,  during 
the  ministry  of  Ludolf  Camphausen,  King  Frederick  William 
IV  of  Prussia  threatened  to  abdicate  whenever  liberal  ideas  were 
tending  in  Prussian  politics  to  gain  the  upper  hand  over  the 
romanticist  conservatism  which  was  dear  to  his  heart.  By  this 
threat  the  liberals  were  placed  in  a  dilemma.    Either  they  must 

45 


46  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

accept  the  king's  abdication,  which  would  involve  the  accession 
to  the  throne  of  Prince  William  of  Prussia,  a  man  of  ultra-reac- 
tionary tendencies,  whose  reign  was  likely  to  be  initiated  by  an 
uprising  among  the  lower  classes;  or  else  they  must  abandon 
their  liberal  schemes,  and  maintain  in  power  the  king  now  be- 
come indispensable.  Thus  Frederick  "William  always  succeeded 
in  getting  his  own  way  and  in  defeating  the  schemes  of  his 
political  opponents.^  Thirty-five  years  later  Prince  Bismarck, 
establishing  his  strength  with  the  weapon  of  his  indispensability, 
consolidated  his  omnipotence  over  the  German  empire  which  he 
had  recently  created,  by  again  and  again  handing  in  his  resigna- 
tion to  the  Emperor  William  I.  His  aim  was  to  reduce  the  old 
monarch  to  obedience,  whenever  the  latter  showed  any  signs  of 
exercising  an  independent  will,  by  suggesting  the  chaos  in  in- 
ternal and  external  policy  which  would  necessarily  result  from 
the  retirement  of  the  "founder  of  the  empire,"  since  the  aged 
emperor  was  not  competent  to  undertake  the  personal  direction 
of  affairs.^  The  present  president  of  the  Brazilian  republic, 
Hermes  da  Fonseca,  owes  his  position  chiefly  to  a  timely  threat  of 
resignation.  Having  been  appointed  Minister  of  War  in  1907, 
Fonseca  undertook  the  reorganization  of  the  Brazilian  army. 
He  brought  forward  a  bill  for  the  introduction  of  universal 
compulsory  military  service,  which  was  fiercely  resisted  in  both 
houses  of  parliament.  Through  his  energetic  personal  advocacy, 
sustained  by  a  threat  of  resignation,  the  measure  was  ultimately 
carried,  and  secured  for  its  promoter  such  renown,  that  not  only 
did  he  remain  in  office,  but  in  the  year  1910  was  elected  Presi- 
dent of  the  Republic  by  102,000  votes  against  52,000. 

It  is  the  same  in  all  political  parties.  Whenever  an  obstacle 
is  encountered,  the  leaders  are  apt  to  offer  to  resign,  professing 
that  they  are  weary  of  office,  but  really  aiming  to  show  to  the 
dissentients  the  indispensability  of  their  own  leadership.  In 
1864,  when  Vahlteich  proposed  a  change  in  the  rules  of  the  Gen- 
eral Association  of  German  Workers,  Lassalle,  the  president,  was 
very  angry,  and,  conscious  of  his  own  value  to  the  movement, 
propounded  the  following  alternative:     Either  you  protect  me 

^  Konig  Friedrich  Wilhelm  IV.  Brief weclisel  mit  Ludolf  Camphausen, 
edited  and  annotated  by  Erich  Brandenburg,  Gebr.  Paetel,  Berlin,  1906,  pp. 
112  et  seq. 

"  DenlcwiirdigTceiten  des  Fiirsten  CModwig  zu  Hohenlohe-ScJiillingsfurst, 
ed.  by  Friedrich  Curtius,  Deutsche  Verlagsanstalt,  Stuttgart  and  Leipzig, 
1907,  vol.  ii. 


COERCION  BY  LEADERS  47 

from  the  recurrence  of  such  friction  as  this,  or  I  throw  up 
my  office.  The  immediate  result  was  the  expulsion  of  the  impor- 
tunate critic.^  In  Holland  to-day,  Troelstra,  the  Dutch  Lassalle, 
likewise  succeeds  in  disarming  his  opponents  within  the  party 
by  pathetically  threatening  to  retire  into  private  life,  saying  that 
if  they  go  on  subjecting  his  actions  to  an  inopportune  criticism, 
his  injured  idealism  will  force  him  to  withdraw  from  the  daily 
struggles  of  party  life.*  The  same  thing  has  occurred  more  than 
once  in  the  history  of  the  Italian  socialist  party.  It  often  hap- 
pens that  the  socialist  members  of  parliament  find  themselves 
in  disagreement  with  the  majority  of  the  party  upon  some  ques- 
tion of  importance,  such  as  that  of  the  opportuneness  of  a  gen- 
eral strike ;  or  in  the  party  congresses  they  may  wish  to  record 
their  votes  in  opposition  to  the  views  of  their  respective  branches. 
It  is  easy  for  them  to  get  their  own  way  and  to  silence  their 
opponents  by  threatening  to  resign.  If  necessary,  they  go  still 
further,  and  actually  resign  their  seats,  appealing  to  the  electors 
as  the  only  authority  competent  to  decide  the  question  in  dispute. 
In  such  cases  they  are  nearly  always  re-elected,  and  thus  attain 
to  an  incontestable  position  of  power.  At  the  socialist  congress 
held  at  Bologna  in  1904,  some  of  the  deputies  voted  in  favour  of 
the  reformist  resolution,  in  opposition  to  the  wishes  of  the  ma- 
jority of  the  comrades  whose  views  they  were  supposed  to  repre- 
sent. When  called  to  account,  they  offered  to  resign  their  seats, 
and  the  party  electors,  wishing  to  avoid  the  expense  and  trouble 
of  a  new  election,  and  afraid  of  the  loss  of  party  seats,  hastened 
to  condone  the  deputies'  action.  In  May,  1906,  twenty-four  out 
of  the  twenty-seven  members  of  the  socialist  group  in  the  Cham- 
ber resigned  their  seats,  in  consequence  of  the  difference  of  views 
between  themselves  and  the  rank  and  file  on  the  subject  of  the 
general  strike,  which  the  deputies  had  repudiated.  All  but 
three  were  re-elected. 

Such  actions  have  a  fine  democratic  air,  and  yet  hardly  serve , 
to  conceal  the  dictatorial  spirit  of  those  who  perform  them.    The  | 
leader  who  asks  for  a  vote  of  confidence  is  in  appearance  submit- 
ting to  the  judgment  of  his  followers,  but  in  reality  he  throws 
into  the  scale  the  entire  weight  of  his  own  indispensability,  real 


^Julius  Vahlteich,  Ferdinand  Lassalle  und  die  Anfdnge  der  deutschen 
'Arbeiterbewegung.    Birk,  Munich,  1904,  p.  74. 

*  This  occurred  at  the  party  congress  at  Utrecht  in  1906.  Cf.  the  account 
given  in  the  "Nieuwe  Arnhemsche  Courant,"  vol.  vii,  No.  4639,  and  P.  J. 
Troelstra,  Inzaken  Partijleiding,  Wakker,  Eotterdam,  1906,  pp.  103-4. 


48  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

or  supposed,  and  thus  commonly  forces  submission  to  his  will.® 
The  leaders  are  extremely  careful  never  to  admit  that  the  true 
aim  of  their  threat  to  resign  is  the  reinforcement  of  their  power 
over  the  rank  and  file.^  They  declare,  on  the  contrary,  that  their 
conduct  is  determined  by  the  purest  democratic  spirit,  that  it  is 
a  striking  proof  of  their  fineness  of  feeling,  of  their  sense  of 
personal  dignity,  and  of  their  deference  for  the  mass.  Yet  if 
we  really  look  into  the  matter  we  cannot  fail  to  see  that,  whether 
they  desire  it  or  not,  their  action  is  an  oligarchical  demonstration, 
the  manifestation  of  a  tendency  to  enfranchise  themselves  from 
the  control  of  the  rank  and  file.  Such  resignations,  even  if  not 
dictated  by  a  self-seeking  policy,  but  offered  solely  in  order  to 
prevent  differences  of  opinion  between  the  leaders  and  the  mass, 
and  in  order  to  maintain  the  necessary  harmony  of  views,  always 
have  as  their  practical  outcome  the  subjection  of  the  mass  to  the 
authority  of  the  leader. 

^1"  ■■  ■  —I  .  ■  I  ■■■■■■        I  ■   ,  I.  rf 

"*  Schweitzer  knew  this  very  well  when  he  declared  to  the  general  assembly 
of  the  Allgemeiner  Deutscher  Arbeiterverein  that  he  would  resign  his  posi- 
tion if  he  were  not  allowed  to  call  a  congress  of  the  association  in  order 
to  discuss  the  foundation  of  trade-unions.  His  biographer  writes  very 
justly:  "Schweitzer  must  have  felt  his  position  to  be  extremely  strong. 
Otherwise  he  would  never  have  ventured  to  deliver  such  an  ultimatum,  for 
his  defeat  on  a  vote  would  have  made  it  almost  impossible  for  him  to  retain 
his  office,  to  which  he  was  greatly  attached.  He  had  not,  however,  overesti- 
mated his  influence,  and  when  he  was  reproached  with  exercising  an  im- 
proper pressure  on  the  delegates,  this  was  in  itself  an  indirect  recognition 
of  his  indispensability.  This  time,  in  fact,  he  got  his  own  way"  (Gustav 
Mayer,  J.  B.  von  Schweitzer  und  die  Sozialdemocratie,  Fischer,  Jena,  1909, 
p.  223). 

®In  the  tactical  struggles  in  the  Italian  party  during  the  year  1904,  the 
Florentine  reformist  socialist.  Professor  Gaetano  Pieraccini,  declared  that 
he  would  not  withdraw  the  resignation  of  his  position  as  a  party-leader  un- 
less the  adherents  of  the  revolutionary  tendency  were  expelled  from  the 
party  ("Avanguardia  Socialista,"  anno  ii,  No.  76). 


CHAPTER  V 

THE  NEED  FOR  LEADERSHIP  FELT  BY  THE  MASS 

A  DISTINGUISHED  French  dramatist  who  devoted  his  leisure  to 
writing  prose  studies  of  serious  social  questions,  Alexandre  Du- 
mas fils,  once  observed  that  every  human  advance  was,  at  its 
outset,  opposed  by  ninety-nine  per  cent  of  humanity.  "Mais 
c'est  sans  aueune  importance  puisque  ce  centieme  auquel  nous 
appartenons,  depuis  le  commencement  du  monde  a  fait  faire  aux 
quatre-vingt-dix-neuf  autres  toutes  les  reformes  dont  ils  se  trou- 
vent  tres  bien  aujourd'hui  tout  en  protestant  contre  celles  qui 
restent  a  faire. ' '  In  another  passage  he  adds :  *  *  Les  majorites 
ne  sont  que  la  preuve  de  ce  qui  est,"  whereas  "les  minorites 
sont  souvent  le  germe  de  ce  qui  sera. ' '  ^ 

There  is  no  exaggeration  in  the  assertion  that  among  the  citi- 
zens who  enjoy  political  rights  the  number  of  those  who  have 
a  lively  interest  in  public  affairs  is  insignificant.  In  the  majority 
of  human  beings  the  sense  of  an  intimate  relationship  between 
the  good  of  the  individual  and  the  good  of  the  collectivity  is  but 
little  developed.  Most  people  are  altogether  devoid  of  under- 
standing of  the  actions  and  reactions  between  that  organism  we 
call  the  state  and  their  private  interests,  their  prosperity,  and 
their  life.  As  de  Tocqueville  expresses  it,  they  regard  it  as  far 
more  important  to  consider  "s'il  faut  faire  passer  un  chemin 
au  bout  de  leur  domaine"^  than  to  interest  themselves  in  the 
general  work  of  public  administration.  The  majority  is  content, 
with  Stirner,  to  call  out  to  the  state,  "Get  away  from  between 
me  and  the  sun!"  Stirner  makes  fun  of  all  those  who,  in  ac- 
cordance with  the  views  of  Kant,  preach  it  to  humanity  as  a 
' '  sacred  duty ' '  to  take  an  interest  in  public  affairs.  * '  Let  those 
persons  who  have  a  personal  interest  in  political  changes  con- 
cern themselves  with  these.  Neither  now  nor  at  any  future  time 
will  'sacred  duty'  lead  people  to  trouble  themselves  about  the 

^^^^'  II  ■  ■  II..  ■-  I        I  ,,.— -i..^.....  ■■■■■■■ 

*  Alexandre  Dumas  fils,  Les  Femmes  qui  tuent  et  les  Femmes  qui  votent, 
Caiman  Levy,  Paris,  1880,  pp.  54  and  214. 
'  Alexis  de  Tocqueville,  op.  cit.,  vol.  i,  p.  167. 


50  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

state,  Just  as  little  as  it  is  by  'sacred  duty'  that  tliey  become  men 
of  science,  artists,  etc.  Egoism  alone  can  spur  people  to  an  in- 
terest in  public  affairs,  and  will  spur  them — ^when  matters  grow 
a  good  deal  worse.  "^ 
f  In  the  life  of  modern  democratic  parties  we  may  observe  signs 
of  similar  indifference.  It  is  only  a  minority  which  participates 
in  party  decisions,  and  sometimes  that  minority  is  ludicrously 
small.  The  most  important  resolutions  taken  by  the  most  demo- 
cratic of  all  parties,  the  socialist  party,  always  emanate  from  a 
handful  of  the  members.  It  is  true  that  the  renouncement  of 
the  exercise  of  democratic  rights  is  voluntary;  except  in  those 
cases,  which  are  common  enough,  where  the  active  participa- 
tion of  the  organized  mass  in  party  life  is  prevented  by  geo- 
graphical or  topographical  conditions.  Speaking  generally,  it  is 
the  urban  part  of  the  organization  which  decides  everything; 
the  duties  of  the  members  living  in  country  districts  and  in  re- 
mote provincial  towns  are  greatly  restricted ;  they  are  expected 
to  pay  their  subscriptions  and  to  vote  during  elections  in  favour 
of  the  candidates  selected  by  the  organization  of  the  great  town. 
There  is  here  at  work  the  influence  of  tactical  considerations  as 
well  as  that  of  local  conditions.  The  preponderance  of  the  towns- 
men over  the  scattered  country  members  corresponds  to  the  neces- 
sity of  promptness  in  decision  and  speed  in  action  to  which  allu- 
sion was  made  in  an  earlier  chapter. 

Within  the  large  towns  there  goes  on  a  process  of  spontaneous 
selection,  in  virtue  of  which  there  is  separated  from  the  organ- 
ized mass  a  certain  number  of  members  who  participate  more 
diligently  than  the  others  in  the  work  of  the  organization.  This 
inner  group  is  composed,  like  that  of  the  pious  frequenters  of 
the  churches,  of  two  very  distinct  categories:  the  category  of 
those  who  are  animated  by  a  fine  sense  of  duty,  and  the  cate- 
gory of  those  whose  attendance  is  merely  a  matter  of  habit. 
In  all  countries  the  number  of  this  inner  circle  is  comparatively 
small.*     The  majority  of  the  members  are  as  indifferent  to  the 

'Max  Stirner  (Kaspar  Schmidt),  Ber  Eimige  und  sein  Eigentum,  Eeclam, 
Leipzig,  1892,  p.  272, 

*  Here  is  a  typical  example.  The  deputy  Leonida  Bissolati,  a  leading 
Italian  socialist  and  one  of  the  founders  of  the  party,  was  on  November  5, 
1905  (with  other  distinguished  members),  expelled  from  the  party.  The 
expulsion  was  effected  at  a  meeting  of  the  Eoman  branch.  The  full  mem- 
bership of  this  branch  was  seven  hundred,  but  only  one  hundred  were  pres- 
ent at  the  meeting;  of  these  fifty-five  voted  for  the  exclusion  and  forty-five 
against  (''Azione  Socialista,"  i,  No.  28).    In  May  1910,  the  same  branch, 


iKEED  FOR  LEADERSHIP  51 

organization  as  tlie  majority  of  the  electors  are  to  parliament.* 
Even  in  countries  like  France,  where  collective  political  educa- 
tion is  of  older  date,  the  majority  renounces  all  active  partici- 
pation in  tactical  and  administrative  questions,  leaving  these  to 
the  little  gi'oup  which  makes  a  practice  of  attending  meetings. 
The  great  struggles  which  go  on  among  the  leaders  on  behalf 
of  one  tactical  method  or  another,  struggles  in  fact  for  supre- 
macy in  the  party,  but  carried  out  in  the  name  of  Llarxism, 
reformism,  or  syndicalism,  are  not  merely  beyond  the  under- 
standing of  the  rank  and  file,  but  leave  them  altogether  cold. 
In  almost  all  countries  it  is  easy  to  observe  that  meetings  held^ 
to  discuss  questions  of  the  hour,  whether  political,  sensational,! 
or  sentimental  (such  as  protection,  an  attack  upon  the  Govern-! 
ment,  the  Russian  revolution,  and  the  like),  or  those  for  thej 
discussion  of  matters  of  general  interest  (the  discovery  of  the 
North  Pole,  personal  hygiene,  spiritualism),  attract  a  far  larger 
audience,  even  when  reserved  to  members  of  the  party,  than  do 
meetings  for  the  discussion  of  tactical  or  theoretical  questions, 
although  these  are  of  vital  importance  to  the  doctrine  or  to  the 
organization.  The  present  writer  knows  this  from  personal  ex- 
perience in  three  typical  great  cities,  Paris,  Frankfort-on-the- 
Main,  and  Turin.  Notwithstanding  differences  of  atmosphere, 
there  was  observable  in  each  of  these  three  centres  the  same  in- 
difference to  party  affairs  and  the  same  slackness  of  attendance 
at  ordinary  meetings.^  The  great  majority  of  the  members  will 
not  attend  meetings  unless  some  noted  orator  is  to  speak,  or  un- 

then  containing  about  six  hundred  members,  passed  a  resolution  fiercely 
condemning  the  socialist  deputies  on.  account  of  their  being  too  friendly 
with  the  ministry.  The  resolution  was  carried  by  forty-one  votes  against 
twenty-four   ("Stampa, "  liv,  No.  134). 

^  In  trade-union  circles  loud  complaints  are  also  heard  regarding  this  hu- 
man, all-too-human,  tendency.  Thus,  of  the  bakers*  union  we  read:  "In 
every  strike  we  have  the  same  experience,  that  in  the  distribution  of  leaflets, 
in  picketing,  in  the  whole  work  of  agitation  which  a  strike  necessitates,  it  is 
only  a  few  of  the  members  who  do  their  share,  while  the  great  mass  of  the 
strikers,  and  especially  the  younger  ones,  shirk  all  these  duties"  (0.  All- 
mann.  Die  EntwicJclung  des  Verhandes  der  BdcJcer  und  Berufsgenossen 
Deutsehlands  und  die  Lolmbewegungen  und  Streilcs  im  B acker gewerbe,  Ver- 
lag  von  O.  Allmann,  1900,  p.  68). 

'  The  same  phenomenon  is  seen  in  the  trade-union  movement.  * '  In  Ger- 
many the  Bourses  du  Travail  numbering  5,000  members  think  themselves 
happy  if  they  can  get  together  500  of  these  at  a  meeting.  The  other  nine- 
tenths  of  the  organized  workers  habitually  lack  all  interest  in  the  intimate 
life  of  their  corporation"  (Bernhard  Schildbach,  Verfassungsfragen  in  den 
Gewerlcscliaften,  "Neue  Zeit, "  xxix,  fasc.  10). 


52  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

less  some  extremely  striking  war-cry  is  sounded  for  their  attrac- 
tion, such  as,  in  France,  "A  bas  la  vie  chere!",  or,  in  Germany, 
"Down  with  personal  government!"  A  good  meeting  can  also 
be  held  when  there  is  a  cinema-show,  or  a  popular  scientific  lec- 
ture illustrated  by  lantern-slides.  In  a  word,  the  ordinary  mem- 
bers have  a  weakness  for  everything  which  appeals  to  their  eyes 
and  for  such  spectacles  as  will  always  attract  a  gaping  crowdJ 
4  It  may  be  added  that  the  regular  attendants  at  public  meetings 
and  committees  are  by  no  means  always  proletarians — especially 
where  the  smaller  centres  are  concerned.  Wlien  his  work  is  fin- 
ished, the  proletarian  can  think  only  of  rest,  and  of  getting  to 
bed  in  good  time.  His  place  at  meetings  is  taken  by  petty  bour- 
geois, by  those  who  come  to  sell  newspapers  and  picture-post- 
cards, by  clerks,  by  young  intellectuals  who  have  not  yet  got  a 
position  in  their  own  circle,  people  who  are  all  glad  to  hear 
themselves  spoken  of  as  authentic  proletarians  and  to  be  glorified 
as  the  class  of  the  future.* 

The  same  thing  happens  in  party  life  as  happens  in  the  state. 
In  both,  the  demand  for  monetary  supplies  is  upon  a  coercive 
foundation,  but  the  electoral  system  has  no  established  sanction. 
An  electoral  right  exists,  but  no  electoral  duty.  Until  this  duty 
is  superimposed  upon  the  right,  it  appears  probable  that  a  small 
minority  only  will  continue  to  avail  itself  of  the  right  which  the 
majority  voluntarily  renounces,  and  that  the  minority  will  al- 
ways dictate  laws  for  the  indifferent  and  apathetic  mass.  The 
consequence  is  that,  in  the  political  groupings  of  democracy, 
the  participation  in  party  life  has  an  echeloned  aspect.  The 
extensive  base  consists  of  the  great  mass  of  electors ;  upon  this  is 
superimposed  the  enormously  smaller  mass  of  enrolled  members 
of  the  local  branch  of  the  party,  numbering  perhaps  one-tenth 
or  even  as  few  as  one-thirtieth  of  the  electors ;  above  this,  again, 
comes  the  much  smaller  number  of  the  members  who  regularly 
attend  meetings ;  next  comes  the  group  of  officials  of  the  party ; 
and  highest  of  all,  consisting  in  part  of  the  same  individuals  as 
the  last  group,  come  the  half-dozen  or  so  members  of  the  execu- 
tive committee.  Effective  power  is  here  in  inverse  ratio  to  the 
number  of  those  who  exercise  it.  Thus  practical  democracy  is 
represented  by  the  following  diagram : — 


1 1 


Cf .,  as  far  as  Italian  conditions  are  concerned,  Giulio  Casalini,  Crisi  di 
Impreparazione,  "Critica  Sociale,"  1904,  xiv,  No.  1. 

*Cf.  the  vigorous  criticism  of  Filippo  Turati,  Ancora  la  Propaganda  irrir 
produttiva,  "Critica  Sociale,"  1903,  xiii,  No.  14. 


NEED  FOR  LEADERSHIP  53 


lyU/ (>CVV^ 


;  ',\*  **  j?.v:  s^'w  '.Sax  -rf^*^.  »rr*-^.'.^^. 


Habitues  of 
meetings. 

Enrolled 
members. 

Voters." 


Though  it  grumbles  occasionally,  the  majority  is  really  de- 
lighted to  find  persons  who  will  take  the  trouble  to  look  after  its 
affairs.  In  the  mass,  and  even  in  the  organized  mass  of  the  la- 
bour parties,  there  is  an  immense  need  for  direction  and  guid- 
ance. This  need  is  accompanied  by  a  genuine  cult  for  the  lead- 
ers, who  are  regarded  as  heroes.  Misoneism,  the  rock  upon  which 
so  many  serious  reforms  have  at  all  times  been  wrecked,  is  at 
present  rather  increasing  than  diminishing.  This  increase  is 
explicable  owing  to  the  more  extensive  division  of  labour  in  mod- 
ern civilized  society,  which  renders  it  more  and  more  impossible 
to  embrace  in  a  single  glance  the  totality  of  the  political  organi- 
zation of  the  state  and  its  ever  more  complicated  mechanism. 
To  this  misoneism  are  superadded,  and  more  particularly  in  the 
popular  parties,  profound  differences  of  culture  and  education 
among  the  members.  These  differences  give  to  the  need  for  lead- 
ership felt  by  the  masses  a  continually  increasing  dynamic  ten- 
dency. 

This  tendency  is  manifest  in  the  political  parties  of  all  coun- 
tries. It  is  true  that  its  intensity  varies  as  between  one  nation 
and  another,  in  accordance  with  contingencies  of  a  historical 
character  or  with  the  influences  of  racial  psychology.  The  Ger- 
man people  in  especial  exhibits  to  an  extreme  degree  the  need 
for  some  one  to  point  out  the  way  and  to  issue  orders.  This 
peculiarity,  common  to  all  classes  not  excepting  the  proletariat, 
furnishes  a  psychological  soil  upon  which  a  powerful  directive 
hegemony  can  flourish  luxuriantly.  There  exist  among  the  Ger- 
mans all  the  preconditions  necessary  for  such  a  development :  a 
psychical  predisposition  to  subordination,  a  profound  instinct 
for  discipline,  in  a  word,  the  whole  still-persistent  inheritance 
of  the  influence  of  the  Prussian  drill-sergeant,  with  all  its  advan- 
tages and  all  its  disadvantages ;  in  addition,  a  trust  in  authority 

which  verges  on  the  complete  absence  of  a  critical  faculty.^*^    It 

■ — - — . < 

'  This  figure  must  not  be  regarded  as  intended  to  represent  such  relation- 
ships according  to  scale,  for  this  would  require  an  entire  page.  It  is  purely 
diagrammatic. 

"  Native  and  foreign  writers  alike  have  referred  to  the  influence  of  these 


54  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

is  only  the  Rhinelanders,  possessed  of  a  somewhat  more  con- 
spicuous individuality,  who  constitute,  to  a  certain  extent,  an  ex- 
ception to  this  generalization."  The  risks  to  the  democratic 
spirit  that  are  involved  by  this  peculiarity  of  the  German  char- 
characteristics  of  German  racial  psychology  upon  the  development  of  the  Ger- 
man socialist  party,  Karl  Diehl  goes  so  far  as  to  ascribe  to  them  the  origin 
and  importance  of  the  German  labour  party.  He  writes :  "  If  we  find  that 
in  Germany  a  socialist  party  has  come  into  existence  greater  than  that  found 
anywhere  else  in  the  world,  this  is  dependent  upon  the  whole  historical  evo- 
lution of  the  labour  movement.  ...  A  certain  political  immaturity,  and 
the  ease  with  which  the  Germans  are  disciplined  and  subordinated,  were 
the  factors  which  enabled  socialism  to  gain  in  this  country  so  extraordinary 
a  number  of  adherents"  (Karl  Diehl,  Z7e6er  Sosialismus,  Kommunismns  und 
Anarchismus,  Fischer,  Jena,  1906,  p.  226).  Another  writer  well  acquainted 
with  the  German  labour  movement,  rightly  points  out  the  contradiction  be- 
tween the  official  doctrine  of  historic  materialism  and  the  actual  overvalua- 
tion of  great  men  in  the  movement :  * '  However  earnestly  German  socialism 
has  desired,  however  fundamentally  its  philosophy  of  history  has  laboured, 
to  undermine  the  influence  of  great  personalities,  the  members  of  the  social- 
ist party  have  in  practice  paid  little  attention  to  such  theories.  From 
1860  down  to  our  own  day,  the  masses  have  always  sworn  by  their  masters. 
If  it  has  been  made  a  just  reproach  to  the  German  people  that  there  exists 
among  us  an  excessive  belief  in  authority,  to  the  labour  movement,  even  in 
its  international  dress,  there  must  attach  considerable  responsibility  for 
this  error"  (Gustav  Mayer,  Die  Losung  der  deutschen  Frage  im  Jahre  1866 
iind  die  Arbeiteriewegung,  ' '  Festgaben  f  iir  Wilhelm  Lexis, ' '  Fischer,  Jena, 
1906,  p.  227).  A  Portuguese  socialist  describes  with  great  acuteness  the 
authoritarian  leanings  of  the  German, party :  "In  Germany,  the  militarist 
tendencies  which  may  be  observed  in  the  other  camps  are,  with  greater  or 
less  intensity,  reflected  in  the  socialist  party.  This  is  especially  noticeable 
in  the  congresses,  where,  at  a  simple  sign  given  by  the  deputy  Singer,  all 
the  delegates  approve  or  disapprove  in  accordance  with  the  instructions  they 
have  received.  The  same  military  discipline  extends  to  the  parties  and  to 
the  political  groupings.  And  woe  to  him  who  transgresses-  these  rules :  he 
runs  the  risk  of  being  expelled  without  chance  of  appeal"  (Magalhaes  Lima, 
O  primeiro  de  Maio,  Typ.  de  la  Companhia  Nacional  Editora,  Lisbon,  1894, 
p.  40), 

"  In  the  Ehenish  districts,  the  active  and  vivacious  character  of  the  popu- 
lation is,  according  to  many  trade-union  leaders,  a  matter  of  considerable 
significance :  * '  More  inclined  to  form  societies  for  recreation  than  for  seri- 
ous undertakings,  the  Ehenish  workers  are  difficult  to  organize.  Those  who 
have  been  induced  to  join  a  union  can  be  retained  in  that  body  only  when 
led  by  some  one  whose  personality  is  sympathetic  to  them,  and  who  under- 
stands on  suitable  occasions  to  flavour  seriousness  with  humour.  If  the 
central  organization  of  the  trade-union  brings  about  a  change  in  the  local 
leadership  without  paying  due  attention  to  this  consideration,  the  anti-au- 
thoritarian tendency  of  the  Ehinelanders  comes  into  play,  and  the  mem- 
bership falls  off  greatly"  (Walter  Troeltsch  and  P,  Hirschfeld,  Die  deutschen 
'Sozialdemolcratischen  GewerJcschaften.  Untersuchungen  u.  Materialen  iiher 
ihre  geogrophische  Verhreitung,  Carl  Heymanns  Verlag,  Berlin,  1905,  p,  71), 


NEED  FOR  LEADERSHIP  55 

acter  were  well  known  to  Karl  Marx.  Although  himself  a  party 
leader  in  the  fullest  sense  of  the  term,  and  although  endowed  to 
the  highest  degree  with  the  qualities  necessary  for  leadership,  he 
thought  it  necessary  to  warn  the  German  workers  against  en- 
tertaining too  rigid  a  conception  of  organization.  In  a  letter 
from  Marx  to  Schweitzer  we  are  told  that  in  Germany,  where  the 
workers  are  bureaucratically  controlled  from  birth  upwards, 
and  for  this  reason  have  a  blind  faith  in  constituted  authority, 
it  is  above  all  necessary  to  teach  them  to  walk  by  themselves.^- 
The  indifference  which  in  normal  times  the  mass  is  accustomed 
to  display  in  ordinary  political  life  becomes,  in  certain  cases  of 
particular  importance,  an  obstacle  to  the  extension  of  the  party 
influence.  The  crowd  may  abandon  the  leaders  at  the  very  mo- 
ment when  these  are  preparing  for  energetic  action.  This  hap- 
pens even  in  connection  with  the  organization  of  demonstrations 
of  protest.  At  the  Austrian  socialist  congress  held  at  Salzburg 
in  1904,  Dr.  Ellenbogen  complained:  "I  am  always  anxious 
when  the  party  leaders  undertake  any  kind  of  action.  It  seems 
simply  impossible  to  arouse  the  interest  of  the  workers  even  in 
matters  which  one  would  have  expected  them  to  understand. 
In  the  agitation  against  the  new  military  schemes,  we  found  it 
impossible  to  organize  meetings  of  a  respectable  size. "  ^^  In 
Saxony,  in  1895,  when  it  was  proposed  to  restrict  the  suffrage, 
the  socialist  leaders  vainly  endeavoured  to  arouse  a  general 
agitation,  their  attempts  being  rendered  nugatory  by  the  gen- 
eral apathy  of  the  masses.  The  language  of  the  press  was  in- 
flammatory. Millions  of  leaflets  were  distributed.  Within  the 
space  of  a  few  days  a  hundred  and  fifty  meetings  of  protest  were 
held.  All  was  without  effect.  There  was  no  genuine  agitation. 
The  meetings,  especially  in  the  outlying  districts,  were  very 
scantily  attended.^*  The  leaders,  alike  the  Central  Committee 
and  the  district  organizers,  were  overwhelmed  with  disgust  at 
the  calm  indifference  of  the  mass,  which  rendered  serious  agita- 
tion altogether  impossible.^^     The  failure  of  the  movement  was 

"  Letter  from  Karl  Marx  to  J.  B.  von  Schweitzer,  dated  London,  October 
13,  1868,  published,  with  comments,  by  Ed.  Bernstein  of  "Neue  Zeit,"  xv, 
1897,  p.  9.  Bernstein  himself  appears  to  share  the  views  of  Marx.  (Cf.  Ed. 
Bernstein,  Gewerkscliaftsdemolcratie,  "Sozial.  Monatshef te, "  1909,  p.  83.) 

"  Protokoll  der  Verhandlungen,  etc.,  J.  Brand,  Vienna,  1904,  p.  90. 

**  Edmund  Fischer,  Der  Widerstand  des  deutschen  Volkes  gegen  Wahlen- 
trechtungen,  <'Sozial.  Monatshef  te, "  viii  (x),  fase.  10. 

^Edmund  Fischer,  Die  Sdchsische  Probe,  "Sozial.  Monatshef  te,"  viii 
(x),  fasc.  12. 


56  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

due  to  an  error  of  omission  on  the  part  of  the  leaders.  The 
rank  and  file  did  not  recognize  the  importance  of  the  loss  they 
were  to  suffer  because  the  leaders  had  neglected  to  point  out 
all  its  consequences.  Accustomed  to  being  ruled,  the  rank  and 
file  need  a  considerable  work  of  preparation  before  they  can  be 
set  in  motion.  In  default  of  this,  and  when  signals  which  the 
rank  and  file  do  not  understand  are  unexpectedly  made  by  the 
leaders,  they  pay  no  attention. 

The  most  striking  proof  of  the  organic  weakness  of  the  mass 
is  furnished  by  the  way  in  which,  when  deprived  of  their  leaders 
in  time  of  action,  they  abandon  the  field  of  battle  in  disordered 
flight ;  they  seem  to  have  no  power  of  instinctive  reorganization, 
and  are  useless  until  new  captains  arise  capable  of  replacing 
those  that  have  been  lost.  The  failure  of  innumerable  strikes 
and  political  agitations  is  explained  very  simply  by  the  oppor- 
tune action  of  the  authorities,  who  have  placed  the  leaders  under 
lock  and  key.^^  It  is  this  experience  which  has  given  rise  to  the 
view  that  popular  movements  are,  generally  speaking,  artificial 
products,  the  work  of  isolated  individuals  termed  agitators 
(Aufwiegler,  Hetzer,  Meneurs,  Sobillatori),  and  that  it  suffices 
to  suppress  the  agitators  to  get  the  upper  hand  of  the  agitation. 
This  opinion  is  especially  favoured  by  certain  narrow-minded 
conservatives.  But  such  an  idea  shows  only  the  incapacity  of 
those  who  profess  to  understand  the  intimate  nature  of  the  mass. 

"  The  most  conspicuous  example  of  this  is  furnished  by  an  episode  in  the 
history  of  the  Danish  labour  movement.  The  condemnation  and  subsequent 
exile  in  America  of  the  socialist  leader,  Louis  Pio,  in  the  seventies,  sufficed 
to  check  for  years  the  growth  of  the  labour  movement,  then  in  its  infancy 
(Eud.  Meyer,  Ber  Socialismus  in  DdnemarJc,  Aug.  Schindler,  Berlin,  1875, 
pp.  13  et  seq.).  Gustav  Bang  describes  the  collapse  of  the  movement  in  the 
following  terms:  "He  [Pio]  had  become  fatigued,  and  was  too  weak  to 
continue  the  struggle.  In  the  spring  of  1877  he  allowed  himself  to  be  bribed 
by  the  police,  who  induced  him  to  leave  the  country  for  ever;  with  him  went 
Geleff,  who  had  also  been  bribed.  Pio  died  in  America  in  1894.  This  was 
disastrous  for  the  party.  It  had  trusted  Pio  too  blindly,  believed  in  him 
too  earnestly,  to  be  able  to  stand  on  its  own  feet.  .  .  .  There  were  no 
new  men  to  fill  the  empty  place,  and  the  party  was  too  loosely  constructed, 
too  weakly  combined,  to  be  able  to  hold  together.  The  unions  dissolved 
or  faded  out  of  existence"  (G.  Bang,  Ein  BlicJc  auf  die  GescMchte  der 
ddnischen  Sosialdemocratie,  "Neue  Zeit, "  December  25,  1897,  xvi,  vol.  i^ 
No.  13,  pp.  404-5).  Another  notable  example,  and  a  more  recent  one,  be- 
longs to  the  history  of  the  labour  movement  in  France,  where  in  1909  the 
attempt  at  a  general  strike  of  railway  men  failed  because  Briand,  the 
Prime  Minister,  had  suddenly  imprisoned  some  of  the  most  influential  lead- 
ers of  the  railway  workers. 


NEED  FOR  LEADERSHIP  57 

In  collective  movements,  with  rare  exceptions,  the  process  is  nat- 
ural and  not  ''artificial."  Natural  above  all  is  the  movement 
itself,  at  whose  head  the  leader  takes  his  place,  not  as  a  rule  of 
his  own  initiative,  but  by  force  of  circumstances.  No  less  natural 
is  the  sudden  collapse  of  the  agitation  as  soon  as  the  army  is  de- 
prived of  its  chiefs. 

The  need  which  the  mass  feels  for  guidance,  and  its  incapacity 
for  acting  in  default  of  an  initiative  from  without  and  from 
above,  impose,  however,  heavy  burdens  upon  the  chiefs.  The 
leaders  of  modern  democratic  parties  do  not  lead  an  idle  life. 
Their  positions  are  anything  but  sinecures,  and  they  have  ac- 
quired their  supremacy  at  the  cost  of  extremely  hard  work. 
Their  life  is  one  of  incessant  effort.  The  tenacious,  persistent, 
and  indefatigable  agitation  characteristic  of  the  socialist  party, 
particularly  in  Germany,  never  relaxed  in  consequence  of  casual 
failures,  nor  ever  abandoned  because  of  casual  successes,  and 
which  no  other  party  has  yet  succeeded  in  imitating,  has  justly 
aroused  the  admiration  even  of  critics  and  of  bourgeois  oppo- 
nents.^^ In  democratic  organizations  the  activity  of  the  profes- 
sional leader  is  extremely  fatiguing,  often  destructive  to  health,  > 
and  in  general  (despite  the  division  of  labour)  highly  complex.^^ 

"In  a  controversial  article  directed  against  a  Catholic  periodical  of  con- 
servative tendencies,  the  "Germania"  of  Berlin,  another  Catholic  paper, 
the  "  Westdeutsche  Arbeiterzeitung, "  the  organ  of  the  Catholic  workers  of 
the  Ehineland,  publishes  the  following  appreciation  of  its  socialist  oppo- 
nents: "We  could  wish  that  our  own  party  would  take  example  by  the 
sentiment  of  sacrifice  for  the  party  welfare  with  which  the  socialist  workers 
are  animated.  We  cannot  venture  to  assert,  as  does  the  *  Germania, '  that  in 
the  socialist  party  there  is  a  larger  number  of  arrivists  than  in  any  other, 
for  we  must  confess  that  we  lack  materials  to  prove  such  a  proposition.  It 
is  indeed  our  own  impression,  based  upon  considerable  experience,  that  the 
socialist  workers  demand  from  their  paid  employees  a  notable  amount  of 
intellectual  labour  and  of  propagandist  activity.  In  fact,  the  leaders  com- 
monly fulfil  the  desires  of  the  mass"  (quoted  from  the  "Frankfurter 
Volksstimme, "  1910,  No.  248,  5th  supplement).  In  the  same  vein  writes 
the  Catholic  priest  Engelbert  Kaeser,  Der  SosialdemoTcrat  hat's  Wort!, 
Herder,  Freiburg  i.  B.,  1905,  3rd  ed.,  p.  201. 

^  The  capitalist  press  is  in  the  habit  of  describing  socialist  leaders  as  de- 
bauchees and  parasites  who  batten  upon  the  funds  extracted  from  the  toilers. 
The  first  part  of  the  accusation  is  absurd.  The  second  is,  of  course,  sub- 
stantially true,  but  does  not,  to  the  sociologist,  involve  condemnation  on 
that  account.  Certainly  the  leaders  live  at  the  cost  of  the  workers,  but  with 
the  full  knowledge  of  these,  and,  in  so  far  as  the  workers  are  organized,  by 
their  deliberate  will.  The  leaders  are  selected  and  paid  to  render  in  return 
inestimable  service.  Another  reflection  may  be  made  in  passing.  The  fact 
that  the  workers  are  able  permanently  to  maintain  out  of  their  savings  so 


58  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

He  has  continually  to  sacrifice  his  own  vitality  in  the  struggle, 
and  when  for  reasons  of  health  he  ought  to  slacken  his  activities, 
he  is  not  free  to  do  so.  The  claims  made  upon  him  never  wane. 
The  crowd  has  an  incurable  passion  for  distinguished  orators, 
for  men  of  a  great  name,  and  if  these  are  not  obtainable,  they 
insist  at  least  upon  an  M.P.  At  anniversaries  and  other  celebra- 
tions of  which  the  democratic  masses  are  so  fond,  and  always 
during  electoral  meetings,  demands  pour  in  to  the  central  organi- 
zation, and  close  always  on  the  same  note,  *'we  must  have  an 
M.P. ! "  ^^  In  addition,  the  leaders  have  to  undertake  all  kinds 
of  literary  work,  and  should  they  happen  to  be  barristers,  they 
must  give  their  time  to  the  numerous  legal  proceedings  which 
are  of  importance  to  the  party.  As  for  the  leaders  of  the  highest 
grade,  they  are  simply  stifled  under  the  honorary  positions  which 
are  showered  upon  them.  Accumulation  of  functions  is,  in 
fact,  one  of  the  characteristics  of  modern  democratic  parties. 
In  the  German  socialist  party  we  not  infrequently  find  that  the 
same  individual  is  a  town-councillor,  a  member  of  the  diet,  and 
a  member  of  the  Eeichstag,  or  that,  in  addition  to  two  of  these 
functions,  he  is  editor  of  a  newspaper,  secretary  of  a  trade 
union,  or  secretary  of  a  co-operative  society ;  -°  the  same  thing 
is  true  of  Belgium,  of  Holland,^^  and  of  Italy.    All  this  brings  J 

enormous  a  party-apparatus  as  that  of  the  German  social  democracy,  con- 
tradicts the  Theory  of  Increasing  Misery,  and  contradicts  even  more  plainly 
Lassalle's  theory  (now,  indeed,  almost  universally  abandoned)  of  the  Iron 
Law  of  Wages.  (Cf.  the  present  writer 's  address  to  the  third  Italian  Con- 
gress of  the  Sciences  held  at  Padua  in  1909,  Dilucidasioni  sulla  teoria  dell' 
immiserimento,  "Giornale  degli  Economist!,"  xxxix,  series  2,  1909.) 

^'  In  Italy,  requests  for  an  M.P.  are  often  sent  to  the  head  ofifice  when  the 
matter  in  question  is  no  more  than  the  proclamation  of  a  strike.  One  of  the 
country  branches  once  asked  for  the  exclusive  services  of  a  socialist  deputy 
for  an  entire  fortnight.  He  was  to  study  the  local  working  conditions  of 
the  agricultural  labourers,  to  discover  possibilities  of  improvement,  to  draft 
a  memorial  to  the  local  landowners,  and  so  on  (Varazzani  and  Costa,  Bela- 
zione  della  Diresione  del  Partito  al  Congresso  d'lmola,  September  1902,  Co- 
opera  tiva  Tip.-editrice,  Iniola,  1902,  p.  7). 

""  Oehme,  referring  to  the  labour  movement  in  Bremen,  writes:  ' '  My  posi- 
tion was  certainly  not  one  to  be  envied,  for  I  was  publisher,  editor,  distribu- 
tor, advertising  agent,  and  cashier,  not  to  mention  maid-of-all-work. 
Throughout  the  year  I  had  not  a  single  Sunday  free,  for  I  spent  all  my 
Sundays  running  up  and  down  stairs  in  order  to  collect  the  monthly  sub- 
scriptions to  the  paper,  a  task  not  accomplished  without  difficulty."  This 
refers  to  an  earlier  date  when  the  anti-socialist  laws  were  still  in  force,  and 
when  the  division  of  labour  in  the  movement  had  not  attained  its  present 
degree  ("Bremer  Burger-Zeitung, "  September  23,  1904,  xv.  No.  225). 

*^In  Holland,  Willem  Hubertus  Vliegen  was  at  one  and  the  same  time 


NEED  FOR  LEADERSHIP  59 

honour  to  the  leader,  gives  him  power  over  the  mass,  makes  him 
more  and  more  indispensable;  but  it  also  involves  continuous 
overwork ;  for  those  who  are  not  of  exceptionally  strong  consti- 
tution it  is  apt  to  involve  a  premature  death.^^ 


socialist  deputy,  editor  in  chief  of  the  central  organ  of  the  party  ("Het 
Volk"),  county  councillor  of  N.  Holland,  municipal  councillor  of  Amster- 
dam, president  of  the  party  executive,  and  chairman  in  ordinary  in  all  the 
congresses — six  functions  in  all  (Leeuwenburg,  "Nieuwe  Arnhemsche  Cou- 
rant,"  No.  4659). 

*^  It  is  remarkable  how  large  a  percentage  of  socialist  agitators  and  or- 
ganizers have  succumbed  to  mental  disorder.  Carlo  Cafiero,  Jean  Volders, 
Bruno  Schonlank,  Georg  Jaeckh,  died  in  asylums.  Lassalle  was  on  the  verge 
of  physical  and  mental  collapse  when  he  determined  to  devote  his  life  to 
Helene  von  Donniges.  This  predisposition  to  insanity  is  a  result  of  the  over- 
work which  the  party  life  imposes  upon  its  leaders. 


CHAPTER   VI 

THE  POLITICAL  GRATITUDE  OF  THE  MASSES 

In  addition  to  the  political  indifference  of  the  masses  and  to 
their  need  for  guidance,  there  is  another  factor,  and  one  of  a; 
loftier  moral  quality,  which  contributes  to  the  supremacy  of  the 
leaders,  and  this  is  the  gratitude  felt  by  the  crowd  for  those 
who  speak  and  write  on  their  behalf.  The  leaders  acquire  fame 
as  defenders  and  advisers  of  the  people;  and  while  the  mass, 
economically  indispensable,  goes  quietly  about  its  daily  work,  the 
leaders,  for  love  of  the  cause,  must  often  suffer  persecution,  im- 
prisonment, and  exile.^ 

These  men,  who  have  often  acquired,  as  it  were,  an  aureole  of 
sanctity  and  martyrdom,  ask  one  reward  only  for  their  services, 
gratitude.^    Sometimes  this  demand  for  gratitude  finds  written 

^ "  It  is  the  privilege  of  the  leaders  to  inarch  in  the  van,  and  to  be  the 
first  to  receive  the  blows  directed  against  the  party  by  our  adversaries" 
(Auguste  Bebel,  Ein  Nachivort  zur  Viseprdsidentenfrage  und  Verwandtem, 
reprint  from  "Neue  Zeit,"  1903,  p.  21).  Naturally  this  applies  chiefly  to 
times  of  comparative  political  calm. 

*The  appeal  to  gratitude  is  an  effective  means  of  domination,  an  ad- 
mirable platform  upon  which  to  base  further  claims.  The  poet  aptly  puts 
in  the  mouth  of  a  spokesman  of  the  masses  the  following  words,  directed 
against  a  victorious  leader  who  is  vaunting  his  own  merits:  "Neither  the 
money  in  our  money-boxes,  nor  the  words  in  our  mouths,  nor  the  wine  in 
our  cellars,  nor  the  wives  in  our  beds,  will  be  safe  from  him.  He  will  always 
be  telling  us,  *I  delivered  you  from  the  Genoese,  I  am  the  victor  of  Alis- 
campo'  "  (Rudolph  Lothar,  Konig  MarleTcin,  G.  H.  Meyer,  Leipzig-Berlin, 
1900,  p.  39). — The  part  which  gratitude  has  played  in  the  political  life  of 
great  national  organizations  still  lacks  adequate  recognition.  The  omnipo- 
tence of  Bismarck,  the  founder  of  the  modern  German  Empire,  an  omnipo- 
tence which  endured  for  nearly  thirty  years,  was  largely  based  upon  this 
sentiment.  Max  Nordau  writes  with  perfect  justice:  "Unprincipled  ad- 
vantage is  taken  of  the  most  touching  and  amiable  characteristic  of  our 
nation,  its  gratitude"  (Max  Nordau,  Die  KraiikJicit  des  Jahrhunderts,  B. 
Elischer,  Leipzig,  1888,  p.  247). — In  Italy,  many  patriots  who  had  rendered 
great  services  in  the  struggles  on  behalf  of  United  Italy  were,  after  the  con- 
fititution  of  the  kingdom,  elected  deputies,  and  were  subsequently  re-elected 
again  and  again,  simply  out  of  gratitude  for  their  ancient  services.  (Of. 
Pasquale  Turiello,  Governo  e  Governati  in  Italia,  Fatti,  N.  Zanichelli,  Bo- 
logna, 1889,  2nd  revised  edition,  p.  325.) 

60 


POLITICAL  GRATITUDE  OF  MASSES    61 

expression.^  Among  the  masses  themselves  this  sentiment  of 
gratitude  is  extremely  strong.*  If  from  time  to  time  we  encoun- 
ter exceptions  to  this  rule,  if  the  masses  display  the  blackest 
ingratitude  towards  their  chosen  leaders,  we  may  be  certain 
that  there  is  on  such  occasions  a  drama  of  jealousy  being  played 
beneath  the  surface.  There  is  a  demagogic  struggle,  fierce, 
masked,  and  obstinate;,  between  one  leader  and  another,  and  the 
mass  has  to  intervene  in  this  struggle,  and  to  decide  between  the 
adversaries.  But  in  favouring  one  competitor,  it  necessarily  dis- 
plays "ingratitude"  towards  the  other.  Putting  aside  these  ex- 
ceptional eases,  the  mass  is  sincerely  grateful  to  its  leaders,  re- 
garding gratitude  as  a  sacred  duty.^  As  a  rule,  this  sentiment 
of  gratitude  is  displayed  in  the  continual  re-election  of  the 

'  Cf .  a  catechism  for  the  use  of  the  Belgian  workers  (Alphonse  Octors, 
De  Catecliismus  van  den  Werkman,  Volksdrukkerij,  Ghent,  1905,  p.  6),  in 
which  we  read,  in  reply  to  the  question,  ' '  Has  there  not  been  considerable 
change  for  the  better  of  late?"  the  answer,  **Yes,  thanks  to  the  unwearying 
propaganda  of  De  Paepe,  Jean  Volders,  G.  Defnet,  Leon  and  Alfred  De 
Puisseaux,  Vandervelde,  Anseele,  and  many  others,  the  workers  have  secured 
the  legal  recognition  of  their  civil  equality." 

*  The  leaders  often  maintain  that  the  democratic  masses  are  ungrateful, 
but  this  is  far  from  being  true.  Eoscher  writes  of  democracy  in  the  life 
of  the  state,  that  whereas  the  ingratitude  of  the  monarchy  and  of  the  aris- 
tocracy is  conscious  and  deliberate,  when  the  democracy  is  ungrateful,  this 
usually  arises  from  an  involuntary  forgetfulness,  dependent  upon  the  fre- 
quent party  changes  characteristic  of  democratic  government,  and  is  alto- 
gether uncalculating  and  devoid  of  personal  intention  (Eoscher,  op.  cit.,  p. 
396).  In  the  internal  life  of  the  democratic  party,  since  here  "party 
changes"  are  much  rarer  than  in  the  national  life  of  democracy,  there 
is  far  less  likelihood  of  the  display  of  ingratitude. 

^  The  German  socialist  party  showed  a  fine  spirit  of  gi'atitude  towards  the 
elder  Liebknecht,  appointing  him,  when  his  intellectual  powers  were  already 
beginning  to  fail,  to  the  editorship  of  ' '  Vorwarts, ' '  and  voting  him,  though 
not  without  opposition,  a  salary  of  £360  (Protolcoll  des  sosialdemokratischen 
Parteitags  su  Frankfurt,  1894,  p.  33).  When  Liebknecht  died  and  his 
family  was  left  badly  off,  the  party  provided  funds  for  the  continuance  of 
his  sons'  education. 

Eduard  Bernstein  considers  that  it  was  simply  on  account  of  a  sense  of 
gratitude  that  Max  Schippel,  the  deputy,  was  not  expelled  from  the  party 
at  the  Bremen  Congress  of  1904.  ''A  fine  human  sentiment,  whose  work- 
ing has  been  seen  in  earlier  congresses,  was  here  once  more  manifest.  I 
refer  to  the  obvious  disinclination  to  pass  a  political  death- sentence  upon 
one  who  has  done  important  services  for  the  party.  .  .  .  These  are  cer- 
tainly among  the  choicest  feelings  of  which  the  human  heart  is  capable: 
respect  for  merit,  and  antipathy  to  the  idea  of  brutal  expulsion"  (Eduard 
Bernstein,  Was  Bremen  gebracht  hat,  "Neue  Montagsblatt, "  i,  No.  22, 
September  26^  1904, 


t 


62  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

leaders  who  have  deserved  well  of  the  party,  so  that  leadership 
commonly  becomes  perpetual.  It  is  the  general  feeling  of  the 
mass  that  it  would  be  "ungrateful"  if  they  failed  to  confirm  in 
his  functions  every  leader  of  long  service.^ 

*It  is  to  this  sentiment  that  Bernstein  refers  the  indignation  which  was 
displayed  at  the  Dresden  Congress  (1903)  by  the  majority  of  the  dele- 
gates, when  it  was  reported  that  a  number  of  the  more  revolutionary  ele- 
ments had  decided  to  vote  against  the  re-election  of  the  reformist  Ignatz 
Auer  as  a  member  of  the  Executive  Committee.  The  general  feeling  in 
the  party  was  that  of  eternal  gratitude  towards  Auer  because  he  had  been 
one  of  the  founders  of  the  party,  and  because  to  the  rank  and  file  he  seemed 
the  personification  of  a  most  interesting  period  in  the  history  of  the  social 
democracy  (Eduard  Bernstein,  Die  Demolcratie  in  der  SosialdemoTcratie, 
"Sozial.  Monatsh.,"  September  3,  1908,  p.  1109).  In  the  opinion  of  the 
present  writer,  the  case  of  Auer  manifests  also,  gratitude  apart,  the  gen- 
eral disinclination  of  the  masses  to  change  their  leaders.  (Cf.  Part  II, 
Chap.  I.) 


CHAPTER   VII 

THE  CULT  OF  VENERATION  AMONG  THE  MASSES 

The  socialist  parties  often  identify  themselves  with  their  leaders 
to  the  extent  of  adopting  the  leaders'  names.  Thus,  in  Ger- 
many from  1863  to  1875  there  were  Lassallists  and  Marxists; 
whilst  in  France  until  quite  recently  there  were  Broussists,  Al- 
lemanists,  Guesdists,  and  Jauresists.^  The  fact  that  these  per- 
sonal descriptive  terms  tend  to  pass  out  of  use  in  such  coun- 
tries as  Germany  may  be  attributed  to  two  distinct  causes :  in  the 
first  place,  there  has  been  an  enormous  increase  in  the  member- 
ship and  especially  in  the  voting  strength  of  the  party;  and 
secondly,  within  the  party,  dictatorship  has  given  place  to  oli- 
garchy, and  the  leaders  of  this  oligarchy  are  inspired  by  senti- 
ments of  mutual  jealousy.  As  a  supplementary  cause  may  be 
mentioned  the  general  lack  of  leaders  of  conspicuous  ability, 
capable  of  securing  and  maintaining  an  absolute  and  indisputa- 
ble authority.^ 

The  English  anthropo-sociologist  Frazer  contends  that  the 
maintenance  of  the  order  and  authority  of  the  state  is  to  a  large 
extent  dependent  upon  the  superstitious  ideas  of  the  masses, 
this  being,  in  his  view,  a  bad  means  used  to  a  good  end.  Among 
such  superstitious  notions,  Frazer  draws  attention  to  the  belief 
so  frequent  among  the  people  that  their  leaders  belong  to  a 

*  In  this  we  see  the  analogy  of  party  with  religious  sects  and  monastic 
orders.  Yves  Guyot  rightly  points  out  that  the  members  of  the  modern 
party  imitate  the  practice  of  the  medieval  monks,  who,  while  faithfully  fol- 
lowing the  teachings  of  their  respective  masters,  called  themselves  after 
St.  Dominic,  St.  Benedict,  St,  Augustine,  and  St.  Francis  (Yves  Guyot,  La 
Comedie  socialiste,  Bibl.  Charpentier,  Paris,  1897,  p.  111). 

*  According  to  Sombart,  there  has  occurred  in  the  German  socialist  party, 
concurrently  with  its  numerical  increase,  a  decline  in  quality.  He  writes: 
"The  socialist  democracy  found  it  necessary  to  reduce  to  impotence  the 
men  of  real  talent,  and  to  replace  them  by  vigorous  routinists.  What  could 
Marx  do  to-day  as  editor  of  the  'Neue  Zeit'  or  even  of  the  '  Sozialistische 
Monatshefte';  what  could  Lassalle  do  in  the  Eeichstag?"  (Werner  Som- 
bart, Die  Deutsche  VolJcswirtschaft  im  19  Jahrhundert,  Bondi,  Berlin,  1903, 
p.  528.) 

63 


64  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

higher  order  of  humanity  than  themselves.^  The  phenomenon 
is,  in  fact,  conspicuous  in  the  history  of  the  socialist  parties 
during  the  last  fifty  years.  The  supremacy  of  the  leaders  over 
the  mass  depends,  not  solely  upon  the  factors  already  discussed, 
but  also  upon  the  widespread  superstitious  reverence  paid  to  the 
leaders  on  account  of  their  superiority  in  formal  culture — for 
which  a  much  greater  respect  is  commonly  felt  than  for  true 
intellectual  worth. 

The  adoration  of  the  led  for  the  leaders  is  commonly  latent. 
It  reveals  itself  by  signs  that  are  barely  perceptible,  such  as 
the  tone  of  veneration  in  which  the  idol's  name  is  pronounced, 
the  perfect  docility  with  which  the  least  of  his  signs  is  obeyed, 
and  the  indignation  which  is  aroused  by  any  critical  attack  upon 
his  personality.  But  where  the  individuality  of  the  leader  is 
truly  exceptional,  and  also  in  periods  of  lively  excitement,  the 
latent  fervour  is  conspicuously  manifested  with  the  violence  of 
an  acute  paroxysm.  In  June  1864,  the  hot-blooded  Rhinelanders 
received  Lassalle  like  a  god.  Garlands  were  hung  across  the 
streets.  Maids  of  honour  showered  flowers  over  him.  Intermina- 
ble lines  of  carriages  followed  the  chariot  of  the  "president." 
With  overflowing  and  irresistible  enthusiasm  and  with  frenzied 
applause  were  received  the  words  of  the  hero  of  the  triumph, 
often  extravagant  and  in  the  vein  of  the  charlatan,  for  he  spoke 
ratherfas  if  he  wished  to  defy  criticism  than  to  provoke  applause. 
It  was  in  truth  a  triumphal  march.  Nothing  was  lacking — tri- 
umphal arches,  hymns  of  welcome,  solemn  receptions  of  foreign 
deputations.^  Lassalle  was  ambitious  in  the  grand  style,  and, 
as  Bismarck  said  of  him  at  a  later  date,  his  thoughts  did  not 
go  far  short  of  asking  whether  the  future  German  Empire,  in 
which  he  was  greatly  interested,  ought  to  be  ruled  by  a  dynasty 
of  Hohenzollerns  or  of  Lassalles.^  We  need  feel  no  surprise  that 
all  this  adulation  excited  Lassalle 's  imagination  to  such  a  degree 
that  he  soon  afterwards  felt  able  to  promise  his  affianced  that 
he  would  one  day  enter  the  capital  as  president  of  the  German 
republic,  seated  in  a  chariot  drawn  by  six  white  horses.  ° 

'J.  G.  Frazer,  Psyche's  TasTc,  Macmillan,  London,  1909,  p.  56. 

*See  the  accounts  in  the  contemporary  papers,  which  appear  as  preface 
to  the  speech  delivered  by  Lassalle  at  Eonsdorf,  May  22,  1864,  in  Ferdinand 
Lassalles  GesamtwerTcen,  edited  by  Erich  Blum,  Pfau,  Leipzig,  vol.  ii,  p.  301. 

"Bismarck,  in  the  Reichstag,  September  17,  1878  (Fiirst  Bismarck's  Be- 
den,  edited  by  Philippe  Stein,  Eeclam,  Leipzig,  vol.  vii,  p.  85). 

"J.  Yahlteich,  op.  cit.,  p.  58. 


VENERATION  AMONG  MASSES        65 

In  Sicily,  in  1892^  when  the  first  agricultural  labourers' 
unions,  known  as  fasci,  were  constituted,  the  members  had  an 
almost  supernatural  faith  in  their  leaders.  In  an  ingenuous  con- 
fusion of  the  social  question  with  their  religious  practices,  they 
often  in  their  processions  carried  the  crucifix  side  by  side  with 
the  red  flag  and  with  placards  inscribed  with  sentences  from  the 
works  of  Marx.  The  leaders  were  escorted  on  their  way  to  the 
meetings  with  music,  torches,  and  Japanese  lanterns.  Many, 
drunk  with  the  sentiment  of  adoration,  prostrated  themselves  be- 
fore their  leaders,  as  in  former  days  they  had  prostrated  them- 
selves before  their  bishops.'^  A  bourgeois  journalist  once  asked 
an  old  peasant,  member  of  a  socialist  fascio,  if  the  proletarians 
did  not  think  that  Giuseppe  De  Felice  Giuffrida,  Garibaldi 
Bosco,  and  the  other  young  students  or  lawyers  who,  though  of 
bourgeois  origin,  were  working  on  behalf  of  the  fasci,  were  not 
really  doing  this  with  the  sole  aim  of  securing  their  own  election 
as  county  councillors  and  deputies.  "De  Felice  and  Bosco  are 
angels  come  down  from  heaven ! ' '  was  the  peasant 's  brief  and 
eloquent  reply.^ 

It  may  be  admitted  that  not  all  the  workers  would  have  re- 
plied to  such  a  question  in  this  way,  for  the  Sicilian  populace 
has  always  had  a  peculiar  tendency  to  hero-worship.  But 
throughout  southern  Italy,  and  to  some  extent  in  central  Italy, 
the  leaders  are  even  to-day  revered  by  the  masses  with  rites  of  a 
semi-religious  character.  In  Calabria,  Enrico  Ferri  was  for  some 
time  adored  as  a  tutelary  saint  against  governmental  corruption. 
In  Rome  also,  where  the  tradition  of  the  classic  forms  of  pa- 
ganism still  survives,  Ferri  was  hailed  in  a  public  hall,  in  the 
name  of  all  the  "proletarian  quirites,"  as  "the  greatest  among 
the  great."  The  occasion  for  this  demonstration  w^as  that  Ferri 
had  broken  a  window  as  a  sign  of  protest  against  a  censure  ut- 
tered by  the  President  of  the  Chamber  (1901).^  In  Holland, 
in  the  year  1886,  when  Domela  Nieuwenhuis  was  liberated  from 
prison,   he   received   from  the   people,   as  he   himself  records, 

'  Adolf 0  Kossi,  Die  Bewegung  in  Sicilien,  Dietz,  Stuttgart,  1894,  pp.  8 
and  35. 

*  Kossi,  op.  cit.,  p.  34.  Even  to-day,  De  Felice  is  venerated  as  a  demigod, 
especially  in  Catagna,  where,  as  Syndic,  he  has  carried  on  an  extensive  and 
many-sided  activity  in  the  field  of  municipal  socialism.  (Cf.  Gisella  Michels- 
Lindner,  GeschicMe  der  modernen  Gemeindehetriehe  in  Italien,  Dunke  u. 
Humblot,  Leipzig,  1909,  pp.  77  et  seq.) 

'Enrico  Ferri,  La  Questio7ie  meridionale,  "Asino,"  Eome,  1902,  p.  4. 


66  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

greater  honours  than  had  ever  been  paid  to  any  sovereign,  and 
the  halls  in  which  he  addressed  meetings  were  profusely  adorned 
with  flowers.^"  Such  an  attitude  on  the  part  of  the  mass  is  not 
peculiar  to  backward  countries  or  remote  periods;  it  is  an  ata- 
vistic survival  of  primitive  psychology.  A  proof  of  this  is 
afforded  by  the  idolatrous  worship  paid  to-day  in  the  depart- 
ment of  the  Nord  (the  most  advanced  industrial  region  in 
France)  to  the  Marxist  prophet,  Jules  Guesde.  Moreover,  in 
certain  parts  of  England,  we  find  that  the  working  classes  give 
their  leaders  a  reception  which  recalls  the  days  of  Lassalle.^^ 

The  adoration  of  the  chiefs  survives  their  death.  The  great- 
est among  them  are  canonized.  After  the  death  of  Lassalle, 
the  Allgemeiner  Deutscher  Arbeiterverein,  of  which  he  had  been 
absolute  monarch,  broke  up  into  two  sections,  the  "fraction  of 
the  Countess  Hatzfeld"  or  "female  line,"  as  the  Marxist  ad- 
versaries sarcastically  styled  it,  and  the  "male  line"  led  by  J. 
B.  von  Schweitzer.  While  quarrelling  fiercely  with  one  another, 
these  two  groups  were  at  one,  not  only  in  respect  of  the  honour 
they  paid  to  Lassalle 's  memory,  but  also  in  their  faithful  ob- 
servance of  every  letter  of  his  programme.  Nor  has  Karl  Marx 
escaped  this  sort  of  socialist  canonization,  and  the  fanatical  zeal 
with  which  some  of  his  followers  defend  him  to  this  day  strongly 
recalls  the  hero-worship  paid  to  Lassalle.^^  Just  as  Christians 
used  to  give  and  still  give  to  their  infants  the  names  of  the 
founders  of  their  religion,  St.  Peter  and  St.  Paul,  so  socialist 
parents  in  certain  parts  of  central  Italy  call  their  boys  Lassallo 
and  their  girls  Marxina,  as  an  emblem  of  the  new  faith.  More- 
over, the  zealots  often  have  to  pay  heavily  for  their  devotion,  in 
quarrels  with  angry  relatives  and  with  recalcitrant  registration- 
officials,  and  sometimes  even  in  the  form  of  serious  material  in- 
jury, such  as  loss  of  employment.  Whilst  this  practice  is  at 
times  no  more  than  a  manifestation  of  that  intellectual  snobbery 
from  which  even  the  working-class  environment  is  not  wholly 
free,  it  is  often  the  outward  sign  of  a  profound  and  sincere  ideal- 

"  Ferdinand  Domela  Nieuwenhuis,  Van  Christen  tot  Anarchist,  GedenTc- 
schriften,  Van  Holkema  en  Warandorp,  Amsterdam,  1911,  p.  198.  Cf.  also 
P.  J.  Troelstra,  "De  Wording  der  S.D.A.P.,"  Na  tien  jaar  (1894-1904) 
Gedenlcschriften,  Soep,  Amsterdam,  1904,  p.  97. 

"Cf.  a  report  by  H.  M.  Hyndman  of  his  visit  to  Burnley,  "Justice," 
1910,  xxviii.  No.  1355. 

"  An  analogous  spirit  is  manifested  by  the  phrase  long  current  among 
the  militant  Italian  democracy,  "He  spoke  evil  of  Garibaldi,"  signifying 
"He  committed  the  most  horrible  of  crimes." 


VENERATION  AMONG  MASSES        67 

ism.^^  Whatever  its  cause,  it  proves  the  adoration  felt  by  the 
masses  for  the  leaders,  an  adoration  transcending  the  limits  of 
a  simple  sense  of  obligation  for  services  rendered.  Sometimes 
this  sentiment  of  hero-worship  is  turned  to  practical  account  by 
speculative  tradesmen,  so  that  we  see  in  the  newspapers  (espe- 
cially in  America,  Italy,  and  the  southern  Slav  lands)  adver- 
tisements of  "Karl  Marx  liqueurs"  and  "Karl  Marx  buttons"; 
and  such  articles  are  offered  for  sale  at  public  meetings.^*  A 
clear  light  is  thrown  upon  the  childish  character  of  proletarian 
psychology  by  the  fact  that  these  speculative  activities  often 
prove  extremely  lucrative. 

The  masses  experience  a  profound  need  to  prostrate  them-j 
selves,  not  simply  before  great  ideals,  but  also  before  the  in- 
dividuals who  in  their  eyes  incorporate  such  ideals.  Their  ado-j 
ration  for  these  temporal  divinities  is  the  more  blind  in  propor-| 
tion  as  their  lives  are  rude.  There  is  considerable  truth  in  the 
paradoxical  phrase  of  Bernard  Shaw,  who  defines  democracy  as 
a  collection  of  idolators,  in  contradistinction  to  aristocracy, 
which  is  a  collection  of  idols.^^  This  need  to  pay  adoring  wor- 
ship is  often  the  sole  permanent  element  which  survives  all  the 
changes  in  the  ideas  of  the  masses.  The  industrial  workers  of 
Saxony  have  during  recent  years  passed  from  fervent  Protestant- 
ism to  socialism.  It  is  possible  that  in  the  case  of  some  of 
them  this  evolution  has  been  accompanied  by  a  complete  reversal 
of  all  their  former  intellectual  and  moral  valuations;  but  it  is 
certain  that  if  from  their  domestic  shrines  they  have  expelled  the 
traditional  image  of  Luther,  it  has  only  been  in  order  to  replace 
it  by  one  of  Bebel.  In  Emilia,  where  the  peasantry  has  under- 
gone a  similar  evolution,  the  oleograph  of  the  Blessed  Virgin 
has  simply  given  place  to  one  of  Prampolini ;  and  in  southern 
Italy,  faith  in  the  annual  miracle  of  the  liquefaction  of  the  blood 
of  St.  Januarius  has  yielded  before  a  faith  in  the  miracle  of  the 
superhuman  power  of  Enrico  Ferri,  "the  Scourge  of  the  Ca- 
morra."  Amid  the  ruins  of  the  old  moral  world  of  the  masses, 
there  remains  intact  the  triumphal  column  of  religious  need. 
They  often  behave  towards  their  leaders  after  the  manner  of  the 
sculptor  of  ancient  Greece  who,  having  modelled  a  Jupiter  To- 
I . -« 

^*Cf,  the  articles  by  Savino  Varazzani,  Una  famiglia  socialista,  and  Eeo 
di  leso-Socialismo,  "Avanti  della  Domenica, "  ii,  Nos.  67  and  68. 

"Eobert  Michels,  Storia  del  Marxismo  in  Italia,  Mongini,  Eome,  1910,  pp. 
148  et  seq. 

**  Bernard  Shaw,  The  Eevolutionist  's  HandbooJc. 


68  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

nans,  prostrated  himself  in  adoration  before  the  work  of  his  own 
hands. 

In  the  object  of  such  adoration,  megalomania  is  apt  to  ensue.^® 
The  immeasurable  presumption,  which  is  not  without  its  comic 
side,  sometimes  found  in  modern  popular  leaders,  is  not  depend- 
ent solely  on  their  being  self-made  men,  but  also  upon  the  atmos- 
phere of  adulation  in  which  they  live  and  breathe.  This  over- 
weening self-esteem  on  the  part  of  the  leaders  diffuses  a  power- 
ful suggestive  influence,  whereby  the  masses  are  confirmed  in 
their  admiration  for  their  leaders,  and  it  thus  proves  a  source 
of  enhanced  power. 

^'  George  Sand  writes :  "  J  'ai  travaille  toute  ma  vie  a  etre  modeste.  Je 
declare  que  je  ne  voudrais  pas  vivre  quinze  jours  entouree  de  quinze  per- 
sonnes  persuadees  que  je  ne  peux  pas  me  tromper.  J'arriverais  peut-etre  a 
me  le  persuader  a  moi-meme"  (George  Sand,  Journal  d'un  voyageur  'pen- 
dant la  guerre,  M.  Levy  Freres,  Paris,  1871,  pp.  216-17). 


CHAPTER   VIII 

ACCESSORY  QUALITIES  REQUISITE  TO  LEADERSHIP 

In  the  opening  days  of  the  labour  movement,  the  foundation 
of  leadership  consisted  mainly,  if  not  exclusively,  in  oratorical 
skill.  It  is  impossible  for  the  crowd  to  escape  the  esthetic  and 
emotional  influence  of  words.  The  fineness  of  the  oratory  ex- 
ercises a  suggestive  influence  whereby  the  crowd  is  completely 
subordinated  to  the  will  of  the  orator.^  Now  the  essential  char- 
acteristic of  democracy  is  found  in  the  readiness  with  which  it 
succumbs  to  the  magic  of  words,  written  as  well  as  spoken.  In 
a  democratic  regime,  the  born  leaders  are  orators  and  journal- 
ists. It  suffices  to  mention  Gambetta  and  Clemenceau  in  France ; 
Gladstone  and  Lloyd  George  in  England ;  Crispi  and  Luzzatti  in 
Italy.  In  states  under  democratic  rule  it  is  a  general  belief  that 
oratorical  power  is  the  only  thing  which  renders  a  man  com- 
petent for  the  direction  of  public  affairs.  The  same  maxim 
applies  even  more  definitely  to  the  control  of  the  great  demo- 
cratic parties.  The  influence  of  the  spoken  word  has  been  ob- 
vious above  all  in  the  country  in  which  a  democratic  regime 
first  came  into  existence.  This  was  pointed  out  in  1826  by  an 
acute  Italian  observer:  ''The  English  people,  so  prudent  in 
the  use  of  its  time,  experiences,  in  listening  to  a  public  speaker. 


^  The  suggestive  force  of  the  oratory  of  the  cultured  leader  is  described 
in  the  following  terms  by  one  who  was  himself  a  master  in  its  exercise: 
"In  a  political  orator  the  principal  matter  is  neither  his  command  of  the 
subject  nor  the  mode  in  which  he  presents  it;  his  power  is  established 
from  the  moment  when  he  begins,  no  longer  to  speak,  but  rather  to  be 
carried  forward  upon  a  thousand  glances,  friendly  it  may  be  or  hostile, 
but  always  vibrant  with  a  metallic  sheen,  and  launched  by  a  thousand  pal- 
pitating hearts.  There  is  always  in  the  orator's  mind,  even  in  that  of 
the  greatest,  a  sense  of  extreme  tension  .  .  .  until  at  last  the  moment 
comes  when  one's  blood  suddenly  warms  up,  and  one  sails  on  a  cloud,  or 
soars  like  a  lark,  higher,  always  higher.  .  .  .  The  orator  on  the  platform 
reacts  to  the  gaze  of  the  audience.  He  sees  the  red  hearts  of  the  crowd 
palpitating  towards  him,  their  thoughts  concentrating  towards  him  like 
a  thousand  threads  uniting  in  one"  (Adolf  Koster,  Die  selin  Schornsteine, 
Langen,  Munich,  1909,  p.  113). 


70  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

the  same  pleasure  which  it  enjoys  at  the  theatre  when  the  works 
of  the  most  celebrated  dramatists  are  being  played. "  -  A  quar- 
ter of  a  century  later,  Carlyle  wrote :  "No  British  man  can  at- 
tain to  be  a  statesman  or  chief  of  workers  till  he  has  first  proved 
himself  a  chief  of  talkers."^  In  France,  Ernest-Charles,  mak- 
ing a  statistical  study  of  the  professions  of  the  deputies,  showed 
that,  as  far  as  the  young,  impetuous,  lively,  and  progressive  par- 
ties are  concerned,  almost  all  the  parliamentary  representatives 
are  journalists  and  able  speakers.*  This  applies  not  only  to  the 
socialists,  but  also  to  the  nationalists  and  to  the  antisemites.  The 
whole  modern  history  of  the  political  labour  movement  confirms 
the  observation.  Jaures,^  Guesde,  Lagardelle,  Herve,  Bebel, 
Ferri,  Turati^  Labriola,  Ramsay  Macdonald,  Troelstra,  Henriette 
Roland-Hoist,  Adler,  Daszynski" — all,  each  in  his  own  fashion, 
are  powerful  orators. 

On  the  other  hand,  it  is  the  lack  of  oratorical  talent  which 
largely  explains  why,  in  Germany,  such  a  personality  as  that  of 
Eduard  Bernstein  has  remained  in  comparative  obscurity,  not- 
withstanding the  vigour  of  his  doctrinal  views  and  his  great 
intellectual  influence;  why,  in  Holland,  Domela  Nieuwenhuis 
has  in  the  end  lost  his  leading  position ;  why,  in  France,  a  man 
possessed  of  so  much  talent  and  cultivation  as  Paul  Lafargue, 

^  Giuseppe  Pecchio,  TJn '  Elesione  di  Merribri  del  Parlamento  in  Inghil- 
terra,  Lugano,  1826,  p.  109. 

^  Thomas  Carlyle,  Latter  Day  Pamphlets,  No.  V,  ' '  Stump-Orator, ' ' 
Thomas  Carlyle 's  Works,  "The  Standard  Edition,"  Chapman  and  Hall, 
London,  1906,  vol.  iii,  p.  167. 

*J.  Ernest-Charles,  Les  Lettres  du  Parlement,  "La  Eevue, "  1901,  vol. 
xxxix,  p.  361. 

'A  critic  says  of  Jaures  that  he  "governs  by  eloquence."  "Jaures  est 
orateur ;  c  'est  un  vaste  orateur,  et  son  eloquence  est  lyrique,  s  'etale  en 
larges  periodes,  pour  I'essort  desquelles  11  faut  de  larges  amphitheatres. 
La  societe,  1 'universe,  toute  la  societe,  si  possible,  dans  sa  majestueuse 
unite,  et  1 'universe  dans  sa  prodigieuse  immensite,  ce  serait  mieux  encore, 
sont  les  amphitheatres  naturels,  les  auditoires  necessaires,  devant  qui 
Jaures  se  sent  de  taille  a  diseourir"  (Edouard  Berth,  Les  discours  de 
Jaures,  "Mouvement  Soeialiste, "  series  2,  iv,  No.  144,  December  1,  1904, 
pp.  215  and  218).  Another  biographer  believes  that  in  Jaures'  skull  he 
can  recognize  the  anthropological  type  of  the  ' '  born  orator  " :  "  il  a  la  tete 
faite  pour  parler  au  loin  et  regarder  en  I'air"  (Gustave  Tery,  Jean  Jaures, 
le  poete  lyrique,  "L'CEuvre, "  Paris,  1904,  viii,  p.  11).  Cf.  also  the  view 
expressed  by  Urbain  Gohier,  Histoire  d'une  trahison,  1899-1903,  Societe 
Parisienne  d 'edition,  Paris,  1903,  pp.  28-9. 

° Richard  Chamarz,  CharaMersTcissen  Oesterreichischer  Politiker,  "Die 
Zeit,"  Naumann,  1902,  p.  493. 


POWER  OF  ORATORY  71 

closely  connected  by  family  ties  with  Karl  Marx,  failed  to  attain 
such  a  position  in  the  councils  of  the  party  as  Guesde,  who  is 
far  from  being  a  man  of  science,  or  even  a  man  of  very  power- 
ful intelligence,  but  who  is  a  notable  orator. 

Those  who  aspire  to  leadership  in  the  labour  organizations 
fully  recognize  the  Importance  of  the  oratorical  art.    In  March, 

1909,  the  socialist  students  of  Ruskin  College,  Oxford,  expressed 
discontent  with  their  professors  because  these  gave  to  sociology 
and  to  pure  logic  a  more  important  place  in  the  curriculum  than 
to  oratorical  exercises.  Embryo  politicians,  the  students  fully 
recognized  the  profit  they  would  derive  from  oratory  in  their 
chosen  career.  Resolving  to  back  up  their  complaint  by  ener- 
getic action,  they  went  on  strike  until  they  had  got  their  own 
way.'' 

The  prestige  acquired  by  the  orator  in  the  minds  of  the  crowd 
is  almost  unlimited.  What  the  masses  appreciate  above  all  are 
oratorical  gifts  as  such,  beauty  and  strength  of  voice,  suppleness 
of  mind,  badinage ;  whilst  the  content  of  the  speech  is  of  quite 
secondary  importance.  A  spouter  who,  as  if  bitten  by  a  taran- 
tula, rushes  hither  and  thither  to  speak  to  the  people,  is  apt  to 
be  regarded  as  a  zealous  and  active  comrade,  whereas  one  who, 
speaking  little  but  working  much,  does  valuable  service  for  the 
party,  is  regarded  with  disdain,  and  considered  but  an  incom- 
plete socialist.^ 

Unquestionably,  the  fascination  exercised  by  the  beauty  of  a 
sonorous  eloquence  is  often,  for  the  masses,  no  more  than  the 
prelude  to  a  long  series  of  disillusionments,  either  because  the 
speaker's  practical  activities  bear  no  proportion  to  his  oratorical 
abilities,  or  simply  because  he  is  a  person  of  altogether  common 
character.  In  most  cases,  however,  the  masses,  intoxicated  by 
the  speaker's  powers,  are  hypnotized  to  such  a  degree  that  for 
long  periods  to  come  they  see  in  him  a  magnified  image  of  their 
own  ego.^  Their  admiration  and  enthusiasm  for  the  orator  are, 
in  ultimate  analysis,  no  more  than  admiration  and  enthusiasm 
for  their  own  personalities,  and  these  sentiments  are  fostered  by 

r-  ■-  ...I-  .,.  .  _.i I...—  ■...■.  -■■  '  ■' ■'  ■ 

'Cf.  a  notice  in  "The  Westminster  Gazette,"  March  30,  1909. 

*  Adolf o  Zerboglio,  Ancora  la  Propaganda  improduttiva,  "Critica  So- 
ciale, "  xiii.  No.   14. 

*  Cf .  regarding  the  emotional  relationships  between  leaders  and  the  masses 
a  sketch  by  J.  K.  Kochanowski,  UrzeitMdnge  und  Wetterleuchten  Ge- 
schichtlicJier  Gesetse  in  den  Ereignissen  der  Gegenwart,  Wagner,  Innsbruck, 

1910,  p.  19. 


72  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

the  orator  in  that  he  undertakes  to  speak  and  to  act  in  the  name 
of  the  mass,  in  the  name,  that  is,  of  every  individual.  In  re- 
sponding to  the  appeal  of  the  great  orator,  the  mass  is  uncon- 
sciously influenced  by  its  own  egoism. 

Numerous  and  varied  are  the  personal  qualities  thanks  to 
which  certain  individuals  succeed  in  ruling  the  masses.  These 
qualities,  which  may  be  considered  as  specific  qualities  of  lead- 
ership, are  not  necessarily  all  assembled  in  every  leader.  Among 
them,  the  chief  is  the  force  of  will  which  reduces  to  obedience 
less  powerful  wills.  Next  in  importance  come  the  following:  a 
wider  extent  of  knowledge  which  impresses  the  members  of  the 
leaders'  environment;  a  catonian  strength  of  conviction,  a  force 
of  ideas  often  verging  on  fanaticism,  and  which  arouses  the  re- 
spect of  the  masses  by  its  very  intensity ;  self-sufficiency,  even  if 
accompanied  by  arrogant  pride,  so  long  as  the  leader  knows  how 
to  make  the  crowd  share  his  own  pride  in  himself ;  ^'^  in  excep- 
tional cases,  finally,  goodness  of  heart  and  disinterestedness, 
qualities  which  recall  in  the  minds  of  the  crowd  the  figure  of 
Christ,  and  reawaken  religious  sentiments  which  are  decayed 
but  not  extinct. 

The  quality,  however,  which  most  of  all  impresses  the  crowd 
is  the  prestige  of  celebrity.  As  we  learn  from  modern  psy- 
chology, a  notable  factor  in  the  suggestive  influence  exercised  by 
a  man  is  found  in  the  elevation  to  which  he  has  climbed  on  the 
path  leading  to  the  Parnassus  of  celebrity.  Tarde  writes :  ' '  En 
realite,  quand  un  esprit  agit  sur  notre  pensee,  c'est  avec  la  col- 
laboration de  beaucoup  d'autres  esprits  a  travers  lesquels  nous 
le  voyons  et  dont  1  'opinion  se  reflete  dans  la  notre,  a  notre  insu. 
Nous  songeons  vaguement  a  la  consideration  qu'on  a  pour  lui 
...  a  1 'admiration  qu'il  inspire.  .  .  .  S'il  s'agit  d'un 
homme  celebre,  c'est  en  masse  et  confusement  que  le  nombre 
considerable  de  ses  appreciateurs  nous  impressionne,  et  cet  in- 
fluence revet  un  air  de  solidarite  objective,  de  realite  imperson- 
nelle,  qui  fait  le  prestige  propre  aux  personnes  glorieuses. "  ^^ 
It  suffices  for  the  celebrated  man  to  raise  a  finger  to  make  for 
himself  a  political  position.  It  is  a  point  of  honour  with  the 
masses  to  put  the  conduct  of  their  affairs  in  the  hands  of  a  ce- 


"Cf,  Eienzi  (H.  van  Kol),  op.  cit.,  p.  250;  Gabriel  Tarde,  L' Action  in- 
termentale,  "Grande  Revue,"  Paris,  1900,  iv.  No.  11,  p.  331;  Ettore  Cic- 
cotti,  Psicologia  del  Movimento  socialista,  Laterza,  Bari,  1903,  p.  128;  E, 
Fourniere,  op.  cit.,  p.  128. 

"G.  Tarde,  L' Action  intermentale,  p.  334. 


POWER  OF  PRESTIGE  73 

lebrity.  The  crowd  always  submits  willingly  to  the  control  of/ 
distinguished  individuals.  The  man  who  appears  before  them  I 
crowned  with  laurels  is  considered  a  priori  to  be  a  demi-god. 
If  he  consents  to  place  himself  at  their  head  it  matters  little 
where  he  has  gained  his  laurels,  for  he  can  count  upon  their 
applause  and  enthusiasm.  It  was  because  Lassalle  was  cele- 
brated at  once  as  poet,  philosopher,  and  barrister  that  he  was 
able  to  aw^aken  the  toiling  masses,  ordinarily  slumbering  or 
drawn  in  the  wake  of  the  bourgeois  democracy,  to  group  them 
round  his  own  person.  Lassalle  was  himself  well  aware  of  the 
effect  which  great  names  produce  upon  the  crowd,  and  for  this 
reason  he  always  endeavoured  to  secure  for  his  party  the  adhe- 
sion of  men  of  note.^-  In  Italy,  Enrico  Ferri,  who  while  still  a 
young  man  was  already  a  university  professor,  and  had  at  the 
same  time  acquired  wide  distinction  as  the  founder  of  the  new 
Italian  school  of  criminology,  had  merely  to  present  himself  at 
the  Socialist  Congress  of  Reggio  Emilia  in  the  year  1893  to 
secure  the  leadership  of  the  Italian  socialist  party,  a  leadership 
which  he  retained  for  fifteen  years.  In  like  manner,  Cesare  Lom- 
broso,  the  anthropologist,  and  Edmondo  De  Amicis,  the  author, 
had  no  sooner  given  in  their  adhesion  to  the  socialist  party  than 
they  were  immediately  raised  to  positions  of  honour,  one  becom- 
ing the  confidential  adviser  and  the  other  the  official  Homer 
of  the  militant  Italian  proletariat.  Yet  not  one  of  these  distin- 
guished men  had  become  a  regular  subscribing  member;  they 
had  merely  sent  certain  congratulatory  telegrams  and  letters.^^ 

"Lassalle,  who  had  a  keen  sense  of  theatrical  pomp,  and  wished  to  dis- 
play the  results  obtained  by  his  energies,  endeavoured  to  introduce  as  many 
bourgeois  as  he  could  into  the  Allgemeiner  Deutscher  Arbeiterverein.  In  his 
famous  last  speech  he  plumed  himself  upon  having  in  the  union  a  con- 
siderable number  of  men  ' '  who  belong  to  the  bourgeois  class  ...  a  whole 
series  of  authors  and  thinkers"  (Ferdinand  Lassalle,  Die  Agitation  des 
Allgemeinen  DeutscJien  Arbeitervereins  und  das  Versprechen  des  Konigs 
von  Preussen,  a  speech  at  Eonsdorf,  1864.  Edition  "Vorwarts, "  Berlin, 
1892,  p.  40).  Even  Bernstein,  whose  judgment  of  Lassalle  is  otherwise 
so  extremely  favourable,  admits  the  president's  excessive  inclination  for  the 
attraction  of  brilliant  names  into  the  Verein  (Eduard  Bernstein,  Ferdi- 
nand Lassalle  und  seine  Bedeutung  fur  die  Arbeiterklasse.  Edition  "Vor-, 
warts,"  Berlin,  1909,  p.  55). 

^^  Regarding  the  relationships  of  these  two  distinguished  men  with  Italian 
socialism,  consult  Eobert  Michels,  Edmondo  Be  Amicis,  "Sozialistische 
Monatshef te, "  1909,  fasc.  6,  p.  361;  and  Cesare  Lombroso,  Note  sulV  Uomo 
politico  e  suW  Vomo  privato,  Archiv.  di  Anthrop.  Grim  in  ale,  xxxii,  fasc. 
iv-v.  ^ 


74  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

In  France,  Jean  Jaures,  already  distin^ished  as  an  academic 
philosopher  and  as  a  radical  politician,  and  Anatole  France, 
the  celebrated  novelist,  attained  to  leading  positions  in  the 
labour  movement  as  soon  as  they  decided  to  join  it,  without  hav- 
ing to  undergo  any  period  of  probation.  In  England,  when 
the  poet  William  Morris,  at  the  age  of  forty-eight,  became  a 
socialist,  he  immediately  acquired  great  popularity  in  the  social- 
ist movement.  Similar  was  the  case  in  Holland  of  Herman 
Gorter,  author  of  the  fine  lyric  poem  Mei,  and  of  the  poetess 
Henriette  Roland-Hoist.  In  contemporary  Germany  there  are 
certain  great  men,  at  the  zenith  of  their  fame,  who  are  intimate 
sympathizers  with  the  party,  but  have  not  decided  to  join  it. 
It  may,  however,  be  regarded  as  certain  that  if  Gerhard  Haupt- 
mann,  after  the  success  of  his  Weavers,  and  "Werner  Sombart, 
when  his  first  published  writings  had  attracted  such  wide  at- 
tention, had  given  in  their  official  adhesion  to  the  German  so- 
cialist party,  they  would  now  be  amongst  the  most  honoured 
leaders  of  the  famous  three  million  socialists  of  Germany,  In 
the  popular  view,  to  bear  a  name  which  is  already  familiar  in 
certain  respects  constitutes  the  best  title  to  leadership.  Among 
the  party  leaders  will  be  found  men  who  have  acquired  fame 
solely  within  the  ranks  of  the  party,  at  the  price  of  long  and 
arduous  struggles,  but  the  masses  have  always  instinctively  pre- 
ferred to  these  those  leaders  who  have  joined  them  when  already 
full  of  honour  and  glory  and  possessing  independent  claims  to 
immortality.  Such  fame  won  in  other  fields  seems  to  them  of 
greater  value  than  that  which  is  won  under  their  own  eyes 
and  solely  in  the  field  of  socialism. 

Certain  accessory  facts  are  worth  mentioning  in  this  connec- 
tion. History  teaches  that  between  the  chiefs  who  have  acquired 
high  rank  solely  in  consequence  of  work  for  the  party  and  those 
who  have  entered  the  party  with  a  prestige  acquired  in  other 
fields,  a  conflict  speedily  arises,  and  there  often  ensues  a  pro- 
longed struggle  for  dominion  between  two  factions.  As  motives 
for  this  struggle,  we  have,  on  the  one  side,  envy  and  jealousy, 
and,  on  the  other,  presumption  and  ambition.  In  addition  to 
these  subjective  factors,  objective  and  tactical  factors  are  also 
in  operation.  The  great  man  who  has  attained  distinction  solely 
within  the  party  commonly  possesses,  when  compared  with  the 
outsider, ' '  the  advantage  of  a  keener  sense  for  the  immediately 
practical,  a  better  understanding  of  mass-psychology,  a  fuller 
knowledge  of  the  history  of  the  labour  movement,  and  in  many 


JEALOUSY  OF  LEADERS  75 

cases  clearer  ideas  concerning  the  doctrinal  content  of  the  party 
programme. 

In  this  struggle  between  the  two  groups  of  leaders,  two  phases 
may  almost  always  be  distinguished.  The  new  arrivals  begin 
by  detaching  the  masses  from  the  power  of  the  old  leaders,  and 
by  preaching  a  new  evangel  which  the  crowd  accepts  with  de- 
lirious enthusiasm.  This  evangel,  however,  is  no  longer  illu- 
minated by  the  treasury  of  ideas  which  as  a  whole  constitute  so- 
cialism properly  so-called,  but  by  ideas  drawn  from  the  science 
or  from  the  art  in  which  these  great  men  have  previously  ac- 
quired fame,  and  it  is  given  a  suggestive  weight  owing  to  the  ad- 
miration of  the  great  amorphous  public.  Meanwhile,  the  old' 
leaders,  filled  with  rancour,  having  first  organized  for  defence, 
end  by  openly  assuming  the  offensive.  They  have  the  natural 
advantage  of  numbers.  It  often  happens  that  the  new  leaders 
lose  their  heads  because,  as  great  men,  they  have  cherished  the 
illusion  that  they  are  quite  safe  from  such  surprises.  Are  not 
the  old  leaders  persons  of  mediocre  ability,  who  have  acquired 
their  present  position  only  at  the  price  of  a  long  and  arduous  ap- 
prenticeship ?  In  the  view  of  the  new-comers,  this  apprentice- 
ship does  not  demand  any  distinguished  intellectual  qualities, 
and  from  their  superior  platform  they  look  down  with  mingled 
disdain  and  compassion.  There  are,  however,  additional  reasons 
why  the  men  of  independent  distinction  almost  invariably  suc- 
cumb in  such  a  struggle.  Poets,  aesthetes,  or  men  of  science,  they 
refuse  to  submit  to  the  general  discipline  of  the  party,  and  at- 
tack the  external  forms  of  democracy.  But  this  weakens  their 
position,  for  the  mass  cherishes  such  forms,  even  when  it  is  ruled 
by  an  oligarchy.  Consequently  their  adversaries,  though  no 
more  truly  democratic,  since  they  are  much  cleverer  in  preserv- 
ing the  appearance  of  democracy,  gain  credit  with  the  crowd. 
It  may  be  added  that  the  great  men  are  not  accustomed  to 
confront  systematic  opposition.  They  become  enervated  when 
prolonged  resistance  is  forced  upon  them.  It  is  thus  easy  to  un- 
derstand why,  in  disgust  and  disillusion,  they  so  often  abandon 
the  struggle,  or  create  a  little  private  clique  for  separate  political 
action.  The  few  among  them  who  remain  in  the  party  are  in- 
evitably overthrown  and  thrust  into  the  background  by  the  old 
leaders.  The  great  Lassalle  had  already  found  a  dangerous 
competitor  in  the  person  of  the  simple  ex-workman,  Julius  Vahl- 
teich.  It  is  true  that  Lassalle  succeeded  in  disembarrassing 
himself  of  this  opponent,  but  had  he  lived  longer,  he  would  have 


76  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

> 
had  to  sustain  a  merciless  struggle  against  Liebknecht  and  Bebel. 
"William  Morris,  after  he  had  broken  with  the  old  professional 
leaders  of  the  English  labour  movement,  was  reduced  to  the 
leadership  of  his  little  guard  of  intellectuals  at  Hammersmith. 
Enrico  Ferri,  who  at  his  first  entrance  into  the  party  had  to 
encounter  the  tenacious  mistrust  of  the  old  leaders,  subsequently 
committed  theoretical  and  practical  errors  which  ended  by  de- 
priving him  once  for  all  of  his  position  as  official  chief  of  the 
Italian  socialists.  Gorter  and  Henriette  Roland-Hoist,  after  hav- 
ing for  some  years  aroused  intense  enthusiasm,  were  finally  over- 
thrown and  reduced  to  complete  impotence  by  the  old  notables  of 
the  party. 

Thus  the  dominion  dependent  upon  distinction  acquired  out- 
side the  party  is  comparatively  ephemeral.  But  age  in  itself 
is  no  barrier  whatever  to  the  power  of  the  leaders.  The  ancient 
Greeks  said  that  white  hairs  were  the  first  crown  which  must 
decorate  the  leaders'  foreheads.  To-day,  however,  we  live  in  an 
epoch  in  which  there  is  less  need  for  accumulated  personal  ex- 
perience of  life,  for  science  puts  at  every  one's  disposal  efficient 
means  of  instruction  that  even  the  youngest  may  speedily  become 
thoroughly  well  instructed.  To-day  everything  is  quickly  ac- 
quired, even  that  experience  in  which  formerly  consisted  the 
sole  and  genuine  superiority  of  the  old  over  the  young.  Thus, 
not  in  consequence  of  democracy,  but  simply  owing  to  the  tech- 
nical type  of  modern  civilization,  age  has  lost  much  of  its  value, 
and  therefore  has  lost,  in  addition,  the  respect  which  it  in- 
spired and  the  influence  which  it  exercised.  It  might  rather 
be  said  that  age  is  a  hindrance  to  progress  within  the  party,  just 
as  in  any  other  career  which  it  is  better  to  enter  in  youth  be- 
cause there  are  so  many  steps  to  mount.  This  is  true  at  least 
in  the  case  of  well  organized  parties,  and  where  there  is  a  great 
influx  of  new  members.  It  is  certainly  different  as  far  as  con- 
cerns leaders  who  have  grown  old  in  the  service  of  the  party. 
Age  here  constitutes  an  element  of  superiority.  Apart  from  the 
gratitude  which  the  masses  feel  towards  the  old  fighter  on  ac- 
count of  the  services  he  has  rendered  to  the  cause,  he  also  pos- 
sesses this  great  advantage  over  the  novice,  that  he  has  a  better 
knowledge  of  his  trade.  David  Hume  tells  us  that  in  practical 
agriculture  the  superiority  of  the  old  farmer  over  the  young 
arises  in  consequence  of  a  certain  uniformity  in  the  effects  of  the 
sun,  the  rain,  and  the  soil  upon  the  growth  of  plants,  and  be- 
cause practical  experience  teaches  the  rules  that  determine  and 


JEALOUSY  OF  LEADERS  77 

guide  these  influences.^*  In  party  life,  the  old  hand  has  a  sim- 
ilar advantage.  He  possesses  a  profounder  understanding  of  the 
relationships  between  cause  and  effect  which  form  the  frame- 
work of  popular  political  life  and  the  substance  of  popular  psy- 
chology. The  result  is  that  his  conduct  is  guided  by  a  fineness 
of  perception  to  which  the  young  have  not  yet  attained. 

14 1 1  Why  is  the  aged  husbandman  more  skilful  in  his  calling  than  the 
young  beginner  but  because  there  is  a  certain  uniformity  in  the  operation 
of  the  sun,  rain,  and  earth  towards  the  production  of  vegetables;  and 
experience  teaches  the  old  practitioner  the  rules  by  which  this  operation 
is  governed  and  directed"  (David  Hume,  Enquiries  Concerning  the  Human 
Understanding,  viii,  i,  65,  Ed.  Clar.  Press,  Oxford,  1902,  p.  85). 


CHAPTER   IX 

ACCESSOEY  PECULIARITIES  OF  THE  MASSES 

To  enable  us  to  understand  and  properly  to  appreciate  the  su- 
periority of  the  leaders  over  the  mass  it  is  necessary  to  turn  our 
attention  to  the  characteristics  of  the  rank  and  file.  The  ques- 
tion arises,  what  are  these  masses? 

It  has  already  been  shown  that  a  general  sentiment  of  in- 
difference towards  the  management  of  its  own  affairs  is  natural 
to  the  crowd,  even  when  organized  to  form  political  parties. 

The  very  composition  of  the  mass  is  such  as  to  render  it  un- 
able to  resist  the  power  of  an  order  of  leaders  aware  of  its 
own  strength.  An  analysis  of  the  German  trade  unions  in  re- 
spect of  the  age  of  their  members  gives  a  sufficiently  faithful 
picture  of  the  composition  also  of  the  various  socialist  parties. 
The  great  majority  of  the  membership  ranges  in  age  from  25 
to  39  years.^  Quite  young  men  find  other  ways  of  employing 
their  leisure;  they  are  heedless,  their  thoughts  run  in  erotic 
channels,  they  are  always  hoping  that  some  miracle  will  deliver 
them  from  the  need  of  passing  their  whole  lives  as  simple  wage- 
earners,  and  for  these  reasons  they  are  slow  to  join  a  trade 
union.  The  men  over  forty,  weary  and  disillusioned,  commonly 
resign  their  membership  (unless  retained  in  the  union  by  purely 
personal  interest,  to  secure  out-of-work  pay,  insurance  against 
illness,  and  the  like).  Consequently  there  is  lacking  in  the  or- 
ganization the  force  of  control  of  ardent  and  irreverent  youth 
and  also  that  of  experienced  maturity.  In  other  words,  the  lead- 
ers have  to  do  with  a  mass  of  members  to  whom  they  are  superior 
in  respect  of  age  and  experience  of  life,  whilst  they  have  noth- 
ing to  fear  from  the  relentless  criticism  which  is  so  peculiarly 
characteristic  of  men  who  have  just  attained  to  virility. 

Another  important  consideration  as  to  the  composition  of 
the  rank  and  file  who  have  to  be  led  is  its  fluctuating  character. 
It  seems,  at  any  rate,  that  this  may  be  deduced  from  a  report 

^  Adolf  Braun,  OrganisierharTceit  der  Arbeiter,  "Annalen  fiir  soziale 
Politik  und  Gesetzebung, "  i,  No.  1,  p.  47. 

78 


PECULIARITIES  OF  THE  MASSES      79 


of  the  socialist  section  of  Munich  for  the  year  1906.  It  contains 
statistics,  showing  analytically  the  individual  duration  of  mem- 
bership. The  figures  in  parenthesis  indicate  the  total  number 
of  members,  including  those  members  who  had  previously  be- 
longed to  other  sections. 


Membership  Classified  According  to  Duration. 


Less  than  6  months 1,502  about 

From  6  months  to  2  years 1,620 

years    684 


"       2 

to 

3  yea 

"      3 

to  4      " 

"      4 

to 

5      " 

"      5 

to 

6      " 

"      6 

to 

7      " 

"      7 

to 

8      " 

More  than 

8      *' 

1,020 
507 
270 
127 
131 
833 


% 
23 
24 
10 
15 

73 

4 

2 

2 
12y2  (1,666)  = 


(1,582) 

(1,816) 
(995) 

(1,965) 
(891) 
(844) 
(604) 

(1,289) 


The  fluctuating  character  of  the  membership  is  manifest  in 
even  greater  degree  in  the  German  trade  unions.  This  has  given 
rise  to  the  saying  that  a  trade  union  is  like  a  pigeon-house  where 
the  pigeons  enter  and  leave  at  their  caprice.  The  German  Met- 
alworkers' Federation  (Deutscher  Metallarbeiterverband)  had, 
during  the  years  1906  to  1908,  210,561  new  members.  But  the 
percentage  of  withdrawals  increased  in  1906  to  60,  in  1907  to  83, 
and  in  1908  to  100.^  This  shows  us  that  the  bonds  connecting  the 
bulk  of  the  masses  to  their  organization  are  extremely  slender, 
and  that  it  is  only  a  small  proportion  of  the  organized  workers 
who  feel  themselves  really  at  one  with  their  unions.  Hence  the 
leaders,  when  compared  with  the  masses,  whose  composition 
varies  from  moment  to  moment,  constitute  a  more  stable  and 
more  constant  element  of  the  organized  membership. 

^Robert  Michels,  Die  deutsche  Sozialdemocratie,  I,  Sosiale  Zusammen- 
setzung,  ' '  Arch,  f iir  Sozialwissenschaf t, ' '  xxiii,  f asc,  2. 

*A.  von  Elm,  Fiihrer  und  Massen,  "  Korrespondenzblatt  der  Generalkom- 
mission, "  xxi,  No.  9. 


C.  INTELLECTUAL  FACTORS 


CHAPTER  X 

SUPEEIORITY  OF  THE  PROFESSIONAL  LEADERS  IN 
RESPECT  OF  CULTURE,  AND  THEIR  INDISPEN- 
SABILITY;  THE  FORMAL  AND  REAL  INCOMPE- 
TENCE OF  THE  MASS 

In  the  infancy  of  the  socialist  party,  when  the  organization  is 
still  weak,  when  its  membership  is  scanty,  and  when  its  princi- 
pal aim  is  to  diffuse  a  knowledge  of  the  elementary  principles  of 
socialism,  professional  leaders  are  less  numerous  than  are  leaders 
whose  work  in  this  department  is  no  more  than  an  accessory  oc- 
cupation. But  with  the  further  progress  of  the  organization, 
new  needs  continually  arise,  at  once  within  the  party  and  in  re- 
spect of  its  relationships  with  the  outer  world.  Thus  the  moment 
inevitably  comes  when  neither  the  idealism  and  enthusiasm  of 
the  intellectuals,  nor  yet  the  goodwill  with  which  the  prole- 
tarians devote  their  free  time  on  Sundays  to  the  work  of  the 
party,  suffice  any  longer  to  meet  the  requirements  of  the  case. 
The  provisional  must  then  give  place  to  the  permanent,  and 
dilettantism  must  yield  to  professionalism. 

With  the  appearance  of  professional  leadership,  there  ensues 
a  gi'eat  accentuation  of  the  cultural  differences  between  the  lead- 
ers and  the  led.  Long  experience  has  shown  that  among  the  fac- 
tors which  secure  the  dominion  qf  minorities  over  majorities — 
money  am^  its  equivalents  (economic  superiority),  tradition  and 
hereditary  transmission  (historical  superiority) — ^the  first  place 
must  be  given  to  the  formal  instruction  of  the  leaders  .(so-called 
intellectual  superiority).  Now  the  most  superficial  observation 
shows  that  in  the  parties  of  the  proletariat  the  leaders  are,  in 
matters  of  education,  greatly  superior  to  the  led. 

Essentially,  this  superiority  is  purely  formal.  Its  existence 
is  plainly  manifest  in  those  countries  in  which,  as  in  Italy,  the 
course  of  political  evolution  and  a  wide-spread  psychological 
predisposition  have  caused  an  afflux  into  the  labour  party  of  a 

80 


SUPERIORITY  OF  LEADERS  81 

great  number  of  barristers,  doctors,  and  university  professors. 
The  deserters  from  the  bourgeoisie  become  leaders  of  the  prole-  * 
tariat,  not  in  spite  of,  but  because  of,  that  superiority  of  formal 
instruction  which  they  have  acquired  in  the  camp  of  the  enemy 
and  have  brought  with  them  thence. 

It  is  obvious  that  the  dynamic  influence  of  these  newcomers 
over  the  mass  of  workers  will  diminish  in  proportion  as  their 
own  number  increases,  that  a  small  nucleus  of  doctors  and  bar- 
risters in  a  great  popular  party  will  be  more  influential  than  a 
considerable  quantity  of  intellectuals  who  are  fiercely  contending 
for  supremacy.^  In  other  countries,  however,  such  as  Germany,  i 
whilst  we  find  a  few  intellectuals  among  the  leaders,  by  far  - 
the  greater  number  of  these  are  ex-manual  workers.  In  these 
lands  the  bourgeois  classes  present  so  firm  a  front  against  the 
revolutionary  workers  that  the  deserters  from  the  bourgeoisie 
who  pass  over  to  the  socialist  camp  are  exposed  to  a  thorough- 
going social  and  political  boycott,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  the 
proletarians,  thanks  to  the  wonderful  organization  of  the  state, 
and  because  highly  developed  capitalist  manufacturing  industry 
demands  from  its  servitors  high  intelligence,  have  attained  to 
the  possession  of  a  considerable,  if  elementary,  degree  of  scholas- 
tic instruction,  w^hich  they  earnestly  endeavour  to  amplify  by 
private  study.  But  the  level  of  instruction  among  the  leaders 
of  w^orking-class  origin  is  no  longer  the  same  as  that  of  their 
former  workmates.  The  party  mechanism,  which,  through  the 
abundance  of  paid  and  honorary  posts  at  its  disposal,  offers  a 
career  to  the  workers,  and  which  consequently  exercises  a  power- 
ful attractive  force,  determines  the  transformation  of  a  number 
of  proletarians  with  considerable  intellectual  gifts  into  employees 
whose  mode  of  life  becomes  that  of  the  petty  bourgeois.  This 
change  of  condition  at  once  creates  the  need  and  provides  the 
opportunity  for  the  acquisition,  at  the  expense  of  the  mass,  of 
more  elaborate  instruction  and  a  clearer  view  of  existing  social 
relationships.-  Whilst  their  occupation  and  the  needs  of  daily 
life  render  it  impossible  for  the  masses  to  attain  to  a  profound 
knowledge  of  the  social  machinery,  and  above  all  of  the  working 

^In  the  earliest  days  of  the  Dutch  socialist  movement,  the  leaders,  all 
of  bourgeois  origin,  were  extremely  restricted  in  number.  For  this  vei^ 
reason,  it  seems,  they  resisted  in  every  possible  way  the  adhesion  to  the 
party  of  new  intellectuals  whose  competition  they  might  have  reason  to 
fear.  (Cf.  Frank  van  der  Goes,  Van  de  Oude  Parti j,  "Na  Tien  Jaar,"  pp. 
52  et  seq.) 

'  Cf .  Part  IV,  Chap.  V. 


82  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

of  the  political  machine,  the  leader  of  working-class  origin  is 
enabled,  thanks  to  his  new  situation,  to  make  himself  intimately 
familiar  with  all  the  technical  details  of  public  life,  and  thu3 
to  increase  his  superiority  over  the  rank  and  file.  In  proportion 
as  the  profession  of  politician  becomes  a  more  complicated  one, 
and  in  proportion  as  the  rules  of  social  legislation  become  more 
numerous,  it  is  necessary  for  one  who  would  understand  politics 
to  possess  wider  experience  and  more  extensive  knowledge.  Thus 
the  gulf  between  the  leaders  and  the  rest  of  the  party  becomes 
ever  wider,  until  the  moment  arrives  in  which  the  leaders  lose 
all  true  sense  of  solidarity  with  the  class  from  which  they  have 
sprung,  and  there  ensues  a  new  class-division  between  ex-prole- 
tarian captains  and  proletarian  common  soldiers.^  When  the 
workers  choose  leaders  for  themselves,  they  are  with  their  own 
hands  creating  new  masters  whose  principal  means  of  dominion 
'is  found  in  their  better  instructed  minds. 

It  is  not  only  in  the  trade-union  organization,  in  the  party 
administration,  and  in  the  party  press,  that  these  new  masters 
make  their  influence  felt.  Whether  of  working-class  or  of  bour- 
geois origin,  they  also  monopolize  the  party  representation  in 
parliament. 

All  parties  to-day  have  a  parliamentary  aim,  (There  is  only 
one  exception,  that  of  the  anarchists,  who  are  almost  without 
political  influence,  and  who,  moreover,  since  they  are  the  de- 
clared enemies  of  all  organization,  and  who,  when  they  form  or- 
ganizations, do  so  in  defiance  of  their  own  principles,  cannot 
be  considered  to  constitute  a  political  party  in  the  proper  sense 
of  the  term. )  They  pursue  legal  methods,  appealing  to  the  elec- 
tors, making  it  their  first  aim  to  acquire  parliamentary  influence, 
and  having  for  their  ultimate  goal  "the  conquest  of  political 
power."  It  is  for  this  reason  that  even  the  representatives  of 
the  revolutionary  parties  enter  the  legislature.  Their  parlia- 
mentary labours,  undertaken  at  first  with  reluctance,*  but  sub- 


'  Cf .  Part  VI,  Chap.  I. 

*It  is  well  known  that  in  all  countries  the  socialists  at  first  took  part 
in  elections  almost  in  spite  of  themselves,  and  full  of  scruples  and  theo- 
retical reserves  which  have  nothing  in  common  with  the  conception  of  par- 
liamentarism held  by  socialist  deputies  to-day.  Thus  in  Germany,  in  1869, 
some  years  after  the  first  participation  of  the  socialists  in  the  elections  to 
the  Eeichstag  of  the  North  German  Federation,  Wilhelm  Liebkneeht 
thought  it  necessary  to  justify  this  action  in  special  writings,  in  which 
express  reference  was  made  to  the  fact  that,  notwithstanding  this  participa- 
tion in  the  elections,  parliament  was  for  the  socialists  an  institution  of 


SUPERIORITY  OF  LEADERS  83 

sequently  with  increasing  satisfaction  and  increasing  profes- 
sional zeal,  remove  them  further  and  further  from  their  elec- 
tors. The  questions  which  they  have  to  decide,  and  whose  effec- 
tive decision  demand  on  their  part  a  serious  work  of  preparation, 
involve  an  increase  in  their  own  technical  competence,  and  a  con- 
sequent increase  in  the  distance  between  themselves  and  their 
comrades  of  the  rank  and  file.  Thus  the  leaders,  if  they  were 
not  ' '  cultured ' '  already,  soon  become  so.  But  culture  exercises 
a  suggestive  influence  over  the  masses. 

In  proportion  as  they  become  initiated  into  the  details  of  po- 
litical life,  as  they  become  familiarized  with  the  different  aspects 
of  the  fiscal  problem  and  with  questions  of  foreign  policy,  the 
leaders  gain  an  importance  which  renders  them  indispensable  so 
long  as  their  party  continues  to  practise  a  parliamentary  tactic, 
and  which  will  perhaps  render  them  important  even  should  this 
tactic  be  abandoned.  This  is  perfectly  natural,  for  the  leaders 
cannot  be  replaced  at  a  moment's  notice,  since  all  the  other 
members  of  the  party  are  absorbed  in  their  every-day  occupa- 
tions and  are  strangers  to  the  bureaucratic  mechanism,^     This 

quite  subordinate  importance.  In  Italy,  in  1882,  when  the  extension  of 
the  suffrage  induced  the  Italian  workers  to  abandon  the  policy  of  ab- 
stention from  voting  which  they  had  hitherto  practised,  Enrico  Bignami 
published  a  similar  apologia.  Liebknecht  wrote:  "By  our  speeches  in 
the  Reichstag  we  cannot  diffuse  among  the  masses  any  truths  that  could 
not  be  much  better  diffused  in  some  other  way.  Then  what  'practical' 
purpose  have  we  in  speaking  in  the  Eeichstag?  None  whatever!  And  to 
speak  without  purpose  is  folly.  We  gain  no  advantage,  whilst  we  incur 
the  obvious  disadvantage  of  sacrificing  our  principles,  of  debasing  our  seri- 
ous political  struggle  to  the  level  of  the  parliamentary  game,  and  of  en- 
couraging the  people  to  cherish  the  illusion  that  the  Bismarekian  Eeich- 
stag is  destined  to  solve  the  social  problem"  (Wilhelm  Liebknecht,  Ueber 
die  politische  Stellung  der  Sosialdemolcratie  insbesondere  mit  Besug  auf  den 
Reichstag,  Vorwarts-Verlag,  Berlin,  1893,  p.  15).  Bignami 's  view  was  a 
very  similar  one.  In  recommending  electoral  activity,  he  contended  that 
the  socialist  deputy  should  always  refrain  from  active  participation  in 
legislation,  and  that  the  only  purpose  of  his  presence  in  parliament  should 
be  to  proclaim  from  this  lofty  tribune  the  annihilation  of  the  very  privilege 
in  virtue  of  which  he  had  himself  mounted  that  tribune  (Enrico  Big- 
nami, II  Candidato  socialista,  Plebe,  Milan,  1882,  p.  3).  It  will  readilly 
be  understood  that  so  long  as  the  socialist  deputies  continued  to  hold  such 
views  of  their  parliamentary  position  they  could  take  no  part  in  '  *  practical 
politics. ' ' 

^It  must  not  be  supposed  that  the  technical  competence  of  the  leaders 
is  necessarily  profound,  and  it  may  be  quite  superficial.  It  has  been 
justly  observed  that  the  deputies  (especially  in  countries  in  which  the 
government  is  responsible  to  parliament)   have  to  spend  a  great  deal  of 


84  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

special  competence,  this  expert  knowledge,  which  the  leader  ac- 
quires in  matters  inaccessible,  or  almost  inaccessible,  to  the  mass, 
gives  him  a  security  of  tenure  which  conflicts  with  the  essential 
principles  of  democracy. 

The  technical  competence  which  definitely  elevates  the  leaders 
above  the  mass  and  subjects  the  mass  to  the  leaders,  has  its 
influence  reinforced  by  certain  other  factors,  such  as  routine, 
the  social  education  which  the  deputies  gain  in  the  chamber, 
and  their  special  training  in  the  work  of  parliamentary  commit- 
tees.^ The  leaders  naturally  endeavour  to  apply  in  the  normal 
life  of  the  parties  the  manoeuvres  they  have  learned  in  the  parlia- 
mentary environment,  and  in  this  way  they  often  succeed  in  di- 
verting currents  of  opposition  to  their  own  dominance^  The 
parliamentarians  are  past  masters  in  the  art  of  controlling 
meetings,  of  applying  and  interpreting  rules,  of  proposing  mo- 

their  valuable  time  in  intrigues,  and  that  just  as  journalists  must  often 
write,  so  deputies  must  often  speak,  impromptu,  discussing  subjects  with 
which  they  are  very  little  acquainted.  "Pour  qui  examine,  sait  ecouter 
et  observe,  ce  n'est  pas  uniquement  le  cabinet  actuel  qui  chancelle;  la 
desaffection,  une  certaine  desaffection,  0  ne  faut  rien  exagerer,  s'adresse  a 
I'outil  parlementaire  lui-meme.  Les  republicains  devraient  renoncer,  de 
leur  propre  initiative,  a  ce  regime,  use  de  palabres,  oii  un  depute  passe  tout 
son  temps  a  harceler  un  Ministre  lequel  emploie  tout  le  sien,  meme  ses 
veilles,  a  ne  pas  se  laisser  desar<5onner.  Toute  minute  se  depense  en  recep- 
tions, en  paroles,  et  en  preparation  de  discours.  Nul  n  'a  le  loisir  de  con- 
troler,  de  reflechir,  de  diriger.  La  qualite  premiere  d  'un  depute  et  d  'un 
Ministre  est  de  posseder  I'organe  et  le  talent  d'un  avocat  capable  de  causer 
de  tout,  a  toute  heure,  en  tous  lieux.  De  ce  regime  qui  a  succede  au 
noble  regno  de  I'epee  et  qui  precede  celui  du  travail,  de  ce  regno  de  la 
parlotte,  1 'opinion  a  deja  donne  une  forte  preuve  de  degout"  (Paul 
Brousse,  "Petit  Meridional,"  April  12,  1909). 

*  Cf .  Ettore  Ciccotti,  Montecitorio.  Noterelle  di  uno  che  c'e  staio,  Mon- 
gini,  Eome,  1908,  pp.  44,  45,  and  74.  Ciccotti  regards  the  committees  as 
the  seat  or  as  the  point  of  origin  of  an  oligarchy  within  parliament,  that  is 
to  say,  of  an  oligarchy  within  an  oligarchy. 

^  Bearing  upon  this  point,  a  striking  passage  may  be  quoted  from  the 
London  correspondence  of  the  socialist  ' '  Volksstimme, ' '  of  Frankf ort-on- 
the-Main,  of  February  2,  1909,  concerning  the  Ninth  Congress  of  the 
English  Labour  Party.  ' '  All  expectations  to  the  contrary  notwithstanding, 
the  two  closing  days  of  the  Congress  were  peaceful,  and  were  marked  by 
no  great  discussions.  This  shows  above  all  how  united  are  the  principal 
party  leaders  upon  matters  of  tactics;  but  it  shows  also  the  extraordinary 
.•adroitness  of  the  party  executive,  which  had  arranged  the  Agenda  in  such 
a  way  that'  it  was  possible  for  the  chairman  to  steer  the  Congress  past 
all  the  danger  points  almost  without  attracting  attention.  .  .  .  The  first 
preventive  measure  adopted  by  the  standing  orders  committee  was  to  rule 
out  of  the  Agenda  certain  resolutions  whose  discussion  was  regarded  aa 


SUPERIORITY  OF  LEADERS  85 

tions  at  opportune  moments;  in  a  word,  they  are  skilled  in  the 
use  of  artifices  of  all  kinds  in  order  to  avoid  the  discussion  of 
controversial  points,  in  order  to  extract  from  a  hostile  majority 
a  vote  favourable  to  themselves,  or  at  least,  if  the  worst  comes 
to  the  worst,  to  reduce  the  hostile  majority  to  silence.  There 
is  no  lack  of  means,  varying  from  an  ingenious  and  often  am- 
biguous manner  of  putting  the  question  when  the  vote  is  to  be 
taken,  to  the  exercise  on  the  crowd  of  a  suggestive  influence  by 
insinuations  which,  while  they  have  no  real  bearing  on  the  ques- 
tion at  issue,  none  the  less  produce  a  strong  impression.  As 
referendaries  (rapporteurs)  and  experts,  intimately  acquainted 
with  all  the  hidden  aspects  of  the  subject  under  discussion,  many 
of  the  deputies  are  adepts  in  the  art  of  employing  digressions, 
periphrases,  and  terminological  subtleties,  by  means  of  which 
they  surround  the  simplest  matter  with  a  maze  of  obscurity 
to  which  they  alone  have  the  clue.  In  this  way,  whether  acting 
in  good  faith  or  in  bad,  they  render  it  impossible  for  the  masses, 
whose  "theoretical  interpreters"  they  should  be,  to  follow  them, 
and  to  understand  them,  and  they  thus  elude  all  possibility  of 
technical  control.    They  are  masters  of  the  situation.^ 

The  intangibility  of  the  deputies  is  increased  and  their  privi- 
leged position  is  further  consolidated  by  the  renown  which  they 
acquire,  at  once  among  their  political  adversaries  and  among 
their  own  partisans,  by  their  oratorical  talent,  by  their  special- 
ized aptitudes,  or  by  the  charm  of  their  intellectual  or  even  of 
their  physical  personalities.  The  dismissal  by  the  organized 
masses  of  a  universally  esteemed  leader  would  discredit  the  party 
throughout  the  country.  Not  only  would  the  party  suffer  from 
being  deprived  of  its  leaders,  if  matters  were  thus  pushed  to  an 
extreme,  but  the  political  reaction  upon  the  status  of  the  party 
would  be  immeasurably  disastrous.  Not  only  would  it  be  neces- 
sary to  find  substitutes  without  delay  for  the  dismissed  leaders, 

needless  or  undesirable. ' '  Neither  the  correspondent  nor  the  editor  of  the 
"  Volksstimme "  thought  it  necessary  to  make  any  comment  on  this  pro- 
cedure. 

*It  is  interesting  to  note  that  the  developing  bourgeoisie  of  the  seven- 
teenth century  found  itself  in  relation  to  the  monarchy  in  the  same  state 
of  intellectual  inferiority  as  that  in  which  to-day  are  the  democratic 
masses  in  relation  to  their  leaders,  and  for  very  similar  reasons.  The  in- 
genious Louis  XIV  expressed  the  point  in  the  following  words:  "Toute 
I'autorite  se  trouvait  alors  [en  Tranche  Comte]  entre  les  mains  du  Parle- 
ment  qui,  comme  une  assemblee  de  simple  bourgeois,  serait  facile  et  h 
tromper  et  a  intimider"  (Dreyss,  op.  cit.,  vol.  ii,  p.  328). 


86  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

who  have  only  become  familiar  with  political  affairs  after  many 
years  of  arduous  and  unremitting  toil  (and  where  is  the  party 
which  between  one  day  and  the  next  would  be  able  to  provide 
efficient  substitutes?)  ;  but  also  it  has  to  be  remembered  that  it  is 
largely  to  the  personal  influence  of  their  old  parliamentary  chiefs 
that  the  masses  owe  their  success  in  social  legislation  and  in  the 
struggle  for  the  conquest  of  general  political  freedom. 

The  democratic  masses  are  thus  compelled  to  submit  to  a 
restriction  of  their  own  wills  when  they  are  forced  to  give  to 
their  leaders  an  authority  which  is  in  the  long  run  destructive  to 
the  very  principle  of  democracy.  The  leader's  principal  source 
of  power  is  found  in  his  indispensability.  One  who  is  indispen- 
sable has  in  his  power  all  the  lords  and  masters  of  the  earth.^ 
The  history  of  the  working-class  parties  continually  furnishes 
instances  in  which  the  leader  has  been  in  flagrant  contradiction 
with  the  fundamental  principles  of  the  movement,  but  in  which 
the  rank  and  file  have  not  been  able  to  make  up  their  minds  to 
draw  the  logical  consequences  of  this  conflict,  because  they  feel 
that  they  cannot  get  along  without  the  leader,  and  cannot  dis- 
pense with  the  qualities  he  has  acquired  in  virtue  of  the  very 
position  to  which  they  have  themselves  elevated  him,  and  be- 
cause they  do  not  see  their  way  to  find  an  adequate  substitute. 
Numerous  are  the  parliamentary  orators  and  the  trade-union 
leaders  who  are  in  opposition  to  the  rank  and  file  at  once  theo- 
retically and  practically,  and  who,  none  the  less,  continue  to 
think  and  to  act  tranquilly  on  behalf  of  the  rank  and  file.  These 
latter,  disconcerted  and  uneasy,  look  on  at  the  behaviour  of  the 
"great  men,"  but  seldom  dare  to  throw  off  their  authority  and 
to  give  them  their  dismissal. 

The  incompetence  of  the  masses  is  almost  universal  throughout 
the  domains  of  political  life,  and  this  constitutes  the  most  solid 
foundation  of  the  power  of  the  leaders.  The  incompetence  fur- 
nishes the  leaders  with  a  practical  and  to  some  extent  with  a 
moral  justification.  Since  the  rank  and  file  are  incapable  of  look- 
ing after  their  own  interests,  it  is  necessary  that  they  should 

*  One  who  is  indispensable  can  submit  even  the  hereditary  leader  to  hia 
will.  Eoscher  relates  that  a  despotic  prince  in  North  Germany,  when  one 
of  his  best  officials  was  offered  a  position  in  a  neighbouring  state,  asked 
the  minister  who  advised  the  prince  to  retain  the  official  in  his  own 
service,  "Is  he  indispensable?"  When  the  minister  replied  in  the  affirma- 
tive, the  prince  said,  "Let  him  go  then,  for  I  have  no  use  for  an  indis- 
pensable servant"  (Roscher,  op.  cit.,  p.  359). 


SUPERIORITY  OF  LEADERS  87 

have  experts  to  attend  to  their  affairs.  From  this  point  of  view 
it  cannot  he  always  considered  a  had  thing  that  the  leaders 
should  really  lead.  The  free  election  of  leaders  by  the  rank  and 
file  presupposes  that  the  latter  possess  the  competence  requisite 
for  the  recognition  and  appreciation  of  the  competence  of  the 
leaders.  To  express  it  in  French,  la  designation  des  capacites 
suppose  elle-meme  la  capacite  de  la  designation. 

The  recognition  of  the  political  immaturity  of  the  mass  and 
of  the  impossibility  of  a  complete  practical  application  of  the 
principle  of  mass-sovereignty,  has  led  certain  distinguished 
thinkers  to  propose  that  democracy  should  be  limited  by  de- 
mocracy itself.^''  Condorcet  wished  that  the  mass  should  itself 
decide  in  what  matters  it  was  to  renounce  its  right  of  direct  con- 
trol.-^^  This  would  be  the  voluntary  renunciation  of  sovereignty 
on  the  part  of  the  sovereign  mass.  The  French  Revolution, 
which  claimed  to  translate  into  practice  the  principle  of  free 
popular  government  and  of  human  equality,  and  according  to 
which  the  mutable  will  of  the  masses  was  in  the  abstract  the  su- 
preme law,  established  through  its  National  Assembly  that  the 
mere  proposal  to  restore  a  monarchical  form  of  government 
should  be  punishable  by  death.^-  In  a  point  of  such  essential 
importance  the  deliberative  power  of  the  masses  must  yield  to 
the  threat  of  martial  law.  Even  so  fanatical  an  advocate  of 
popular  sovereignty  as  Victor  Considerant  was  forced  to  ac- 
knowledge that  at  the  first  glance  the  machinery  of  government 
seemed  too  ponderous  for  it  to  appear  possible  for  the  people  as 
such  to  make  the  machine  work,  and  he  therefore  proposed  the 
election  of  a  group  of  specialists  whose  duty  it  should  be  to 
elaborate  the  text  of  the  laws  which  the  sovereign  people  had 
voted  in  principle.^^  Bernstein  also  denies  that  the  average  man 
has  sufficient  political  competence  to  render  unrestricted  popu- 
lar sovereignty  legitunate.  He  considers  that  a  great  part  of  the 
questions  that  have  to  be  decided  consist  of  peculiar  problems 
concerning  which,  until  all  men  become  living  encyclopedias,  a 

'»Cf.  Part  III,  Chap.  IV. 

"Condorcet,  Progres  de  UEsprit  hummn,  ed.  de  la  Bib.  Nat.,  p.  186. 

"  Adolphe  Thiers,  Histoire  de  la  Bevolution  Frangaise,  Brockhaus,  Leip- 
zig, 1846,  vol.  ii,  p.  141.  The  same  spirit  of  illogical  amalgamation  of  un- 
limited popular  sovereignty  with  the  most  rigid  and  despotic  tutelage  ex- 
ercised over  this  alleged  sovereign  by  its  leaders,  dominates  most  of  the 
speeches  of  the  Jacobins.  (Cf.,  for  example,  CEuvres  de  Danton,  recueiUies 
et  annotees  par  A.  Vermorel,  Cournol,  Paris,  pp.  119  et  seq.) 

"Victor  Considerant,  op.  cit.,  p.  41. 


88  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

few  only  will  have  interest  and  knowledge.  To  attain  to  an  ade- 
quate degree  of  information  regarding  such  questions,  so  that  a 
carefully  considered  judgment  can  be  given,  requires  a  rare 
sense  of  responsibility  such  as  cannot  at  present  be  attributed  to 
the  majority  of  the  citizens.^*  Even  Kautsky  could  not  but  rec- 
ognize the  difficulty  of  the  problem  thus  presented  to  the  labour 
movement;  he  has  pointed  out  that  it  is  not  every  province  of 
social  life  which  is  suitable  for  democratic  administration,  and 
that  democracy  must  be  introduced  gradually,  and  will  not  be 
completely  realized  until  those  interested  shall  have  become 
capable  of  forming  an  independent  judgment  upon  all  decisive 
questions;  and  he  shows  that  the  possibility  of  realizing  demo- 
cratic administration  will  be  greater  in  proportion  as  the  co- 
operation of  all  the  persons  concerned  in  the  decision  of  the  is- 
sues becomes  possible.^^ 

The  incompetence  of  the  masses,  which  is  in  last  analysis  al- 
ways recognized  by  the  leaders,  serves  to  provide  a  theoretical 
justification  for  the  dominion  of  these.  In  England,  which  owes 
to  Thomas  Carlyle  the  theory  of  the  supreme  importance  of 
great  men,  or  ''heroes,"  and  where  that  theory  has  not,  as  in 
Germany,  been  utterly  expelled  from  the  official  doctrine  of 
socialism  by  the  theory  of  historical  materialism,  even  socialist 
thought  has  been  profoundly  influenced  by  the  great-men  theory. 
/  The  English  socialists,  in  fact,  including  those  of  the  most  vari- 
ous tendencies,  have  openly  declared  that  if  democracy  is  to  be 
effective  it  must  assume  the  aspect  of  a  benevolent  despotism. 
"He  [the  leader]  has  a  scheme  to  which  he  works,  and  he  has 
the  power  to  make  his  will  effective."^®  In  all  the  affairs  of 
management  for  whose  decision  there  is  requisite  specialized 
knowledge,  and  for  whose  performance  a  certain  degree  of  au- 
thority is  essential,  a  measure  of  despotism  must  be  allowed,  and 
thereby  a  deviation  from  the  principles  of  pure  democracy. 
4  From  the  democratic  point  of  view  this  is  perhaps  an  evil,  but 
\  it  is  a  necessary  evil.  Socialism  does  not  signify  everything  hjj 
the  people,  but  everything  for  the  people.^^     Consequently  the 

"  Eduard  Bernstein,  Zur  Geschichte  und  Theorie  des  ■  Sozialismus,  Edel- 
heim,  Berlin,  1910,  p.  204. 

"  Karl  Kautsky,  Consumvereine  und  Arbeiterhewegung,  Ignaz  Brand, 
Erste  Wiener  Volksbuchhandlung,  Vienna,  1897,  p.  16. 

^^  James  Eamsay  Macdonakl,  Socialism  and  Society,  Independent  Labour 
Party,  London,  1905,  pp.  xvi,  xvii. 

"  Ernest  Belfort  Bax,  Essays  in  Socialism  New  and  Old,  Grant  Richards, 
London,  1906,  pp.  174,  182. 


SUPERIORITY  OF  LEADERS  89 

English  socialists  entrust  the  salvation  of  democracy  solely  to 
the  good  will  and  to  the  insight  of  the  leaders.  The  majority 
determined  by  the  counting  of  heads  can  do  no  more  than  lay 
down  the  general  lines ;  all  the  rest,  which  is  tactically  of  greater 
importance,  devolves  upon  the  leaders.  The  result  is  that  quite 
a  small  number  of  individuals — three,  suggests  Bax — effectively 
controls  the  policy  of  the  whole  party.  Social  democracy  is  not 
democracy,  but  a  party  fighting  to  attain  to  democracy.  In 
other  words,  democracy  is  the  end,  but  not  the  means.^^  The 
impossibility  of  the  means'  being  really  democratic  is  conspicu- 
ously shown  by  the  character  of  the  socialist  party  as  an  under- 
taking endowed  with  certain  financial  characteristics,  and  one 
which,  though  created  for  ideological  aims,  depends  for  its  suc- 
cess, not  only  upon  the  play  of  economic  forces,  but  also  upon 
the  quality  of  the  persons  who  have  assumed  leadership  and  re- 
sponsibility. 

Here,  as  elsewhere,  the  saying  is  true  that  no  undertaking 
can  succeed  without  leaders,  without  managers.  In  parallelism 
with  the  corresponding  phenomena  in  industrial  and  commer- 
cial life,  it  is  evident  that  with  the  growth  of  working-class 
organization  there  must  be  an  accompanying  growth  in  the 
value,  the  importance,  and  the  authority  of  the  leaders.^^  The 
principle  of  the  division  of  labour  creates  specialism,  and  it  is 
with  good  reason  that  the  necessity  for  expert  leadership  has  been 
compared  with  that  which  gives  rise  to  specialism  in  the  medical 
profession  and  in  technical  chemistry.^'' 

Specialism,  however,  implies  authority.  Just  as  the  patient 
obeys  the  doctor,  because  the  doctor  knows  better  than  the 
patient,  having  made  a  special  study  of  the  human  body  in 
health  and  disease,  so  must  the  political  patient  submit  to  the 
guidance  of  his  party  leaders,  who  possess  a  political  competence 
impossible  of  attainment  by  the  rank  and  file. 

Thus  democracy  ends  by  undergoing  transformation  into  a 
form  of  government  by  the  best,  into  an  aristocracy.  At  once 
materially  and  morally,  the  leaders  are  those  who  must  be  re- 
garded as  the  most  capable  and  the  most  mature. 

Is  it  not,  therefore,  their  duty  as  well  as  their  right  to  put 

"  Bax,  ibid. 

'"Fausto  Pagliari,  Le  organiszasione  e  i  loro  Impiegati,  relazione  al  VII 
Cougresso  Nazionale  delle  societa  di  resistenza,  Tip.  Coop.,  Turin,  1908,  pp. 
3,  5,  8. 

^"Kienzi  (H.  van  Kol),  op.  cit.,  p.  250. 


90  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

themselves  at  the  head,  and  to  lead  not  merely  as  representatives 
of  the  party,  but  as  individuals  proudly  conscious  of  their  own 
personal  value  ?  ^^ 

^'  Such  was  in  actual  fact  the  thesis  of  a  Milanese  politician,  Guglielmo 
Gambarotta.  Cf.  his  article  La  Funsione  dell'  TJomo  politico,  "Eivista 
critica  del  Socialismo,"  Eome,  1899,  anno  I,  fasc.  9,  p.  888.  Gambarotta, 
not  having  succeeded  in  becoming  a  socialist  deputy,  abandoned  the  social- 
ists to  join  the  bourgeois  radicals. 


PAET    TWO 
AUTOCRATIC    TENDENCIES   OF   LEADERS 


i 


CHAPTER   I 

THE    STABILITY   OF   LEADERSHIP 

No  one  who  studies  the  history  of  the  socialist  movement  in  Ger- 
many can  fail  to  be  greatly  struck  by  the  stability  of  the  group 
of  persons  leading  the  party. 

In  1870-71,  in  the  year  of  the  foundation  of  the  German  Em- 
pire, we  see  two  great  personalities,  those  of  Wilhelm  Lieb- 
kneeht  and  August  Bebel,  emerge  from  the  little  group  of  the 
faithful  to  the  new  socialist  religion  to  acquire  leadership  of 
the  infant  movement  by  their  energy  and  their  intelligence. 
Thirty  years  later,  at  the  dawn  of  the  new  century,  we  find  them 
still  occupying  the  position  of  the  most  prominent  leaders  of  the 
German  workers.^  This  stability  in  the  party  leadership  in  Ger- 
many is  very  striking  to  the  historian  when  he  compares  it  with 
what  has  happened  in  the  working-class  parties  elsewhere  in 
Europe.  The  Italian  socialist  party,  indeed,  for  the  same  rea- 
sons as  in  Germany,  has  exhibited  a  similar  stability.  Elsewhere, 
however,  among  the  members  of  the  Old  International,  a  few  in- 
dividualities only  of  minor  importance  have  retained  their  faith 
in  socialism  intact  into  the  new  century.  In  Germany,  it  may 
be  said  that  the  socialist  leaders  live  in  the  party,  grow  old  and 
die  in  its  service. 

AVe  shall  subsequently  have  occasion  to  refer  to  the  smallness, 
in  Germany,  of  the  number  of  desertei^  from  the  socialist  camp 
to  join  the  other  parties.^    In  addition  to  these  few  who  have 


*In  the  minutes  of  the  Congress  of  Unification  held  at  Gotha  in  1875, 
at  which  the  existing  German  socialist  party  was  born,  we  find  among  the 
seventy-three  delegates  the  following  names  of  persons,  who  all  remained 
faithful  to  the  party,  and  of  whom  those  yet  alive  are  still  prominent  and 
active  workers  on  its  behalf:  Auer,  Bock,  Bios,  Geib,  Grillenberger,  Lieb- 
knecht,  Loewenstein,  Dreesbach,  A.  Kapell,  Molkenbuhr,  Hoifmann,  Bebel, 
Motteler  and  StoUe.  (Cf.  ProtokoU  reissued  by  the  Frankfort  "Volks- 
stimme, "  Waffenlcammer  des  Sosialismus,  eine  Sammlung  alter  und  neuer 
Propagandaschriften.  Sixth  half-yearly  issue,  January  to  June,  1906,  p. 
122.) — The  facts  recorded  on  p.  85  show  that  the  stability  in  the  rank  and 
file  of  the  party  is  far  less  marked  than  the  stability  of  the  leadership. 

^Vide  infra,  pp.  107  et  seq. 

93 


94  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

completely  abandoned  socialism,  there  are  some,  who,  after  work- 
ing on  behalf  of  the  party  for  a  time,  have  left  politics  to  devote 
their  energies  to  other  fields.  There  are  certain  men  of  letters, 
who  rose  in  the  party  like  rockets,  to  disappear  with  corre- 
sponding rapidity.  After  a  brief  and  sometimes  stormy  activity, 
they  have  quitted  the  rude  political  stage  to  return  to  the  peace- 
ful atmosphere  of  the  study;  and  often  their  retirement  from 
active  political  life  has  been  accomplished  by  a  mental  estrange- 
ment from  the  world  of  socialist  thought,  whose  scientific  content 
they  had  perhaps  never  assimilated.  Among  such  may  be  men- 
tioned: Dr.  Paul  Ernst,  at  one  time  editor  of  the  "Volkstrib- 
iine";  Dr.  Bruno  Wille,  who  led  the  section  of  Die  Jungen  (the 
Young  Men)  to  the  assault  upon  the  veterans  of  the  party  who 
were  captained  by  Bebel  and  Liebknecht  (1890)  ;  Dr.  Otto  Erich 
Hartleben,  once  dramatic  critic  of  "Vorwarts,"  but  never  a 
conspicuous  member  of  the  party ;  Dr.  Ludwig  Woltmann,  dele- 
gate of  the  Ehenish  manufacturing  town  of  Barmen  to  the  Con- 
gress of  Hanover  in  1899,  where  he  was  engaged  in  the  defence 
of  Bernstein,  and  who,  after  writing  some  socialist  books  which 
constitute  notable  contributions  to  sociology,  subsequently  de- 
voted himself  entirely  to  ' '  political  anthropology ' '  with  a  strong 
nationalist  flavour;^  Ernst  Gystrow  (Dr.  A¥illy  Hellpach)  ;  and 
several  others,  for  the  most  part  talented  and  highly  cultured 
men  who  have  made  names  for  themselves  in  German  belletristic 
literature  or  in  German  science,  but  who  were  not  suited  for  en- 
during political  activities.  It  has  also  happened  more  than  once 
in  the  history  of  the  social  democracy  that  men  dominated  by  a 
fixed  idea,  and  inspired  by  the  hope  of  concentrating  upon  the 
realization  of  this  idea  the  whole  activity  of  socialist  propaganda, 
or  of  simply  annexing  socialism  to  the  service  of  this  obsession, 

-■       -■  I  ■■  -  ■■ I     I-..—    ■■1.^— »—  ■—!     I  ■        ■■  ■■■■■■■II  .■■■III  .       .^ 

^We  owe  to  Paul  Ernst  a  little  work  on  social  science,  Die  Gesellschaft- 
licher  Frodiiktion  des  Kapitals  hei  gesteigerter  ProduJctivitdt  der  Arbeit 
(1894),  and  also  two  literary  studies,  LumpenbagascJi  and  Im  Chambre 
separee,  which  belong  to  socialist  imaginative  literature. — To  the  socialist 
phase  of  Otto  Erich  Hartleben  belong  the  interesting  description  of  social 
life  TJm  den  Glauhen,  ein  Tagebuch  (known  also  under  the  title  Die  Se- 
renyi),  published  in  "Zwei  Novellen, "  Wilhelm  Friedrich,  Leipzig,  1887. 
— Ludwig  Woltmann  wrote  Die  DarwinscJie  Theorie  und  der  Sozialismus, 
Beitrag  sur  QUaturgescJdchte  der  menschliclien  Gesellschaft  (Diisseldorf, 
1889),  and  Der  Mstorische  Materialismus,  Darstellung  und  Kritilc  der  Marx- 
istischen  Weltanschauung  (Diisseldorf,  1900).  His  brief  but  able  and  bold 
defence  of  Bernstein  will  be  found  in  the  ProtoTcoll  of  the  Congress  of 
Hanover   (Buchhandlung  "Vorwarts,"  Berlin,  1899,  pp.  147  et  seq.). 


THE  STABILITY  OF  LEADERSHIP      95 

have  rnshed  into  the  party,  only  to  leave  it  as  suddenly  with  a 
chilled  enthusiasm  as  soon  as  they  perceived  that  they  were  at- 
tempting the  impossible.  At  the  Munich  Congress  of  1902,  the 
pastor  Georg  Welker  of  Wiesbaden,  a  member  of  the  sect  of 
Freireligiosen  (Broad  Church),  inspired  by  all  the  ardour  of  a 
neophyte,  wished  to  substitute  for  the  accepted  socialist  principle 
that  religion  is  to  be  co*isidered  as  a  private  matter  the  tactically 
dangerous  device  Ecrasez  rinfdme.  Again,  at  the  first  Congress 
of  Socialist  Women,  which  was  held  contemporaneously  with  the 
Munich  Socialist  Congress,  Dr.  Karl  von  Oppel,  who  had  re- 
cently returned  from  Cape  Colony  and  was  a  new  member  of 
the  socialist  party,  emphasized  the  need  for  the  study  by  social- 
ists of  foreign  languages,  and  even  foreign  dialects,  to  enable 
them  to  come  into  more  intimate  contact  with  their  brethren  in 
other  lands,  and  in  his  peroration  insisted  that  the  use  of  the 
familiar  *'thou"  should  be  made  universal  and  compulsory  in 
the  intercourse  of  socialist  comrades.  Such  phenomena  are  char- 
acteristic of  the  life  of  all  parties,  but  are  especially  common 
among  socialists,  since  socialism  exercises  a  natural  force  of  at- 
traction for  cranks  of  all  kinds.  Every  vigorous  political  party 
which  is  subversive  in  its  aims  is  predestined  to  become  for  a 
time  an  exercise  ground  for  all  sorts  of  innovators  and  quack- 
salvers, for  persons  who  wish  to  cure  the  ills  of  travailing  hu- 
manity by  the  use  of  their  chosen  specifics,  employed  exclusively 
in  smaller  or  larger  doses — the  substitution  of  friction  with  oil 
for  washing  with  soap  and  water,  the  wearing  of  all-wool  under- 
clothing, vegetarianism.  Christian  science,  neo-Malthusianism, 
and  other  fantasies. 

More  serious  than  the  loss  of  such  casual  socialists  were  the 
losses  which  the  party  sustained  during  the  period  of  the  early 
and  fierce  application  of  the  anti-socialist  laws.  At  this  time,  in 
the  period  of  reaction  from  1840  to  1850,  a  large  proportion  of 
the  leaders  were  forced  to  emigrate  to  America.*  Still  more  seri- 
ous were  the  losses  sustained  by  the  party  during  the  Bismarck- 
ian  regime.    Bebel  declares  that  at  this  time  the  number  of  those 

*  Among  these  refugees,  in  the  early  fifties,  was  F.  A.  Sorge,  one  of 
the  founders  of  the  "Neue  Zeit. "  When  by  the  influence  of  Marx  the 
General  Council  of  the  International  had  in  1872  been  transferred  from 
London  to  New  York,  Sorge  assumed  the  largely  imaginary  function  of 
secretary  of  the  Council,  and  subsequently,  after  the  extinction  of  the  Old 
International,  devoted  himself  entirely  to  music.  Another  refugee  was  the 
poet  Robert  Schweichel,  who  returned  to  Germany  after  fifty  years  in 
America. 


96  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

who  were  deprived  of  their  means  of  livelihood  and  were  forced 
to  seek  work  and  asylum  on  foreign  soil  ran  into  several  hun- 
dreds. Of  the  nucleus  of  those  who  before  the  passing  of  the 
anti-socialist  laws  which  unchained  the  tempest  against  the  so- 
cialists, had  worked  actively  in  the  party  as  propagandists,  edi- 
tors, and  deputies,  more  than  eighty  left  Germany,  which  most 
of  them  never  revisited.  ' '  This  involved  a  great  draining  of  our 
energies."^  In  the  worst  years  the  exodus  was  particularly 
strong.  Thus  in  the  year  1881,  just  before  the  elections  had  dem- 
onstrated the  indomitable  vitality  of  the  German  socialist  party, 
Friedrich  Wilhelm  Fritzsche  (ob.  1905)  and  Julius  Vahlteich, 
the  critic  of  Lassalle,  both  of  them  at  one  time  leaders  in  the 
party  of  Lassalle  and  socialist  deputies  to  the  Reichstag,  crossed 
the  Atlantic  never  to  return.^  Notwithstanding  the  storm  which 
raged  for  more  than  ten  years  against  the  socialist  party,  the 
number  of  those  whose  socialist  activity  survived  this  period  of 
terror  was  very  large.  Obviously,  then,  in  times  of  comparative 
calm  the  stability  of  the  leaders  must  be  considerably  greater. 
The  author  has  examined  the  lists  of  those  present  at  the  con- 
gresses held  in  1893  by  three  of  the  international  socialist  parties, 
namely,  the  German  social  democrats,  the  Parti  Ouvrier  (Gues- 
distes)  in  France,  and  the  Italian  socialist  party,  in  order  to  as- 
certain the  names  of  those  who  in  the  year  1910  were  still  in  the 
first  rank  of  the  fighters  on  behalf  of  socialism  in  their  respective 
countries.  The  results  of  this  enquiry,  which  cannot  claim  abso- 
lute scientific  precision,  but  which  have  none  the  less  consider- 
able practical  value,  are  as  follows.  Of  the  200  delegates  to  the 
Congress  of  Cologne,  60  were  still  fighting  in  the  breach  in  1910 ; 
of  the  93  delegates  of  the  Congress  of  Paris,  12 ;  and  of  the  311 
delegates  to  the  Congress  of  Reggio  Emilia,  102.^  This  shows  a 
very  high  percentage  of  survivals,  above  all  for  the  proletarian 
parties  of  Italy  and  Germany,  but  to  a  less  extent  for  the  Parti 

^  Protolcoll  der  Verhandlungen  des  Farteitags  zu  Salle  a/S.,  1890,  p.  29. 

*  Vahlteich,  however,  though  lost  to  the  German  labour  movement,  was 
not  lost  to  socialism,  for  as  editor  of  the  German  socialist  daily  published 
in  New  York  he  continued  to  play  an  active  part  in  the  life  of  the  party 
until  his  death  in  1915. 

'  Cf.  the  lists  of  delegates  published  in  the  ProtoJcoll  iiber  die  Verhand- 
lungen des  Parteitages  su  Coin  (Verlag  Vorwilrts,  Berlin,  1893,  pp.  28G 
et  seq.)  ;  Onzieme  Congres  National  du  Parti  Ouvrier  tenu  a,  Paris  du 
7  au  9  octobre,  1893  (Imp.  Ouvriere  S.  Delory,  Lille,  1893,  p.  9);  11  Con- 
gresso  di  Eeggio  Emilia,  Verbale  stenografico  (Tip.  degli  Operai  [Societa 
Cooperativa],  Milan,  1893,  p.  57). 


THE  STABILITY  OF  LEADERSHIP      97 

Ouvrier.^    The  bourgeois  parties  of  the  left  on  the  Continent  will 
hardly  find  it  possible  to  boast  of  a  similar  continuity  in  the 
personnel  of  their  leaders  great  and  small.    In  the  working-class  | 
parties  we  find  that  the  personnel  of  the  officials  is  even  more  \/ 
stable  than  that  of  the  leaders  in  general.     The  causes  of  this  \  ' 
stability,  as  will  be  shown  in  the  sequel,  depend  upon  a  complex :' 
of  numerous  phenomena. 

Long  tenure  of  office  involves  dangers  for  democracy.  For 
this  reason  those  organizations  which  are  anxious  to  retain  their 
democratic  essence  make  it  a  rule  that  all  the  offices  at  their  dis- 
posal shall  be  conferred  for  brief  periods  only.''  If  we  take  into 
account  the  number  of  offices  to  be  filled  by  universal  suffrage 
and  the  frequency  of  elections,  the  American  citizen  is  the  one 
who  enjoys  the  largest  measure  of  democracy.  In  the  United 
States,  not  only  the  legislative  bodies,  but  all  the  higher  adminis- 
trative and  judicial  officials  are  elected  by  popular  vote.  It  has 
been  calculated  that  every  American  citizen  must  on  an  average 
exercise  his  function  as  a  voter  twenty-two  times  a  year.^"  The 
members  of  the  socialist  parties  in  the  various  countries  must 
to-day  exercise  similarly  extensive  electoral  activities:  nomina- 
tion of  candidates  for  parliament,  county  councils,  and  munici- 

^  It  would  obviously  be  altogether  erroneous  to  deduce  from  this  the 
existence  in  the  French  national  character  of  any  particular  fickleness  or 
instability.  The  reasons  for  the  comparative  instability  of  the  French 
leadership  are  connected  with  various  tendencies  of  historical  tradition 
and  political  democracy  in  France,  the  discussion  of  which  would  lead 
us  too  far  from  our  subject. 

^  The  third  French  Kepublic,  wishing  to  guard  against  the  danger  of  a 
military  dictatorship  and  a  new  Caasarism,  has  decreed  that  no  general 
shall  remain  in  command  of  an  army  corps  for  more  than  three  years  in 
succession. — In  periods  especially  inspired  with  democratic  ideas  the  very 
chambers  of  commerce  have  been  moved  to  similar  preventive  measures. 
In  the  time  of  Napoleon,  the  Cologne  chamber  of  commerce  made  a  rule 
that  all  the  ofl&cers  must  be  re-elected  annually,  except  the  president,  who 
must  be  changed  every  three  months.  It  soon  appeared,  however,  that  the 
strict  application  of  such  a  system  was  impossible.  The  frequent  changes 
in  the  presidency  were  extremely  injurious  to  the  conduct  of  business, 
and  deprived  the  chamber  of  commerce  of  the  services  of  its  best  elements, 
thus  reducing  all  reformatory  energy  to  impotence  (Mathieu  Schwann, 
GeschicMe  der  Kolner  Sandelskammer,  Neubner,  Cologne,  1906,  p.  444). 
Schmoller  considers  that  this  election  to  offices  in  rotation  is  a  peculiar 
blessing  of  urban  civilization,  municipal  in  its  origin.  (Cf.  Schmoller,  TJm- 
risse  und  Vntersucliungen  zur  Verfassungs-,  Verwaltungs-  und  Wirtschafts- 
geschicMe,  1898,  p.  291.) 

"Werner  Sombart,  TV  arum  gieht  es  in  der  Vereinigten  Staaten  Tceinen 
Sosialismus?,  3.  C.  B.  Mohr  (Siebeck),  Tubingen,  1906,  p.  43. 


98  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

palities ;  nomination  of  delegates  to  local  and  national  party  con- 
gresses; election  of  committees;  re-election  of  the  same;  and  so 
on,  da  capo.  In  almost  all  the  socialist  parties  and  trade  unions 
the  officers  are  elected  for  a  brief  term,  and  must  be  re-elected  at 
least  every  two  years.  The  longer  the  tenure  of  office,  the  greater 
becomes  the  influence  of  the  leader  over  the  masses  and  the 
greater  therefore  his  independence.  Consequently  a  frequent 
repetition  of  election  is  an  elementary  precaution  on  the  part  of 
democracy  against  the  virus  of  oligarchy. 

Since  in  the  democratic  parties  the  leaders  owe  their  position 
to  election  by  the  mass,  and  are  exposed  to  the  chance  of  being 
dispossessed  at  no  distant  date,  when  forced  to  seek  re-election,  it 
would  seem  at  first  sight  as  if  the  democratic  working  of  these 
parties  were  indeed  secured.  A  persevering  and  logical  appli- 
cation of  democratic  principles  should  in  fact  get  rid  of  all  per- 
sonal considerations  and  of  all  attachment  to  tradition.  Just  as 
in  the  political  life  of  constitutional  states  the  ministry  must 
consist  of  members  of  that  party  which  possesses  a  parliamentary 
majority,  so  also  in  the  socialist  party  the  principal  offices  ought 
always  to  be  filled  by  the  partisans  of  those  tendencies  which 
have  prevailed  at  the  congresses.^^  Thus  the  old  party  digni- 
taries ought  always  to  yield  before  youthful  forces,  before  those 
who  have  acquired  that  numerical  preponderance  which  is  repre- 
sented by  at  least  half  the  membership  plus  one.  It  must,  more- 
over, be  a  natural  endeavour  not  to  leave  the  same  comrades  too 
long  in  occupation  of  important  offices,  lest  the  holders  of  these 
should  stick  in  their  grooves,  and  should  come  to  regard  them- 
selves as  God-given  leaders.  But  in  those  parties  which  are  sol- 
idly organized,  the  actual  state  of  affairs  is  far  from  correspond- 
ing to  this  theory.  The  sentiment  of  tradition,  in  co-operation 
with  an  instinctive  need  for  stability,  has  as  its  result  that  the 
leadership  represents  always  the  past  rather  than  the  present. 
Leadership  is  indefinitely  retained,  not  because  it  is  the  tangible 
expression  of  the  relationships  between  the  forces  existing  in 
the  party  at  any  given  moment,  but  simply  because  it  is  already 
constituted.  It  is  through  gregarious  idleness,  or,  if  we  may  em- 
ploy the  euphuism,  it  is  in  virtue  of  the  law  of  inertia,  that  the 
leaders  are  so  often  confirmed  in  their  office  as  long  as  they  like. 
These  tendencies  are  particularly  evident  in  the  German  social 
democracy,  where  the  leaders  are  practically  irremovable.     The 

■  ■  -  -  B 

"  This  has  recently  been  laid  down  as  a  rule  by  the  Dutch  socialist  party. 


THE  STABILITY  OF  LEADERSHIP.      99 

practice  of  choosing  an  entirely  new  set  of  leaders  every  two 
years  ought  long  ago  to  have  become  general  in  the  socialist  party, 
as  prototype  of  all  democratic  parties.  Yet,  as  far  as  the  Ger- 
man socialists  are  concerned,  not  merely  does  no  such  practice 
exist,  but  any  attempt  to  introduce  it  provokes  great  discontent 
among  the  rank  and  file.  It  is  true  that  one  of  the  fundamental 
rules  of  the  party,  voted  at  the  Mainz  congress  in  1900,  lays 
down  that  at  every  annual  congress  the  party  must  ' '  renew, ' '  by 
ballot  and  by  absolute  majority,  the  whole  of  the  executive  com- 
mittee, consisting  of  seven  persons  (two  presidents,  two  vice- 
presidents,  two  secretaries,  and  a  treasurer).  This  would  be  the 
true  application  of  the  democratic  principle,  but  so  little  is  it 
commonly  observed  in  practice,  that  at  every  congress  there  are 
distributed  to  the  delegates  who  are  about  to  elect  their  new  lead- 
ers printed  ballot  papers  bearing  the  names  of  all  the  members 
of  the  retiring  committee.  This  proves,  not  merely  that  the  re- 
election of  these  leaders  is  taken  as  a  matter  of  course,  but  even 
that  a  certain  pressure  is  exercised  in  order  to  secure  their  re- 
election. It  is  true  that  in  theory  every  elector  is  free  to  erase 
the  printed  names  and  to  write  in  others,  and  that  this  is  all 
the  easier  since  the  vote  is  secret.  None  the  less,  the  printed 
ballot  paper  remains  an  effective  expedient.  There  is  a  French 
phrase,  corriger  la  fortune;  this  method  enables  the  leaders  to 
corriger  la  democratie}^  A  change  in  the  list  of  names,  although 
this  is  simply  the  exercise  of  an  electoral  right  established  by  the 
rules,  is  even  regarded  as  a  nuisance  by  most  of  the  delegates, 
and  is  censured  by  them  should  it  occur.  This  was  characteristi- 
cally shown  at  the  Dresden  congress  in  1903.^^  When  the  report 
spread  through  the  congress  that  the  revolutionary  socialists  of 
Berlin  intended  to  remove  from  among  the  names  on  the  ballot 
paper  the  name  of  Ignaz  Auer,  of  whom  they  disapproved  on 
account  of  his  revisionist  tendencies  (an  accusation  which  they 
subsequently  repelled  with  indignation),  the  vddespread  anger 
aroused  by  the  proposed  sacrilege  sufficed  to  overthrow  the 
scheme.^* 

It  is  in  this  manner  that  the  leaders  of  an  eminently  demo- 
cratic party,  nominated  by  indirect  suffrage,  prolong  throughout 

r • — ' — ' — — 

"Eegarding  identical  practices  employed  by  the  **  party  macliine"  in 
America,  cf.  Ostrogorsky,  La  Bemoeratie  et  V Organisation  des  Partis  po- 
litiques,  Caiman  Levy,  Paris,  1903,  vol.  ii,  p.  200. 
See  p.  62,  note  6. 
'  Cf .  Froiokoll  des  Parteitages  su  Dresden,  pp.  361,  373  et  seq.,  403. 


13  ! 


100  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

their  lives  the  powers  with  which  they  have  once  been  invested. 
The  re-election  demanded  by  the  rules  becomes  a  pure  formality. 
The  temporary  commission  becomes  a  permanent  one,  and  the 
tenure  of  office  an  established  right.  The  democratic  leaders  are 
more  firmly  established  in  their  seats  than  were  ever  the  leaders 
of  an  aristocratic  body.  Their  term  of  office  comes  greatly  to 
exceed  the  mean  duration  of  ministerial  life  in  monarchical 
states.  It  has  been  calculated  that  in  the  German  Empire  the 
average  official  life  of  a  minister  of  state  is  four  years  and  three 
months.  In  the  leadership,  that  is  to  say  in  the  ministry^  of  the 
socialist  party  we  see  the  same  persons  occupying  the  same  posts 
for  forty  years  in  succession.^^  Naumann  writes  of  the  demo- 
cratic parties:  ''Here  changes  in  the  leading  offices  occur  less 
rapidly  than  in  those  of  the  secretaries  of  state  and  of  the  min- 
isters. The  democratic  method  of  election  has  its  own  peculiar 
loyalty.  As  far  as  individual  details  are  concerned  it  is  incalcu- 
lable, and  yet  on  general  lines  we  can  count  upon  its  activity 
with  more  certainty  than  upon  the  policy  of  princes.  Through 
all  democracy  there  runs  a  current  of  slow-moving  tradition,  for 
the  ideas  of  the  masses  change  only  step  by  step  and  by  gentle 
gradations.  While  in  the  monarchical  organism  there  is  an 
abundance  of  ancient  forms,  we  find  no  less  in  the  democratic 
organism  that  the  longer  it  exists  the  more  does  it  become  domi- 
nated by  tenaciously  established  phrases,  programmes,  and  cus- 
toms. It  is  not  until  new  ideas  have  been  in  progress  up  and 
down  the  country  for  a  considerable  time  that  these  ideas  can 
penetrate  the  constituted  parties  through  the  activity  of  par- 
ticular groups  that  have  adopted  them,  or  as  an  outcome  of  a 
spontaneous  change  of  opinion  among  the  rank  and  file.  This  nat- 
ural tenacity  of  parliaments  which  are  the  outcome  of  popular 
election  is  indisputable,  be  it  advantageous  or  disadvantageous 
to  the  community. '  '^'^  In  democratically  constituted  bodies  else- 
where than  in  Germany  a  similar  phenomenon  is  manifest.  In 
proof  of  this,  reference  may  be  made  to  a  paragraph  in  the  rules 
drawn  up  on  February  3,  1910,  by  the  Italian  General  Confeder- 
ation of  Labour  as  to  the  proclamation  of  the  general  strike. 

IB ' '  We  hear  a  great  deal  of  the  capriciousness  and  fickleness  of  popular 
favour.  But  it  is  certain  that  a  leader  who  does  his  duty  conscientiously  is 
more  secure  in  his  position  in  the  labour  movement  than  is  a  minister  in 
the  Prussian  monarchy  founded  upon  the  grace  of  God"  (Eduard  Bern- 
stein, Die  Arbeiterbewegimg,  ed.  cit.,  p.  149). 

"Friedrich  Naumann,  Demotratie  und  Kaisertum,  ed.  cit.,  p.  53. 


THE  STABILITY  OF  LEADERSHIP    101 

The  rule  begins  by  declaring,  in  perfect  conformity  with  demo- 
cratic principles,  that  the  declaration  of  a  general  strike  must 
always  be  preceded  by  a  referendum  to  the  branches.  To  the 
terms  of  this  referendum  were  to  be  appended  the  minutes  of 
the  session  at  which  the  Confederation  of  Labour  had  decided  to 
submit  the  question.  But  the  rule  adds  that  if  there  should  be 
disagreement  between  the  executive  council  of  the  Federation 
and  the  results  of  the  reference  to  the  branches,  if,  for  instance, 
the  council  had  rejected  the  general  strike  while  the  referendum 
showed  that  the  rank  and  file  favoured  it,  this  difference  must 
not  be  taken  to  imply  a  vote  of  censure  on  the  leaders.^^  This 
shows  that  in  the  working-class  organizations  of  Italy  ministerial 
responsibility  is  not  so  strongly  established  as  in  the  Italian 
state,  where  the  ministry  feels  that  it  must  resign  if,  when  it 
has  brought  forward  a  bill,  this  bill  is  rejected  by  the  majority 
of  the  Chamber.  As  far  as  concerns  England,  we  learn  from 
the  Webbs  that  the  stability  of  the  officials  in  the  labour  organi- 
zations is  superior  to  that  of  the  employees  in  the  civil  service. 
In, the  Amalgamated  Association  of  Operative  Cotton-Spinners 
we  actually  find  that  there  is  a  rule  to  the  effect  that  the  officials 
shall  remain  in  office  indefinitely,  as  long  as  the  members  are 
satisfied  with  them.^^ 

An  explanation  of  this  phenomenon  is  doubtless  to  be  found  in  I 
the  force  of  tradition,  whose  influence  assimilates,  in  this  respect,  1 
the  revolutionary  masses  to  the  conservatives.     A  contributory 
.cause  is  one  to  which  we  have  already  referred,  the  noble  human 
sentiment  of  gratitude.^"    The  failure  to  re-elect  a  comrade  who 
has  assisted  in  the  birth  of  the  party,  who  has  suffered  with  it 
many  adversities,  and  has  rendered  it  a  thousand  services,  would 
be  regarded  as  a  cruelty  and  as  an  action  to  be  condemned.    Yet 
it  is  not  so  much  the  deserving  comrade  as  one  who  is  tried  and 
expert  whom  the  collectivity  approves  above  all  others,  and  whose 
collaboration  must  on  no  account  be  renounced.     Certain  indi- 
viduals, simply  for  the  reason  that  they  have  been  invested  with  | 
determinate  functions,  become  irremovable,  or  at  least  difficult/ 
to  replace.    Every  democratic  organization  rests,  by  its  very  na- 
ture, upon  a  division  of  labour.    But  wherever  division  of  labour 
prevails,  there  is  necessarily  specialization,  and  the  specialists 
become  indispensable.     This  is  especially  true  of  such  states  aa 

""Stampa,"  February  3,  1910. 

"Sidney  and  Beatrice  Webb,  op.  cit.,  vol.  i,  p.  16. 

"Cf.  supra,  pp.  60  et  seq. 


102  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

Germany,  where  the  Prussian  spirit  rules,  where,  in  order  that 
the  party  may  be  safely  steered  through  all  the  shoals  and  break- 
ers that  result  from  police  and  other  official  interference  and 
from  the  threats  of  the  penal  laws,  the  party  can  be  assured  of 
a  certain  continuity  only  when  a  high  degree  of  stability  charac- 
terizes the  leadership. 

There  is  an  additional  motive  in  operation.  In  the  working- 
class  organization,  whether  founded  for  political  or  for  economic 
ends,  just  as  much  as  in  the  life  of  the  state,  it  is  indispensable 
that  the  official  should  remain  in  office  for  a  considerable  time, 
so  that  he  may  familiarize  himself  with  the  work  he  has  to  do,  1 
may  gain  practical  experience,  for  he  cannot  become  a  useful 
official  until  he  has  been  given  time  to  work  himself  into  his  new 
office.  Moreover,  he  will  not  devote  himself  zealously  to  his  task, 
he  will  not  feel  himself  thoroughly  at  one  with  the  aim  he  is  in- 
tended to  pursue,  if  he  is  likely  to  be  dismissed  at  any  moment ; , 
he  needs  the  sense  of  security  provided  by  the  thought  that  noth-  ^ 
ing  but  circumstances  of  an  unforeseen  and  altogether  extraor- 
dinary character  will  deprive  him  of  his  position.  Appointment 
to  office  for  short  terms  is  democratic,  but  is  quite  unpractical 
alike  on  technical  and  psychological  grounds.  Since  it  fails  to 
arouse  in  the  employee  a  proper  sense  of  responsibility,  it  throws 
the  door  open  to  administrative  anarchy.  In  the  ministries  of 
lands  under  a  parliamentary  regime,  where  the  whole  official 
apparatus  has  to  suffer  from  its  subordination  to  the  continuous 
changes  in  majorities,  it  is  well  known  that  neglect  and  disorder 
reign  supreme.  Where  the  ministers  are  changed  every  few 
months,  every  one  who  attains  to  power  thinks  chiefly  of  making 
a  profitable  use  of  that  power  while  it  lasts.  Moreover,  the  con- 
fusion of  orders  and  regulations  which  results  from  the  rapid 
succession  of  different  persons  to  command  renders  control  ex- 
traordinarily difficult,  and  when  abuses  are  committed  it  is  easy 
for  those  who  are  guilty  to  shift  the  responsibility  on  to  other 
shoulders.  ''Rotation  in  office/'  as  the  Americans  call  it,  no 
doubt  corresponds  to  the  pure  principle  of  democracy.  Up  to  a 
certain  point  it  is  adapted  to  check  the  formation  of  a  bureau- 
cratic spirit  of  caste.  But  this  advantage  is  more  than  compen- 
sated by  the  exploitive  methods  of  ephemeral  leaders,  with  all 
their  disastrous  consequences.  On  the  other  hand,  one  of  the 
great  advantages  of  monarchy  is  that  the  hereditary  prince,  hav- 
ing an  eye  to  the  interests  of  his  children  and  his  successors,  pos- 
sesses an  objective  and  permanent  interest  in  his  position,  and 


THE  STABILITY  OF  LEADERSHIP     103 

almost  always  abstains  from  a  policy  whicli  would  hopelessly 
impair  the  vital  energies  of  his  country,  just  as  the  landed  pro- 
prietor usually  rejects  methods  of  cultivation  which,  while  pro- 
viding large  immediate  returns,  would  sterilize  the  soil  to  the 
detriment  of  his  heirs. 

Thus,  no  less  in  time  of  peace  than  in  time  of  war,  the  rela- 
tionships between  different  organizations  demand  a  certain  de- 
gree of  personal  and  tactical  continuity,  for  without  such  con- 
tinuity the  political  authority  of  the  organization  would  be  im- 
paired. This  is  just  as  true  of  political  parties  as  it  is  true  of 
states.  In  international  European  politics,  England  has  always 
been  regarded  as  an  untrustworthy  ally,  for  her  history  shows 
that  no  other  country  has  ever  been  able  to  confide  in  agree- 
ments concluded  with  England.  The  reason  is  to  be  found  ia^v^oJA'^' 
this,  that  the  foreign  policy  of  the  United  Kingdom  is  largely  -,  ^^ 
dependent  upon  the  party  in  power,  and  party  changes  occur 
with  considerable  rapidity.  Similarly,  the  party  that  changes  its 
leaders  too  often  runs  the  risk  of  finding  itself  unable  to  con- 
tract useful  alliances  at  an  opportune  moment.  The  two  gravest 
defects  of  genuine  democracy,  its  lack  of  stability  (perpetuum 
mobile  democraticum)  and  its  difficulty  of  mobilization,  are  de- 
pendent on  the  recognized  right  of  the  sovereign  masses  to  take 
part  in  the  management  of  their  own  affairs. 

In  order  to  bind  the  leader  to  the  will  of  the  mass  and  to  re- 
duce him  to  the  level  of  a  simple  executive  organ  of  the  mass, 
certain  primitive  democracies  have  at  all  times  sought  to  apply, 
in  addition  to  the  means  previously  enumerated, ^'^  measures  of 
moral  coercion.  In  Spain,  the  patriotic  revolutionary  Junta  of 
1808  insisted  that  thirty  proletarians  should  accompany  the  gen- 
eral who  was  to  negotiate  with  the  French,  and  these  compelled 
him,  in  opposition  to  his  own  convictions,  to  reject  all  Napo- 
leon's proposals.^^  In  modern  democratic  parties  there  still  pre- 
vails the  practice,  more  or  less  general  according  to  the  degree 
of  development  these  parties  have  attained,  that  the  rank  and 
file  send  to  the  congresses  delegates  who  are  fettered  by  definite 
instructions,  the  aim  of  this  being  to  prevent  the  delegate  from 
giving  upon  any  decisive  question  a  vote  adverse  to  the  opinion 
of  the  majority  of  those  whom  he  represents.  This  precaution 
may  be  efficacious  in  certain  cases,  where  the  questions  con- 
cerned are  simple  and  clear.    But  the  delegate,  since  he  has  no 

■ ,1 I 

*"  Supra,  p.  28.  '^  Eoseher,  op.  cit.,  p.  392. 


104  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

freedom  of  choice,  is  reduced  to  the  part  of  puppet,  and  can- 
not allow  himself  to  be  influenced  by  the  arguments  he  hears  at 
the  congress  or  by  new  matters  of  fact  which  are  brought  to 
light  in  the  course  of  the  debate.  But  the  result  is,  that  not  only 
is  all  discussion  rendered  superfluous  in  advance,  but  also  that 
the  vote  itself  is  often  falsified,  since  it  does  not  correspond  to 
the  real  opinions  of  the  delegates.  Of  late  fixed  instructions  have 
less  often  been  given  to  the  delegate,  for  it  has  become  manifest 
that  this  practice  impairs  the  cohesion  so  urgently  necessary  to 
every  party,  and  provokes  perturbations  and  uncertainties  in  its 
leadership. 

In  proportion  as  the  chiefs  become  detached  from  the  mass 
they  show  themselves  more  and  more  inclined,  when  gaps  in 
their  own  ranks  have  to  be  filled,  to  effect  this,  not  by  way  of 
popular  election,  but  by  co-optation,  and  also  to  increase  their 
own  effectives  wherever  possible,  by  creating  new  posts  upon 
their  own  initiative.  There  arises  in  the  leaders  a  tendency  to 
isolate  themselves,  to  form  a  sort  of  cartel,  and  to  surround 
themselves,  as  it  were,  with  a  wall,  within  which  they  will  admit 
those  only  who  are  of  their  own  way  of  thinking.  Instead  of 
allowing  their  successors  to  be  appointed  by  the  choice  of  the 
rank  and  file,  the  leaders  do  all  in  their  power  to  choose  these 
successors  for  themselves,  and  to  fill  up  gaps  in  their  own  ranks 
directly  or  indirectly  by  the  exercise  of  their  own  volition. 

This  is  what  we  see  going  on  to-day  in  all  the  working-class 
organizations  which  are  upon  a  solid  foundation.  In  a  report 
presented  to  the  seventh  congress  of  Italian  labour  organizations, 
held  at  Modena  in  1908,  we  find  it  stated  that  the  leaders  must 
recognize  capable  men,  must  choose  them,  and  must  in  general 
exercise  the  functions  of  a  government.^^  In  England  these 
desiderata  have  already  received  a  practical  application,  for  in 
certain  cases  the  new  employees  of  the  organization  are  directly 
chosen  by  the  old  officials.-^  The  same  thing  happens  in  Ger- 
many, where  about  one-fifth  of  the  trade-union  employees  are 
appointed  by  the  central  power.  Moreover,  since  the  trade-union 
congresses  are  composed  almost  exclusively  of  employees,  the 
only  means  of  which  the  individual  organized  workers  can  avail 
themselves  for  the  expression  of  their  personal  opinions  is  to  be 

'^  Fausto  Pagliari,  Le  Organizzasioni  e  i  loro  Impiegati,  Tip.  Coop., 
Turin,  1908,  p.  8. 

^^  Sidney  and  Beatrice  Webb,  TJie  History  of  Trade  Unionism,  new 
edition,  Longmans,  London,  1907,  vol.  i,  p.  87. 


THE  STABILITY  OF  LEADERSHIP    105 

found  in  contributions  to  the  labour  press.^*  In  the  French  la- 
bour movement,  which  claims  to  be  the  most  revolutionary  of  all, 
the  secretary  of  the  Confederation  Generale  du  Travail  possesses 
the  right  of  nomination  when  there  is  a  question  of  electing  new 
representatives  to  the  executive  committee  of  the  federation.  He 
exercises  this  right  by  sending  to  those  Bourses  du  Travail  wdiich 
are  not  represented  on  the  executive,  a  list  of  the  comrades  whom 
he  considers  suitable  for  this  position,  recommending  the  elec- 
tion of  these.^^ 

In  the  German  socialist  party,  the  individual  Landesvorstdnde, 
or  provincial  committees,  and  the  central  executive  claim  the 
right  of  veto  over  the  selection  of  candidates.  But  this  right  of 
veto  gives  them  a  privilege  of  an  essentially  oligarchical  char- 
acter, elevating  the  committees  to  the  rank  of  a  true  government, 
and  depriving  the  individual  branches  of  one  of  the  fundamental 
rights  of  all  democracy,  the  right  of  individual  liberty  of  action.^^ 
In  Holland,  again,  the  socialist  candidatures  for  parliament  must 
be  approved  by  the  party  executive,  and  this  executive  is  as  ir- 
removable as  that  of  the  German  party.  It  rarely  happens  that 
an  old  member  of  the  executive  wdiose  term  of  office  has  expired 
fails  to  obtain  re-election  should  he  desire  it.  It  is  in  Holland 
also  that  we  see  such  conspicuous  pluralism  among  the  party 
officials. 

In  the  nomination  of  candidates  for  election  we  find,  in  addi- 

'*  Cf.  Paul  Kampffmeyer,  Die  EntwicMung  der  deittschen  GewerTcschaften, 
"Annalen  fiir  soziale  Politik  u.  Gesetzg.,"  vol.  i,  No.  1,  p.  114, 

^  Fernand  Pelloutier,  Histoire  des  Bourses  du  Travail,  Schleicher  Freres, 
Paris,  1902,  p.  150. 

^  W.  Heine  writes  in  this  connection :  * '  We  desire  that  the  people  should 
rule  themselves;  our  party  programme  demands  that  in  the  most  impor- 
tant and  most  difficult  problem  the  people  should  decide  by  direct  voting 
and  direct  legislation;  is  it  right  then  that  in  the  most  immediate  and 
simplest  of  questions,  namely,  in  what  men  is  the  people  to  put  its  con- 
fidence, the  decision  of  the  people  should  be  subject  to  the  goodwill  and 
pleasure  of  a  superior  authority?  ...  If  the  party  officials  are  allowed 
to  decide  for  themselves  who  is  to  enter  their  charmed  circle,  the  danger 
arises  that  fresh  blood  and  new  ideas  will  more  and  more  be  refused  admit- 
tance, and  that  the  party  will  tend  to  undergo  that  ossification  which  is 
characteristic  of  all  oligarchies  and  bureaucracies.  Further  consequences 
of  such  a  tendency  are  shown  in  the  slackening  of  the  spirit  of  initiative 
and  in  the  decline  of  interest  in  the  intellectual  life  of  the  party,  and  also 
in  an  inclination  to  an  obstinate  or  unreflective  clinging  to  traditional 
formulas,  in  a  tendency  to  stick  in  a  groove.  From  this  point  of  view,  a 
good  bureaucracy  is  more  dangerous  than  a  bad  one"  (Wolfgang  Heine, 
op.  cit.,  pp.  282,  284). 


106  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

tion,  another  grave  oligareliical  phenomenon,  nepotism.  The 
choice  of  the  candidates  almost  always  depends  upon  a  little 
clique,  consisting  of  the  local  leaders  and  their  assistants,  which 
suggests  suitable  names  to  the  rank  and  file.^^  In  many  cases 
the  constituency  comes  to  be  regarded  as  a  family  property.-^  In 
Italy,  although  democratic  principles  are  greatly  honoured,  we 
not  infrequently  find  that  when  a  representative  dies,  or  can  no 
longer  continue  in  office,  the  suffrages  of  the  constituency  are 
transferred  without  question  to  his  son  or  to  his  younger  brother, 
so  that  the  position  is  kept  in  the  family. 

Those  who  love  paradox  may  be  inclined  to  regard  this  process 
as  the  first  symptom  marking  the  passage  of  democracy  from  a 
system  of  plebiscitary  Bonapartism  to  one  of  hereditary  mon- 
archy. 

^ ' '  Trois  ou  quatre  personnes  au  plus  redigent  les  programmes  et  choi- 
sissent  les  noms  des  futurs  representants  dans  chaque  departement.  Cea 
personnes  font  de  la  politique  una  carriere:  elles  veulent  surtout  et  avant 
tout,  je  ne  dirai  pas  le  pouvoir,  mais  les  places.  Ces  politiciens  trouvent 
plus  commode  de  se  faire  agents  electoraux  pour  arriver  aux  fonctions 
publiques  que  de  s'y  preparer  par  de  longues  etudes."  This  description 
of  the  conditions  of  French  political  life  is  from  the  pen  of  Germain, 
quoted  by  J.  Novicow,  Conscience  et  Volonte  sociales,  Giard  et  Briere,  Paris, 
1897,  p.  65. 

'Cf.  supra,  p.  13. 


28| 


CHAPTER  II 

THE  FINANCIAL  POWER  OP  THE  LEADERS  AND  OF 

THE  PARTY 

In  the  German  socialist  party  desertion  and  treason  on  the  part 
of  the  leaders  have  been  rare.  This  is  conspicuous  in  contrast 
with  what  has  happened  in  the  French  socialist  party,  especially 
as  regards  the  parliamentary  group  of  the  latter.  The  elections 
of  August  20,  1893,  sent  to  the  Palais  Bourbon  six  socialist  depu- 
ties: Paulin  Mery,  Alphonse  Humbert,  A.  Abel  Hovelacque, 
Alexandre  ]\Iillerand,  Pierre  Richard,  and  Ernest  Roche.  Of 
these,  one  only,  the  distinguished  linguist  and  anthropologist, 
Hovelacque,  remained  faithful  to  the  party  to  his  death;  the 
other  five  are  now  declared  enemies  of  the  socialist  party.  The 
part  played  by  Millerand  in  socialism,  a  great  one  as  is  well 
known,  came  to  an  end  in  1904,  In  his  electoral  address  of  May, 
1906,  the  term  ''socialist"  had  passed  into  the  background;  he 
was  running  in  opposition  to  the  official  socialist  candidate,  the 
sociologist  Paul  Lafargue,  the  son-in-law  of  Marx ;  his  role  was 
now  that  of  an  anti-collectivist  and  patriotic  bourgeois  reformer. 
The  other  socialist  ex-deputies  in  the  above  list  had  deserted  their 
colours  at  an  even  earlier  date.  The  trifling  political  shock 
which  is  associated  with  the  name  of  General  Boulanger  sufficed 
to  overthrow  the  house  of  cards  which  represented  the  socialist 
convictions  of  these  warriors  on  behalf  of  the  revolutionary  prole- 
tariat of  France.  To-day  they  are  all  vowed  to  the  service  of 
the  clerico-nationalist  reaction.  Paulin  Mery  became  one  of  the 
Boulangist  leaders ;  in  May,  1906,  when,  in  the  second  ballot,  he 
was  opposed  to  the  bourgeois  radical,  Ferdinand  Buisson,  the 
socialists  of  his  constituency  unhesitatingly  cast  their  votes  in 
favour  of  his  opponent.  At  the  time  of  the  Dreyfus  affair,  Al- 
phonse Humbert  was  one  of  the  most  ardent  defenders  of  the 
general  staff  of  the  army.  Ernest  Roche,  at  one  time  a  disciple 
of  Auguste  Blanqui,  and  then,  in  conjunction  with  Edouard  Vail- 
lant,  one  of  the  most  noted  leaders  of  the  Blanquists,  is  now  the 
lieutenant  of  Henri  Rochefort ;  in  a  recent  parliamentary  election 
in  the  seventeenth  arrondissement  of  Paris  he  was  defeated  by 

107 


108  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

the  reformist  socialist  Paul  Brousse,  although  Brousse,  the  some- 
time anarchist  and  theoretical  father  of  the  propaganda  by  deed 
in  western  Europe,  had  recently  forfeited  the  good-will  of  the 
more  revolutionary  section  of  the  workers  (Brousse,  as  President 
of  the  Paris  municipal  council,  had  received  Alfonso  XIII  as 
guest  at  the  Hotel  de  Ville,  and  this  conduct  was  hardly  in  con- 
formity with  socialist  principles).  It  is  true  that  even  to-day 
Roche  still  belongs  to  a  Parti  Blanquiste  ni  Dieu  ni  Maitre  which 
announces  week  by  week  in  the  "Intransigeant"  meetings  of  a 
more  or  less  private  character,  but  this  party  is  really  fictitious, 
for  though  it  has  a  few  branches  it  does  not  count  in  political 
life;  in  all  practical  political  questions  this  petty  group  works 
hand  in  hand  with  the  antisemites  and  the  nationalists,  and  in 
matters  of  theory,  whenever  Roche  has  occasion  to  allude  to  them, 
he  proclaims  himself  le  champion  incorruptihle  de  la  Bepublique, 
du  Socialisme  et  de  la  Patrie,  his  anti-capitalism  being  extremely 
tame,  but  his  jingoism  fanatical.^ 

In  contrast  with  this,  the  German  socialist  party  shares  with 
the  Italian  and  the  Belgian  parties  the  good  fortune  of  possess- 
ing faithful  and  devoted  leaders.  The  leadership  of  the  German 
party  has  been  again  and  again  reinforced  by  valuable  acces- 
sions from  the  other  parties  of  the  left,  such  as  August  Bebel, 
the  bourgeois  democrat.  Max  Quarck  and  Paul  Bader,  of  the 
"Frankfurter  Zeitung,"  Paul  Gohre  and  Max  Maurenbrecher, 
who  had  previously  founded  the  national  socialist  party  in  op- 
position to  the  socialists.  On  the  other  hand,  it  has  suffered  no 
extensive  losses  of  significant  personalities  by  desertion  to  the 
bourgeois  camp.  The  only  exceptions  to  this  generalization  re- 
late to  leaders  of  minor  importance,  such  as  Max  Lorenz,^  ex- 
editor  of  the  *  *  Leipzige  Volkszeitung, ' '  who  subsequently  passed 
through  the  gate  of  national  socialism  to  gain  a  secure  position 
as  editor  of  the  ' '  Antisozialdemokratische  Korrespondenz ' ' ;  the 
young  Count  Ludwig  Reventlow,  who  in  1906  became  a  deputy 
in  the  antisemite  interest ;  and  a  few  other  academic  personalities 
of  minor  importance,^  besides  one  or  two  exceptional  converted 

*Cf.  Michels,  Die  deutsche  Sozialdemocratie  im  internationalen  Fer- 
hande,  "Arch.  f.  Sozialw., "  vol.  xxv,  pp.  213  et  seq. 

*  Max  Lorenz  has  written  a  number  of  small  socialist  works,  and  is  author 
of  the  reformist  book  Die  marxistische  Sozialdemokratie,  Wiegand,  Leipzig, 
1896. 

^ Among  these  may  be  mentioned:  Louis  Viereck,  formerly  an  official 
JBi  the  Prussian  service,  subsequently  socialist  deputy  to  the  Eeichstag,  and 


FIDELITY  OF  LEADERS  109 

proletarians,  such  as  the  basket-maker  Fischer.^  It  would  not  be 
right  to  regard  as  treason  in  the  strict  sense  of  the  term  a  simple 
passage  from  the  socialist  party  properly  so-called  to  some  other 
form  of  militant  socialism,  such  as  happened  in  the  case  of  social- 
ists as  fervent  and  convinced  as  the  deputy  Johann  Most,  the 
noted  binder  of  Augsburg,  and  Wilhelm  Hasselmann,  the  chem- 
ist, another  deputy,  who  after  1890  broke  openly  with  the  party, 
to  adhere  first  to  anti-parliamentary  socialism  and  subsequently 
to  anarchism.  To  speak  of  these  men  as  "deserters"  would  be  to 
identify  the  notion  of  desertion  of  the  organized  party  with  de- 
sertion of  the  idea  of  working-class  emancipation.  But  even  if 
we  count  as  deserters  from  socialism  those  who  have  gone  over 
to  the  ranks  of  the  anarchists,  we  are  compelled  to  admit  that 
among  the  apostates  from  the  German  socialist  party  there  has 
not  been  one  of  those  who  have  occupied  a  leading  position  in 
the  party. 

The  fighting  proletariat  in  Germany  has  hitherto  been  spared 
the  spectacle  of  its  former  representatives  seated  on  the  Govern- 
ment benches  surrounded  by  the  enemies  of  the  socialists.  There 
has  in  Germany  been  no  such  figure  as  Aristide  Briand,  yester- 
day advocate  of  the  general  strike  and  counsel  for  the  defence 
of  men  prosecuted  for  anti-militarism,  who  had  expressly  de- 
clared himself  in  full  sympathy  with  the  anti-militarist  theory 
plutot  rinsurrection  que  la  guerre,  and  to-day,  as  Minister  of 
Public  Instruction,  approving  no  less  vigorously  and  explicitly 


now  correspondent  of  bourgeois  newspapers  in  New  York;  Max  Pfund, 
at  one  time  an  ardent  socialist,  author  of  Unsere  Taktik,  ein  ehrliches  Wort 
zur  Kldrung  (Mauerer  &  Dimmiak,  Berlin,  1891 — which  closes  with  the 
words,  "Let  us  see  to  it  that  we  have  a  firm  standing-ground  when  the 
storm  begins  to  rage"),  now  on  the  staff  of  the  "Lokal  Anzeiger,"  of 
Berlin;  Dr.  Franz  Liitgenau,  who  formerly  played  a  leading  part  as  a  so- 
cialist in  the  political  life  of  Westphalia,  and  was  the  author  of  a  number 
of  books  published  by  Dietz,  and  of  a  work  entitled  Darwin  und  der  Staat 
(Thomas,  Leipzig),  but  now  on  the  staff  of  a  bourgeois  journal  at  Dort- 
mund; Heinrieh  Oberwinder,  the  author,  one  of  the  original  disciples  of 
Lassalle,  but  who,  during  the  days  of  the  anti-socialist  law  was  unmasked 
at  Paris  as  a  spy  of  the  German  government.  (Cf.  Franz  Mehring,  Ge- 
scMchte  der  deutsclien  SosialdemokraUe,  Dietz,  Stuttgart,  1904,  2nd  ed., 
vol.  ii,  p.  300) ;  Fernand  Bueb,  of  Miilhausen,  elected  in  1893,  when 
twenty-eight  years  of  age,  as  socialist  deputy  to  the  Eeichstag,  but  who 
has  since  deserted  the  party  and  disappeared  from  the  political  stage. 

*In  order  to  make  a  parade  of  his  proletarian  origin,  Fischer,  who  has 
now  joined  the  conservative  party,  ostentatiously  signs  his  articles  "Fischer, 
the  Basket-Maker." 


110  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

the  measures  of  repression  enforced  by  his  colleagues  in  the  Cab- 
inet against  anti-militarists.  Germany  has  not  known  a  John 
Burns,  who  as  a  labour  leader  in  1886  played  a  prominent  part 
in  the  organization  of  huge  demonstrations  of  the  unemployed, 
at  which  open  reference  was  made  to  the  possible  need  for  de- 
stroying the  palaces  and  sacking  the  shops,  and  whose  activities 
had  led  to  a  panic  in  the  bourgeois  world  of  the  English  capital, 
but  who  a  few  years  later  as  President  of  the  Local  Government 
Board,  when  a  motion  was  brought  forward  in  Parliament  at  the 
instance  of  the  Labour  Representation  Committee  demanding  the 
intervention  of  Parliament  on  behalf  of  the  unemployed,  replied 
that  he  was  neither  a  public-house  politician  nor  a  soft-hearted 
philanthropist  prepared  to  squander  the  money  of  hard-working 
citizens  upon  the  so-called  unemployed,  and  who  advised  the 
workers  to  save  their  money  in  good  times  and  not  to  spend  it 
upon  unworthy  objects.  Such  disillusionments,  experienced  at 
the  hands  of  men  in  whose  sincerity  and  firmness  of  character  the 
organized  workers  had  an  ingenuous  confidence,  have  a  politically 
discouraging  and  morally  enervating  effect.  They  tend  to  lead 
the  workers  to  indifferentism,  or  to  one-sided  specializations,  such 
as  the  new  unionism,  or  an  exclusive  belief  in  the  co-operative 
movement,  or,  again,  to  certain  forms  of  libertarian  aspiration, 
and  to  alienate  them  from  the  thought  of  political  organization, 
and  from  a  considered  and  measured  parliamentary  activity.  We 
see  this,  above  all,  in  France,  where  the  case  of  Briand  was 
merely  a  sequel  to  that  of  Millerand,  and  the  case  of  Millerand 
a  sequel,  if  you  will,  to  the  case  of  Louis  Blanc,  and  where  the 
great  mass  of  the  manual  workers  are  split  up  into  the  two  sec- 
tions of  those  who  advocate  the  most  defiant  abstentionism  and 
of  those  whose  minds  are  dominated  by  the  spirit  which  the 
French  aptly  term  jemenfichisme.^    The  fact  that  the  socialist 

^  Quite  recently  a  number  of  the  most  eminent  socialist  leaders  in  France 
have  passed  over  into  the  governmental  camp  and  are  thus  in  violent  con- 
flict with  their  former  comrades.  Among  these  may  be  mentioned  Kene 
Viviani,  now  Minister  of  State;  the  university  professor  V.  Augagneur,  at 
one  time  socialist  mayor  of  Lyons  and  subsequently  governor  of  the  Island 
of  Madagascar;  Gabriel  Deville,  disciple  of  Marx,  and  one  of  the  founders 
of  the  Parti  Ouvrier;  Alexandre  Zevaes,  formerly  one  of  the  ablest  of 
the  Guesdist  leaders  and  at  that  time  a  strict  Marxist;  Joseph  Sarraute; 
and  many  others.  De  Pressense  writes  very  truly,  "Combien  d'hommes  n'a- 
t-elle  pas  vus  [la  classe  ouvriere  fran^aise],  qui,  apres  lui  avoir  prodigue  les 
paroles  de  revolte,  apres  avoir  seme  les  excitations,  apres  avoir  pratique 
sans  relache   le   verbalisme   revolutionnaire,   h  peine   arrives  au  pouvoir, 


FINANCIAL  POWER  OF  LEADERS    111 

parties  of  Germany,  Italy,  and  Belgium  have  hitherto  been  free 
from  the  disturbing  and  demoralizing  effects  of  such  episodes 
furnishes  the  chief  if  not  the  only  reason  for  the  unlimited  and 
often  blind  confidence  which  is  displayed,  as  no  unprejudiced  ob- 
server of  the  members  of  these  parties  can  fail  to  notice,  in  the 
"tried  and  trusted"  leaders.  In  Germany,  indeed,  the  author- 
ity which  this  spirit  gives  to  the  party  leaders,  and  which  con- 
tinually accentuates  the  tendency  towards  centralization,  is  enor- 
mously reinforced  by  the  spirit  of  organization,  by  the  intense 
need  for  guidance,  which  characterizes  the  German  proletariat, 
and  also  by  the  comparative  poverty  of  the  party  in  individuals 
of  intellectual  pre-eminence  and  of  those  possessing  economic  in- 
dependence. Owing  to  these  exceptional  conditions,  the  leaders 
are  preserved  from  the  disintegrating  influence  of  personal  and  5 
tactical  dissensions,  which  would  otherwise  have  led  them  into  J 
conflicts  with  the  masses  of  the  party  similar  to  those  that  have 
raged  with  such  violence  in  Italy  and  in  Holland,  notwithstand- 
ing the  stability  and  the  authoritative  position  of  the  socialist 
leaders  in  these  latter  countries. 

It  may  be  said  of  the  German  socialist  leaders  that  they  have 
not  yet  lost  contact  with  the  masses;  that  there  still  prevails 
complete  harmony  between  the  form  and  the  content  of  their 
tactics  even  when  there  should  be  a  conflict  between  these ;  that 
the  community  of  ideas  between  leaders  and  led  has  not  yet  been 
broken;  and,  to_^^um  up,  that  the  executive  committee  of  the 
party,  and  also  (though  perhaps  less  perfectly)  the  parliamen- 
tary socialist  group,  still  represent  the  average  opinion  of  the 
comrades  throughout  the  country.  The  confidence  which  the 
organized  German  workers  give  to  those  that  represent  them  in 
the  complex  game  of  politics  is  based  upon  the  security  which 
the  leaders  offer  at  once  from  the  moral  and  the  political  point 
of  view.  This  security  incontrovertibly  exists.  The  manner  in 
which  the  masses  entrust  their  interests  to  the  leaders  is,  histori- 
cally at  least,  legitimate  and  explicable.    But  the  causes  of  the 

se  sont  cyniquement  retournes  centre  leur  propre  passe  et  contra  leurs  dupes, 
leur  ont  fait  un  crime  d  'avoir  garde  f oi  a  leurs  predications  et  se  sont  f aits 
les  ordonnateurs  sans  merci  et  sans  scrupule  des  hauts  et  basses  oeuvres 
de  la  reaction  sociale.  .  .  .  II  me  semble  pourtant  que  rien  ne  serait  plus 
deraisonnable  et  plus  funeste  que  de  se  livrer,  pour  cette  cause,  a  une  apa- 
thie  sceptique,  a  un  pococurantisme  gouailleur,  qui  ferait  le  jeu  de  ces 
viles  politiciens  au  moins  autant  que  le  fit  jadis  la  naive  credulite  d'un 
enthousiasme  sans  critique"  (Francis  de  Pressense,  L' Affaire  Durant,  ou 
la  nouvelle  Affaire  Dreyfus,  <'Le  Mouvement  Socialiste,"  xiii.  No.  227). 


112  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

stability  of  the  leaders  are  naturally,  like  all  causes,  complex. 
Among  various  explanations,  it  has  been  suggested  that  all  the 
virtue  of  the  German  labour  leaders  lies  in  the  fact  that  they 
have  never  been  exposed  to  serious  temptations,  so  that  it  resem- 
bles that  of  a  young  woman  who  has  never  been  courted.  There 
is  a  certain  element  of  truth  in  this  explanation,  in  so  far  as  we 
have  to  do  with  that  special  political  virtue  which  consists  in 
the  faithful  defence  of  the  party  flag.  In  a  state  where  parlia- 
mentary government  does  not  exist,  where  the  ministers  of  state 
are  chosen  by  the  sovereign  from  among  the  leading  officials  of 
the  administration  without  any  regard  to  the  parliamentary  ma- 
I  jority,  and  where  consequently  no  direct  path  to  office  is  open  to 
!  popular  representatives^  the  possibility  of  intellectual  corruption, 
'  that  is  to  say  of  a  more  or  less  complete  change  of  front  on  the 
part  of  the  socialist  leaders  under  the  influence  of  a  desire  for 
ministerial  office,  is  ipso  facto  excluded,  just  as  is  excluded  an 
adhesion  to  the  party  of  bourgeois  social  reform  of  the  revolu- 
tionary socialists  who  aim  at  changing  the  very  base  of  the  ex- 
isting economic  order.  On  the  other  hand,  Arturo  Labriola, 
who  has  followed  the  German  movement  with  keen  interest  and 
lively  sympathy,  is  undoubtedly  right  in  his  caustic  prediction 
that  as  soon  as  the  day  comes  when  the  German  Government  is 
willing  to  afford  itself  the  luxury  of  a  lukewarm  liberal  ministry, 
since  the  socialists  are  really  not  difficult  to  satisfy,  the  * '  reform- 
ist infection"  will  spread  far  even  in  Germany.  He  adds  that 
the  germs  of  this  infection  are  already  widely  diffused.^ 

Yet  although  it  is  true  that  the  feudal  structure  of  the  Ger- 
man Empire,  which  is  still  reflected  in  the  laws  and  in  the  col- 
lective mentality  of  the  country,  imposes  necessary  limits  upon 
the  ambition  of  the  labour  leaders,  it  must  be  admitted  that  the 
fact  we  are  now  considering  does  not  find  an  adequate  explana- 
tion in  the  mere  lack  of  temptation.  Moreover,  temptation,  in 
the  vulgar  and  material  sense  of  the  term,  is  no  more  lacking  in 
Germany  than  elsewhere.  No  government,  however  autocratic, 
has  ever  neglected  a  chance  of  corrupting  the  austere  virtue  of 
the  leaders  of  any  movement  dangerous  to  authority,  by  the 
distribution  of  a  portion  of  those  secret  service  funds  which 
every  state  has  at  its  disposal,  and  which  have  been  voted  by 
the  popular  representatives  themselves.  Nevertheless,  it  may  be 
affirmed  that  the  leaders  of  the  German  labour  movement,  even 

-  I.  ,  ,     -  I  ■  ■        I      -  -^ 

*  Arturo  Labriola,  Biforme  e  Eivolusione  Sociale,  Soc.  Edit.  Milan,  Milan, 
1904,  p.  17. 


FIDELITY  OF  LEADERS  113 

if  they  do  not  possess  that  evangelical  morality  of  which  we  find 
so  many  examples  in  the  early  days  of  the  Italian  labour  move- 
ment, have  yet  alwaj^s  resisted  any  attempts  to  corrupt  their  in- 
tegrity by  bribes.  We  need  hardly  reckon  as  an  exception,  the 
case  which  has  not  yet  been  fully  cleared  up  of  the  president  of 
the  Allgemeiner  Deutsche  Arbeiterverein,  Johann  Baptist  von 
Schweitzer,  in  the  year  1872,  for  it  seems  probable  that  the  fiery 
Bebel,  who  secured  Schweitzer's  condemnation  and  expulsion 
from  the  party,  was  in  reality  altogether  in  the  wrongJ  Even 
the  subordinates  in  the  leadership  of  the  party,  those  whom  we 
may  speak  of  as  the  non-commissioned  officers,  have  usually 
proved  altogether  inaccessible  to  the  blandishments  of  the  police. 
They  have  sometimes  accepted  bribes,  but  always  to  hand  them 
over  at  once  to  "Vorwarts"  or  some  other  socialist  paper,  in 
which  there  has  then  appeared  an  invitation  to  the  owner  of  the 
money  to  come  and  claim  it  personally  within  a  certain  number 
of  days,  since  if  unclaimed  it  would  be  handed  over  to  the  party 
funds. 

The  unshaken  fidelity  of  the  German  socialist  leaders  rests 
upon  powerful  reasons,  and  some  of  these  are  ideal  in  nature. 
The  characteristic  love  of  the  German  for  his  chosen  vocation, 
devotion  to  duty,  years  of  proscription  and  of  persecution  shared 
with  other  comrades,  the  isolation  from  the  bourgeois  world  of 
the  workers  and  their  representatives,  the  invincible  conviction 
that  only  a  party  of  a  compact  and  solid  structure  will  be  able 
to  translate  into  action  the  lofty  aims  of  socialism,  and  the  conse- 
quent aversion  for  any  socialist  struggle  conducted  by  free-lances 
outside  the  ranks  of  the  organized  party — such  are  some  of  the 
numerous  reasons  which  have  combined  to  produce  in  the  minds 
of  the  German  socialists  a  love  for  their  organization  enabling  it 
to  resist  the  most  violent  storms.    This  attachment  to  the  party, 

'  Although,  so  far  as  is  known,  Bebel  continued  to  the  end  of  his  life 
to  maintain  the  justice  of  the  accusation  he  brought  in  1872  (cf.  August 
Bebel,  Aus  meinem  Lehen,  Dietz  Nachf.,  Stuttgart,  1911,  Part  II,  p.  130), 
the  official  historian  of  the  party,  Franz  Mehring  (Geschichte,  der  deutschen 
Sozialdemohratie,  ed.  cit.,  vol.  iv,  pp.  66  et  seq.),  takes  the  opposit-e  view. 
Commenting  on  Schweitzer 's  declaration  after  his  exclusion  from  the  Verein, 
Mehring  remarks :  ' '  We  cannot  read  without  emotion  the  wise  and  dig- 
nified leave-taking  of  the  man  who  in  difficult  times  had  so  firmly  steered 
the  ship  of  the  social  democracy,  who  had  rendered  so  many  invaluable 
services  to  the  class-conscious  proletariat,  and  who,  enmeshed  in  the  con- 
sequences of  his  own  best  actions,  committed  more  than  one  unjust  action, 
but  suffered  far  greater  injustice  in  return." 


114  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

often  manifested  by  fine  and  moving  actions,  certainly  represents 
one  of  the  most  solid  elements  in  the  foundation  upon  which  has 
been  erected  the  edifice  of  German  socialism.  It  enables  us  to 
understand  the  conduct  of  the  socialist  leaders  during  and  after 
numerous  crises  which,  in  the  view  of  the  profane,  would  neces- 
sarily terminate  in  the  open  abandonment  of  the  party  by  a 
number  of  its  leaders.  It  is  their  love  for  the  party,  with  which 
the  great  majority  of  the  comrades  feel  themselves  to  be  identi- 
fied, which  has  led  such  men  as  Eduard  Bernstein  and  Kurt 
Eisner  to  retain  their  membership  after  violent  conflicts  which 
had  almost  led  to  their  expulsion.  It  is  proper  to  add  that  in 
the  course  of  this  struggle  these  men  have  always  preserved  the 
personal  dignity  without  which  a  self-respecting  man  cannot 
possibly  remain  among  his  companions-at-arms. 

These  ideal  motives  are  reinforced  by  motives,  no  less  impor- 
tant, of  a  material  order.  The  practice  of  paying  for  the  serv-> 
ices  rendered  to  the  party  by  its  employees  creates  a  bond  which 
many  of  the  comrades  hesitate  to  break,  and  this  for  a  thousand 
reasons.  The  pecuniary  remuneration  for  services  to  the  party 
which  is  given  by  the  German  social  democracy  immunizes  the 
party  employees  against  the  grosser  forms  of  temptation.  Where- 
as in  France,  England,  Holland,  Italy,  and  elsewhere,  socialist 
propaganda,  spoken  and  written,  is  effected  chiefly  by  volunteers, 
in  the  German  socialist  party  gratuitous  propaganda  is  practi- 
cally unknown.  Elsewhere  than  in  Germany,  socialist  activity 
is  based  upon  individual  enthusiasm,  individual  initiative,  and 
individual  devotion;  but  in  Germany  it  reposes  upon  loyalty, i 
discipline,  and  the  sentiment  of  duty,  encouraged  by  pecuniary^ 
remuneration.  In  the  history  of  the  non-German  socialist  parties, 
for  example,  we  find  important  periodicals,  such  as  the  ' '  Avan- 
guardia  Socialista"  of  Milan  and  the  "Nieuwe  Tijd"  of  Amster- 
dam, which  have  been  founded  by  individual  initiative,  and 
which  are  maintained  by  the  political  idealism  of  a  few  individ- 
uals. These  continue  to  carry  on  their  work  although  the  ex- 
penses of  the  venture  often  exceed  the  income,  and  although 
those  who  write  for  the  papers  in  question  are  unpaid  or  almost 
wholly  unpaid.  In  Germany,  on  the  other  hand,  the  *  *  Vorwarts" 
of  Berlin,  the  "Leipziger  Volkszeitung"  and  the  "Neue  Zeit" 
were  founded  and  sustained  by  the  party  as  a  whole,  and  have  a 
paid  editorial  staff  and  paid  contributors.  It  would  nevertheless 
be  quite  wrong  to  suppose  that  socialist  propagandists  and  so- 
cialist officials  are  paid  on  a  scale  which  enables  them  with  the 


FIDELITY  OF  LEADERS  115 

hard-earned  pence  of  the  workers  to  lead  that  luxurious  exist- 
ence which,  with  an  ignorance  bordering  on  impudence,  is  often 
ascribed  to  them  by  the  ' '  respectable ' '  press  and  the  loungers  of 
the  clubs.  The  life  of  a  socialist  journalist  is  far  from  resem- 
bling that  of  a  spendthrift  or  a  libertine ;  his  day's  work  is  by  no  ^ 
means  an  easy  one,  his  labours  demand  an  abundance  of  self- 
denial  and  sacrifice  and  are  nervously  exhausting;  whilst  the  , 
remuneration  he  receives  is  a  modest  one  when  compared  with 
the  gravity  and  the  difficulty  of  his  task.^  No  one  will  deny 
this  who  has  even  an  elementary  acquaintance  with  the  condi- 
tions of  work  and  pay  in  the  socialist  press  and  with  the  life  led 
by  the  employees  of  the  party.  Men  of  the  ability  and  education 
of  Karl  Kautsky,  Max  Quarck,  Adolf  Miiller,  and  a  hundred 
others,  would  have  been  able,  had  they  chosen  to  devote  them- 
selves to  some  other  service  than  that  of  the  workers,  to  obtain 
a  material  reward  much  greater  than  that  which  they  secure  in 
their  present  positions. 

This  reference  to  the  practice  of  the  German  socialist  party  of 
remunerating  all  services  rendered  was  necessary  to  enable  the 
reader  to  understand  rightly  certain  peculiarities  of  German  so- 
cialist life.  But  it  must  not  be  supposed  that  there  is  no  unpaid 
socialist  work  in  Germany.  In  country  districts  where  the  organ- 
ization is  still  poor,  and  in  the  case  of  small  weekly  papers  whose 
financial  resources  are  inconsiderable,  much  gratuitous  work  is 
done  by  the  socialists.  In  not  a  few  places,  moreover,  the  local 
comrades  do  not  receive  pay  for  any  of  the  speeches  they  make. 
A  witness  to  the  idealism  which,  despite  all  difficulties,  continues 
to  flourish  in  the  working  class  is  the  way  in  which  during  elec- 
tions and  at  other  times  many  working-class  socialists  sacrifice 
their  Sunday  rest  in  order  to  do  propagandist  work  in  the  coun- 
try, vigorously  distributing  leaflets,  electoral  addresses,  socialist 
calendars,  etc.  This  gratuitous  work  is  often  carried  out,  not 
only  under  conditions  involving  the  patient  endurance  of  expo- 
sure and  privation,  but  also  in  face  of  all  kinds  of  abuse  and  of 
the  danger  of  arrest  on  the  most  trivial  pretexts,  and  of  attacks 
made  by  excited  antisemitic  or  clerical  peasants. 

In  general,  however,  the  German  practice  is  to  pay  for  all  | 
services  to  the  party,  from  the  most  trifling  notice  contributed  to  j 
a  newspaper  to  the  lengthiest  public  discourse.    Whilst  this  de- 
prives the  party  to  a  large  extent  of  the  spirit  of  heroism  and 

*Cf.  pp.  57  et  seq. 


116  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

enthusiasm,  and  of  work  done  by  voluntary  and  spontaneous 
collaboration,  it  gives  to  the  organization  a  remarkable  cohesion,  / 
and  an  authority  over  the  personnel  which,  though  doubtless 
detracting  from  its  elasticity  and  its  spirit  of  initiative,  and,  in 
essence,  tending  to  impair  the  very  socialist  mentality,  constitutes 
none  the  less  one  of  the  most  important  and  indispensable  bases 
of  the  party  life. 

Able  critics  of  socialist  affairs,  such  as  Ernst  Giinther,  have 
endeavoured  to  explain  the  fact  that  persons  of  recognized  abil- 
ity and  worth  have  preferred  as  a  rule  to  subject  themselves  to 
the  party-will  rather  than  to  break  completely  with  the  organiza- 
tion, by  the  suggestion  that  had  they  decided  otherwise  they 
would  have  imperilled  their  political  existence,  and  would  have 
renounced  "the  possibility  of  continuing  to  represent  efficiently 
the  interests  of  the  workers. "  '^  It  is  unquestionable  that  the ,/ 
socialist  platform  is  now  the  best  one  from  which  to  advocate 
the  interests  of  the  workers,  and  is  historically  the  most  appro- 
priate, so  that  the  renunciation  of  this  platform  almost  always || 
involves  the  loss  of  the  opportunity  for  defending  working-class r 
interests.  But  it  is  no  less  indisputable  that ' '  to  the  average  man 
the  close  association  of  his  own  economic  existence  with  his  de- 
pendence upon  the  socialist  party  seems  a  sufficient  excuse"  for 
the  sacrifice  of  his  own  convictions  in  order  to  remain  in  a  party 
with  which  he  is  in  truth  no  longer  in  full  sympathy.^" 

It  has  been  written : 

Staatserhaltend  sind  nur  jene, 
Die  vom  Staate  viel  erhalten." 

For  all  their  exaggeration,  there  is  a  nucleus  of  truth  in  these 
words,  and  the  criticism  applies  with  equal  justice  to  the  party  as 
to  the  state.  The  practice  of  paying  for  all  services  rendered, 
tends  in  no  small  degree  to  reinforce  the  party  bureaucracy,  and 
favours   centralized    power.      Financial    dependence   upon   the 

^  Ernst  Giinther,  Die  Bevisionisticlie  Bewegung  in  der  deutscTien  Sosial- 
demoJcratie,  Jahrbueh  fur  Gesetzgebung  (Sehmoller,  anno  xxx  (1906),  fasc. 
1,  p.  253). 

"  Giinther,  op.  eit. 
.,  "  There  is  a  word-play  here  which  renders  a  literal  translation  impossi- 
ble. The  general  significance  is  that  those  only  can  be  counted  upon  to 
support  the  state  who  receive  much  at  the  hands  of  the  state. — Much  in 
the  same  way  as  in  England  the  reactionaries  are  accustomed  to  say 
(though  here  without  any  intention  to  gibe)  that  those  only  who  have  a 
"stake  in  the  country"  can  be  trusted  to  care  for  its  interests! 


ECONOMIC  PHASES  117 

party,  that  is  to  say  upon  the  leaders  who  represent  the  major- 
ity, enshackles  the  organization  as  with  iron  chains.  The  most 
tenaciously  conservative  members  of  the  organization  are,  in 
fact,  those  who  are  most  definitely  dependent  upon  it.  When 
this  dependence  attains  to  a  certain  degree  of  intensity,  it  exer- 
cises a  decisive  influence  upon  the  mentality.  It  has  been  noted 
that  in  those  countries  in  which  members  of  parliament  are  not 
salaried,  but  where  the  party  organizations  themselves  provide 
for  the  support  of  their  parliamentary  representatives,  the  dep- 
uties have  a  very  strong  sense  of  dependence  upon  the  members 
of  their  organizations.  Where,  on  the  contrary,  members  of  par- 
liament are  remunerated  by  the  state,  they  feel  themselves  be- 
fore all  to  be  parliamentarians,  even  though,  they  may  owe  their 
election  exclusively  to  the  socialist  party. 

It  is  well  known  that  the  numerical  strength  of  the  trade 
unions  depends  to  a  very  considerable  extent  upon  the  economic 
advantages  which  the  unions  offer  to  their  members.  The  suc- 
cess of  the  trade-union  movement  from  this  point  of  view  has 
suggested  to  the  German  socialists  that  the  socialist  party  should 
extend  to  the  rank  and  file  of  the  membership  some  of  the  ad- 
vantages which  have  hitherto  been  the  exclusive  privilege  of  the 
party  bureaucracy.  Otto  Gerisch,  treasurer  of  the  party  and 
member  of  the  executive  committee,  referred  to  this  possibility  in 
a  speech  on  the  problem  of  organization,  made  at  the  Bremen 
Congress  of  1904.^^  After  quoting  facts  proving  the  superiority 
of  the  trade-union  organization  over  that  of  the  party,  he  stated 
that  in  his  view  the  real  reason  of  this  superiority  was  to  be 
found  in  the  "accumulation  of  benefits"  which  the  unions  pro- 
vided for  their  members.  He  added  that  the  workers  did  not 
prove  faithful  to  their  unions  until  these  organizations  under- 
took the  practice  of  mutual  aid  on  the  large  scale,  but  that  there- 
after the  membership  increased  enormously  and  became  far  more 
stable.  Continuing  this  train  of  thought,  he  said :  "  It  is  char- 
acteristic that  the  Konigsberg  comrades,  who,  in  view  of  the  ad- 
vanced position  they  occupy  in  the  German  socialist  movement, 
must  certainly  be  held  to  possess  extensive  experience  in  matters 
of  organization  and  propaganda,  provide  subsidies  to  members  of 
the  party  to  meet  funeral  expenses.^^     This  practice  has  been 

"  Protolcoll  iiber  die  Verhandlungen  des  Parteitages  der  sozialdemoTcra- 
tischen  Partei  Deutschlands,  abgehalten  su  Bremen,  Sept.  10-24,  1904,  Ver- 
lag  "Vorwarts,"  Berlin,  p.  272. 

"A  similar  institution  is  found  also  in  Giessen.    Here  every  member  of 


118  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

introduced  for  a  very  good  reason.  We  are  at  a  disadvantage  in 
the  socialist  party  as  compared  with  the  trade  unions,  in  that  we 
cannot  offer  any  direct  advantages  to  our  members.  But  this 
will  not  always  be  the  case."  It  seems  doubtful  if  these  words 
are  to  be  interpreted  as  a  direct  announcement  of  the  intention 
to  introduce  a  system  of  mutual  life-insurance,  or  whether  Ger- 
isch  merely  intended  a  warm  recommendation  of  such  a  measure. 
Oda  Olberg,  who  was  present  at  the  congress  on  behalf  of  the 
Italian  socialist  paper  "Avanti,"  interpreted  the  words  in  the 
former  sense,  and  described  the  speech  as  a  "menace  of  degener- 
ation. "  ^*  It  is  certain  that  in  the  German  socialist  party  ten- 
dencies exist  towards  laying  greater  stress  upon  such  material 
advantages,  tendencies  which  might  lead  to  the  transformation 
of  the  party  organization  into  a  socialistically  tinged  proletarian 
assurance  society.  It  is  evident  that  an  evolution  in  this  direc- 
tion would  attract  to  the  party  hundreds  of  thousands  of  new 
members,  so  that  there  would  be  a  considerable  accession  of 
strength.  At  the  same  time  the  apparatus  of  the  socialist  bu- 
reaucracy would  be  greatly  developed.  The  effects  which  such 
an  evolution  would  have  upon  the  real  strength  of  the  party 
vis-a-vis  the  state,  upon  its  moral  impetus,  its  internal  unity,  and 
its  tactical  cohesion,  are  questions  which  cannot  be  discussed 
here.  For  our  purpose  it  has  been  enough  to  draw  attention  to 
the  influence  which  the  practice  of  paying  for  services  rendered 
has  upon  the  maintenance  and  the  reinforcement  of  the  organi- 
zation. 

In  aristocratic  regimes,  so  long,  at  least,  as  the  aristocracy 
retains  its  essentially  plutocratic  character,  the  elected  officials 
are  usually  unpaid.  Their  functions  are  purely  honorary,  even 
when  they  require  the  whole  time  of  those  who  undertake  them. 
They  are  members  of  the  dominant  class,  are  assumed  to  be  rich, 
to  make  it  a  point  of  honour  to  spend  money  for  the  public  good, 

the  local  branch  of  the  socialist  party  pays  a  monthly  subscription  of  25 
pfennigs.  Five  pfennigs  out  of  this  sum  are  paid  in  to  a  special  funeral  ac- 
count, and  from  this  account  is  made  a  disbursement  of  20  marks  for  the 
funeral  expenses  of  every  member,  or  of  bis  wife. 

"Cf.  leading  article,  II  Congresso  di  Brema,  "Avanti, "  anno  viii.  No. 
2,608.  Oda  Olberg  writes:  "Frankly,  we  cannot  conceive  a  socialist  party 
which  attracts  and  retains  its  members  by  offering  them  economic  ad- 
vantages. We  consider  that  it  would  be  far  better  to  have  a  handful  of 
devoted  comrades  who  have  joined  our  ranks,  not  for  lucre,  but  impelled 
by  the  socialist  faith,  ready  for  every  sacrifice,  willing  to  give  themselves, 
rather  than  a  whole  army  of  members  who  have  entered  the  party  regarding 


ECONOMIC  PHASES  119 

and  to  oeeiipy,  even  at  considerable  pecuniary  sacrifice,  eminent 
positions  in  the  service  of  the  state.  A  similar  practice  prevails 
even  in  modern  democracies.  The  Lord  JMayor  of  London  and 
his  colleagues  in  the  other  gi'eat  cities  of  England  are  unpaid. 
The  same  is  true  of  the  Italian  Syndics.  Inasmuch  as  the  enter- 
tainment allowances,  etc.,  are  usually  altogether  inadequate,  the 
holders  of  such  offices  must  be  men  of  considerable  private  means 
to  enable  them  to  support  the  necessary  charges,  and  they  must 
therefore  be  either  wealthy  parvenus  or  men  born  to  wealth. 
Similar  considerations  apply  to  Italian  parliamentary  represen- 
tation. In  Italy  the  government  opposes  the  idea  of  paying  sal- 
.aries  to  members  of  parliament,  on  the  ground  that  it  would  be 
improper  for  the  elected  of  the  nation  to  receive  base  money  for 
their  activities.^^  The  consequence  is  that  in  Italy,  since  the 
Italian  socialist  party  is  a  poor  one,  the  manual  workers  are 
a  priori  excluded  from  parliament.  Among  the  thirty-six  social- 
ist deputies  in  the  Italian  chamber  during  1909,  two  only  had 
been  manual  workers  (trade-union  leaders).  In  such  conditions 
it  is  likely  that  the  party  representation  in  the  legislature  will  be 
restricted  to  persons  with  private  means,  to  those,  that  is  to  say, 
who  have  time  and  money  which  they  are  able  to  devote  to  an 
unremunerative  occupation,  and  one  which  demands  frequent 
changes  of  residence.  In  France,  moreover,  where  the  salaries 
of  the  deputies  are  on  a  liberal  scale,  it  has  been  noted  that  the 
poorest  constituencies  are  represented  in  parliament  by  the  rich- 
est members.^® 
Even  in  certain  democratic  parties  the  assumption  of  official 

it  as  a  mutual  aid  society."  This  view  is  estimable  from  the  moral  and 
socialist  outlook,  but  its  utterance  shows  that  Oda  Olberg  has  an  inadequate 
understanding  of  the  most  conspicuous  quality  of  the  masses;  unless  it  be 
that  she  has  abandoned  her  Marxism,  that  after  the  Blanquist  manner  she 
is  willing  to  renounce  the  democratic  criterion  of  majority  rule,  and  that 
she  looks  to  find  salvation  solely  from  the  action  of  a  small  but  intelligent 
minority. 

^^  Giolitti,  replying  in  the  year  1909  to  a  proposal  that  the  Italian  depu- 
ties should  be  salaried,  expressed  again  and  again  his  clear  conviction  that 
the  payment  of  members  would  tend  to  weaken  the  repute  of  parliament 
throughout  the  country.  In  his  view,  the  representative  function  is  a  free 
gift  from  the  people  (cf.  Atti  del  Parlamento  Italiano,  Camera  dei  Depu- 
tati,  sessione  1909,  Tip.  della  Cam.  dei  Dep.,  Kome,  1909,  vol.  i,  pp.  518  and 
913). — In  the  year  1885  Bismarck,  apropos  of  a  paragraph  in  the  Prussian 
civil  code,  went  so  far  as  to  describe  the  salary  paid  to  the  members  of  the 
Reichstag  as  "  a  dishonourable  gain. ' ' 

"Eugene  Fourniere,  op.  cit.,  p.  109. 


120  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

positions  in  tlie  party  may  be  regarded  as  an  honorary  office, 
especially  where  the  organization  is  not  well  supplied  with  means. 
Thus  there  not  infrequently  arises  within  the  party  a  peculiar 
form  of  financial  authority,  since  the  comrades  who  are  better 
endowed  with  means,  gain  and  retain  influence  through  the  pe- 
cuniary services  which  they  render.  A  plutocratic  supremacy  of 
this  nature  exists  in  the  press  of  those  parties  which,  lacking 
means  for  the  independent  maintenance  of  their  own  organs,  are 
forced  to  depend  upon  the  pecuniary  assistance  given  by  well-to- 
do  comrades.  The  result,  of  course,  is  that  these  latter,  as  prin- 
cipal shareholders  in  the  newspaper,  possess  a  natural  right  of 
controlling  its  policy.  A  typical  example  of  this  is  found  in 
France,  where  for  a  time  ' '  1  'Humanite ' '  was  supported  by  a  syn- 
dicate of  wealthy  Jews.  Again,  in  choosing  delegates  to  the 
party  congresses,  the  preference  is  often  given  to  those  who  are 
able  and  willing  to  pay  their  own  travelling  expenses.  In  this 
way  it  results  that  the  congresses,  which  constitute  the  supreme 
authority  of  the  party,  often  come  to  be  chiefly  composed,  like 
the  parliamentary  group  in  certain  countries,  of  persons  who  are 
comparatively  well-to-do.  This  is  what  happens  in  Italy,  France, 
Holland,  etc.^^  As  far  as  Germany  is  concerned,  this  is  less  likely 
to  occur,  partly  because  very  few  members  of  the  socialist  party 
are  well  off,  and  partly  because  of  the  flourishing  condition  of 
the  party  finances.  In  Germany,  therefore,  the  financial  superi- 
ority of  the  rich  comrade  over  the  poor  one  is  often  replaced  by 
the  superiority  of  the  rich  branch.  It  is  naturally  very  difficult 
for  the  organizations  that  are  short  of  money  to  send  delegates  to 
the  party  congress,  especially  if  this  is  held  in  a  distant  city. 
Consequently  these  poor  branches,  when  they  are  unable  to  ap- 
point as  delegate  some  one  who  has  the  time,  the  means,  and  the 
will  to  undertake  the  journey  at  his  own  expense,  are  compelled 
to  abandon  the  idea  of  being  represented  at  the  congress.  It 
should  be  added  that  public  opinion  within  the  party  has  often 
shown  itself  strongly  adverse  to  the  practice,  stigmatizing  the 
delegates  who  are  appointed  on  these  terms  as  "mandataries  by 
accommodation,"  and  regarding  the  conferring  and  the  accept- 
ance of  such  a  mandate  as  a  treason  to  the  party  and  as  a  form 
of  corruption.  At  the  Bremen  congress  of  1904,  in  the  case  of 
Fehndrich,  it  was  loudly  denounced  as  a  veritable  crime.^^    Such 

"As  regards  France,  cf.  A.  Jobert,  Impressions  de  Congres,  "La  Guerre 
Sociale,"  anno  ii.  No.  45. 
^^  Frotokoll,  pp.  116  et  seq.,  265  e.t  seq.    Cf.  also  the  discussion  upon  the 


ECONOMIC  PHASES  121 

accusations  are  often  unjust,  for  more  spirit  of  sacrifice  and 
love  of  duty  are  commonly  needed  to  induce  a  comrade  to  at- 
tend a  congress  at  his  own  cost  than  would  be  the  case  if  he  had 
a  week's  holiday  at  the  expense  of  his  local  branch. 

Nevertheless  it  remains  true  that  as  regards  representation  at 
party  congresses,  the  smaller  sections  are  in  a  position  of  serious 
inferiority.  Numerous  proposals  have  been  made  for  the  remedy 
of  this  state  of  affairs.  For  instance,  in  order  to  realize  the 
democratic  postulate  of  the  equal  representation  of  all  districts, 
in  the  years  1903  and  190-4  the  section  of  Marburg  proposed  that 
all  the  costs  of  delegation  should  be  defrayed  by  the  central 
treasury.  This  proposal  was  not  accepted,  and  consequently  an- 
other attempt  was  made  to  find  a  remedy,  and  this  has  taken  the 
form  of  uniting  numerous  local  branches  into  provincial  feder- 
ations. Thus  the  rules  of  the  provincial  federation  of  Hesse- 
Nassau  contain  a  clause  to  the  following  effect:  "Those  local 
branches  of  the  federation  which  are  unable  to  pay  the  costs  of 
delegation. to  the  congress  will  draw  lots  every  year  to  select 
one  among  their  number,  and  the  branch  thus  chosen  will  have 
the  right  to  send  a  delegate  to  the  congress  at  the  expense  of  the 
federation."  It  may  be  noted  in  passing  that  five  of  the  branches 
out  of  the  ten  of  which  the  federation  consists  have  to  avail 
themselves  of  this  privilege. 

A  party  which  has  a  well-filled  treasury  is  in  a  position,  not 
only  to  dispense  with  the  material  aid  of  its  comparatively  af- 
fluent members,  and  thus  to  prevent  the  acquirement  by  these 
of  a  preponderant  influence  in  the  party,  but  also  to  provide 
itself  with  a  body  of  officials  who  are  loyal  and  devoted  because 
they  are  entirely  dependent  on  the  party  for  their  means  of  sub- 
sistence. Before  the  year  1906,  when  the  payment  of  members 
was  conceded  by  the  German  state,  the  German  socialist  party 
had  provided  the  salaries  of  its  deputies.  In  this  way  the  party 
leaders,  poor  men  for  the  most  part,  were  enabled  to  enter 
parliament  without  being  in  a  position  to  emancipate  themselves 
from  the  party,  or  to  detach  themselves  from  the  majority  of 
the  parliamentary  group  of  socialists — as  has  happened  in  France 
with  the  formation  of  the  group  of  "independent  socialists." 
The  French  socialist  party  has  been  forced  to  recognize  the 
danger  involved  in  the  existence  of  leaders  who  are  not  economi- 

similar  case  of  Lily  Braun  at  the  Munich  congress  of  1902  {Frotolcoll,  p. 
250). 


122  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

cally  dependent  on  the  party.  In  those  countries  in  which  the 
representatives  of  the  people  are  not  paid  by  the  government  nor 
salaried  by  the  party,  the  danger  of  plutocracy  arises  from  the 
fact  that  the  members  of  parliament  must  necessarily  be  men  of 
means ;  but  in  France  such  a  danger  arises  in  the  opposite  way, 
for  here  not  only  are  the  deputies  paid,  but  they  are  paid  at  the 
high  rate  of  £600  a  year.  Consequently  it  has  occurred  to  the 
French  socialists  to  adopt  a  measure  which  shall  at  once  reduce 
the  financial  supremacy  of  its  representatives  at  the  Palais 
Bourbon  and  provide  a  steady  accession  to  the  party  funds,  and 
they  have  decreed  that  every  deputy  elected  under  the  segis  of 
the  party  must  pay  over  one-fifth  of  his  salary,  £120  per  annum, 
to  the  party  treasury.  Many  of  the  French  socialist  deputies, 
in  order  to  elude  this  obligation,  have  simply  resigned  their  mem- 
bership of  the  party.  Among  the  causes  which  in  the  year  1905 
led  to  the  formation  of  the  new  parliamentary  socialist  group, 
the  so-called  independent  socialists,  the  chief  was  certainly  the 
desire  to  escape  this  heavy  tax,  and  to  preserve  intact  for  them- 
selves the  fine  round  sum  paid  as  salary  by  the  state.  Even  in 
the  case  of  the  deputies  who,  in  order  to  preserve  their  seats, 
have  found  it  expedient  to  accept  as  a  matter  of  principle  their 
liability  to  the  party  treasury,  the  majority  have  shown  little 
alacrity  in  the  discharge  of  this  liability.  Year  after  year,  in 
fact,  at  the  party  congresses,  there  have  been  interminable  dis- 
cussions as  to  the  means  to  be  adopted  to  compel  the  recalci- 
trant socialist  deputies  to  discharge  their  financial  obligations. 
And  yet  (and  here  is  one  of  the  ironies  of  history)  it  has  not 
taken  long  to  discover  that  to  despoil  the  deputies  of  a  portion 
of  their  salary  does  not  after  all  constitute  the  most  efficacious 
means  of  preventing  the  formation  within  the  party  of  an  oli- 
garchy of  plutocrats.  From  the  report  made  to  the  congress  of 
Nimes  (1910)  by  the  executive  committee  it  appears  that  of  the 
128,000  francs  which  constitute  the  party  revenue,  more  than 
half,  67,250  francs  to  be  precise,  was  made  up  by  the  contribu- 
tions of  the  socialist  members  of  parliament.^"  Such  a  state  of 
affairs  is  eminently  calculated  to  favour  the  predominance  of  the 
deputies,  who  become  the  financial  props  of  the  party  administra- 
tion, and  thus  are  persons  of  importance  whom  the  rank  and  file 
must  treat  with  all  possible  respect. 

Speaking  generally,  when  the  manual  workers  become  employ- 

"  Letter  contributed  hy  Grumbacli  to  the  * '  Volksstimme "  of  Frankfort, 
March  1,  1910. 


ECONOMIC  PHASES  123 

ers  it  is  not  found  that  tliey  are  easy  masters.  They  are  prone 
to  mistrust,  and  are  extremely  exacting. ^°  Were  it  not  that 
these  employees  have  as  a  rule  abundant  means  of  escaping  from 
the  influence  of  their  many-headed  masters,  they  would  be  worse 
treated — so  runs  the  complaint — than  by  any  private  employer. 
In  relation  to  the  salaried  officials,  every  member  of  the  organi- 
zation considers  himself  a  capitalist  and  behaves  accordingly. 
Moreover,  the  manual  workers  often  lack  any  criterion  for  the 
appreciation  of  intellectual  labour. 

In  Rome,  many  societies  for  co-operative  production  make  it  a 
principle  to  pay  their  commercial  and  technical  managers  on 
the  same  scale  as  their  manual  workers.^^  In  Germany,  too,  for 
a  long  time  the  same  tendency  prevailed.  At  the  assembly  of 
the  Christian  miners  held  at  Gelsenkirchen  in  1898,  the  demand 
found  expression  that  Brust,  one  of  the  leaders,  should  continue 
manual  work  as  a  miner,  since  otherwise  he  would  forfeit  the 
esteem  of  his  comrades.^-  At  the  socialist  congress  held  at  Berlin 
in  1892  a  motion  was  discussed  for  many  hours  in  accordance 
with  which  no  employee  of  the  party  was  to  be  paid  a  salary  ex- 
ceeding £125  per  annum  f^  whilst  at  the  congress  of  Frankfort 
in  1894  the  proposal  to  increase  the  salary  of  the  two  party  sec- 
retaries by  £25  had  to  be  withdrawn,  since  the  voting  was  inde- 
cisive, although  the  ballot  was  taken  several  times.^*  For  a  long 
time  in  the  German  socialist  party  there  continued  to  prevail  the 
erroneous  view  that  the  salaries  paid  to  the  party  employees,  and 
even  the  disbursements  made  to  propagandists  on  account  of  ex- 
penses and  time  lost,  were  a  sort  of  gratuity,  a  ''pourboire."^^ 
» — — —i 

^°Cf.  Heinrich  Herkner,  Die  Arbeiterfrage,  ed.  cit.,  p.  116;  Richard  Cal- 
wer,  Prinsipien  und  Meinungsfreiheit,  "Soz.  Monatsh., "  x  (xii),  fasc.  1. — • 
In  an  inquiry  instituted  in  Italy  by  the  General  Federation  of  Labour  con- 
cerning the  wages  paid  to  the  employees  of  trade  unions,  one  of  the  wit- 
nesses, when  asked,  "How  are  the  employees  paid  in  your  union?"  replied 
bitterly,  "With  frequent  votes  of  censure!  "  (Fausto  Pagliari,  Le  Organiz- 
sazioni  e  %  loro  Impiegati,  ed.  cit.  p.  11). — In  England  it  has  been  said: 
"Socialist  advocates  in  England  are  disgracefully  sweated.  Heaven  help 
those  who  throw  their  bread  upon  socialist  waters ;  from  no  mundane  source 
will  help  come"  (S.  G.  Hobson,  Boodle  and  Cant,  "International  Socialist 
Eeview,"  vol.  ii,  No.  8,  p.  587). 

^  Lamberto  Paoletti,  Un  Cimitero  di  Cooperative,  "Giornale  degli  Eco- 
nomisti,"  September  1905,  p.  266. 

"  Heinrich  Herkner,  op.  cit.,  p.  114. 

""Frotokoll,  pp.  116-131. 

'^^  Protokoll,  pp.  69  et  seq. 

^  Cf .  speech  by  Richard  Fischer  at  the  congress  of  Berlin  in  1892,  Pro- 
toJcoll,  p.  127. 


124  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

In  the  case  of  the  socialist  newspapers,  the  editor  was  often 
worse  paid  than  the  business  manager  and  even  than  the  com- 
positors.^'' Matters  have  changed  since  then,  but  there  always 
exists  a  tendency  on  the  part  of  the  manual  workers  which  in- 
duces them  to  endeavour  to  keep  down  the  salaries  of  the  party 
officials  to  the  level  of  what  is  paid  to  a  factory  hand.  A  few 
years  ago  a  trade  union  passed  a  motion  to  the  effect  that  the  em- 
ployees of  the  union  should  be  paid  by  the  hour,  and  on  the  same 
scale  as  that  which  prevailed  in  the  branch  of  industry  to  which 
they  belonged  as  trade  unionists.  Even  now,  in  fixing  the  sal- 
aries of  their  own  employees,  many  of  the  comrades  adopt  as  a 
principle  that  the  remuneration  ought  to  be  less  than  that  which 
is  paid  for  the  same  work  by  capitalist  employers.^^  Speaking 
generally,  however,  it  may  be  said  that  the  German  working  class 
is  now  accustomed  to  pay  its  employees  liberally.  This  improve- 
ment is  explicable,  in  part,  from  the  improved  financial  position 
of  the  trade  unions  and  of  the  socialist  party.  But  there  is  an- 
other reason.  The  employees  have  succeeded  in  withdrawing  the 
question  of  their  salaries  from  the  publicity  of  the  congresses 
and  of  reserving  the  discussion  of  this  question  for  private  com- 
mittees. 

In  France,  on  the  other  hand,  the  tendency  among  the  workers 
to  stint  their  employees  has  gained  ground,  especially  of  late, 
since  the  deputies  to  the  Chamber  have  been  allotted  salaries  of 
£600  a  year.  The  indignation  against  the  ''Quinze  Mille" 
(15,000  francs)  has  been  so  great  that  in  many  cases  the  man- 
ual workers  have  been  unwilling  to  pay  their  employees  in  the 
trade  unions  more  than  the  tenth  part  of  this  sum,  the  modest 
annual  salary  of  £60.^^  During  1900-1901,  the  three  employees 
of  the  Confederation  Generale  du  Travail  (the  secretary,  the 
treasurer,  and  the  "organizer")  received  in  all  only  3,173  francs 
(i.e.,  a  little  over  £40  a  year  each).^*  The  two  chief  employees 
of  the  Printers'  Federation  receive  an  annual  salary  of  £144 

»— — — —    "     ■■■■ '  '       "      '        --.....  ■  ■ .. .  ■       —  .,  ■ ,       ...  .^ 

^"Cf.  Eichard  Calwer,  Bas  Kommunistisclie  Manifest  und  die  heutige  So- 
zialdemokratie,  Giinther,  Brunswick,  1894,  p.  38;  also  E.  Fischer,  Protokoll, 
p.  129. 

"  Bernstein,  Arheiterhewegung ,  ed.  cit.,  pp.  142  et  seq. 

^Enquete  sur  la  crise  sindicaliste ;  reponse  de  E.  Clemczynski,  "Mouve- 
ment  socialiste,"  vol.  xi,  Nos.  215-216,  p.  302. 

^'Paul  Louis,  Histoire  du  mouvement  syndical  en  France  (1789-1906), 
Alcan,  Paris,  1907,  p.  244.  From  March  1901  the  salary  of  the  "perma- 
nent, ' '  Georges  Yvetot,  was  raised  to  8  francs  a  day,  £116  a  year  (Fernand 
Pelloutier,  op.  cit.,  p.  152). 


ECONOMIC  PHASES  125 

each,  whilst  the  treasurer  receives  £48  a  year.  The  Metalworkers 
Federation  regards  itself  as  extraordinarily  liberal  in  engaging 
three  employees  at  a  salary  of  £112  per  annum,  and  (in  1905) 
seven  district  secretaries  at  salaries  of  £95  each.^*^ 

In  Italy  there  has  not  yet  come  into  existence  a  numerous  gen- 
eral staff  of  employees  salaried  by  the  socialist  party  and  the 
trade-union  organizations.  This  is  chiefly  explicable  by  lack  of 
funds.  For  many  years  it  has  been  necessary  to  improvise  sec- 
retaries, administrators^,  and  treasurers  of  trade  unions  and  local 
branches,  to  find  them  from  day  to  day  by  appealing  to  the  good- 
will and  devotion  of  the  comrades.^^  Before  1905,  the  Printers' 
Federation  was  the  only  one  which  had  special  employees  for 
bookkeeping  and  for  the  administration  of  the  funds.^^  Even 
to-day  the  life  of  the  labour  organizations  is  extremely  rudimen- 
tary and  is  exposed  to  great  vicissitudes.  Of  late  years,  indeed, 
the  number  of  permanent  employees  of  the  federations  and  the 
Bourses  du  Travail  has  undergone  a  continuous  increase,  but 
these  employees  are  still  very  badly  paid.  We  are  told  by  Rigola 
that  the  salary  has  been  raised  from  100  lire  to  200  lire  a  month, 
and  that  "no  self-respecting  organization  will  now  offer  less." 
But  this  increase  does  not  suffice  to  provide  a  remedy,  for  200 
lire  will  not  induce  a  skilled  workman  to  abandon  his  trade  to 
become  a  trade-union  leader.^^  Notwithstanding  this,  if  we  are 
to  believe  the  trade  unionists,  even  in  Italy  some  of  the  trade- 
union  leaders  are  already  manifesting  that  tendency  to  grow  fat 
and  idle  for  which  the  leaders  of  the  rich  English  labour  organ- 
izations have  sometimes  been  reproached. 

The  meagreness  of  the  salaries  paid  to  their  employees  by  the 
socialist  party  and  the  trade  unions  is  not  due  solely  to  that  em- 
ployers' arrogance  and  arbitrariness  from  which  the  working 
class  is  by  no  means  exempt  when  it  becomes  an  employer.  Where 
the  younger  organizations  are  concerned,  the  trouble  may  arise 
simply  from  lack  of  means.  Moreover,  in  paying  at  a  low  rate 
there  is  a  practical  end  in  view,  the  desire  being  that  the  em- 
ployees should  serve  for  love  of  the  cause,  and  not  with  an  eye 


^'Paul  Louis,  op.  cit,  pp.  198-9. 

^^  Alessandro  Schiavi,  II  Nerio  delle  Associasioni  operaie,  "Critica  So- 
eiale, "  anno  xv.  No.  10. 

^^Eenato  Brocehi,  L'Organissasione  di  Eesistenza  in  Italia,  Libr.  Editr. 
Marchigiana,  Macerata,  1907,  p.  137. 

^Rinaldo  Rigola,  /  Funzionari  dell'  Organissasione,  "Avanti, "  anno 
xiv,  No.  341. 


126  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

to  the  material  advantages  attaching  to  their  office.  It  was  hoped 
that  in  this  way  the  idealism  of  the  leaders  would  be  artificially 
fostered,  and  that  it  would  be  possible  to  prevent  them  from 
raising  themselves  above  the  social  level  of  their  proletarian  com- 
rades. During  the  early  and  revolutionary  period  of  the  labour 
movement,  whether  economic  or  political,  such  attempts  were 
made  in  every  country  of  the  world.  The  labour  organizations 
have  not  always  been  satisfied  with  paying  their  employees  on  a 
stingy  scale,  but  members  of  the  party  or  the  union  have  even 
been  forbidden  to  accept  the  money  which  the  state  paid  to  those 
who  became  members  of  parliament.  Among  the  reasons  which 
in  the  year  1885  induced  the  socialists  of  Berlin  to  abstain  from 
participation  in  the  elections  to  the  Prussian  Landtag,  the  chief 
was  the  consideration  that  the  fifteen  marks  a  day  which  the 
members  of  this  body  receive  would  tend  to  lift  the  socialist 
members  out  of  their  class.^* 

In  practice,  however,  the  grudging  payment  of  the  leaders 
which  at  least  in  the  early  days  of  the  trade-union  movement  was 
a  deliberate  policy,  has  proved  to  be  a  very  untrustworthy  safe- 
guard against  possible  breaches  of  duty. 

For  the  great  majority  of  men,  idealism  alone  is  an  inade- 
quate incentive  for  the  fulfilment  of  duty.  Enthusiasm  is  not 
an  article  which  can  be  kept  long  in  store.  Men  who  will  stake 
their  bodies  and  their  lives  for  a  moment,  or  even  for  some 
months  in  succession,  on  behalf  of  a  great  idea  often  prove  in- 
capable of  permanent  work  in  the  service  of  the  same  idea  even 
when  the  sacrifices  demanded  are  comparatively  trifling.  The 
joy  of  self-sacrifice  is  comparable  to  a  fine  gold  coin  which  can 
be  spent  grandly  all  at  once,  whereas  if  we  change  it  into  small 
coin  it  dribbles  imperceptibly  away.  Consequently,  even  in  the 
labour  movement,  it  is  necessary  that  the  leaders  should  receive 
a  prosaic  reward  in  addition  to  the  devotion  of  their  comrades 
and  the  satisfaction  of  a  good  conscience.    Quite  early  in  the  his- 

®*  The  following  passage  may  be  quoted  from  the  resolution  voted  in  this 
connection:  "Finally,  seeing  that  every  member  of  the  Prussian  House 
of  Eepresentatives  is  paid  an  allowance  of  15  marks  a  day,  we  cannot  escape 
recognizing  that  by  participating  in  the  elections  we  may  be  opening  the 
way  for  a  renunciation  of  principles,  and  may  be  creating  a  forcing-house 
for  professonal  parliamentarians  (our  principles  are  sacred  to  all  of  U3 
and  our  representatives  are  men  of  honour,  but  man  is  a  product  of  cir- 
cumstances, and  it  is  better  to  intervene  now  than  when  it  is  too  late ! )  " 
(Eduard  Bernstein,  Die  Geschichte  der  Berliner  Arbeiterbewegung,  Buch- 
handl.  "Vorwarts,"  Berlin,  1907,  vol.  ii,  p.  160). 


PAYMENT  OF  LEADERS  127 

tory  of  the  organizations  formed  by  the  Italian  agricultural 
workers  we  find  in  a  manual  written  for  the  guidance  of  these 
that  if  the  capolega  or  chief  of  the  union  is  to  do  his  duty  it 
would  be  well  to  pay  him  for  his  work.^^ 

For  two  additional  reasons  it  is  necessary  that  the  employees 
should  be  adequately  paid.  The  first  of  these  is  a  moral  one, 
belonging  to  the  department  of  socialist  ethics.  The  labourer  is 
worthy  of  his  hire.  In  Marxist  terminology,  the  worker  who  does 
not  receive  pay  correspondent  to  the  social  value  of  his  work  is 
being  exploited.  The  other  reason  belongs  to  the  sphere  of  prac- 
tical politics.  To  pay  the  leaders  poorly  as  a  matter  of  principle 
is  dangerous  precisely  because  it  stakes  everything  upon  the 
single  card  of  idealism.  Eduard  Bernstein  is  right  in  contend- 
ing that  underpayment  leads  to  corruption  and  demoralization.^'' 
The  leader  who  is  poorly  paid  is  more  likely  to  succumb  to  temp- 
tation, more  likely  to  betray  the  party  for  gain,  than  one  who, 
being  well  paid,  finds  in  his  occupation  a  safe  and  sufficient  in- 
come. ]\Ioreover,  the  payment  of  the  leaders  at  a  low  rate  ren- 
ders difficult  the  application  of  another  preventive  means  against 
the  establishment  of  an  oligarchy,  for  it  hinders  frequent  changes 
in  the  personnel  of  the  leading  employees,  and  thus  indirectly 
favours  the  formation  of  an  oligarchy.  In  France,  where  it  is 
still  the  rule  to  pay  the  trade-union  leaders  very  small  salaries, 
there  is  lacking  a  new  generation  of  leaders  ready  to  take  the 
place  of  the  old,  and  for  this  reason  at  the  trade-union  congresses 
the  same  members  continually  appear  as  delegates.^'^ 

If,  however,  the  non-payment  of  the  party  leaders  or  their 
remuneration  on  a  very  moderate  scale  does  not  afford  any  safe- 
guard for  the  observance  of  democratic  principles  on  the  part  of 
the  officials,  we  have  on  the  other  hand  to  remember  that  an  in- 
crease in  the  financial  strength  of  the  party,  which  first  renders 
liberal  payment  of  the  officials  possible,  contributes  greatly  to 
nourish  the  dictatorial  appetites  of  the  members  of  the  party 
bureaucracy,  who  control  the  economic  forces  of  the  party  in 
virtue  of  their  position  as  administrators.  In  the  history  of 
Christianity  we  learn  that  as  the  wealth  of  the  Church  increased, 
there  increased  also  the  independence  of  the  clergy,  of  the  ec- 
clesiastical employees,  vis-a-vis  the  community.     As  representa- 

^  Egidio  Bernaroli,  op,  cit.,  p.  27, 

^Eduard  Bernstein,  Die  Demolratie  in   der  SozialdemoTcratie,  "Sozial. 
Monatsh.,"  September  3,  1908,  p.  1108. 
^^  E,  Clemczynski,  op.  cit.,  p,  301. 


i 


128  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

tives  of  the  community  they  were  in  charge  of  the  goods.  Con- 
sequently all  those  who  had  need  of  these  goods,  or  wished  in 
any  way  to  speculate  upon  them,  were  dependent  upon  the 
clergy.  This  applied  not  only  to  mendicants  and  to  all  kinds 
of  receivers  of  alms,  but  also  to  those  whose  aim  it  was  to  swell 
the  ranks  of  the  clergy,  or  to  succeed  to  the  positions  of  these, 
all  aspirants  to  sacerdotal  honours.  For  the  administration  of 
the  funds  and  for  the  conduct  of  affairs,  Christianity  needed  a 
graded  corps  of  employees.  This  was  the  origin  of  the  hierarchy 
which  changed  the  inner  meaning  of  Christianity  and  perverted 
its  aims.  A  similar  danger  is  encountered  by  all  democratic 
parties  which  possess  an  elaborate  financial  administration.^® 
This  danger  is  especially  marked  in  the  case  of  the  German  so- 
cialist party,  whose  central  organization  in  the  year  1908  em- 
ployed merely  in  its  printing  office  298  persons,^"  and  all  of  these, 
having  no  share  whatever  in  the  net  profits,  nor  any  rights  in  the 
management  of  the  social  property,  depend  upon  the  party  just 
as  they  might  depend  upon  any  ordinary  private  employer.  In 
the  hands  of  the  party  bureaucracy  are  the  periodical  press,  the 
publication  and  sale  of  the  party  literature,  and  the  enrolment 
of  orators  in  the  list  of  paid  propagandists.  All  these  sources  of 
income  can  at  any  time  be  closed  to  undesirable  competitors  or  to 
dissatisfied  members  of  the  rank  and  file,  and  this  power  is  uti- 
lized in  actual  practice.^*^    The  concentration  of  power  in  those 

^  This  clanger  has  been  recognized  by  Ettore  Ciccotti,  notwithstanding 
the  optimist  tendency  of  his  views  on  the  relationship  of  the  leaders  to  the 
masses.     Cf.  Fsicologia  del  Movimento  socialista,  ed.   cit.,  p.   127. 

^^  Eduard  Bernstein,  Die  Natur  und  die  Wirkungen  der  capitalistische 
Wirtsclmftsordnung,  Buchhandlung  ' '  Vorwarts, ' '  Berlin,  1909,  p.  12. 

^"During  the  struggle  between  the  party  leaders  and  the  so-called  "Jung- 
en,"  the  executive  committee  forbade  the  sale  in  the  bookshops  of  the 
party  of  works  by  Dr.  Bruno  Wille  (youthful  writings  and  poems),  since 
Wille  himself  belonged  to  the  opposing  faction,  although  the  work  in  ques- 
tion was  not  written  to  voice  the  views  of  the  opposition.  In  defence  of  the 
leaders'  action  Eichard  Fischer,  a  member  of  the  executive,  wrote  to  Wille 
tinder  date  November  6,  1891:  "Our  party  is  no  mere  vague  ideal  com- 
munity, but  a  practical  body,  with  such  and  such  organs.  However  little 
we  are  inclined  to  exclude  from  intellectual  participation  any  one  from 
the  realm  of  Cuckoo  Cloudland,  the  party  has  to  take  every  care  that  within 
the  framework  of  the  organization  its  adherents  yield  to  the  will  of  the 
community  in  matters  of  tactics  and  discipline.  One  who  will  not  submit 
himself  to  these  principles  of  subordination,  and  who  combines  with  others 
who  are  declared  to  be  unworthy  to  belong  to  this  organization,  in  order 
to  work  against  the  party,  renounces  ipso  facto  all  claim  to  make  use  of  the 
organs  and  of  the  advantages  which  the  organisation  has  created  and 


FINANCIAL  POWER  OF  LEADERS     129 

parties  which  preach  the  IMarxist  doctrine  is  more  conspicuous 
than  the  concentration  of  capital  predicted  by  Marx  in  economic 
life.  For  some  years  past  the  leaders  of  the  German  socialist 
party  have  employed  numerous  methods  of  oppression,  such  as 
the  threat  to  give  no  aid  either  in  men  or  money  on  behalf  of 
the  electoral  propaganda  of  a  candidate  from  whose  views  they 
dissent,  although  the  local  comrades  give  this  candidate  their 
full  confidence.  It  is  hardly  necessary  to  say  that  such  a  prac- 
tice as  this  accords  ill  with  the  principles  of  liberty  and  frater- 
nity.*^ In  this  way  have  come  into  existence  strict  relationships 
of  dependence,  of  hierarchical  superiority  and  inferiority,  engen- 
dered by  the  invisible  force  of  the  great  god  ]\Ioney,  and  this 
within  the  bosom  of  the  working-class  party  which  has  taken  as 
its  motto  Blanqui's  phrase,  7ii  Dieu  ni  Maitre. 

Brief  allusion  may  be  made  in  conclusion  to  another  kind  of 
economic  pressure  which  labour  organizations  are  able  to  exer- 
cise. Publicans  whose  houses  are  frequented  chiefly  or  exclu- 
sively by  members  of  the  working  class,  or  small  shopkeepers 
whose  customers  consist  mainly  of  working  women,  are  indirectly 
if  not  directly  dependent,  in  the  economic  sense,  upon  the  party 
and  upon  the  trade  union.  They  are  dependent,  that  is  to  say, 
upon  the  leading  personalities  in  these  organizations,  who,  by 
declaring  a  boycott,  can  involve  them  in  absolute  ruin. 

which  it  safeguards  for  its  members.  One  of  these  organs  is  our  book- 
selling business,  and  consequently  it  was  a  matter  of  course  that  we  came 
to  the  decision  of  which  you  complain"  (Hans  Miiller,  Der  KlassenTcampf 
in  der  deutschen  demoTcratie,  Verlagsmagazin  J.  Schabelitz,  Zurich,  1892, 
p.  119).  Cf.  also  a  speech  made  by  Von  Elm  at  the  Mannheim  congress 
of  1906  {Protokoll,  p.  300). — The  pecuniary  effect  of  such  a  boycott  as  that 
of  Wille's  book  is  naturally  greater  in  proportion  as  all  the  workers  have 
become  accustomed  to  accept  only  such  intellectual  nutriment  as  has 
been  officially  prepared  in  the  party  kitchens  and  is  guaranteed  as  thor- 
oughly wholesome.  Above  all,  then,  this  applies  to  Germany. 
*^  .Wolfgang  Heine,  op.  cit.,  p.  283. 


CHAPTER  III 

THE  LEADERS  AND  THE  PRESS 

The  press  constitutes  a  potent  instrument  for  the  conquest,  the 
preservation,  and  the  consolidation  of  power  on  the  part  of  the 
leaders.  The  press  is  the  most  suitable  means  of  diffusing  the 
fame  of  the  individual  leaders  among  the  masses,  for  populariz- 
ing their  names.  The  labour  press,  and  this  applies  equally  to 
the  trade-union  journals  and  to  those  which  devote  themselves 
predominantly  to  political  ends,  is  full  of  panegyrics  concern- 
ing the  personalities  of  the  leaders,  of  references  to  their  ' '  disin- 
terestedness and  self-sacrificingness, "  to  their  "ardent  idealism, 
conjoined  with  a  vigorous  force  of  conviction  and  with  invincible 
tenacity,"  qualities  which,  we  are  told,  have  alone  made  it  pos- 
sible for  them  to  create  the  great  working-class  organizations.^ 
Such  flattering  phrases  as  are  from  time  to  time  used  of  the  so- 
cialist leaders  by  the  capitalist  press  (mostly  dictated  by  mo- 
tives of  electoral  opportunism)  are  complacently  reproduced  by 
socialist  journals,  and  whether  taken  at  par  value  or  not  they 
serve,  by  their  diffusion  among  the  socialist  rank  and  file,  to  in- 
crease the  prestige  of  the  leaders.^ 

^Cf.  the  article  entitled  Die  GewerTcschaften  Deutschlands  in  the  "Schwa- 
bische  Tagwacht, "  anno  xxvii,  No,  191   (August  17,  1907). 

^  A  typical  example  of  this  is  furnished  by  an  article  Loh  aus  gegnerischen 
Munde  [Praise  from  the  Enemy]  which  was  circulated  among  the  electors 
of  Giessen  apropos  of  an  election  to  the  diet,  and  from  which  the  following 
passages  may  be  quoted.  "Now  that  the  elections  to  the  diet  are  ap- 
proaching, we  may  remind  our  readers  that  the  activity  of  our  comrades 
in  the  Diet  of  Hesse  has  been  recognized  and  praised  by  the  leading 
organ  of  the  national  liberals.  Six  years  ago,  just  before  the  then  elec- 
tions, an  article  was  published  in  the  'Kolnische  Zeitung, '  dealing  with" 
the  conditions  in  Hesse  and  the  parties  in  the  diet,  judging  these  last  from 
a  thoroughly  oh^jective  standpoint.  The  writer,  who  was  obviously  well 
acquainted  with  his  subject,  opened  by  a  strongly  adverse  criticism  of 
the  leaders  of  his  own  party,  the  national  liberals,  who  were  then  pre- 
dominant in  the  Hessian  diet.  Turning  them  to  consider  our  comrades,  he 
continued:  'The  Hessian  social  democrats  in  the  diet  are  remarkable  men. 
Not  only  do  they  work  very  hard,  indeed  harder  than  all  others,  in  the 
fulfilment  of  their  parliamentary  duties,   but  they  often  play  a  leading 

130 


THE  LEADERS  AND  THE  PRESS     131 

It  is  true  that  the  press  cannot  exert  the  immediate  influence 
which  the  popular  propagandist  exercises  over  his  audience  in 
public  meetings,  debates,  and  party  congresses.^  In  compensa- 
tion for  this  defect,  however,  the  circle  of  influence  of  the  writ- 
ten word  is  far  more  extensive.  The  press  can  be  used  with 
effect  to  influence  public  opinion  by  cultivating  a  "sensation" — 
a  point  in  which  modern  party  democracy  exhibits  a  fundamental 
trait  which  it  shares  with  Bouapartism.  This  means  is  fre- 
quently employed  by  the  leaders  in  order  to  gain  or  to  retain 
the  sympathy  of  the  masses,  and  to  enable  them  to  keep  the  guid- 
ance of  the  movement  in  their  own  hands.    The  democratic  press 

part.  Many  members  of  the  constitutional  parties  would  do  well  to 
take  example  at  the  manner  in  which  the  socialist  locksmith  Ulrich  of 
Offenbach  performed  his  duties  as  secretary  of  the  finance  committee,  the 
way  in  which  he  examined  the  demand  for  universities  and  schools,  showing 
himself  as  a  rule  to  be  the  most  zealous  and  the  most  friendly  to  the 
government  of  all  those  who  desire  to  favour  a  progressive  culture.  He 
was  supported  in  this  activity  by  his  colleague  Dr.  David,  who,  although 
his  views  are  somewhat  more  doctrinaire  and  Utopian,  none  the  less  greatly 
excels  most  of  the  representatives  in  point  of  general  culture.  Such" 
socialists  as  these  are  all  the  more  dangerous  because  of  their  moderation, 
and  it  is  not  surprising  that  they  have  to  be  reckoned  with.'  Again, 
'Strongly  in  contrast  with  the  socialists  are  the  antisemites  and  the 
peasant-leagues,  for  these  have  always  displayed  themselves  as  the  bitter- 
est enemies  of  the  government;  they  are  incapable  of  being  influenced  by 
reason,  utterly  unteachable,  rude  blusterers,  unpractical  and  barren  poli- 
ticians, insanely  particularist,  and  often  positively  ludicrous.  .  .  .'  " 
(" Mitteldeutsche  Sonntagszeitung, "  xii,  No.  46).  The  article  concludes 
with  a  vigorous  appeal  to  the  electors  to  vote  for  the  socialist  candidates, 
because  of  all  the  parties  the  socialist  is  the  one  most  friendly  to  the 
(Grand  Ducal  government! 

^The  powerful  stimulus  which  the  personality  of  Singer  exercised  over 
the  masses  was  described  by  Kurt  Eisner  in  the  following  terms:  **With 
a  sort  of  jovial  energy  and  with  a  never  failing  sureness  of  touch  he 
knew  how  to  tame  and  to  lead  the  rude  multitude.  .  .  .  Specially  remark- 
able was  Singer  in  the  small  official  speeches,  in  the  *  addresses  to  the  throne ' 
with  which  he  was  accustomed  to  conclude  the  labours  of  the  'socialist 
parliamentary  session.'  Then  it  became  apparent  how  importance  is  con- 
ferred upon  the  individual  by  the  greatness  of  the  cause  in  which  he 
is  as  it  were  rooted.  Naturally  in  such  addresses  he  did  not  rise  above 
that  level  of  daily  commonplace  which  is  appropriate  to  all  official  utter- 
ances, but  he  knew  so  well  how  to  polish  his  phrases  until  they  shone;  his 
voice,  almost  completely  losing  its  Berlin  twang,  then  rose  to  its  full 
strength ;  pale  words  and  anaemic  emotion  became  transfused  with  red  blood ; 
and  he  always  closed  with  some  word  of  power,  with  one  of  those  turns 
of  phrase  intermediate  between  the  trivial  and  the  sublime,  which  are 
characteristic  of  the  gifted  public  speaker"  (Kurt  Eisner,  Taggeist, 
Kulturglossen,  Dr.  John  Edelheim  Verlag,  Berlin,  1901,  pp.  107-108). 


132  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

is  also  utilized  by  the  leaders  in  order  to  make  attacks  (more  or 
less  masked)  upon  their  adversaries;  or  to  launch  grave  accusa- 
tions against  persons  of  note  in  the  world  of  politics  or  finance. 
These  attacks  may  or  may  not  be  established  upon  a  sufficient 
foundation  of  proof,  but  at  any  rate  they  serve  to  raise  a  dust- 
storm.'*  Sometimes,  again,  the  leaders  endeavour  to  ingratiate 
themselves  with  the  masses  by  employing  in  respect  of  their  capi- 
talist opponents,  coarse  and  insulting  language  which  recalls  the 
proverbial  "Billingsgate."  All  means  are  good  to  the  popular- 
ity-hunter, and  he  varies  them  to  suit  his  environment. 

The  manner  in  which  the  leaders  make  use  of  the  press  to  se- 
cure their  domination  naturally  varies  from  one  country  to  an- 
other in  accordance  with  variation  in  national  customs.  Where 
the  party  organization  and  the  force  at  its  disposal  are  still  weak, 
the  influence  of  the  leaders  is  direct  and  personal.  The  conse- 
quence is  that  in  France,  in  England,  and  in  Italy,  where  the 
popular  character  still  presents  a  strongly  individual  stamp,  the 
democratic  leader  presents  himself  as  personally  responsible  for 
what  he  writes,  and  signs  his  articles  in  full.  An  article  M^hicli 
appears  in  "Le  Socialiste"  in  Paris  will  attract  attention,  not  so 
much  on  account  of  its  own  merits,  but  because  at  the  foot  it 
displays  in  large  type  the  signature  of  a  Jules  Guesde.  The 
leader  imposes  his  influence  upon  the  masses  directly,  manifest- 
ing his  opinion  openly,  often  giving  it  the  form  of  a  decree,  pub- 
lished in  the  most  conspicuous  part  of  the  paper.  From  the 
Eesthetic  and  ethical  points  of  view,  this  is,  moreover,  the  best 
form  of  journalism,  for  the  reader  has  a  right  to  know  the  source 
of  the  wares  which  are  offered  him,  and  this  altogether  apart 
from  the  consideration  that  to  all  public  activity  there  should  be 
applied  the  fundamental  moral  principle  that  each  one  is  respon- 
sible to  all  for  his  conduct.  For  the  aspirants  to  leadership, 
again,  the  practice  of  signing  newspaper  articles  has  the  incon- 
testable advantage   that  it  makes  their  names  known  to   the 

*In  the  -winter  of  1904  "Vorwarts"  came  out  with  the  sensational 
news  of  alleged  homosexual  misconduct  at  Capri  on  the  part  of  Frederick 
Krupp,  of  Essen.  Shortly  afterwards  the  same  journal  published  details 
of  a  plan  which  the  emperor  was  supposed  to  have  drawn  up  with  his 
own  hand  for  the  construction  in  Berlin  of  a  fortified  castle  for  defence 
against  the  workers.  In  the  winter  of  1905,  "Avanti"  published  at- 
tacks upon  the  personal  and  official  honour  of  Admiral  Bettolo,  Minister  of 
Marine — attacks  which  some  years  later,  when  they  had  attained  their 
end,  were  withdrawn  by  the  editor-in-chief,  Enrico  Ferri.  Similar  examples 
could  be  quoted  by  hundreds  from  the  socialist  press. 


THE  LEADERS  AND  THE  PRESS     133 

masses,  and  this  facilitates  their  gradual  rise  in  the  scale  of  rep- 
resentative honours  until  they  attain  to  the  highest. 

In  other  countries,  as  for  instance  in  Germany,  the  faith  of 
the  masses  in  authority  is  so  robust  that  it  does  not  require  to  be 
sustained  by  the  prestige  of  a  few  conspicuous  individualities. 
Hence  journalism  is  here  almost  always  anonymous.  The  indi- 
vidual contributor  disappears  behind  the  editorial  staff.  The 
journal  does  not  serve  to  diffuse  the  writers'  names  far  and  wide, 
and  regular  readers  are  often  totally  ignorant  of  the  individuali- 
ties of  the  staff.  This  explains  the  comparative  unimportance  of 
the  personal  role  played  by  German  publicists  when  compared 
with  those  of  most  other  countries;  it  explains  their  small  part 
in  public  life,  and  the  trifling  social  consideration  they  enjoy. 
But  this  must  not  be  taken  to  mean  that  the  anonymous  press 
fails  to  serve  the  leaders  as  an  instrument  of  domination.  Since 
the  German  journalist  is  identified  with  the  whole  editorial  staff, 
and  even  with  the  entire  party,  the  result  is  that  his  voice  ap- 
peals to  the  public  with  the  entire  force  of  this  collective  author- 
ity. His  personal  ideas  thus  acquire  a  prominence  and  attain 
an  influence  which  would  otherwise  be  lacking.^  What  the  indi- 
vidual member  of  the  staff  loses  through  his  anonymity,  in  respect 
of  direct  influence  upon  the  masses,  is  gained  by  the  journalist 
leaders  as  a  group.  The  editorial  * '  we, ' '  uttered  in  the  name  of 
a  huge  party,  has  a  much  greater  effect  than  even  the  most  dis- 
tinguished name.  The  "party,"  that  is  to  say  the  totality  of 
the  leaders,  is  thus  endowed  with  a  special  sanctity,  since  the 
crowd  forgets  that  behind  an  article  which  thus  presents  itself 
under  a  collective  aspect  there  is  concealed  in  the  great  majority 
of  cases  but  one  single  individual.  In  Germany  it  is  not  difficult 
to  observe  that  the  anonymous  polemical  and  other  articles  of 
"Vorwarts,"  the  central  organ  of  the  party,  are  regarded  by 
the  rank  and  file,  and  especially  in  Prussia,  as  a  sort  of  periodical 
gospel,  as  a  Bible  in  halfpenny  numbers.  It  is  more  especially  for 
the  publication  of  violent  personal  attacks  that  anonymous  jour- 
nalism furnishes  convenient  and  almost  tempting  opportunities, 
guaranteeing  moral  and  legal  impunity.    Behind  the  shelter  thus 

"  In  order  to  avoid  this  danger  a  portion  of  the  German  socialist  press 
seeks  to  render  the  personality  of  its  writers  distinguishable  by  having 
the  articles  signed  by  one  or  more  initials,  whose  significance  is  known  at 
any  rate  to  an  inner  circle  of  initiates.  Unfortunately  this  prophylactic 
measure  is  not  extended  to  those  official  journalistic  utterances  which  are 
apt  to  contain  the  most  venomous  attacks  upon  certain  members  of  the  party. 


134  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

afforded  by  anonymity  those  of  base  and  cowardly  nature  are  apt 
to  lurk  in  order  that  they  may  launch  thence  in  safety  their 
poisoned  arrows  against  their  personal  or  political  adversaries. 
The  victim  of  aggression  is  thus  for  four  separate  reasons  placed 
in  a  position  of  inferiority.  The  rank  and  file  consider  the  cen- 
sure which  has  been  expressed  against  him  as  having  been  ut- 
tered in  the  name  of  a  principle  or  a  class,  as  emanating  from 
a  superior  and  impersonal  region,  and  as  consequently  of  an 
extremely  serious  character  and  practically  indelible.  On  the 
other  hand^  the  whole  editorial  staff  feels  itself  responsible  for 
what  has  been  published,  for  the  anonymous  article  is  regarded 
as  published  with  the  unanimous  consent  of  the  collectivity ;  the 
result  is  that  the  whole  staff  makes  common  cause  with  the  ag- 
gressor, and  this  renders  it  almost  impossible  to  secure  any 
reparation  for  the  wrong  which  has  been  committed.  Further, 
the  person  attacked  does  not  know  who  is  the  aggressor,  whereas 
if  he  knew  the  latter 's  name  he  might  be  able  to  understand  the 
motives  for  the  attack  instead  of  being  forced  to  fight  a  shadow. 
Finally,  if  he  is  by  chance  able  to  unveil  the  personality  of  the 
aggressor,  journalistic  etiquette  forbids  him  to  undertake  his 
defence  on  lines  directed  against  the  aggressor  individually,  and 
he  is  thus  deprived  of  one  of  the  most  efficient  methods  of  de- 
fence. It  recently  happened  that  a  writer  in  the  German  social- 
ist press,  who  had  attacked  another  member  of  the  party,  when 
this  latter  made  a  reply  which  unquestionably  demanded  a  re- 
joinder, refused  to  continue  the  discussion  because  the  person 
attacked  had  addressed  his  reply,  not  to  the  editorial  staff  gen- 
erally, but  "to  one  single  member  of  that  staff,"  who  was  in 
fact  the  aggressor.  The  reason  given  for  this  refusal  was  that  in 
thus  replying  to  an  individual  instead  of  to  the  staff  the  second 
writer  had  "infringed  the  most  elementary  decencies  of  party 
life."« 

The  obliteration  of  personality  in  German  journalism  has 
favoured  the  institution,  in  connection  with  the  socialist  press  of 
that  country,  of  what  are  known  as  "correspondence  bureaux." 
These  organizations,  which  are  managed  by  some  of  the  writers 
of  the  party,  transmit  every  day  to  the  socialist  press  informa- 
tion relating  to  special  branches,  such  as  foreign  politics,  coopera- 
tive questions,  and  legislative  problems.  The  bureaux  owe  their 
origin  in  great  part  to  the  spirit  of  intense  economy  which  domi- 

*"  Frankfurter  Volksstimme, "  1909,  No.  175. 


THE  LEADERS  AND  THE  PRESS     135 

nates  the  party  press.  They  confer  upon  this  press  a  stamp  of 
great  uniformity,  since  dozens  of  newspapers  receive  their  in- 
spiration from  the  same  source^  Further,  they  insure  the  su- 
premacy of  a  small  closed  group  of  official  journalists  over  the 
independent  writers — a  supremacy  which  is  manifested  chiefly 
in  the  economic  sphere,  since  those  who  write  for  the  correspond- 
ence bureaux  seldom  play  any  notable  part  in  the  political  life 
of  the  party. 

In  all  cases  the  press  remains  in  the  hands  of  the  leaders  and 
is  never  controlled  by  the  rank  and  file.  There  is  often  inter- 
calated between  the  leaders  and  the  mass  an  intermediate  stratum 
of  press  commissaries  who  are  delegated  by  the  rank  and  file 
to  exercise  a  certain  supervision  over  the  editorial  staff.  In  the 
most  favourable  circumstances,  however,  these  functionaries  can- 
not aspire  to  more  than  a  very  small  share  of  power,  and  consti- 
tute merely  a  sort  of  inopportune  and  untechnical  supplementary 
government.  Speaking  broadly  it  may  be  said  that  it  is  the 
paid  leaders  who  decide  all  the  political  questions  which  have  to 
do  with  the  press. ^ 

'  Cf .    Heinrich   Strobel,   Ein  sosiSlistisches  Echo?,   "Neue  Zeit, "   anno 
xxvii,   vol.   ii,   No.   45. 
« Cf .  supra,  pp.  24,  25,  26,  39-40. 


CHAPTER   ly 

THE  POSITION  OF  THE  LEADERS  IN  RELATION  TO 
THE  MASSES  IN  ACTUAL  PRACTICE 

In  tlie  political  organizations  of  the  international  proletariat, 
the  highest  order  of  the  leaders  consists  chiefly  of  members  of 
parliament.  In  proof  of  this  it  suffices  to  mention  the  names  of 
a  few  men  who  were  or  are  the  most  distinguished  socialist 
leaders  of  their  day,  and  at  the  same  time  men  of  note  as  par- 
liamentarians :  Bebel,  Jaures,  Guesde,  Adler,  Vandervelde,  Troel- 
stra,  Turati,  Keir  Hardie,  Macdonald,  Pablo  Iglesias.  Hyndman 
is  an  exception  only  because  he  has  never  succeeded  in  winning 
an  election.  The  section  of  the  English  party  to  which  he  be- 
longs is  unrepresented  in  parliament. 

The  fact  here  noted  indicates  the  essentially  parliamentary 
I  character  of  the  modern  socialist  parties.  The  socialist  members 
of  parliament  are  those  who  have  especially  distinguished  them- 
selves in  the  party  by  their  competence  and  by  their  capacity. 
But  in  addition  to  this  superiority,  recognized  and  consecrated 
by  the  party  itself,  there  are  two  reasons  for  the  great  authority 
exercised  by  the  socialist  parliamentarian.  In  the  first  place, 
in  virtue  of  his  position,  he  largely  escapes  the  supervision  of 
the  rank  and  file  of  the  party,  and  even  the  control  of  its  execu- 
tive committee.  He  owes  his  comparative  independence  to  the 
fact  that  the  parliamentary  representative  is  elected  for  a  con- 
siderable term  of  years,  and  can  be  dispossessed  by  no  one  so  long 
as  he  retains  the  confidence  of  the  electors.  In  the  second  place, 
and  even  at  the  moment  of  his  election,  his  dependence  on  the 
party  is  but  indirect,  for  his  power  is  derived  from  the  electoral 
masses,  that  is  to  say,  in  ultimate  analysis  from  an  unorganized 
body.  It  is  true  that  in  certain  countries  the  independence  of 
the  party  organization  thus  enjoyed  by  the  parliamentary  depu- 
ties is  subject  to  limits  more  or  less  strict  according  to  the  degree 
of  organization  and  cohesion  of  the  party.  But  even  then  the 
respect  and  the  power  enjoyed  by  the  parliamentarians  remain 
unquestioned,  since  it  is  they  who  within  the  party  fill  the  prin- 
cipal offices,  and  whose  power  predominates  to  a  notable  degree 

136 


POSITION  OF  THE  LEADERS        ISTi 

in  the  party  executive.     This  is  true,  above  all,  of  Germany.^ 
Where  the  rules  forbid  the  deputy  to  function  also  as  a  member^ 
of  the  executive  committee  (in  Italy,  for  example,  only  one  dep-  V/ 
uty,  chosen  by  the  parliamentary  group,  can  sit  on  the  party  ^ 
executive),^  much  friction  is  apt  to  arise  between  the  two  groups 
of  leaders,  impairing  the  authority  of  both.    But,  for  the  reasons 
expounded  above,  the  influence  of  the  parliamentary  group  com- 
monly predominates. 

The  influence  of  parliamentarism  is  particularly  great  in  the 
German  social  democracy.  This  is  clearly  shown  by  the  attitude 
towards  the  party  commonly  assumed  by  the  socialists  in  parlia- 
ment. There  is  no  other  socialist  party  in  the  world  in  which  , 
the  conduct  of  its  representatives  in  parliament  is  subject  to  so  '' 
little  criticism.  The  socialist  members  of  the  Reichstag  fre- 
quently make  speeches  in  that  body  which  might  be  expected  to 
give  rise  to  the  liveliest  recriminations,  and  yet  neither  in  the 
party  press  nor  at  the  congresses  is  to  be  heard  a  word  of  crit- 
icism or  of  disapproval.  During  the  discussions  in  the  Reichstag 
concerning  the  miners'  strike  in  the  basin  of  the  Ruhr  (1905), 
the  deputy  Hue  spoke  of  the  maximum  programme  of  the  party 
as  "Utopian,"  and  in  the  socialist  press  there  was  manifested 
no  single  symptom  of  revolt.  On  the  first  occasion  on  which  the 
party  departed  from  its  principle  of  unconditional  opposition  to 
all  military  expenditure,  contenting  itself  with  simple  abstention 
when  the  first  credit  of  1,500,000  marks  was  voted  for  the  war 
against  the  Hereros,  this  remarkable  innovation,  which  in  every 
other  socialist  party  would  have  unquestionably  evoked  a  storm 
from  one  section  of  the  members,  even  if  there  might  have  been 
manifested  cheerful  approval  by  another,  aroused  among  the 
German  socialists  no  more  than  a  few  dispersed  and  timid  pro- 
tests. Subsequently,  at  the  Bremen  congress  of  1904,  when  the 
deputies  had  to  give  an  account  of  their  conduct,  very  few  dele- 
gates were  found  to  express  disapproval.  It  is,  further,  remark- 
able to  what  a  degree  the  power  of  the  parliamentary  group  be- 
comes consolidated  as  the  party  increases  throughout  the  country. 

^In  France,  until  1914,  the  right  of  the  deputies  to  enter  the  executive 
committee  of  the  socialist  party  was  restricte^^l  by  the  rules,  but  in  the  be- 
ginning of  that  year  the  restrictions  were  relaxed,  enabling  the  deputies 
to  exercise  a  predominant  influence  in  the  councils  of  the  party. 

^  Two  deputies  may  be  members  of  the  executive  committee  if  one  of  these 
two  is  chairman  of  the  central  organization,  and  thus  ex  officio  member 
of  the  executive. 


138  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

In  earlier  days,  far  less  important  questions  aroused  much  more 
acute  struggles  between  the  party  and  the  parliamentary  group. 
To-day,  the  socialist  masses  in  Germany  have  accustomed  them- 
selves to  the  idea  that  the  decisive  struggle  on  behalf  of  the  aims 
they  have  at  heart  will  be  carried  out  in  parliament,  and  for  this 
reason  they  scrupulously  avoid  doing  anything  which  might  make 
idifficulties  for  their  parliamentary  representatives.  This  con- 
Iviction  constantly  determines  the  conduct  of  the  masses  in  rela- 
,|t*ion  to  their  leaders.  Hence  in  many  questions  the  conduct  of 
"[^the  parliamentary  group  is  really  decisive,  suprema  lex.  All  vig- 
orous criticism,  though  made  in  accordance  with  the  basic  prin- 
ciples of  socialism,  is  at  once  repudiated  by  the  rank  and  file  if  it 
tends  to  weaken  the  position  of  the  parliamentary  group.  Those 
who,  notwithstanding  this,  venture  to  voice  such  criticism  are 
immediately  put  to  silence  and  are  severely  stigmatized  by  the 
leaders.  Two  examples  may  be  given  in  illustration.  The  "Leip- 
ziger  Volkszeitung, "  in  the  year  1904,  in  a  leading  article  en- 
titled The  Usury  of  Bread,  vented  its  anger  in  somewhat  violent 
terms  upon  the  political  leaders  of  the  capitalist  parties.  There- 
upon in  the  Eeichstag  certain  orators  of  the  right  and  of  the 
centre,  when  Prince  Biilow  had  himself  read  this  article  to  the 
house,  adducing  it  as  an  evil  example  of  journalistic  methods, 
made  a  great  display  of  indignation  against  the  socialists.  When 
this  happened,  Bebel,  who  had  hitherto  been  a  declared  friend  of 
the  "Leipziger  Volkszeitung,"  did  not  hesitate  to  repudiate  the 
article  in  open  parliament,  though  his  conduct  was  here  in  fla- 
grant contradiction  with  the  best  established  traditions  of  democ- 
racy, and  with  the  essential  principle  of  party  solidarity.^  At 
the  congress  of  Bremen  in  1904,  Georg  von  Vollmar  openly  con- 
demned the  first  attempts  at  anti-militarism  made  in  Germany 
by  certain  members  of  the  party.    He  did  this  with  the  express 

^It  is  true  that  the  early  history  of  the  German  socialist  party  con- 
tains one  or  two  precedents  for  Bebel 's  action.  In  1881,  Hasenclever 
and  Bios  made  use  of  certain  expressions  in  the  Eeichstag  which  amounted 
to  a  disavowal  of  the  central  party  organ  of  that  day,  the  "Sozialdemo- 
krat. "  Still  better  known  is  the  dispute  between  the  parliamentary  group 
and  the  "Sozialdemokrat"  of  Zurich  apropos  of  the  debate  concerning  the 
Steamship  Subsidy  in  1885,  in  the  course  of  which  the  group  published  a  ' 
declaration  to  the  effect  that  the  party  organ  must  in  no  case  set  itself 
in  opposition  to  the  group,  while  the  group  was  responsible  for  the  party 
press:  "It  is  not  the  journal  which  has  to  determine  the  conduct  of  the 
parliamentary  group,  but  the  latter  which  has  to  control  the  journal"  . 
(Franz  Mehring,  op.  cit.,  vol.  iv,  pp.  214  and  267). 


POSITION  OF  THE  LEADERS        139 

approval  of  most  of  the  delegates  and  without  arousing  any  dis- 
approval from  the  others.  Yet  anti-militarism  is  a  logical  con- 
sequence of  socialism,  and  for  such  a  party  as  the  socialist,  anti- 
militarist  propaganda  must  surely  be  a  matter  of  primary  im- 
portance. Vollmar,  however,  justified  his  attitude  by  remarking 
that  if  a  systematic  anti-militarist  propaganda  were  to  be  un- 
dertaken, the  Minister  of  War  would  have  a  pretext  ready  to  his 
hand  for  disregarding  all  the  protests  and  complaints  which 
might  be  made  by  the  socialist  deputies  on  account  of  the  dif- 
ferential treatment  of  soldiers  known  to  hold  socialist  views. 
If,  for  example,  the  party  representatives  in  parliament  were  to 
take  action  against  the  secret  inquiries  which  the  authorities  are 
accustomed  to  make  and  to  transmit  to  the  district  commanders, 
sending  in  the  names  of  recruits  who  before  enlistment  have 
been  in  the  habit  of  frequenting  socialist  meetings  and  have 
even  been  known  as  local  leaders,  the  minister  could  readily 
reply,  and  with  effect,  that  socialists,  being  anti-militarists,  are 
enemies  of  their  country  and  as  such  deserve  to  be  handled  with 
all  possible  rigour.  Vollmar  concluded  by  saying:  "Anti- 
militarist  propaganda  will  make  it  impossible  for  the  socialists 
in  parliament  to  continue  to  assert  that  socialists  fulfil  their  mili- 
tary duties  no  less  patriotically  than  non-socialists,  and  that  for 
this  reason  it  is  unjust  to  subject  them  to  exceptional  treat- 
ment."* 

It  is  well  known  that  great  efforts  have  been  made  by  the  par- 
liamentary socialist  groups  in  every  country  to  secure  for  their 
members  ex-officio  the  right  to  vote  at  the  party  congresses.  In 
Germany  this  right  was  recognized  in  1890  by  the  congress  of 
Berlin,  with  the  unimportant  restriction  that  in  questions  con- 
cerning their  parliamentary  activities  the  rights  of  the  members 
of  the  group  in  congress  should  be  purely  deliberative.  Despite 
some  opposition,  this  right  was  confirmed  in  the  new  rules  of 
the  party  which  were  passed  at  the  Jena  congress  in  1905.  It 
is  obvious  that  the  deputy,  even  if  he  does  not  as  such  possess  the 
right  to  vote,  will  not  find  much  difficulty  in  securing  delegation 
to  the  congress.  Auer  once  said  that  those  deputies  who  were 
not  thus  delegated  must  be  poor  fellows  indeed.^    Nevertheless 

*  Protokoll  des  Parteitags  zu  Bremen,  p.  186. 

^ "  In  any  case,  since,  in  view  of  their  responsibilities  to  the  party,  their 
presence  at  the  congress  may  be  indispensable,  it  should  not  be  made 
necessary  for  them  to  go  about  begging  for  a  mandate"  (Protokoll  des 
Parteitags  su  Berlin,  1890,  p.  122). 


140  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

they  have  been  saved  this  trifling  trouble.  Thus  the  members 
of  the  parliamentary  group  are  admitted  to  an  active  partici- 
pation in  the  most  intimate  deliberations  of  the  party,  not  as 
delegates  approved  by  a  vote  of  the  branch  to  which  they  belong, 
but  as  representatives  of  the  entire  electorate  of  their  constit- 
uency for  the  whole  period  for  which  they  are  elected  to  the  leg- 
islature. This  involves  an  express  recognition  of  their  position 
as  leaders  (and  a  further  admission  that  this  leadership  owes  its 
origin  in  part  to  non-party  sources),  and  obviously  raises  them 
to  the  position  of  super-comrades  independent  of  the  rank  and 
file  of  the  party,  or  makes  them  irremovable  delegates  for  so  long 
as  they  may  remain  members  of  the  Eeichstag.  This  institu- 
tion is  certainly  peculiar  to  Germany.  In  other  countries  iden- 
tical rules  apply  for  the  appointment  of  all  delegates  to  the  con- 
gress, whether  these  may  happen  to  be  parliamentary  representa- 
tives or  not.^  In  France  and  Holland^  for  instance,  the  deputies 
can  take  part  in  the  congresses,  and  are  able  to  vote  in  these  only 
if  they  are  specially  delegated  for  the  purpose.  In  Italy,  the 
members  of  the  executive  committee  and  the  members  of  the 
parliamentary  group  cannot  speak  in  the  congress  unless  they 
are  charged  by  the  executive  committee  to  present  a  report  of 
some  kind.  In  Italy,  as  in  France  and  Holland,  they  can  vote 
only  when  regularly  delegated. 

Yet  in  view  of  their  greater  competence  in  various  questions, 
the  socialist  parliamentary  groups  consider  themselves  superior 
even  to  the  congresses,  which  are  in  theory  the  supreme  courts 
of  the  party,  and  they  claim  an  effective  autonomy.  The  mem- 
bers of  the  parliamentary  group  obey  a  natural  tendency  to  re- 
strict more  and  more  the  circle  of  questions  Avhich  must  be  sub- 
mitted to  the  congress  for  decision,  and  to  make  themselves  the 
sole  arbiters  of  the  party  destinies.  In  Germany,  many  of  the 
socialist  deputies  put  forward  a  claim  in  1903  to  decide  for  them- 
selves, independently  of  the  party  congresses,  whether  the  par- 
liamentary group  should  or  should  not  accept  the  vice-presidency 
of  the  Reichstag  for  one  of  its  members,  and  whether,  if  this  post 
were  accepted,  the  socialist  vice-president  should  conform  to  the 
usage  attaching  to  this  ofSce,  and  put  in  appearances  at  court.^ 

***Avanti,"  No.  3433.  Nevertheless,  in  these  other  countries  the  lead- 
ing roles  in  the  socialist  congresses  are  played  by  the  parliamentary  repre- 
sentatives. 

'  This  claim  was  endorsed  by  certain  aspirants  to  parliamentary  honours 
■who   had   recently   failed   to   secure  election.     Bebel   wrote   ironically   in 


rOSITION  OF  THE  LEADERS        141 

In  Italy,  the  socialist  and  tlie  republican  parliamentary  ^oups 
have  secured  complete  independence  of  the  executives  of  their 
respective  parties.  The  socialist  group  has  even  been  accused  at 
times  of  accepting  deputies  who  are  not  even  regular  members 
of  the  party,  men  who  contend  that  their  electors  would  look 
askance  should  they  adhere  officially  to  the  local  socialist  organi- 
zation. 

The  parliamentary  leaders  of  the  socialist  as  well  as  those  of 
the  capitalist  parties  assume  the  right  to  constitute  a  closed  cor- 
poration, cut  off  from  the  rest  of  their  party.*  The  parlia- 
mentary group  of  the  German  socialists  has  on  more  than  one 
occasion,  and  of  its  own  initiative,  disavowed  the  actions  of  con- 
siderable sections  of  the  party.  The  most  notable  of  such  dis- 
avowals have  been  those  of  the  article  Th  e  Usury  of  Bread,  in  the 
"Leipziger  Volkszeitung"  (1904),''  and  that  of  the  anti-militarist 
agitation  of  Karl  Liebknecht  (1907).  In  the  former  instance, 
the  "Leipziger  Volkszeitung"  could  very  well  console  itself  for 
the  disapproval  of  the  *' fifty-seven  comrades"  (i.e.  the  members 
of  the  parliamentary  group)  as  that  of  an  infinitesimal  minority 
of  the  party — in  accordance  with  the  historic  and  typically  dem- 
ocratic utterance  of  the  Abbe  Sieyes  on  the  eve  of  the  French 
Eevolution,  when  he  said  that  the  rights  of  the  king  bore  to 

this  connection:  "Remarkable  logic!  If  H.  had  secured  a  seat  at  the 
last  election  he  would  have  regarded  himself  as  competent  to  decide  upon 
this  question.  But  since  he  has  been  beaten  at  the  polls  he  is  incompetent. 
One  must  therefore  be  elected  deputy  in  order  to  secure  the  necessary 
mental  illumination. ' ' 

*"In  this  atmosphere  of  bourgeois  parliamentarism,  which  is  so  foreign 
to  the  essential  nature  of  socialism,  the  social  democracy,  involuntarily 
and  unconsciously,  has  assumed  many  of  the  customs  of  this  parliamentarism 
which  harmonize  ill  with  the  democratic  characteristics  of  socialism.  In. 
the  writer's  view,  the  appearance  of  the  parliamentary  group  as  a  closed 
corporation  (not  merely  vis-a-vis  the  capitalist  parties,  which  is  necessary, 
but  also  vis-a-vis  our  own  party)  is  such  a  development  of  bourgeois  parlia- 
mentarism, and  may  lead  to  grave  inconveniences"  (Rosa  Luxemburg, 
Sosialreform  oder  Eevolution?  Appendix,  Miliz  und  Militarismus,  ed.  of 
the  "Leipziger  Volkszeitung,"  Leipzig,  1899,  p.  75). 

*  The  declaration  made  by  the  party  executive  in  the  affair  of  the  "Leip- 
ziger Volkszeitung"  begins  as  follows:  "On  Saturday,  the  10th  inst.,  when, 
after  the  speech  of  comrade  von  Vollmar,  the  Imperial  Chancellor  brought 
up  for  discussion  the  subject  of  the  article  in  the  'Leipziger  Volkszeitung' 
of  December  2nd,  those  members  of  the  parliamentary  group  who  were 
present  agreed  to  instruct  comrade  Bebel  to  state  in  his  speech  that  the 
group  regretted  the  publication  of  this  article  and  repudiated  responsibility 
for  it." 


142  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

those  of  his  subjects  the  ratio  of  1 :  30,000,000.  As  a  matter  of 
pure  theory,  and  considering  the  democratic  principles  of  the 
party,  the  paper  here  hit  the  right  nail  on  the  head ;  but  in  prac- 
tice its  contention  had  no  significance,  for  to  the  ineffective  right 
of  principle  there  was  opposed  the  right  of  the  stronger,  imma- 
nent in  the  leadership. 

The  local  branches  of  the  party  follow  their  deputies.  In  the 
congresses  the  great  majority  of  the  delegates  accept  as  a  matter 
of  habit  the  guidance  of  the  men  of  note.^''  At  the  Bremen  con- 
gress in  1904  the  German  socialists  rejected  the  idea  of  the  gen- 
eral strike  as  a  general  absurdity;  at  Jena,  in  1905,  they  ac- 
claimed it  as  an  official  weapon  of  the  party;  at  Mannheim,  in 
1906,  they  declared  it  to  be  Utopian.  All  the  individual  phases 
of  this  zigzag  progress  were  hailed  with  the  conscientious  ap- 
plause of  the  mass  of  the  delegates  in  the  congress  and  of  the 
comrades  throughout  the  country,  who  exhibited  on  each  occa- 
sion the  same  lack  of  critical  faculty  and  the  same  unthinking 
enthusiasm.  In  France,  the  little  handful  of  men  who  consti- 
tuted the  general  staff  of  the  French  ]\Iarxists  when  these  still 
formed  a  separate  party  under  the  leadership  of  Jules  Guesde 
was  so  permeated  with  the  authoritarian  spirit  that  at  the  party 
congresses  the  executive  committee  (Comite  National)  was  not 
elected  in  due  form,  but  was  appointed  en  hloc  by  acclamation;  ^^ 

'"  Cramer,  deputy  to  the  Hessian  diet,  in  his  report  concerning  a  divisional 
conference  in  the  Grand  Duchy,  deplores  the  comparatively  slight  demo- 
cratic value  which  the  party  congresses  have  for  the  mass  of  the  delegates, 
and  how  little  these  assert  themselves  in  opposition  to  the  despotic  con- 
duct of  the  leaders.  "In  the  press  of  business"  a  proposal  sent  in  before 
the  opening  of  the  session  that  the  conference  should  last  for  two  days 
instead  of  one  was  completely  ignored.  "1  feel  compelled  to  say  that  the 
propagandist  value  of  the  last  conference  must  be  regarded  as  infinitesimal. 
The  work  was  done  in  such  a  hurry,  freedom  of  debate  was  suppressed 
so  roughly  by  the  chair,  and  there  were  so  many  other  disagreeable  features, 
that  the  conference  was  in  truth  a  painful  spectacle"  ("Mainzer  Volks- 
zeitung,"  September  16,  1903). 

"  This  practice  continues  to  the  present  day  in  the  Unified  French 
Socialist  party.  At  the  Amiens  congress  in  January  1914,  the  election 
of  the  executive  committee  (Commission  Administrative  Permanente)  was 
postponed  until  the  very  end  of  the  congress,  when  a  large  proportion  of 
the  delegates  had  already  left  and  when  those  who  remained  were  tired  out. 
The  re-election  en  bloc  of  the  executive  was  then  proposed,  with  the  sub- 
stitution of  one  name  for  that  of  Francis  de  Pressense,  recently  deceased, 
and  the  most  important  administrative  act  of  the  congress  was  thus  effected 
under  conditions  which  made  any  discussion  of  the  personnel  of  the  execu- 
tive quite  impossible. 


POSITION  OF  THE  LEADERS        143 

it  was  impossible  for  the  chiefs  to  conceive  that  the  rank  and 
file  of  the  party  could  dream  of  refusing  to  follow  their  leaders. 
]\Ioreover,  the  congresses  were  conducted  in  camera}^  Eeports 
were  published  in  an  extremely  condensed  form  so  that  no  one 
could  check  the  speakers.  In  the  German  socialist  congresses,  and 
in  the  reports  of  these  assemblies,  it  is  easy  to  distinguish  between 
a  higher  and  a  lower  circle  of  delegates.  The  report  of  what  is 
said  by  the  "ordinary"  delegates  is  greatly  abbreviated,^^  whilst 
the  speeches  of  the  big  guns  are  reproduced  verbatim.  In  the 
party  press,  too,  different  measures  are  applied  to  the  comrades. 
In  the  year  1904,  when  "Vorwarts,"  then  edited  by  Eisner,  did 
not  publish  a  letter  sent  by  Bebel,  the  latter  moved  heaven  and 
earth  with  his  complaints,  saying  that  freedom  of  opinion  was 
being  suppressed  in  the  party  and  that  it  was  "the  most  ele- 
mentary right ' '  for  all  the  comrades  to  have  their  letters  printed 
in  the  party  organs.  Yet  it  is  hardly  possible  to  ignore  that  the 
*  *  right ' '  which  Bebel  thus  invoked  is  in  practice  proportional  to 
a  comrade's  degree  of  elevation  in  the  party.  The  excitement 
over  the  non-appearance  of  Bebel 's  letter  shows  that  his  case 
was  an  exceptional  one. 

In  the  trade-union  movement,  the  authoritative  character  of  j 
the  leaders  and  their  tendency  to  rule  democratic  organizations 
on  oligarchic  lines,  are  even  more  pronounced  than  in  the  polit- 
ical organizations.^* 

Innumerable  facts  recorded  in  the  history  of  trade-union  or- 
ganizations show  to  what  an  extent  centralized  bureaucracy  can 
divert  from  democracy  a  primarily  democratic  working-class 
movement.  In  the  trade  union,  it  is  even  easier  than  in  the  polit- 
ical labour  organization,  for  the  officials  to  initiate  and  to  pursue 
a  course  of  action  disapproved  of  by  the  majority  of  the  workers 
they  are  supposed  to  represent.  It  suffices  here  to  refer  to  the 
two  famous  decisions  of  the  trade-union  congress  at  Cologne  in 
1905.     In  one  of  these  the  leaders  declared  themselves  to  be 

"Georges  Sorel,  Dove  va  il  marxismo?,  "Eivista  Critiea  del  Socialismo, " 
i,  p.  16   (1889). 

"Eduard  David,  Faktion  und  Parteitag,  "Vorwarts,"  anno  xxii.  No. 
131. 

"  "  In  the  socialist  party,  owing  to  the  nature  of  the  matters  with  which 
it  has  to  deal  and  owing  to  the  characteristics  of  the  political  struggle, 
narrower  limits  are  imposed  upon  bureaucracy  than  in  the  case  of  the 
trade-union  movement"  (Rosa  Luxemburg,  Massenstreik,  Partei,  und 
Gewerkschaften,  ed.  cit.,  p.  61).  This  cautious  expression  of  the  differ- 
ences may  be  accepted. 


144  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

opposed  (in  opposition  to  the  views  of  the  majority)  to  the  con- 
tinued observance  of  the  1st  of  May  as  a  general  labour  demon- 
stration of  protest.  In  the  second,  the  discussion  of  the  general 
strike  was  absolutely  forbidden.  By  these  and  similar  occur- 
rences the  oligarchical  practices  of  the  leaders  are  sufficiently 
proved,  although  some  writers  continue  to  dispute  the  fact.^^ 

For  a  good  many  years  now,  the  executive  committees  of  the 
trade-union  federations  have  endeavoured  to  usurp  the  exclusive 
right  to  decide  on  behalf  of  the  rank  and  file  the  rhythm  of  the 
movement  for  better  wages,  and  consequently  the  right  to  decide 
whether  a  strike  is  or  is  not  "legitimate."  ^^  Since  the  leaders 
of  the  federation  are  in  charge  of  the  funds,  which  often  amount 
to  a  considerable  sum,  the  dispute  reduces  itself  in  practice  to  a 
question  as  to  who  is  to  decide  whether  a  strike  shall  or  shall  not 
be  subsidized.^^  This  question  is  one  which  involves  the  very  life 
of  the  democratic  right  of  the  organized  masses  in  the  trade 
unions  to  regulate  their  own  affairs.  When  the  leaders  claim 
that  they  alone  have  a  right  to  decide  in  a  matter  of  such  impor- 
tance, and  still  more  when  they  already  largely  possess  this  right, 

"Heinrich  Strobel,  for  instance,  a  writer  on  the  staff  of  "Vorwarts. " 
"We  at  least  do  not  believe  that  the  majority  of  trade-union  members 
favour  tactics  differing  from  those  pursued  by  the  trade-union  officials. 
Unfortunately  the  majority  of  the  trade  unions,  owing  to  the  'neutrality' 
which  they  have  observed  for  some  years,  have  become  politically  indiffer- 
ent, and  judge  the  trade-union  movement  in  practice  only  from  the  out- 
look of  the  petty  and  immediate  interests  of  their  respective  trades"  (H. 
Strobel,  Gewerhschaften  und  sozialistische  Geist,  "Neue  Zeit,"  xxiii,  vol. 
ii.  No.  44). 

"  This  has  recently  happened  also  in  Italy  (cf.  Kinaldo  Rigola,  Ventun 
mesi  di  Vita  della  Confederazione  del  Lavoro,  Tip.  Coop.,  Turin,  1908,  pp. 
62  et  seq.). 

"  In  practice,  the  executive  committees  have  been  able,  to  a  large  extent, 
to  make  good  their  claim  to  decide  this  matter.  To-day  the  decision 
whether  a  strike  is  or  is  not  to  take  place  rarely  depends  upon  local  groups, 
but  is  in  the  hands  of  the  central  executives.  One  well  acquainted  with 
labour  organizations,  Otto  Geithner  of  Berlin,  a  carpenter  by  trade,  quotes 
the  argument  employed  by  the  trade-union  leaders  to  justify  this  tendency, 
which  runs  as  follows:  "Since  the  executive  committees  of  the  unions  have 
to  supply  the  financial  means  it  is  necessary  that  the  decision  should  be 
in  their  hands"  (" Korrespondenzblatt  der  Generalkommission  der  Gewerk- 
schaften  Deutschlands, "  anno  vii,  No.  28).  Geithner  makes  the  apt  com- 
ment that  this  seems  to  imply  that  the  poor  officials  have  to  pay  the  cost 
of  the  strike  out  of  their  own  pockets,  that  the  funds  of  the  union  are 
ends  in  themselves,  and  that  the  movement  to  secure  better  wages  is  an 
unimportant  accessory  (Otto  Geithner,  sur  Talctik  der  SosialdemoJcratie, 
BetracMungen  eines  Lohnarbeiters,  "Neue  Zeit,"  anno  xziii,  No.  47). 


POSITION  OF  THE  LEADERS        145 

it  is  obvious  that  the  most  essential  democratic  principles  are 
gravely  infringed.  The  leaders  have  openly  converted  them- 
selves into  an  oligarchy,  leaving  to  the  masses  who  provide  the 
funds  no  more  than  the  duty  of  accepting  the  decisions  of  that 
oligarchy.^^  This  abuse  of  power  may  perhaps  find  justification 
on  tactical  grounds,  the  leaders  alleging  in  defence  of  their  proce- 
dure the  supreme  need  that  a  strike  should  be  declared  cau- 
tiously and  in  unison.  They  claim  the  right  to  decide  the  merits 
of  the  question  on  the  sole  ground  that  they  know  better  than 
the  workers  themselves  the  conditions  of  the  labour  market 
throughout  the  country  and  are  consequently  more  competent  to 
judge  the  chances  of  success  in  the  struggle.  The  trade-union 
leaders  add  that  since  the  stoppage  of  work  in  a  town  necessarily 
impairs  the  financial  strength  of  the  union  in  that  town,  and  , 
sometimes  disturbs  the  conditions  of  work  of  a  whole  series  of  ' 
organized  workers,  it  is  for  the  leaders  to  decide  when  and  where 
a  strike  should  be  declared.  Thus  they  consider  that  their  action 
is  justified  by  the  democratic  aim  of  safeguarding  the  interests 
of  the  majority  against  the  impulsive  actions  of  the  minority.^'' 

"Some  time  ago  a  notice  went  the  rounds  of  the  socialist  press  in  Ger- 
many, under  the  headline  TJie  View  Talcen  by  Employers  of  Trade-union 
Officials.  This  was  an  extremely  characteristic  document.  It  runs  as  fol- 
lows: "The  federation  of  employers  in  the  building  trade  of  Greater 
Berlin  is  opposed  to  the  foundation  of  conciliation  boards,  but  has  made  a 
notable  proposal  in  the  event  of  these  being  instituted  by  law.  The  em- 
ployers demand  that  in  this  ease  it  shall  be  ordained  by  the  law  that  the 
officials  of  the  professional  associations  of  the  employers  and  also  those  of 
the  trade  unions  shall  be  eligible  for  appointment  to  the  boards.  It  is 
alleged  as  a  reason  that  it  is  much  easier  and  more  fruitful  to  negotiate  with 
the  trained  employees  of  the  unions  than  with  workers  who  are  still  engaged 
in  manual  labour  and  who  lack  the  necessary  ability  and  independence 
("Frankische  Tagespost,"  February  26,  1909).  Two  considerations  may 
be  deduced  from  this  notice:  1,  that  in  the  view  of  the  more  intelligent 
among  the  employers  the  trade-union  leader  is  independent  of  his  union, 
in  other  words,  that  he  leads  it;  2,  that  this  independence  has  already  be- 
come so  considerable  that  the  leaders  do  not  hesitate  to  admit  it  openly 
before  the  led,  and  even  make  a  parade  of  their  power. — Eegarding  the 
omnipotence  of  the  leaders  of  the  English  unions  cf .  Fausto  Pagliari :  "In 
the  unions  .  .  .  there  has  come  into  existence  a  bureaucracy  which  is  prac- 
tically irresistible  and  which  rules  the  organization  as  an  absolute  master, 
and  the  unity  and  efficiency  of  the  administration  are  enhanced  by  the 
sacrifice  of  democratic  guarantees  and  of  the  education  of  the  rank  and 
file  in  the  methods  of  trade-union  action"  (L'organissasione  operaia  in 
Europa,  Societa  Umanitaria,  Milan,  1909,  2nd  ed.,  p.  54). 

"This  was  the  principal  argument  employed  by  the  German  Metal- 
workers'  Federation   against   the    metal-workers'   strike   at   Mannheim   in 


146  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

"We  are  not  here  concerned,  however,  with  the  causation  of  the 
oligarchy  which  prevails  in  the  trade  unions.  It  suffices  to  point 
out  how  little  difference  exists  between  the  tendencies  of  prole- 
tarian oligarchies  and  those  of  such  oligarchies  as  prevail  in  the 
life  of  the  state — governments,  courts,  etc.  It  is  interesting  to 
note  that  in  Germany,  as  elsewhere,  the  socialist  leaders  do  not 
hesitate  to  admit  the  existence  of  a  well-developed  oligarchy  in 
the  trade-union  movement ;  while  the  leaders  of  the  trade  unions, 
in  their  turn,  draw  attention  to  the  existence  of  an  oligarchy  in 
the  socialist  party ;  both  groups  of  leaders  unite  however  in  de- 
claring that  as  far  as  their  own  organizations  are  concerned  these 
are  quite  immune  to  oligarchical  infection.^" 

Nevertheless,  the  trade-union  leaders  and  the  leaders  of  the 
socialist  party  sometimes  combine  upon  a  course  of  action  which, 
were  it  undertaken  by  either  group  of  leaders  alone,  those  of  the 
other  group  would  not  fail  to  stigmatize  as  grossly  undemocratic. 
For  example,  in  the  serious  question  of  the  1st  of  INIay  demon- 
stration, one  of  primary  democratic  importance  in  the  year  1908, 
the  executive  committee  of  the  socialist  party  and  the  general 
committee  of  the  trade  unions  issued  by  common  accord  an  an- 
nouncement definitely  decreeing  from  above  the  conduct  of  the 
separate  political  and  trade-union  organizations.  In  a  question 
thus  profoundly  affecting  the  individual  trade  unions  and  local 
socialist  committees,  the  executives  regarded  it  as  quite  unnec- 
essary to  ask  these  for  their  opinion.^^  Such  conduct  shows  how 
much  justification  there  is  for  the  criticism  which  each  of  the 
two  branches  of  the  working-class  movement  directs  against  the 
other.  Moreover,  the  question  which  has  been  debated  whether 
the  local  trades  councils  might  not  be  directly  represented  at  the 
trade-union  congresses  is  after  all  merely  one  of  the  enlargement 
of  the  oligarchical  circle. 

Let  us  next  briefly  consider  the  third  form  of  the  working- 
class  movement,  cooperative  organizations,  and  in  particular  the 

October  1908  (Adolf  Weber,  Ber  Kampf  zwischen  Kapital  und  Arbeit, 
Mohr,  Tubingen,  1910,  p.  30). 

^°Cf.  articles  by  K.  Kautsky,  H.  Strobel,  Eosa  Luxemburg,  Parvus,  and 
Anton  Pannekoek,  on  the  one  hand,  and,  on  the  other,  those  which  have 
appeared  in  the  trade-union  press  discussing  the  eternal  polities  of  the 
socialist  party  (for  example,  those  published  during  the  dispute  that 
broke  out  in  December  1905  in  the  matter  of  the  editorship  of  "Vor- 
warts");  here  there  will  be  found  innumerable  documents  to  sustain  what 
has  been  said  in  the  text. 

^  * '  Volksstimme ' '  of  Frankfort,  anno  xix,  No.  22,  supplement  3. 


POSITION  OF  THE  LEADERS        147 

organizations  for  cooperative  production,  as  those  wliich  in  their 
very  nature  should  incorporate  most  perfectly  the  democratic 
principle. 

As  far  as  concerns  distributive  cooperative  societies,  it  is  easy 
to  understand  that  these  cannot  be  directly  governed  by  the 
mass  of  the  members.  As  Kautsky  has  shown,  we  are  here  con- 
cerned with  an  enterprise  whose  functions  are  essentially  com- 
mercial, and  therefore  outside  the  competence  of  the  rank  and 
file.  For  this  reason,  the  principal  business  activities  of  these 
societies  must  be  entrusted  to  the  employees  and  to  a  few  ex- 
perts. ' '  Unless  we  consider  buying  as  cooperation,  in  which  case 
the  customers  of  an  ordinary  shopman  are  also  cooperators  with 
the  shopman,  the  members  of  a  cooperative  society  have  nothing 
more  to  do  with  the  management  than  have  the  shareholders  of 
a  limited  company;  they  choose  their  managing  committee,  and 
then  leave  the  machine  to  run  itself,  waiting  till  the  end  of  the 
year  to  express  their  approval  or  disapproval  of  the  management, 
and  to  pocket  their  dividends. "  ^-  In  actual  fact,  the  distribu- 
tive cooperative  societies  present  in  general  a  monarchical  aspect. 
Eead,  for  example,  what  was  written  by  a  well-disposed  critic 
concerning  the  cooperative  society  "Vooruit"  of  Ghent,  which 
is  led  by  Edouard  Anseele,  the  socialist,  and  which  is  definitely 
socialist  in  its  tendency:  "Cette  prosperite  et  cette  bonne  ad- 
ministration ne  vont  pas  sans  quelques  sacrifices  a  la  sacrosainte 
liberte  ouvriere.  Le  'Vooruit'  tout  entier  porte  I'empreinte  de 
la  forte  personalite  qui  I'a  cree.  .  .  .  Une  volonte  puissante, 
avide  a  revendiquer  des  responsabilites,  alors  que  d'autres  recu- 
lent  sans  cesse  devant  les  responsabilites,  s'enivre  presque  tou- 
jours  d'elle-meme.  M.  Anseele,  grand  industriel  de  fait,  a  vo- 
lontiers  les  manieres  impetueuses,  imperieuses  et  brusques  des 
capitaines  d'industrie  les  plus  bourgeois,  et  le  'Vooruit'  n'est  rien 
moins  qu'une  republique  anarchique.  II  repose  plutot  sur  le 
principe  d 'autorite. "  ^^ 

Societies  for  cooperative  production,  on  the  other  hand,  and 
especially  the  smaller  of  these,  offer  in  theory  the  best  imag- 
inable field  for  democratic  collaboration.  They  consist  of  homo- 
geneous elements  belonging  to  the  same  stratum  of  the  working 
class,  of  persons  following  the  same  trade,  and  accustomed  to 
the  same  manner  of  life.    In  so  far  as  the  society  needs  a  man- 

'^Karl  Kautsky,  Konsumvereine  und  Arbeitcrbewegung,  ed.  cit.,  p.   17. 
*"*Pourquoi  pas?"  Brussels,  anno  ii,  No.  97. 


148  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

agement,  this  management  can  readily  be  effected  by  all  the 
members  in  common,  since  all  possess  the  same  professional  com- 
petence, and  all  can  lend  a  hand  as  advisers  and  coadjutors.  In 
a  political  party  it  is  impossible  that  every  member  should  be 
engaged  in  important  political  work,  and  it  is  for  this  reason 
that  in  the  political  party  there  necessarily  exists  a  great  gulf 
between  the  leaders  and  the  rank  and  file.  But  in  a  society  for 
cooperative  production,  for  boot-making  for  example,  all  the 
members  are  equalty  competent  in  the  making  of  boots,  the  use 
of  tools,  and  knowledge  of  the  quality  of  leather.  There  do  not 
exist  among  them  any  essential  differences  in  matters  of  tech- 
nical knowledge.  Yet  despite  the  fact  that  the  circumstances 
are  thus  exceptionally  favourable  for  the  constitution  of  a  demo- 
cratic organism,  we  cannot  as  a  general  rule  regard  productive 
cooperatives  as  models  of  democratic  auto-administration.  Rod- 
bertus  said  on  one  occasion  that  when  he  imagined  productive  as- 
sociations to  have  extended  their  activities  to  include  all  manu- 
facture, commerce,  and  agriculture,  when  he  conceived  all  social 
work  to  be  effected  by  small  cooperative  societies  in  whose  man- 
agement every  member  had  an  equal  voice,  he  was  unable  to  avoid 
the  conviction  that  the  economic  system  would  succumb  to  the 
cumbrousness  of  its  own  machinery.^*  The  history  of  productive 
cooperation  shows  that  all  the  societies  have  been  faced  with  the 
following  dilemma:  either  they  succumb  rapidly  owing  to  dis- 
cord and  powerlessness  resulting  from  the  fact  that  too  many  in- 
dividuals have  the  right  to  interfere  in  their  administration ; 
or  else  they  end  by  submitting  to  the  will  of  one  or  of  a  few 
persons,  and  thus  lose  their  truly  cooperative  character.^^  In 
almost  all  cases,  such  enterprises  owe  their  origin  to  the  personal 
initiative  of  one  or  a  few  members.  They  are  sometimes  minia- 
ture monarchies,  being  under  the  dictatorship  of  the  manager, 
who  represents  them  in  all  internal  and  external  relations,  and 
upon  whose  will  they  depend  so  absolutely  that  if  he  dies  or  re- 
signs his  post  they  run  the  risk  of  perishing.-''    This  tendency  on 


"Karl  Eodbertus,  Offener  Brief  an  das  Komitee  des  deutschen  Arbeiter- 
vereins  zu  Leipzig,  in  F.  Lassalle's  Politische  Beden  und  Schriften,  ed. 
cit.,  vol.  ii,  p.  9. 

^'Cf.  the  identical  judgment  expressed  by  Frederick  van  Eeden,  the 
founder  and  for  many  years  the  manager  of  a  cooperative  colony  in  the 
neighborhood  of  Amsterdam.  His  views  were  expressed  in  an  interview 
published  by  the  cooperative  newspaper  ' '  De  Volharding, ' '  anno  v,  No.  8. 

'^Lomberto  Paoletti,  op.  cit.,  pp.  273-274. 


POSITION  OF  THE  LEADERS        149 

the  part  of  the  productive  cooperative  societies  is  further  ac- 
centuated by  their  character  as  ag^egates  of  individuals  whose 
personal  advantages  decrease  in  proportion  as  the  number  of  the 
members  increases.  Thus  from  their  very  nature  they  are  sub- 
ject to  the  same  immutable  psychological  laws  which  governed 
the  evolution  of  the  medieval  guilds.  As  they  become  more  pros- 
perous, they  become  also  more  exclusive,  and  tend  always  to 
monopolize  for  the  benefit  of  the  existing  members  the  advan- 
tages they  have  been  able  to  secure.  For  example,  by  imposing 
a  high  entrance-fee  they  put  indirect  obstacles  in  the  way  of  the 
entry  of  new  members.  In  some  cases  they  simply  refuse  to  ac- 
cept new  members,  or  pass  a  rule  establishing  a  maximum  mem- 
bership. When  they  have  need  of  more  labour-power  they  sup- 
ply this  need  by  engaging  ordinary  wage-labourers.  Thus  we 
not  infrequently  find  that  a  society  for  cooperative  production 
becomes  gradually  transformed  into  a  joint-stock  company.  It 
even  happens  occasionally  that  the  cooperative  society  becomes 
the  private  enterprise  of  the  manager.  In  both  these  cases  Kaut- 
sky  is  right  in  saying  that  the  social  value  of  the  working-class 
cooperative  is  then  limited  to  the  provision  of  means  for  certain 
proletarians  which  will  enable  them  to  climb  out  of  their  own 
class  into  a  higher."  Rodbertus  described  labour  associations  as 
a  school  for  the  education  of  the  working  class,  in  which  the  man- 
ual workers  could  learn  administration,  discussion,  and  within 
limits  the  art  of  government.^^  We  have  seen  to  how  small  an 
extent  this  statement  is  applicable. 

In  the  democratic  movement  the  personal  factor  thus  plays  a 
very  considerable  part.  In  the  smaller  associations  it  is  often 
predominant.^^  In  the  larger  organizations,  larger  questions 
commonly  lose  the  personal  and  petty  characteristics  which  they 
originally  possessed,  but  all  the  same  the  individuals  who  bring 
these  questions  forward,  and  who  in  a  sense  come  to  personify 


"  Karl  Kautsky,  Konsumvereine  und  Ardeiterhewegung,  ed.  cit.,  p.  6. — 
More  recently  the  socialist  professor,  Gaetano  Salvemini,  speaking  of  the 
extensive  and  in  many  respects  noteworthy  movement  towards  cooperative 
production  in  Central  Italy,  has  referred  to  it  as  a  leech  applied  to  the 
body  of  the  proletariat  and  as  a  buttress  of  the  dominant  parasitism,  and 
has  declared  that  its  aim  is  to  enrich  the  minority  at  the  expense  of  the 
collectivity.  (Cf.  the  series  of  articles  Cooperative  di  Lavoro  e  Movimento 
socialista,  "Avanti,"  anno  xiv,  Nos.  174  et  seq.) 

^Rodbertus,  op.  cit.,  p.  9. 

"  This  statement  is  confirmed  by  the  testimony  of  the  German  socialist 
Otto  Geithner,  who  says:   "He  who  like  myself  has  had  some  experience 


150  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

them,  retain  their  influence  and  importance.  In  England,  three 
or  four  men,  Macdonald,  Keir  Hardie,  Henderson,  and  Clynes, 
for  instance,  enjoy  the  confidence  of  the  socialist  masses  so  un- 
restrictedly that,  as  an  able  observer  declares,  it  is  impossible  to 
exercise  an  influence  upon  the  rank  and  file  except  by  influencing 
these  leaders.^"  In  Italy,  the  first  among  the  leaders  of  the  trade- 
union  organizations  has  affirmed  that  those  only  which  are  headed 
by  a  good  organizer  can  continue  in  existence.  ''Categories  of 
the  most  various  trades,  found  in  the  most  diverse  environments, 
have  been  unable  to  secure  organization  and  to  live  through 
crises,  except  in  so  far  as  they  have  been  able  to  find  first-class 
men  to  manage  their  affairs.  Those  which  have  had  bad  leaders 
have  not  succeeded  in  establishing  organizations;  or  the  organi- 
zations if  formed  have  proved  defective."^'-  In  Germany,  the 
supreme  authority  of  Bebel  was  manifested  by  a  thousand  signs/^ 
from  the  joy  with  which  he  was  hailed  wherever  he  went,  to  the 
efforts  always  made  in  the  various  congresses  by  the  representa- 
tives of  different  tendencies  to  win  him  over  to  their  side.  More- 
over, the  working-class  leaders  are  well  aware  of  their  ascend- 
ancy over  the  masses.  Sometimes  political  opportunism  leads 
them  to  deny  it,  but  more  commonly  they  are  extremely  proud 
of  it  and  boast  of  it.  In  Italy,  and  in  other  countries  as  well, 
the  socialist  leaders  have  always  claimed  that  the  bourgeoisie  and 
the  government  are  greatly  indebted  to  them  for  having  held 
the  masses  in  check,  and  as  having  acted  as  moderators  to  the 
impulsive  crowd.  This  amounts  to  saying  that  the  socialist 
leaders  claim  the  merit,  and  consequently  the  power,  of  prevent- 
ing the  social  revolution,  which,  according  to  them,  would,  in 
default  of  their  intervention,  have  long  ago  taken  place.^^  Dis- 
union in  parties,  although  often  evoked  by  objective  necessities, 

(and  I  have  been  an  observer  of  the  labour  movement  for  nearly  fifteen 
years),  cannot  fail  to  be  aware  that  in  small  organizations  questions  of 
fact  are  almost  always  overshadowed  by  personal  considerations,  to  which 
an  exaggerated  importance  is  attached"  (Discussion  in  "Vorwarts, "  anno 
xxiii,  No.  137). 

^°M.  Beer's  report  on  the  9th  annual  congress  of  the  British  Labour 
Party,  "Frankische  Tagespost,"  anno  xli,  No.  28   (1909), 

^'  Einaldo  Eigola,  1  Funsionari  delle  Organissazioni,  ' '  Avanti, ' '  anno  xiv, 
No.  341. 

^  Cf ,  the  excellent  description  given  by  Albert  Weidner,  Behel,  ' '  Der 
Arme  Teufel,"  anno  ii,  No.  21   (1903). 

°'Cf.  the  well-known  speech  of  Camillo  Prampolini  in  the  Chamber  of 
Deputies  March  13,  1902    (Tip,   Op.,  Reggio  Emilia,   1902,  p.  24)  j    also 


POSITION  OF  THE  LEADERS        151 

is  almost  always  the  work  of  the  leaders.  The  masses  never 
oppose  the  reconciliation  of  their  chiefs,  partly,  no  doubt,  be- 
cause the  differences  between  the  leaders,  in  so  far  as  they  are  of 
an  objective  character,  are  for  the  most  part  outside  the  narrow 
circle  of  interests  and  the  limited  understanding  of  the  rank 
and  file.3* 

The  esteem  of  the  leaders  for  the  masses  is  not  as  a  rule  very  i 
profound,  even  though  there  are  some  among  them  who  profess  'i 
great  enthusiasm  for  the  masses  and  repay  with  interest  the  hon-  j  ] 
our  which  these  render.    In  the  majority  of  cases  the  veneration  '  I 
is  a  one-sided  affair,  if  only  for  the  reason  that  the  leaders  have 
had  an  opportunity  of  learning  the  miseries  of  the  crowd  by  first- 
hand experience.     Fourniere  said  that  the  socialist  leaders  re- 
garded the  crowd,  which  had  entrusted  them  with  the  fulfilment 
of  its  own  aspirations  and  which  consisted  of  devoted  followers, 
as  a  passive  instrument  in  their  own  hands,  as  a  series  of  ciphers 
whose  only  purpose  was  to  increase  the  value  of  the  little  figure 
standing  to  the  left.    "N'en  a-t-il  qu'un  a  sa  droite,  il  ne  vaut 
que  pour  dix ;  en  a-t-il  six,  il  vaut  pour  un  million. ' '  ^^ 

The  differences  in  education  and  competence  which  actually 
exist  among  the  members  of  the  party  are  reflected  in  the  dif- 
ferences in  their  functions.  It  is  on  the  ground  of  the  incompe- 
tence of  the  masses  that  the  leaders  justify  the  exclusion  of  these 
from  the  conduct  of  affairs.  They  contend  that  it  would  be  con- 
trary to  the  interests  of  the  party  if  the  minority  of  the  com- 
rades who  have  closely  followed  and  attentively  studied  the  ques- 
tions under  consideration  should  be  overruled  by  the  majority 
which  does  not  really  possess  any  reasoned  opinion  of  its  own 
upon  the  matters  at  issue.  This  is  why  the  chiefs  are  opposed 
to  the  referendum,  at  any  rate  as  far  as  concerns  its  introduction 
into  party  life.  "The  choice  of  the  right  moment  for  action 
demands  a  comprehensive  view  which  only  a  few  individuals  in 

numerous  articles  and  speeches  by  Pilippo  Turati,  as  for  example  II  partito 
socialista  e  I'aUuale  momento  politico  (''Critica  Sociale, "  Milan,  1902,  3rd 
edition,  p.  15),  and  his  speech  to  the  7th  Italian  Socialist  Congress  at 
Imola  in  1902  {Rendiconto,  Lib,  Soc.  Ital.,  Rome,  1903,  p.  54). 

**Mermeix  (La  France  socialiste,  Notes  d'un  contemporain,  Fetscherin  et 
Chuit,  Paris,  1886  3rd  ed.,  p.  138)  wrote  as  long  ago  as  1886  with  ref- 
erence to  the  struggle  between  the  Marxists  and  the  possibilists  which 
occurred  in  1875:  "Si  les  chefs  pouvaient  se  donner  la  main,  1 'union  serait 
parfaite  dans  le  parti  ouvrier."  As  every  one  knows,  this  prophecy  waa 
fulfilled  in  1904. 

^^E.  Fourniere,  La  sociocratie,  ed.  cit.,  p.  117. 


152  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

the  mass  can  ever  possess^,  wliilst  the  majority  are  guided  by  mo- 
mentary impressions  and  currents  of  feeling.  A  limited  body  of 
officials  and  confidential  advisers,  in  closed  session,  where  they 
are  removed  from  the  influence  of  coloured  press  reports,  and 
where  every  one  can  speak  without  fearing  that  his  words  will 
be  bruited  in  the  enemy's  camp,  is  especially  likely  to  attain 
to  an  objective  judgment. "  ^*^ 

To  justify  the  substitution  of  the  indirect  vote  for  the  direct 
vote,  the  leaders  invoke,  in  addition  to  political  motives,  the  com- 
plicated structure  of  the  party  organization.  Yet  for  the  state 
organization,  which  is  infinitely  more  complicated,  direct  legis- 
lation by  means  of  the  initiative  and  the  referendum  is  an  in- 
tegral part  of  the  socialist  programme. ^^  The  antinomy  which 
underlies  these  different  ways  of  looking  at  the  same  thing  ac- 
cording as  it  presents  itself  in  the  politics  of  the  state  or  in 
those  of  the  party  pervades  the  whole  life  of  the  latter. 

The  working-class  leaders  sometimes  openly  avow,  with  a  sin- 
cerity verging  on  cynicism,  their  own  superiority  over  the  troops 
they  command,  and  may  go  so  far  as  to  declare  their  firm  inten- 
tion to  refuse  to  these  latter  any  facility  for  dictating  the  leaders' 
conduct.     The  leaders  even  reserve  to  themselves  the  right  of 

^  Eduard  Bernstein,  GewerJcschaftsdeviokratie,  ' '  Sozial.  Monatsh., ' '  1909, 
p.  86. 

^^  Cf .,  for  example,  Hans  Block,  Ueierspannung  der  DemoTcratie,  "Neue 
Zeit, ' '  xxvi.  No.  8,  p.  266.  The  author  himself  sees  very  clearly  how  the 
reasons  applied  by  him  to  combat  democracy  within  the  party  are  equally 
applicable  against  democracy  in  the  state.  He  therefore  takes  occasion 
to  cleave  democracy  in  two,  and  to  make  a  distinction  between  its  applica- 
tion in  party  life  and  in  the  life  of  the  state.  He  writes:  "Our  pro- 
gramme, however,  demands  direct  election,  rejecting  indirect.  It  also  con- 
tains the  demand  for  direct  legislation  by  the  people  through  the  initiative 
and  the  referendum.  But  elections  and  votes  which  concern  the  life  of  the 
state  cannot  be  compared  with  those  which  concern  party  organization. 
The  circumstances  are  altogether  different.  In  the  case  of  the  state,  the 
matters  under  consideration  have  taken  shape  long  before  the  time  comes 
for  the  vote;  the  persons  involved  have  already  assumed  definite  positions. 
The  problem  is  plain  and  is  plainly  formulated  from  the  first.  Very  different 
is  the  matter  in  party  life,  where  even  in  the  last  weeks  before  the  annual 
congress  important  proposals  and  recommendations  come  up  for  discussion 
of  which  an  organization  which  insisted  upon  employing  the  ponderous 
mechanism  of  the  direct  vote  could  not  possibly  take  account"  (p.  265). — • 
This  distinction  is  in  truth  utterly  fictitious.  It  is  incomprehensible  that 
the  affairs  of  a  party,  whose  organization  when  compared  with  that  of  the 
state  is  small  and  simple,  can  be  more  complicated  than  those  of  the  state 
itself,  and  that  therefore  a  violation  of  democratic  principles  can  be 
more  readily  justified  in  the  case  of  the  party  than  in  the  case  of  the  state. 


POSITION  OF  THE  LEADERS        153 

rebelling  against  the  orders  they  receive.  A  typical  example, 
among  many,  is  the  opinion  expressed  on  this  subject  by  Filippo 
Turati,  an  exceptionally  intelligent  and  well-informed  man  and 
one  of  the  most  influential  members  of  the  Italian  socialist  party, 
in  a  labour  congress  held  at  Rome  in  1908.  Referring  to  the 
position  of  the  socialist  deputy  in  relation  to  the  socialist  masses, 
he  said :  ' '  The  socialist  parliamentary  group  is  always  at  the 
disposal  of  the  proletariat,  as  long  as  the  group  is  not  asked  to 
undertake  absurdities."^®  It  need  hardly  be  said  that  in  each 
particular  case  it  is  the  deputies  who  have  to  decide  whether  the 
things  they  are  asked  to  do  are  or  are  not  "absurd."  ^^ 

*' This  speech  was  made  in  a  Convegno  pro  Amnistia  on  March  31,  1908, 
reported  in  the  Turin  "Stampa, "  xvii.  No.  92. 

°°  Essentially  this  view  is  held  also  by  Eduard  Bernstein,  who,  however, 
in  correspondence  with  his  thoughtful  and  amiable  character,  expresses  it 
more  mildly,  and  endeavours  to  justify  it  by  serious  reasons.  He  tells 
us  that  the  leader  is  not  the  mere  mouthpiece  of  the  masses,  but  has  to 
decide  on  behalf  of  the  masses  what  are  their  true  interests.  To  quote 
his  actual  words:  "Bebel  contends  that  the  leaders  should  follow  the 
masses.  This  is  not  my  view,  I  consider  that  the  so-called  '  leaders, '  that  is 
to  say  the  confidential  agents  of  the  workers,  hold  the  position  of  experts 
on  behalf  of  the  working  class.  Unquestionably  they  must  cooperate 
harmoniously  with  those  from  whom  they  derive  their  power,  but  above  all 
they  must  act  in  accordance  with  their  own  best  convictions  of  what 
the  interests  of  the  working  class  really  demand;  when  it  is  needful  they 
must  oppose  the  views  of  the  workers,  and  make  their  own  opinions  prevail. 
We  must  not  allow  ourselves  to  be  carried  away  by  transitory  currents. 
Bebel  laughs  at  the  idea  of  reserving  certain  questions  for  the  decision 
of  the  parliamentary  group.  But  is  it  not  quite  right  to  hold  that  the 
deputies,  who  are  always  in  the  Eeiclistag,  can  judge  certain  questions 
better  than  those  who  are  not  members  of  this  body?  Unless  it  be  in- 
tended to  pass  a  vote  of  no-confidence  in  the  group,  the  question  with 
which  we  are  now  concerned  can  surely  be  left  to  its  judgment"  (Eduard 
Bernstein,  speaking  at  the  socialist  party  congress,  Dresden,  1903,  Protokoll 
iiber  die  Verhandlungen  des  Parteitages,  Buchh.  "Vorwarts, "  Berlin,  1903, 
p.  309),  Some  years  earlier  Bernstein  expressed  the  view  that  the  control 
of  the  masses  over  their  leaders  must  be  restricted  to  those  questions  which 
profoundly  concern  the  interests  of  the  masses  and  which  are  not  of  too 
specialized  a  character — but  he  fails  to  give  us  any  more  precise  indication 
as  to  the  nature  of  these  questions  (Eduard  Bernstein  Zur  GeschicMe  und 
Theorie  des  SosiaUsmus,  Edelheim,  Berlin,  1901,  p.  205).  Other  leaders 
believe  that  they  can  attain  the  same  end,  and  effect  in  a  less  honour- 
able way  what  in  German  journalistic  language  is  described  as  "shepherd- 
ing the  masses."  A  German  trade-union  leader  has  actually  declared  in 
writing  that  the  leaders  must  sometimes  say  things  which  are  contrary  to 
their  own  opinions  simply  because  they  thus  please  the  masses,  "because 
the  masses  become  wise  only  after  they  have  burned  their  own  fingers"; 
and  that  it  is  easier  for  them  to  act  in  this  way,  because  "it  is  always 


40 


154.  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

The  accumulation  of  power  in  the  hands  of  a  restricted  num- 
ber of  persons,  such  as  ensues  in  the  labour  movement  to-day, 
necessarily  gives  rise  to  numerous  abuses.  The  ' '  representative, 
proud  of  his  indispensability,  readily  becomes  transformed  from 
a  servitor  of  the  people  into  their  master.*^  The  leaders,  who 
have  begun  by  being  under  obligations  to  their  subordinates, 
become  in  the  long  run  the  lords  of  these:  such  is  the  ancient 
truth  which  was  recognized  by  Goethe  when  he  made  Mephisto- 
pheles  say  that  man  always  allows  himself  to  be  ruled  by  his  own 
creatures.  The  very  party  which  fights  against  the  usurpations 
of  the  constituted  authority  of  the  state  submits  as  by  natural 
necessity  to  the  usurpations  effected  by  its  own  constituted  au- 
thorities. The  masses  are  far  more  subject  to  their  leaders  than 
to  their  governments,  and  they  bear  from  the  former  abuses  of 
power  which  they  would  never  tolerate  from  the  latter.*^  The 
lower  classes  sometimes  react  forcibly  against  oppression  from 
above,  and  take  bloody  reprisals,  as  happened  in  the  French  Jac- 
queries, in  the  German  Peasants'  Wars,  in  the  English  revolts 
under  Wat  Tyler  and  Jack  Cade,  and  more  recently  in  the  revolts 
of  the  Sicilian  Fasci  in  1893 ;  whereas  they  do  not  perceive  the 
tyranny  of  the  leaders  they  have  themselves  chosen.  If  at  length 
the  eyes  of  the  masses  are  opened  to  the  crimes  against  the  demo- 
cratic ideal  which  are  committed  by  their  party  leaders,  their 
astonishment  and  their  stupor  are  unbounded.  If,  however,  they 
then  rise  in  rebellion,  the  nature  of  their  criticisms  shows  how 
little  they  have  understood  the  true  character  of  the  problem. 
Far  from  recognizing  the  real  fount  of  the  oligarchical  evil  in 
the  centralization  of  power  within  the  party,  they  often  consider 
that  the  best  means  of  counteracting  oligarchy  is  to  intensify  this 
very  centralization.^^ 

within  their  power  as  masters  to  do  what  their  own  enlightened  intelligence 
suggests  without  the  masses  understanding  what  they  are  about"  (Tischen- 
dorfer  in  the  "  Korrespondenzblatt  der  Generalkommission  der  Gewerk- 
schaften  Deutschlands,"  quoted  by  Otto  Geithner,  Zur  Taktik  der  Sosial- 
demol-ratie,  "Neue  Zeit,"  anno  xxiii,  vol.  ii,  p.  657). 

*»  Cf .  p.  64. 

"This  possibility  has  been  admitted  even  by  Kautsky  (Karl  Kautsky, 
Wahlkreis  und  Partie,  "Neue  Zeit,"  xxii  No.  28,  p.  36). 

*^**It  is  well  known  that  the  people  finds  it  far  easier  to  get  the 
better  of  kings  than  of  legislative  assemblies"  (Karl  Marx,  "Neue  Kheinis- 
che  Zeitung,"  November  11,  1848). 

^'This  ineptitude  was  conspicuously  displayed  in  the  debates  which  took 
place  in  Germany  concerning  the  1st  of  May  demonstrations  (see  p.  146). 
Shortly  after  the  official  orders  upon  this  subject  had  been  issued,  a  meet- 


POSITION  OF  THE  LEADERS        155 

ing  of  the  socialist  branch  of  Leipzig,  a  branch  noted  for  its  revolutionary 
spirit  and  subject  to  the  influence  of  Marxist  extremists  such  as  Mehring  and 
Lensch,  took  up  a  definite  position  in  favour  of  the  1st  of  May  celebration. 
In  this  year  (1908)  certain  concessions  had  been  made  by  the  Leipzig 
police  in  the  matter  of  the  procession,  so  that  the  celebration  promised' 
to  be  more  imposing  than  ever.  Consequently  in  the  socialist  branch  at 
Leipzig  vigorous  protests  were  made  against  the  executive  committee  of 
the  party,  which,  in  agreement  with  the  executive  of  the  trade-union 
organizations,  had  decided  that  in  future  the  workers  who  were  discharged 
by  their  employers  in  consequence  of  the  1st  of  May  celebrations  should 
not  have  any  right  to  out-of-work  relief  from  the  central  treasury  of  the 
socialist  party  or  from  that  of  the  general  federation  of  trade  unions,  but 
that  it  would  be  necessary  for  special  local  and  voluntary  funds  to  be 
founded  to  subsidize  the  1st  of  May  manifestants.  The  resolution  passed 
by  the  Leipzig  socialists,  in  criticism  of  this  decision,  ran  as  follows:  "The 
Leipzig  comrades  regard  this  as  an  attempt  to  limit  by  indirect  measures 
the  cessation  of  work  on  the  1st  of  May,  and  to  exercise  such  an  in- 
fluence upon  the  trade  unions  as  to  lead  the  individual  trade  unions  to 
revoke  their  resolutions  in  favour  of  the  support  of  those  who  are  dis- 
missed by  their  employers  because  of  participation  in  the  celebration.  The 
further  attempt  to  throw  upon  the  local  organizations  responsibility  for 
and  execution  of  the  determinations  made  by  the  central  organizations  ia 
regarded  by  the  Leipzig  comrades  as  an  infringement  of  the  principle  of 
centralization.  The  comrades  express  their  profoundest  regret  that  the 
local  branches  of  the  party  were  not  consulted,  as  were  the  leaders  of  the 
federations,  before  this  decision  was  arrived  at,  and  they  look  to  the  next 
party  congress  to  regulate  the  question  of  the  1st  of  May  demonstration." 
In  this  resolution,  which  in  the  main  is  identical  with  the  resolutions  adopted 
by  the  committees  of  the  party  and  trade-union  branches  in  Frankfort-on- 
the-Main,  and  which  was  accepted  by  the  committees  of  the  party  and 
trade-union  branches  in  Flensburg,  Schleswig  (' *  Volkstimme, "  Frankfurt 
a/M.  xix,  79),  the  comrades,  revolting  against  the  oligarchico-autocratie 
consequences  of  centralization,  seriously  proposed  a  more  vigorous  carrying 
out  of  the  principle  of  centralization. 


CHAPTER   V 

THE  STRUGGLE  BETWEEN  THE  LEADERS  AND  THE 

MASSES 

Those  who  defend  the  arbitrary  acts  committed  by  the  democ- 
racy, point  out  that  the  masses  have  at  their  disposal  means 
whereby  they  can  react  against  the  violation  of  their  rights. 
These  means  consist  in  the  right  of  controlling  and  dismissing 
their  leaders.  Unquestionably  this  defence  possesses  a  certain 
theoretical  value,  and  the  authoritarian  inclinations  of  the  lead- 
ers are  in  some  degree  attenuated  by  these  possibilities.  In  states 
with  a  democratic  tendency  and  under  a  parliamentary  regime, 
to  obtain  the  fall  of  a  detested  minister  it  suffices,  in  theory,  that 
the  people  should  be  weary  of  him.  In  the  same  way,  once 
more  in  theory,  the  ill-humour  and  the  opposition  of  a  socialist 
group  or  of  an  election  committee  is  enough  to  effect  the  recall 
of  a  deputy 's  mandate,  and  in  the  same  way  the  hostility  of  the 
majority  at  the  annual  congress  of  trade  unions  should  be  enough 
to  secure  the  dismissal  of  a  secretary.  In  practice,  however,  the 
exercise  of  this  theoretical  right  is  interfered  with  by  the  work- 
ing of  the  whole  series  of  conservative  tendencies  to  which  allu- 
sion has  previously  been  made,  so  that  the  supremacy  of  the 
autonomous  and  sovereign  masses  is  rendered  purely  illusory. 
The  dread  by  which  Nietzsche  was  at  one  time  so  greatly  dis- 
turbed, that  every  individual  might  become  a  functionary  of  the 
mass,  must  be  completely  dissipated  in  face  of  the  truth  that 
while  all  have  the  right  to  become  functionaries,  few  only  pos- 
sess the  possibility. 

With  the  institution  of  leadership  there  simultaneously  begins, 
owing  to  the  long  tenure  of  office,  the  transformation  of  the 
leaders  into  a  closed  caste.^ 

Unless,  as  in  France,  extreme  individualism  and  fanatical  po- 
litical dogmatism  stand  in  the  way,  the  old  leaders  present  them- 
selves to  the  masses  as  a  compact  phalanx — at  any  rate  whenever 
the  masses  are  so  much  aroused  as  to  endanger  the  position  of  the 
leaders. 

^Cf.  p.  104. 
156 


INTERNAL  CONFLICT  157 

The  election  of  the  delegates  to  congresses,  etc.,  is  sometimes 
regulated  by  the  leaders  by  means  of  special  agreements,  whereby 
the  masses  are  in  fact  excluded  from  all  decisive  influence  in  the 
management  of  their  affairs.  These  agreements  often  assume  the 
aspect  of  a  mutual  insurance  contract.  In  the  German  socialist 
party,  a  few  years  ago,  there  came  into  existence  in  not  a  few 
localities  a  regular  system  in  accordance  with  which  the  leaders 
nominated  one  another  in  rotation  as  delegates  to  the  various 
party  congresses.  In  the  meetings  at  which  the  delegates  were 
appointed,  one  of  the  big  guns  would  always  propose  to  the  com- 
rades the  choice  as  delegate  of  the  leader  whose  "turn"  it  was. 
The  comrades  rarely  revolt  against  such  artifices,  and  often  fail 
even  to  perceive  them.  Thus  competition  among  the  leaders  is 
prevented,  in  this  domain  at  least;  and  at  the  same  time  there 
is  rendered  impossible  anything  more  than  passive  participation 
of  the  rank  and  file  in  the  higher  functions  of  the  life  of  that 
party  which  they  alone  sustain  with  their  subscriptions.^  Not- 
withstanding the  violence  of  the  intestine  struggles  which  di- 
vide the  leaders,  in  all  the  democracies  they  manifest  vis-a-vis 
the  masses  a  vigorous  solidarity.  "lis  concoivent  bien  vite  la 
necessite  de  s'accorder  entre  eux,  afin  que  le  parti  ne  puisse  pas 
leur  echapper  en  se  divisant.  "^  This  is  true  above  all  of  the 
German  social  democracy,  in  which,  in  consequence  of  the  excep- 
tional solidity  of  structure  which  it  possesses  as  compared  with 
all  the  other  socialist  parties  of  the  world,  conservative  tenden- 
cies have  attained  an  extreme  development. 

When  there  is  a  struggle  between  the  leaders  and  the  masses, 
the  former  are  always  victorious  if  only  they  remain  united.* 
At  least  it  rarely  happens  that  the  masses  succeed  in  disembar- 
rassing themselves  of  one  of  their  leaders.  At  Mannheim,  a  few 
years  ago,  the  organized  workers  did  actually  dismiss  one  of 
their  chiefs,  but  not  without  arousing  intense  indignation  among 
the  leaders,  who  described  this  act  of  legitimate  rebellion  as  a 

^Similar  phenomena  have  been  observed  in  party  life  in  America  (Ostro- 
gorsky.  La  Democratie,  etc.,  ed.  cit.,  vol.  ii,  p.  196). 

^  Antoine  Elisee  Cherbuliez,  Theorie  dcs  Garantis  constitutionelles,  Ab. 
Cherbuliez,  Paris,  1838,  vol.  ii,  p.  253. 

*  Domela  Nieuwenhuis  once  compared  the  organization  of  the  socialist 
party  to  a  flock  of  sheep  with  dogs  and  shepherds.  When  any  member  of  the 
flock  endeavours  to  stray  he  is  immediately  driven  back  by  the  barking 
dogs  (Debat  tusschen  F.  Domela  Nieuwenhuis  en  H.  Gorter  over  Sociaal- 
Demokratie  of  Anarchisme,  held  at  Enschede,  October  8,  1904,  "Nieuwe 
Tijd,"  p.  17). 


158  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

crime  on  the  part  of  the  rank  and  file,  and  were  careful  to  obtain 
another  post  for  the  poor  victim  of  popular  anger.^  In  the  course 
of  great  political  agitations  and  in  extensive  economic  struggles 
undertaken  by  the  masses  against  the  will  of  their  leaders  these 
soon  reacquire  the  supremacy  which  they  may  for  a  moment 
have  lost.  Then  it  often  happens  that  the  leaders,  over  the  heads 
of  the  crowd  and  in  opposition  to  its  expressed  will,  contraven- 
ing the  fundamental  principles  of  democracy  and  ignoring  all  the 
legal,  logical,  and  economic  bonds  which  unite  the  paid  leaders 
to  the  paying  masses,  make  peace  with  the  enemy,  and  order  the 
close  of  the  agitation  or  the  resumption  of  work.  This  is  what 
happened  in  the  last  Italian  general  strike,  and  also  in  the  great 
strikes  at  Crimmitschau,  Stetten,  Mannheim,  etc.  The  masses  in 
such  cases  are  often  sulky,  but  they  never  rebel,  for  they  lack 
power  to  punish  the  treachery  of  the  chiefs.  After  holding  tu- 
multuous meetings  in  which  they  declare  their  legitimate  and 
statutory  displeasure,  they  never  fail  to  provide  their  leaders 
with  the  democratic  fig-leaf  of  a  bill  of  indemnity.  In  1905  the 
miners  of  the  Ruhr  basin  were  enraged  against  their  leaders  when 
these  had  taken  it  upon  themselves  to  declare  the  great  miners' 
strike  at  an  end.  It  seemed  as  if  on  this  occasion  the  oligarchy 
was  at  length  to  be  called  to  account  by  the  masses."    A  few  weeks 

^  Adolf  Weber,  Kapital  und  Arheit,  ed.  eit.,  p.  380. 

"  Cf .  the  series  of  articles  Streikeindrucke,  by  Conrad  Haenisch,  in  the 
"Sachsische  Arbeiterzeitung, "  xvi,  Nos.  51-58,  and  the  series  in  the  "Leip- 
ziger  Volkszeitung, "  1905,  Nos.  41-44  and  61-63.  Haenisch  reports:  "I 
shall  never  forget  the  moment  when  it  was  announced  to  the  rank  and 
file  that  their  leaders  had  suddenly  come  to  a  decision  without  consulting 
them.  The  speech  was  interrupted  by  a  general  shout  'Continue  the 
strike ! '  and  a  number  of  excited  miners  endeavoured  to  storm  the  plat- 
form by  a  side  door.  Yet  it  was  only  a  momentary  disturbance,  for  the 
stewards  soon  reduced  the  'mutineers'  to  order.  But  aU  the  more  fiercely 
now  flamed  the  wrath  of  the  masses  in  the  street,  who  had  expected  any- 
thing rather  than  such  a  decision.  The  cart  carrying  the  255,000  leaflets 
announcing  the  resumption  of  work,  which  the  committee  of  seven  had  had 
printed  the  previous  day  at  an  ultramontane  printer's,  was  taken  by 
assault.  Sachse  (socialist  deputy,  president  of  the  miners'  federation,  and 
one  of  the  principal  leaders  of  the  strike)  was  followed  to  the  station 
by  at  least  300  desperately  raging  miners.  From  the  whole  of  Essen  there 
arose  but  one  cry,  'Treason!'  However  absurd  and  unjust  this  cry  may 
have  been,  the  fact  that  it  was  uttered  gives  us  a  profound  insight  into  the 
intensely  disturbed  popular  mind"  ("Sachs.  Arbz., "  xvi,  58).  Again: 
"Old  and  tried  comrades  came  to  the  editorial  offices  at  Dortmund,  in 
tears,  in  an  emotional  state  that  I  should  never  have  deemed  possible  to 
our  sober-minded  Westphalians,  overwhelming  ua  with  desperate  accusations 


LEADERS'  AND  MASSES'  STRUGGLES     159 

later,  tranquillity  was  completely  restored,  as  if  it  had  never 
been  disturbed.  The  leaders  had  defied  the  anger  of  their  fol- 
lowers, and  had  nevertheless  remained  in  power.  In  Turin,  in 
October,  1907,  on  the  third  day  of  the  general  strike,  the  workers 
had  decided  by  a  large  majority  that  the  strike  should  be  contin- 
ued, but  the  leaders  (the  executive  committee  of  the  local  branch 
of  the  party  and  the  committees  of  the  local  trade  unions)  went 
counter  to  this  decision,  which  ought  to  have  been  valid  for  them, 
by  issuing  a  manifesto  in  which  they  counselled  the  strikers  to 
return  to  work.'^  In  the  meetings  of  the  party  and  of  the  trades 
council  which  followed  upon  these  events  the  breach  of  discipline 
was  condoned.  The  rank  and  file  dreaded  the  resignation  of  the 
leaders  and  the  bad  appearance  which  their  organizations  would 
have  displayed  in  face  of  the  bourgeoisie  when  deprived  of  their 
best  known  and  most  highly  esteemed  men.  Thus  the  governing 
bodies  of  democratic  and  socialist  parties  can  in  case  of  need  act 
entirely  at  their  own  discretion,  maintaining  a  virtual  independ- 
ence of  the  collectivity  they  represent,  and  in  practice  making 
themselves  omnipotent.^ 

which  I  cannot  bring  myself  to  transcribe.  The  fate  of  the  255,000  leaflets 
destroyed  by  the  tumultuous  crowd  at  Essen  was  shared  by  innumerable 
pamphlets  of  the  organization.  This  may  give  the  reader  some  idea  of  the 
emotions  of  the  organized  masses,  unaccustomed  to  discipline!  I  have 
said  enough,  and  shall  not  attempt  to  describe  the  scenes  of  Thursday  and 
Friday  at  all  the  mass  meetings"  ("Leipz.  Volksz.,"  1905,  p.  41). 

^  Whilst  the  prefect  forbade  that  the  decision  of  the  workers  to  continue 
the  strike  should  be  put  into  effect,  the  local  authorities,  acting  on  hia 
instructions,  did  everything  they  could  to  secure  the  adoption  of  the  leaders' 
proposal  that  work  should  be  resumed. 

*  It  is  a  remarkable  psychological  phenomenon  that  the  leaders  of  great 
organizations  exhibit  in  private  life  weaknesses  and  other  deficiencies  which 
are  in  singular  contrast  with  the  qualities  of  leadership.  The  great  organizer 
Lassalle  perished  shamefully  through  his  incapacity  for  conducting  to  a 
happy  end  an  engagement  to  marry,  too  lightly  undertaken.  The  domestic 
relationships  of  the  great  majority  of  the  socialist  leaders  (nomina  sunt 
odiosa)  are  extremely  unhappy.  The  talent  for  organization  and  com- 
mand often  becomes  transformed  into  its  opposite  within  the  four  walls 
of  the  house.  * '  lis  semblent  incapables  de  reflechir  et  de  se  conduire  dans 
les  circonstances  les  plus  simples,  alors  qu'ils  savaient  si  bien  conduire 
les  autres"  (Gustave  Le  Bon,  Psychologie  des  Foules,  Alcan,  Paris,  1899, 
p.  110).  The  marriages  contracted  by  most  of  the  socialist  leaders  are  of  a 
typically  bohemian  character.  Among  these  leaders  those  who  have  been 
divorced  and  those  who  practise  the  so-called  free  love  constitute  a  high 
percentage.  A  happy  and  retired  family  life  like  that  of  a  few  of  the  most 
noted  among  the  leaders  (Karl  Marx,  August  Bebel,  Enrico  Ferri)  is  so 
exceptional  in  the  case  of  socialist  marriages  that  the  socialists  are  in  the 


160  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

Such  a  condition  of  affairs  is  essentially  oligarchical,  and  mani- 
fold are  its  consequences  in  the  movements  that  have  been  ini- 
tiated under  the  banner  of  democracy.  One  of  the  chief  of  these 
consists  in  the  daily  infringement  on  the  part  of  the  executive 
of  the  tactical  resolutions  whose  fulfilment  is  entrusted  to  the 
executive  as  a  sacred  charge  by  the  numerous  leaders  of  the  sec- 
ond rank  who  make  up  the  congresses  and  assemblies  of  the 
party ;  ^  hence  arises  the  practice  which  becomes  continually 

habit  of  trumpeting  these  exceptions  widely,  referring  to  them  for  propa- 
ganda purposes  in  order  to  repel  the  accusation  so  often  levelled  that  they 
aim  at  the  disorganization  of  the  family. 

*  The  discipline  prescribed  for  the  narrower  circle  of  leaders  (executives) 
by  the  resolutions  of  the  wider  circle  of  leaders  (congresses)  is  very 
frequently  infringed.  It  was  by  a  breach  of  discipline  that  Ulrich  was  the 
first  socialist  to  enter  the  Hessian  chamber,  for  he  came  forward  as  a 
candidate  although  his  party  had  forbidden  any  socialist  participation  in 
the  elections  which  were  effected  by  a  system  of  indirect  suffrage.  In  many 
instances  the  socialists  of  Bavaria,  Wiirtemberg,  and  Baden  openly  disre- 
garded the  decisions  of  the  congresses  forbiding  alliances  with  the  liberals 
or  with  the  clericals,  and  in  the  various  diets  they  often  voted  the  budget 
although  the  national  congresses  had  expressly  ordained  that  no  support 
was  ever  to  be  given  to  any  ministry.  The  central  executive  of  the  party 
has  also  frequently  disregarded  the  decisions  of  the  congresses.  For  ex- 
ample, this  was  done  in  the  second  ballots  for  the  Eeichstag  in  1903,  when 
the  executive  committee  decreed  that  the  votes  of  the  socialists  might  be 
given  to  any  one  who  was  opposed  to  restriction  of  the  suffrage,  thus  violat- 
ing the  resolution  of  the  Munich  congress  of  1902,  which  laid  down  that 
support  at  the  second  ballot  given  to  a  bourgeois  candidate  of  the  left  who 
was  running  in  opposition  to  a  candidate  of  the  right  must  depend  not 
only  on  the  candidate 's  attitude  to  the  question  of  universal  suffrage  but 
also  upon  his  declared  opposition  to  an  imperialist  colonial  policy.  Similarly, 
again,  after  the  congress  of  Jena  (1903),  the  executive  (in  accord  with  the 
general  committee  of  the  trade-union  organizations)  effected  profound 
modifications  in  the  decision  taken  at  Jena  concerning  the  general  strike.  In 
Italy,  at  the  socialist  congress  of  Florence  in  1896,  it  was  decreed  that  no 
member  of  the  party  should  under  any  circumstances  fight  a  duel  (cf. 
Alfredo  Angiolini,  Cinquant'  Anni  di  Socialismo  in  /i«Zia,  Nerbini,  Florence, 
1904,  2nd  ed.,  p.  346).  Notwithstanding  this,  every  year  some  half  dozen  of 
the  most  conspicuous  leaders  of  the  party  have  sent  or  accepted  challenges. 
Again,  the  various  votes  against  freemasonry  have  had  no  effect  what- 
ever, the  socialist  freemasons  remaining  in  the  party  and  in  their  lodges. 
Even  in  Germany,  where  discipline  is  professedly  far  more  strict,  the  pro- 
cedure is  extremely  lax  when  authoritative  comrades  are  accused  of  having 
transgressed  the  laws  of  the  party.  Thus  the  parliamentary  socialist  group 
of  the  Grand  Duchy  of  Baden  ignoring  the  decision  of  the  previous  national 
congress  of  Nuremberg,  participated  in  a  vote  of  confidence  in  the  govern- 
ment (1910).  On  this  occasion  the  party  executive,  by  failing  to  censure  the 
group  for  its  action,  rendered  itself  an  accessory  after  the  fact.     Often 


INTERNAL  CONFLICT  161 

more  general  of  discussing  en  petit  comite  questions  of  the  great- 
est importance,  and  of  confronting  the  party  subsequently  with 
accomplished  facts  (for  example,  electoral  congresses  are  not 
summoned  until  after  the  elections,  so  that  the  leaders  decide  on 
their  sole  responsibility  what  is  to  be  the  electoral  platform). 
Again,  there  are  secret  negotiations  among  different  groups  of 
leaders  (as  happened  in  Germany  in  the  case  of  the  1st  of  May 
demonstration  and  in  that  of  the  general  strike),  and  secret  un- 
derstandings with  the  government.  Once  more,  silence  is  often 
maintained  by  the  members  of  the  parliamentary  group  upon 
matters  which  have  been  discussed  by  the  group  and  upon  deci- 
sions at  which  they  have  arrived,  and  this  practice  is  censured  by 
members  of  the  executive  only  when  they  themselves  are  kept  in, 
the  dark,  but  is  approved  by  them  when  it  is  merely  the  masses 
who  are  hoodwinked. 

There  is  no  indication  whatever  that  the  power  possessed  by 
the  oligarchy  in  party  life  is  likely  to  be  overthrown  within  an 
appreciable  time.  The  independence  of  the  leaders  increases  con- 
currently with  their  indispensability.  Nay  more,  the  influence 
which  they  exercise  and  the  financial  security  of  their  position 
become  more  and  more  fascinating  to  the  masses,  stimulating 
the  ambition  of  all  the  more  talented  elements  to  enter  the  privi- 
leged bureaucracy  of  the  labour  movement.  Thus  the  rank  and 
file  becomes  continually  more  impotent  to  provide  new  and  intel- 
ligent forces  capable  of  leading  the  opposition  which  may  be  la- 
tent among  the  masses.^"  Even  to-day  the  masses  rarely  move  ex- 
enough  the  leaders  actually  pride  themselves  on  their  disregard  of  the  most 
elementary  principles  of  democracy.  When  the  socialist  group  of  the 
Badenese  chamber  was  reproached  for  having  voted  the  budget,  in  defiance 
of  the  rule  established  at  the  Nuremberg  congress  of  1908,  the  deputy 
Ludwig  Frank  declared:  "It  would  go  ill  with  the  party  if  it  lacked 
men  with  the  courage  to  ignore  congress  resolutions  when  these  are  al- 
together impracticable"  (reported  in  the  " Volksstimme, "  Frankfort,  anno 
xxi,  No.  168).  No  one  can  fail  to  see  that  this  explanation  is  invalid.  It 
may  well  happen  that  certain  resolutions  adopted  by  the  congresses  are 
inopportune,  and  may  be  so  inopportune  that  to  carry  them  out  would 
be  an  act  of  madness,  or  would  at  least  involve  serious  harm  to  the  party. 
But  this  would  merely  signify  that  the  delegates  responsible  for  passing  such 
impossibilist  resolutions  were  characterized  by  great  political  immaturity. 
He  who  will  not  admit  this  must  at  least  recognize  that  the  frequent  in- 
fringement by  the  leaders  of  the  determinations  of  the  party  congresses 
constitutes  a  grave  lack  of  democratic  sentiment  and  discipline.  Tertium 
non  datur. 

"Thus  Pareto  writes:  "Si  les  B  [nouvelle  elite]  prennent  peu  a  pen  la 
place  des  A    [ancienne  elite]    par  une  lente   infiltration,  et  si  le  mouve- 


162  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

cept  at  the  command  of  their  leaders.  When  the  rank  and  file 
does  take  action  in  conflict  with  the  wishes  of  the  chiefs,  this 
is  almost  always  the  outcome  of  a  misunderstanding.  The 
miners'  strike  in  the  Euhr  basin  in  1905  broke  out  against  the 
desire  of  the  trade-union  leaders,  and  was  generally  regarded  as 
a  spontaneous  explosion  of  the  popular  will.  But  it  was  sub- 
sequently proved  beyond  dispute  that  for  many  months  the  lead- 
ers had  been  stimulating  the  rank  and  file,  mobilizing  them 
against  the  coal  barons  with  repeated  threats  of  a  strike,  so  that 
the  mass  of  the  workers,  when  they  entered  on  the  struggle, 
could  not  possibly  fail  to  believe  that  they  did  so  with  the  full 
approval  of  their  chiefs.^ ^ 

It  cannot  be  denied  that  the  masses  revolt  from  time  to  time, 
but  their  revolts  are  always  suppressed.  It  is  only  when  the 
dominant  classes,  struck  by  sudden  blindness,  pursue  a  policy 
which  strains  social  relationships  to  the  breaking-point,  that  the 
party  masses  appear  actively  on  the  stage  of  history  and  over- 
throw the  power  of  the  oligarchies.  Every  autonomous  move- 
ment of  the  masses  signifies  a  profound  discordance  with  the  will 
of  the  leaders.^^    Apart  from  such  transient  interruptions,  the 

ment  de  circulation  sociale  n  'est  pas  interrompu,  les  C  [la  masse]  sont  privea 
des  chefs  qui  pourraient  les  pousser  a  la  re  volte"  (Vilfredo  Pareto,  Les 
Systemes  socialistes,  ed.  cit.,  vol.  i,  p.  35). 

"  Cf.  p.  158,  note  6. 

"  The  outbreak  of  the  great  railway  strike  in  England  in  August  1911 
has  been  considered  by  some  to  have  been  such  a  victory  on  the  part  of  the 
masses  over  their  leaders.  Those  who  take  this  view  contend  that  this 
strike  was  a  sudden  transition  from  the  "sluggish  and  pacific"  tactics  of 
the  trade  unions,  whose  funds  are  ample  and  the  "respectability"  of 
whose  leaders  is  indisputable,  to  a  vigorous  and  revolutionary  policy;  this 
change  of  tactics  they  suppose  to  have  been  due  to  the  impatience  of  the 
crowd,  rebelling  simultaneously  against  the  yoke  of  the  railway  companies 
and  that  of  their  own  officials.  But  those  who  hold  such  a  view  have  not 
given  due  weight  to  the  most  conspicuous  characteristics  of  the  movement. 
If  ever  a  strike  was  conducted  by  tried  and  powerful  leaders,  it  was  this 
one.  The  supreme  command  of  the  forces  of  the  * '  northern  army ' '  of  the 
strikers  (at  the  Liverpool  headquarters)  was  in  the  hands  of  Tom  Mann, 
one  of  the  boldest  and  most  energetic  figures  of  the  modern  labour  move- 
ment, a  man  who  in  London  in  1889  was  one  of  the  leaders  of  the  dockers 
in  their  famous  and  successful  strike,  and  who  subsequently,  inspired  by  the 
sentiment  of  the  class  struggle,  was  an  organizer  of  socialism  in  Australia. 
Nay  more,  the  aims  of  the  strike  were  such  that  the  trade-union  leaders 
were  profoundly  interested  in  its  success.  Not  only  was  their  amour  propre 
involved,  but  it  was  a  question  of  giving  a  more  solid  foundation  to  the 
economic  organization  of  the  workers.  If  we  are  to  understand  the  sociology 
of  the  English  railway  strike  of  1911,  we  must  not  forget  that  the  com- 


INTERNAL  CONFLICT  163 

natural  and  normal  development  of  the  organization  will  im- 
press upon  the  most  revolutionary  of  parties  an  indelible  stamp 
of  conservatism. 

panics  were  unwilling  to  meet  the  representatives  of  the  labour  organization 
and  to  negotiate  with  these.  But  the  Amalgamated  Society  of  Eailway 
Servants  had  unanimously  resolved  "to  give  twenty-four  hours  to  the  com- 
panies to  make  up  their  minds  that  they  would  at  once  meet  the  representa- 
tives of  the  trade  unions  in  order  to  discuss  a  basis  of  agreement."  Thus 
the  question  was  one  of  recognition  of  the  working-class  leaders  by  the 
employers '  organizations,  which  amounts  to  saying  that  it  was  one  touching 
the  personal  interest  of  the  employees  of  the  trade  unions.  Accounts  of 
the  strike  written  from  very  various  points  of  view  suffice  to  establish 
this.  Cf.,  for  instance,  that  of  the  syndicalist  James  Barrison  in  the 
* '  Internazionale "  of  Parma  (anno  v,  No.  18),  and  that  published  by  the 
central  organ  of  the  Catholic  trade  unionists  of  Germany,  the  ' '  Centralblatt 
der  Christlichen  Gewerkschaften  Deutschlands "   (xi,  No.  19). 


/^ 


CHAPTER   VI 

THE  STRUGGLE  AMONG  THE  LEADERS  THEMSELVES 

The  thesis  of  the  unlimited  power  of  the  leaders  in  democratic 
parties  requires,  however,  a  certain  limitation.  Theoretically  the 
leader  is  bound  by  the  will  of  the  mass,  which  has  only  to  give  a 
sign  and  the  leader  is  forced  to  withdraw.  He  can  be  discharged 
and  replaced  at  any  moment.  But  in  practice,  as  we  have 
learned,  for  various  reasons  the  leaders  enjoy  a  high  degree  of 
independence.  It  is  none  the  less  true  that  if  the  democratic 
party  cannot  dispense  with  autocratic  leaders,  it  is  at  least  able 
to  change  these.  Consequently  the  most  dangerous  defect  in  a 
leader  is  that  he  should  possess  too  blind  a  confidence  in  the 
masses.  The  aristocratic  leader  is  more  secure  than  the  demo- 
cratic against  surprises  at  the  hands  of  the  rank  and  file.  It  is 
an  essential  characteristic  of  democracy  that  every  private  car- 
ries a  marshal 's  baton  in  his  knapsack.  It  is  true  that  the  mass 
is  always  incapable  of  governing ;  but  it  is  no  less  true  that  each 
individual  in  the  mass,  in  so  far  as  he  possesses,  for  good  or  for 
ill,  the  qualities  which  are  requisite  to  enable  him  to  rise  above 
the  crowd_,  can  attain  to  the  gi-ade  of  leader  and  become  a  ruler. 
Now  this  ascent  of  new  leaders  always  involves  the  danger,  for 
those  who  are  already  in  possession  of  power,  that  they  will  be 
forced  to  surrender  their  places  to  the  new-comers.  The  old 
leader  must  therefore  keep  himself  in  permanent  touch  with  the 
opinions  and  feelings  of  the  masses  to  which  he  owes  his  position. 
Formally,  at  least,  he  must  act  in  unison  with  the  crowd,  must 
admit  himself  to  be  the  instrument  of  the  crowd,  must  be  guided, 
in  appearance  at  least,  by  its  goodwill  and  pleasure.  Thus  it 
often  seems  as  if  the  mass  really  controlled  the  leaders.  But 
whenever  the  power  of  the  leaders  is  seriously  threatened,  it  is 
in  most  cases  because  a  new  leader  or  a  new  group  of  leaders 
is  on  the  point  of  becoming  dominant,  and  is  inculcating  views 
opposed  to  those  of  the  old  rulers  of  the  party.  It  then  seems  as 
if  the  old  leaders,  unless  they  are  willing  to  yield  to  the  opinion 
of  the  rank  and  file  and  to  withdraw,  must  consent  to  share  their 
power  with  the  new  arrivals.    If,  however,  we  look  more  closely 

164 


STRUGGLE  A]\IONG  THE  LEADERS     165 

into  the  matter,  it  is  not  difficult  to  see  that  their  submission  is 
in  most  eases  no  more  than  an  act  of  foresight  intended  to  ob- 
viate the  influence  of  their  younger  rivals.  The  submission  of 
the  old  leaders  is  ostensibly  an  act  of  homage  to  the  crowd,  but 
in  intention  it  is  a  means  of  prophylaxis  against  the  peril  by 
which  they  are  threatened — the  formation  of  a  new  elite. 

The  semblance  of  obedience  to  the  mass  which  is  exhibited  by 
the  leaders  assumes,  in  the  case  of  the  feebler  and  the  more  cun- 
ning among  them,  the  form  of  demagogy.  Demagogues  are  the 
courtesans  of  the  popular  will.  Instead  of  raising  the  masses  to 
their  own  level,  they  debase  themselves  to  the  level  of  the  masses. 
Even  for  the  most  honest  among  them,  the  secret  of  success  con- 
sists in  "knowing  how  to  turn  the  blind  impulsiveness  of  the 
crowd  to  the  service  of  their  own  ripely  pondered  plans."  ^  The 
stronger  leaders  brave  the  tempest,  well-knowing  that  their  power  i 
may  be  attacked,  but  cannot  be  broken.  The  weak  or  the  base,  on,i<; 
the  other  hand,  give  ground  when  the  masses  make  a  vigorous  on- 
slaught ;  their  dominion  is  temporarily  impaired  or  interrupted. 
But  their  submission  is  feigned ;  they  are  well  aware  that  if  they 
simply  remain  glued  to  their  posts,  their  quality  as  executants 
of  the  will  of  the  masses  will  before  long  lead  to  a  restoration  of 
their  former  dominance.  One  of  the  most  noted  leaders  of  Ger- 
man socialism  said  in  a  critical  period  of  tension  between  the 
leaders  and  the  masses,  that  he  must  follow  the  will  of  the  masses 
in  order  to  guide  them.^  A  profound  psychological  truth  is  hid- 
den in  this  sarcasm.  He  who  wishes  to  command  must  know  how 
to  obey. 

It  has  been  affirmed  that  popular  revolutions  usually  end  by 
destroying  their  leaders.  In  proof  there  have  been  quoted  the 
names  of  Rieuzi,  ]\Iasaniello,  and  Michele  di  Lando,  for  Italy,  and 
of  Danton  and  Robespierre,  for  France.  For  these  and  many 
similar  instances  the  observation  is  a  true  one.  It  would,  how- 
ever, be  an  error  to  accuse  the  crowd  of  rising  against  its  lead- 
ers, and  to  make  the  masses  responsible  for  their  fall.  It  is  not 
the  masses  which  have  devoured  the  leaders :  the  chiefs  have  de- 
voured one  another  with  the  aid  of  the  masses.  Typical  examples 
are  that  of  Danton,  who  was  overthrown  by  Robespierre,  and  that 
of  Robespierre,  who  was  destroyed  by  the  surviving  Dantonists. 


^  Kochanowski,  TJrzeitTcldnge,  etc.,  ed.  cit.,  p.  10. 

"'Ich  bin  ihr  Fiihrer,  also  muss  icli  ihnen  folgen. "     (Cf.  Adolf  Weber, 
Ber  Eampf  swischen  Kapital  u.  Arbeit,  ed.  cit.,  p.  369.) 


/ 


166  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

The  struggle  which  arises  between  the  leaders,  and  their  mn- 
tual  jealousies,  induce  them  to  employ  active  measures  and  often 
to  have  recourse  to  artifices.^  Democratic  deputies  endeavour  to 
disarm  their  adversaries  within  the  party,  and  at  the  same  time 
to  acquire  a  new  prestige  in  the  eyes  of  the  masses,  by  displaying 
in  parliament  '*a  formidable  activity  on  behalf  of  the  common 
cause."  This  is  regarded  at  once  as  a  democratic  duty  and  as  a 
measure  of  personal  precaution.  Since  the  great  majority  of 
the  deputies,  electors,  and  comrades  have  no  precise  ideas  con- 
cerning the  functions  he  exercises,  and  are  continually  inclined 
to  accuse  him  of  slackness,  the  deputy  is  from  time  to  time  forced 
to  recall  himself  to  their  memories.*  It  is  this  need  which  has 
given  rise  to  not  a  few  of  those  speeches  to  which  the  Germans 
give  the  name  of  Dauerreden  (interminable  speeches),  and  it 
has  also  been  the  cause  of  more  than  one  * '  scene ' '  in  the  various 
parliaments  of  Austria,  France,  England,  and  Italy.  It  is,  in 
fact,  held  that  the  most  efficacious  means  for  retaining  the  atten- 
tion of  the  masses  and  of  rendering  them  proud  of  their  leaders 
is  to  be  found  in  the  provocation  of  those  personal  incidents 
which  are  far  more  interesting  to  the  great  public  and  far  more 
within  the  scope  of  its  intelligence  than  a  report  upon  the  utiliza- 
tion of  water  power  or  upon  a  commercial  treaty  with  the  repub- 
lic of  Argentina.  Moreover,  it  has  to  be  remembered  that  in 
many  countries,  and  above  all  in  Italy,  such  scenes  are  recorded 
in  the  capitalist  press  with  the  greatest  abundance  of  detail, 
whilst  serious  speeches  are  summed  up  in  a  few  lines,  and  with 
especial  brevity  when  the  speaker  is  a  socialist.  Thus  even  in 
normal  times  the  oratorical  activity  of  the  parliamentary  repre- 
sentatives of  the  democratic  parties  is  considerable.  In  Italy, 
the  socialist  deputies  have  boasted  that  between  March  25  and 
July  10, 1909,  they  spoke  in  the  Chamber  212  times.  The  figure 
represents  20.4  per  cent,  of  all  the  speeches  made  in  parliament 
during  the  period,  whilst  the  socialist  deputies  at  this  time  con- 
stituted only  8  per  cent,  of  the  members.^  Such  loquacity  serves 
not  merely  to  maintain  the  prestige  of  the  party  in  the  eyes  of 

'  Concerning  the  varied  character  and  the  intensity  of  such  activities,  the 
socialist  deputy  Guido  Podrecca  has  written  a  charmingly  humorous  sketch 
entitled  The  Joys  of  a  Deputy  (Le  Gioie  del  Deputato,  "Avanti,"  anno  xiv, 
No.  44,  Rome,  1910). 

*Cf.  Pio  Viazzi,  Le  Gioie  della  Deputazione,  "Eivista  Populare,"  anno 
XV,  No,  11. 

"  Cf .  the  account  given  by  Oddiuo  Morgari, ' '  Avanti, ' '  August  12,  1909. 


rivalry;  of  leaders  ler 

its  opponents,  but  is  also  a  matter  of  personal  interest  to  each 
deputy,  being  a  means  to  secure  his  re-election  in  competition, 
not  only  with  enemies  in  other  parties,  but  also  with  jealous 
rivals  belonging  to  his  own  organization. 

The  differences  which  lead  to  struggles  between  the  leaders 
arise  in  various  ways.  Eeference  has  previously  been  made  to 
the  inevitable  antagonism  between  the  "great  men"  who  have 
acquired  a  reputation  in  other  fields,  and  who  now  make  adhesion 
to  the  party,  offering  it  their  services  as  generals,  and  the  old- 
established  leaders,  who  have  been  socialists  from  the  first.*^ 
Often  conflict  arises  simply  between  age  and  youth.  Sometimes 
the  struggle  depends  upon  diversity  of  social  origin,  as  when 
there  is  a  contest  between  proletarian  leaders  and  those  of  bour- 
geois birth.^  Sometimes  the  difference  arises  from  the  objective 
needs  of  the  various  branches  of  activity  into  which  a  single 
movement  is  subdivided,  as  when  there  is  a  struggle  between  the 
political  socialist  party  and  the  trade-union  element,  or  within 
the  political  party  between  the  parliamentary  group  and  the 
executive.  In  some  cases  there  is  a  horizontal  stratification,  caus- 
ing a  struggle  between  one  stratum  of  the  bureaucracy  and  an- 
other ;  at  other  times  the  stratification  is  vertical,  as  when  there 
occurs  a  conflict  between  two  local  or  national  groups  of  leaders ; 
between  the  Bavarian  socialists  and  the  Prussian ;  between  those 
of  Frankfort  and  those  of  Hanau ;  between  the  French  followers 
of  Vaillant,  Jaures,  and  Herve,  and  the  German  adherents  of 
Bebel  and  von  Vollmar  (in  the  anti-militarist  discussion  at  the 
international  congress  of  Stuttgart).  Often  enough  struggles 
among  the  socialists  are  the  outcome  of  racial  differences.  The 
unceasing  contests  in  the  international  congresses  between  the 
German  socialists  and  the  French  afford  in  more  than  one  re- 
spect a  parallel  with  the  Franco-German  War  of  1870.  In  these 
same  congresses  there  participates  a  third  group,  misunderstood 
and  heterogeneous,  the  representatives  of  English  socialism,  hos- 
tile to  all  the  others  and  encountering  the  enmity  of  all.  In 
most  cases,  however,  the  differences  between  the  various  groups 
of  leaders  depend  upon  two  other  categories  of  motives.  Above 
all  there  are  objective  differences  and  differences  of  principle  in 
general  philosophical  views,  or  at  least  in  the  mode  in  which  the 
proximate  social  evolution  is  conceived,  and  consequent  diver- 

'Cf.  pp.  74-5. 

'  A  special  chapter  (Part  IV,  chap,  vi)  will  be  devoted  to  this  question. 


168  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

gences  of  opinion  as  to  the  most  desirable  tactics:  this  leads  to 
the  manifestation  of  the  various  tendencies  known  as  reformist 
and  Marxist,  syndicalist  and  political  socialist,  and  so  on.  In 
the  second  place,  we  have  the  struggles  that  depend  on  personal 
reasons:  antipathy,  envy,  jealousy,  a  reckless  attempt  to  grasp 
the  first  positions,  demagogy.  Enrico  Ferri  said  of  his  opponent 
Filippo  Turati:  "He  hates  me  because  he  thinks  there  is  not 
room  for  two  cocks  in  the  same  fowl-house. "  ^  In  most  cases  the 
two  series  of  motives  are  somewhat  confounded  in  practice ;  and 
in  the  long  run  we  find  that  those  of  the  former  series  tend  to  be 
replaced  by  those  of  the  latter,  inasmuch  as  differences  of  prin- 
ciple and  of  the  intellectual  order  soon  become  personal  and  lead 
to  a  profound  hostility  between  the  representatives  of  the  various 
theories.  Conversely  it  is  clear  that  motives  of  the  second  series, 
since  those  who  are  influenced  by  them  are  ashamed  to  display 
them  in  their  true  colours,  always  endeavour  to  assume  the 
mantle  of  theory;  personal  dislike  and  personal  hostility  pom- 
pously masquerade  as  differences  of  views  and  tactics. 

The  oligarchy  which  issues  from  democracy  is  menaced  by  two 
grave  dangers:  the  revolt  of  the  masses,  and  (in  intimate  rela- 
tionship with  this  revolt,  of  which  it  is  often  the  result)  the 
transition  to  a  dictatorship  when  one  among  the  oligarchs  suc- 
ceeds in  obtaining  supreme  power.  Of  these  two  dangers,  one 
comes  from  below,  whilst  the  other  arises  within  the  very  bosom 
of  the  oligarchy :  we  have  rebellion  on  one  side,  and  usurpation 
on  the  other.  The  consequence  is  that  in  all  modern  popular 
parties  a  spirit  of  genuine  fraternity  is  conspicuously  lacking; 
we  do  not  see  sincere  and  cordial  mutual  trust;  there  is  a  con- 
tinual latent  struggle,  a  spirit  of  irritation  determined  by  the 
reciprocal  mistrust  of  the  leaders,  and  this  spirit  has  become  one 
of  the  most  essential  characteristics  of  every  democracy.  The 
mistrust  of  the  leaders  is  directed  above  all  against  those  who 
aspire  to  command  their  own  organizations.  Every  oligarchy  is 
full  of  suspicion  towards  those  who  aspire  to  enter  its  ranks, 
regarding  them  not  simply  as  eventual  heirs  but  as  successors 
who  are  ready  to  supplant  them  without  waiting  for  a  natural 
death.  Those  who  have  long  been  in  possession  (and  this  applies 
just  as  much  to  spiritual  and  psychical  possession  as  to  mate- 
rial) are  proud  of  their  past,  and  are  therefore  inclined  to  look 

'Speech  made  by  Ferri  at  Suzzara,  reported  in  "Stampa,"  anno  xlvii, 
No.  358  (December  27,  1909), 


STRUGGLE  AMONG  THE  LEADERS  169 

down  upon  those  whose  ownership  is  of  more  recent  date.  In 
certain  Sicilian  towns,  struggles  go  on  between  two  parties  who 
in  popular  phrase  are  ironically  termed  i  ricchi  and  gli  arricchiti 
(the  wealthy  and  those  who  have  attained  to  wealth).  The 
former  consists  of  the  old  landed  gentry;  whilst  the  latter,  the 
parvenus,  are  merchants,  contractors  for  public  works,  manu- 
facturers, and  the  like.''  A  similar  struggle  makes  its  appear- 
ance in  modern  democratic  parties,  although  it  is  not  in  this  case 
characterized  by  any  flavour  of  economic  distinction.  Here  also 
we  have  a  struggle  between  the  detenteurs  d'emploi  et  les  cher- 
cheurs  d'emploi,  or  as  the  Americans  put  it,  between  the  "ins" 
and  the  "outs."  The  latter  declare  war  on  the  former,  osten- 
sibly on  the  ground  of  eternal  principle,  but  in  reality,  in  most 
cases,  because  in  such  opposition  they  find  the  most  effective 
means  of  forcing  their  way  into  the  circle  of  the  chiefs.  Conse- 
quently in  meetings  they  display  themselves  as  implacable  the- 
oretical adversaries,  "talking  big"  solely  in  order  to  intimidate 
the  accepted  leaders,  and  in  order  to  induce  them  to  surrender  a 
share  of  the  spoil  to  these  turbulent  comrades.  Often  enough, 
the  old  leaders  resist,  and  maintain  their  ground  firmly ;  in  such 
cases  their  opponents,  changing  front,  abandon  the  attitude  of 
struggle,  and  attach  themselves  to  the  triumphal  car  of  the  men 
in  power,  hoping  thus  to  attract  favour,  and,  by  a  different  route, 
to  realize  their  own  ambitions.^" 

The  struggle  between  the  old  leaders  and  the  aspirants  to 
power  constitutes  a  perpetual  menace  to  freedom  of  speech  and 
thought.  We  encounter  this  menace  in  every  democratic  organ- 
ization in  so  far  as  it  is  well  ordered  and  solidly  grounded,  and 
in  so  far  as  it  is  operating  in  the  field  of  party  politics  (for  in 
the  wider  life  of  the  state,  in  which  the  various  parties  are  in 
continual  reciprocal  concussion,  it  is  necessary  to  leave  intact  a 
certain  liberty  of  movement). ^^  The  leaders,  those  who  already 
hold  the  power  of  the  party  in  their  hands,  make  no  conceal- 

'  Giacomo  Montalto,  La  Questione  sociale  e  il  Partito  socialista,  Soeieta 
Editrice  Lombarda,  Milan  1895,  p,  81. — The  description  of  the  landed 
gentry  as  "the  rich"  is  a  striking  confirmation  of  the  truth  of  Sombart'a 
view,  that,  in  the  case  of  a  hereditarily  gentle  class,  wealth  is  a  natural 
attribute,  psychologically  and  socially  congenital,  qualitative  rather  than 
quantitative  (cf.  Sombart,  Die  deutsche  VolJcswirtscliaft,  etc.,  ed.  cit.,  p. 
542). 

"  Ostrogorsky,  Organisation  de  la  JDemocratie,  ed.  cit.,  vol,  ii,  pp.  203, 
206,  and  363, 

" ' '  Experience  shows  only  too  clearly  that,  wherever  democracy  is  tending 


170  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

ment  of  their  natural  inclination  to  control  as  strictly  as  pos- 
sible the  freedom  of  speech  of  those  of  their  colleagues  from 
whom  they  differ. 

The  consequence  is  that  those  in  office  are  great  zealots  for 
discipline  and  subordination,  declaring  that  these  qualities  are 
indispensable  to  the  very  existence  of  the  party.  They  go  so 
far  as  to  exercise  a  censorship  over  any  of  their  colleagues 
whom  they  suspect  of  rebellious  inclinations,  forcing  them  to 
abandon  independent  journals,  and  to  publish  all  their 
articles  in  the  official  organs  controlled  by  the  leaders  of 
the  majority  in  the  party.  The  prohibition,  in  the  German 
socialist  party,  of  collaboration  on  the  part  of  its  members  with 
the  capitalist  press,  is  in  part  due  to  the  same  tendency;  whilst 
the  demand  that  the  comrades  should  have  nothing  to  do  with 
periodicals  which,  though  socialist,  are  founded  with  private  cap- 
ital and  are  not  subject  to  the  official  control  of  the  party  exec- 
utive, arises  solely  from  this  suspicion  on  the  part  of  the  leaders.^^ 

In  the  struggle  against  the  young  aspirants,  the  old  leader  can 
as  a  rule  count  securely  upon  the  support  of  the  masses.  The 
rank  and  file  of  the  working-class  parties  have  a  certain  natural 
distrust  of  all  new-comers  who  have  not  been  openly  protected 
or  introduced  into  the  party  by  old  comrades ;  and  this  is  above 
all  the  case  when  the  new-comer  is  derived  from  another  social 
class.  Thus  the  new  recruit,  before  he  can  come  into  the  open 
with  his  new  ideas,  must  submit,  if  he  is  not  to  be  exposed  to 
the  most  violent  attacks,  to  a  long  period  of  quarantine.  In  the 
German  socialist  party,  this  period  of  quarantine  is  especially 
protracted,  for  the  reason  that  the  German  party  has  been  longer 
established  than  any  of  the  others,  and  because  its  leaders  there- 
fore enjoy  an  exceptional  prestige.  Many  of  them  were  among 
the  actual  founders  of  the  party,  and  their  personalities  have 
been  consecrated  by  the  baptism  of  fire  which  they  suffered  dur- 
ing the  enforcement  of  the  anti-socialist  laws.  A  socialist  who 
has  had  his  party  card  in  his  pocket  for  eight  or  ten  years  is 
often  regarded  in  his  branch  as  a  ''young"  member.  This  ten- 
dency is  reinforced  by  the  respect  for  age  which  is  so  strong 
among  the  Germans,  and  by  the  tendency  towards  hierarchy  of 

to  degenerate,  freedom  of  speech  and  the  press  are  the  first  to  perish" 
(Eoscher,  Politik,  ed.  cit.,  p.  324). 

"Cf.  the  discussions  of  the  congresses  of  the  German  socialist  party  at 
Munich  (Frotokoll,  pp.  255  et  seq.)  and  at  Dresden  (ProtoJcoll,  pp.  158 
et  seq.) 


rivalry;  oi:  leaders  171 

which  even  the  democracy  has  not  been  able  to  divest  itself. 
Finally,  it  may  be  added  that  the  bureaucracy  of  the  German 
labour  movement,  like  every  strongly  developed  bureaucracy, 
tends  instinctively  towards  exclusivism.  Consequently  in  the 
German  social  democracy,  in  contradistinction  to  other  socialist 
parties  which  are  less  solidly  organized,  we  find  that  not  merely 
the  recently  enrolled  member  of  the  party  (the  so-called  Fuchs), 
but  also  the  ordinary  member  who  does  not  live  in  the  service 
and  by  the  service  of  the  party  but  has  preserved  his  outward 
independence  as  a  private  author  or  in  some  other  capacity,  and 
has  therefore  not  been  incorporated  among  the  cogwheels  of 
the  party  machine,  very  rarely  succeeds  in  making  his  influence 
felt.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  this  fact  plays  a  large  part  in 
the  causation  of  that  lack  of  a  number  of  capable  young  men, 
displaying  fresh  energies,  and  not  greatly  inferior  to  the  old 
leaders,  a  lack  which  has  often  been  deplored.  The  annual  con- 
gresses of  the  socialist  party  have  even  been  spoken  of  as  "con- 
gresses of  the  party  officials."  The  criticism  is  not  unjust,  for 
among  the  delegates  to  the  socialist  congresses  the  percentage  of 
party  and  trade-union  officials  is  enormous.^^  It  is  above  all  in 
the  superior  grades  of  the  organization  that  the  tendencies  we 
are  here  analysing  are  especially  conspicuous.  In  Germany,  the 
management  of  the  socialist  party  is  not  entrusted  to  young  men, 
as  often  happens  in  Italy,  or  to  free  publicists,  as  in  France,  but 
to  old  members,  des  anciens,  elderly  officials  of  the  party.  More- 
over, the  conservative  psychology  of  the  masses  supports  the  as- 
pirations of  the  old  leaders,  for  it  would  never  occur  to  the  rank 
and  file  to  entrust  the  care  of  their  interests  to  persons  belong- 
ing to  their  own  proper  sphere,  that  is  to  say,  to  those  who  have 
no  official  position  in  the  party  and  who  have  not  pursued  a 
regular  bureaucratic  career.^* 

Often  the  struggle  between  the  old  leaders  in  possession  of 
power  and  the  new  aspirants  assumes  the  aspects  of  a  struggle 

"Cf.  pp.  120,  127. 

"In  Frankfort- Nordend  the  list  proposed  for  the  election  of  delegates 
to  the  congress  of  Nuremberg,  1908,  drawn  up  in  accordance  with  the 
express  wishes  of  the  district  assemblies  of  the  party,  contained,  among 
eleven  names,  those  of  eight  officials  of  the  labour  movement  (two  socialist 
journalists,  one  party  secretary,  one  secretary  of  trades  council,  one  organ- 
izer, one  trade-union  employee,  one  insurance-bureau  employee,  and  one 
cooperative  salesman)  as  compared  with  three  simple  wage-earners  who  were 
not  dependent  upon  working-class  organizations  (Frankfort  "  Volksstimme, " 
Supplement  188,  1908). 


172  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

between  responsible  and  irresponsible  persons.^^  Many  criti- 
cisms levelled  by  the  latter  against  the  former  are  beside  the 
mark,  because  the  leaders  have  grave  responsibilities  from  which 
the  aspirants  are  free.  This  freedom  gives  the  aspirants  a  tacti- 
cal advantage  in  their  conflict  with  the  old  leaders.  Moreover, 
precisely  because  they  are  irresponsible,  because  they  do  not 
occupy  any  official  position  in  the  party,  the  opponents  are  not 
subject  to  that  simulacrum  of  democratic  control  which  must  in- 
fluence the  conduct  of  those  in  office. 

In  order  to  combat  the  new  chiefs,  who  are  still  in  a  minority, 
the  old  leaders  of  the  majority  instinctively  avail  themselves  of  a 
series  of  underhand  methods  through  which  they  often  secure 
victory,  or  at  least  notably  retard  defeat.  Among  these  means, 
there  is  one  which  will  have  to  be  more  fully  discussed  in  an- 
other connection.  The  leaders  of  what  we  may  term  the  ''gov- 
ernment ' '  arouse  in  the  minds  of  the  masses  distrust  of  the  lead- 
ers of  the  ' '  opposition ' '  by  labelling  them  incompetent  and  pro- 
fane, terming  them  spouters,  corrupters  of  the  party,  dema- 
gogues, and  humbugs,  whilst  in  the  name  of  the  mass  and  of 
democracy  they  describe  themselves  as  exponents  of  the  collec- 
tive will,  and  demand  the  submission  of  the  insubordinate  and 
even  of  the  merely  discontented  comrades. 

In  the  struggle  among  the  leaders  an  appeal  is  often  made  to 
loftier  motives.  When  the  members  of  the  executive  claim  the 
right  to  intervene  in  the  democratic  functions  of  the  individual 
sections  of  the  organization,  they  base  this  claim  upon  their 
more  comprehensive  grasp  of  all  the  circumstances  of  the  case, 
their  profounder  insight,  their  superior  socialist  culture  and 
keener  socialist  sentiment.  They  often  claim  the  right  of  refus- 
ing to  accept  the  new  elements  which  the  inexpert  and  ignorant 
masses  desire  to  associate  with  them  in  the  leadership,  basing 
their  refusal  on  the  ground  that  it  is  necessary  to  sustain  the 
moral  and  theoretical  level  of  the  party.  The  revolutionary  so- 
cialists of  Germany  demand  the  maintenance  of  the  centralized 
power  of  the  executive  committee  as  a  means  of  defence  against 
the  dangers,  which  would  otherwise  become  inevitable  as  the 

"  In  socialist  and  trade-union  literature  this  aspect  of  the  problem  has 
often  been  discussed.  Cf.  Filippo  Turati,  II  Partito  socialista  e  I'attuale 
Momento  politico,  Uffici  della  "Critica  Sociale, "  Milan,  1901,  3rd  ed., 
p.  19;  Paul  Karapffmeyer,  Die  EntwicTclung  der  deutscJien  Gewerkschaften, 
"Annalen  fiir  Soziale  Politilj  und  Gesetzgebung, "  vol.  i,  fasc.  1,  pp.  114 
et  seq. 


RIVALRY  OF  LEADERS  173 

party  grows,  of  the  predominant  influence  of  new  and  theoreti- 
cally untrustworthy  elements.  The  old  leaders,  it  is  said,  must 
control  the  masses,  lest  these  should  force  undesirable  colleagues 
upon  them.  Hence  they  claim  that  the  constituencies  must  not 
nominate  parliamentary  candidates  without  the  previous  ap- 
proval of  the  party  executive.^'' 

"Kautsky  defends  this  claim.  "The  greater  the  increase  in  our  voting 
strength,  the  greater  the  dearth  of  candidates,  the  more  remote  from  the 
great  centres  of  economic,  political,  and  intellectual  life  are  many  con- 
stituencies with  socialist  majorities,  the  more  essential  does  it  become  that 
the  party  organizations  in  the  individual  constituencies  should  not  possess 
absolute  sovereignty  in  the  choice  of  candidates,  but  that  the  right  of  selec- 
tion should  be  vested  in  the  party  as  a  whole.  The  best  way  of  securing 
this  is  that  in  the  case  of  candidates  for  the  diet  the  constituencies  should 
secure  the  approval  of  the  territorial  executive  or  territorial  congress,  and 
in  the  case  of  candidates  for  the  Reichstag  that  of  the  territorial  executive 
and  of  the  central  executive.  In  1876  the  party  congress  decided  the  various 
candidatures  to  the  Reichstag,  in  so  far  as  time  permitted.  But  in  the  case 
of  a  number  of  candidatures  it  was  necessary  that  the  selection  should 
be  entrusted  to  the  electoral  committee  appointed  by  the  congress.  It  is 
obvious  that  there  are  several  different  ways  in  which  the  party  as  a  whole 
may  exercise  a  determinative  influence  in  the  choice  of  candidates.  Which 
of  these  ways  is  the  most  practical  need  not  here  be  discussed.  The 
point  of  immediate  importance  is  to  recognize,  in  principle,  that  the  selection 
of  a  candidate  for  the  Reichstag  is  a  matter  which  concerns  the  party 
as  a  whole  quite  as  much  as  it  concerns  the  individual  constituency."  The 
expression  * '  the  party  as  a  whole ' '  is  naturally  to  be  understood  as  synony- 
mous with  * ' the  party  executive. ' '  Kautsky  continues :  "Of  course  the 
choice  of  candidates  must  not  be  exclusively  in  the  hands  of  the  party 
executive  or  of  a  central  electoral  committee.  The  comrades  in  the  con- 
stituencies have  to  shoulder  most  of  the  electoral  work  and  it  is  upon 
them  that  success  in  the  election  mainly  depends.  It  would  certainly  be 
preposterous  to  force  upon  them  a  candidate  whom  they  did  not  want.  But 
on  the  other  hand  the  constituency  must  not  have  the  right  to  force  upon 
the  party  a  parliamentary  representative  whom  the  majority  in  the  party 
has  serious  reasons  to  dislike.  The  local  organizations  must  choose  their 
own  candidates  in  the  first  instance.  But  the  candidatures  must  always  be 
approved  by  the  party  as  a  whole.  ...  It  may,  indeed,  sometimes  be  de- 
sirable that  the  party,  or  its  executive,  should  itself  nominate  the  candidate. 
This  will  be  the  case  especially  in  those  states  in  which  the  number  of  safe 
constituencies  is  extremely  small.  Here  the  selection  of  candidates  must 
not  be  left  solely  to  the  play  of  local  influences.  The  party  has  a  right 
to  demand  that  in  the  safe  constituencies  those  candidates  shall  be  run 
whose  presence  in  parliament  is  absolutely  indispensable.  It  is  owing  to 
the  unrestricted  autonomy  of  the  constituencies  that  in  Austria  such  a  man 
as  Victor  Adler  has  been  excluded  from  the  house  of  representatives  for 
two  parliaments  in  succession,  and  it  is  doubtful  if  he  will  secure  a  seat 
at  the  forthcoming  elections.  But  as  far  as  the  German  Empire  is  con- 
cerned, the  number  of  safe  constituencies  is  so  large,  that  these  considera* 


174  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

The  old  leaders  always  endeavour  to  harness  to  their  own 
chariot  the  forces  of  those  new  movements  which  have  not  yet 
found  powerful  leaders,  so  as  to  obviate  from  the  first  all  com- 
petition and  all  possibility  of  the  formation  of  new  and  vigorous 
intellectual  currents.  In  Germany,  the  leaders  of  the  socialist 
party  and  the  trade-union  leaders  at  first  looked  askance  at  the 
Young  Socialist  movement.  When,  however,  they  perceived  that 
this  movement  could  not  be  suppressed,  they  hastened  to  place 
themselves  at  its  head.  There  was  founded  for  the  guidance  of 
the  socialist  youth  a  "Central  Committee  of  Young  German 
Workers,"  comprising  four  representatives  from  each  of  the 
three  parties,  that  is  to  say,  four  from  the  executive  of  the  social- 
ist party,  four  from  the  general  committee  of  trade  unions,  and 
four  from  the  Young  Socialists  (the  representatives  of  the  lat- 
ter being  thus  outnumbered  by  two  to  one).^^  The  old  leaders 
endeavour  to  justify  the  tutelage  thus  imposed  on  the  Young 
Socialists  by  alleging  (with  more  opportunist  zeal  than  logical 
acuteness)  the  incapacity  of  the  youthful  masses,  if  left  to  their 
own  guidance,  of  wisely  choosing  their  own  leaders  and  of  exer- 
cising over  these  an  efficient  control.^^ 

We  have  by  no  means  come  to  an  end  of  our  enumeration  of 
the  weapons  at  the  disposal  of  the  old  leaders  in  their  conflict 
with  the  new  aspirants  to  power.  Charlemagne  effected  the  final 
subjugation  of  the  Saxon  tribal  chiefs  by  making  them  counts. 
In  this  way  he  not  only  increased  the  brilliancy  of  their  position, 
but  also  gave  them  a  restricted  share  in  his  own  power.  This 
means  has  been  practised  again  and  again  in  history,  where  an 
old  ruler  has  wished  to  render  harmless,  insubordinate  but  influ- 
ential chiefs,  and  thus  to  prevent  a  rebellion  against  his  own 
authority.  Oligarchies  employ  this  stratagem  with  just  as  much 
success  as  monarchies.  The  feudal  state  of  Prussia  appointed  to 
the  privy  council  the  most  defiant  among  the  leaders  of  its  bour- 
geoisie. At  a  time  when  the  youthful  German  bourgeoisie  was 
still  filled  with  a  rebellious  spirit  towards  the  nobility  and  to- 
wards the  traditional  authority  of  the  state,  this  tendency  aroused 

tions  hardly  apply"  (Karl  Kautsky,  WalilTcreis  und  Partei,  "Neue  Zeit," 
xxii,  No.  28,  p.  36). 

17  <  i  prankische  Tagespost, ' '  anno  xxxix,  No.  191,  Supplement  2. 

" ' '  The  associations  of  the  Young  Socialists  are  impotent  vis-a-vis  their 
leaders,  lacking  the  force  and  adroitness  which  would  enable  them  to 
avoid  the  arbitrary  rule  of  these"  (Max  Kette,  Die  Jugendbewegung, 
"Neue  Zeit,"  xxviii,  No.  9). 


STRUGGLE  AMONG  THE  LEADERS  175 

much  bitterness.  Thus  Ludwig  Borne  wrote  in  1830:  "Wher- 
ever a  talented  force  of  opposition  has  made  itself  apparent  and 
has  secured  respect  from  those  in  authority,  it  is  chained  to  the 
professorial  chair,  or  is  controlled  by  being  harnessed  to  the  gov- 
ernment. If  the  governmental  ranks  are  full,  so  that  no  place 
can  be  found  for  the  new  energies,  a  state  livery  is  at  least  pro- 
vided for  the  authors  by  giving  them  titles  and  orders.  In  other 
cases  the  dangerous  elements  are  isolated  from  the  people  by 
immuring  them  in  some  noble 's  castle  or  princely  court.  It  is 
for  this  reason  that  nowhere  else  do  we  find  so  many  privy  coun- 
cillors as  in  Germany,  where  the  courts  are  least  inclined  to  take 
any  one's  advice."  ^^  In  the  Spanish  elections  of  1875,  we  learn 
that  so  great  was  the  popular  indifference  that  the  government 
had  matters  altogether  in  its  own  hands,  but  in  order  to  be  se- 
cure in  any  event  it  thoughtfully  selected  a  certain  number  of 
opposition  candidates. ~°  It  seems  that  things  are  much  the  same 
in  Spain  even  to-day.^^  These  tactics  are  not  confined  to  states 
that  are  still  permeated  by  feudal  conceptions.  Where  pluto- 
cratic rule  is  supreme,  corruption  persists  unchanged,  and  it  is 
only  the  corrupter  who  is  different.  This  is  plainly  shown  by 
Austin  Lewis  when  he  writes:  "The  public  ownership  contin- 
gent in  politics  being  composed  of  the  middle  and  subjugated 
class  have  neither  the  political  ability  nor  the  vital  energy  nec- 
essary for  the  accomplishment  of  the  task  which  they  have  under- 
taken. The  brains  of  the  smaller  middle  class  have  already  been 
bought  by  the  greater  capitalists.  Talent  employed  in  the  serv- 
ice of  the  chiefs  of  industry  and  finance  can  command  better 
prices  than  can  be  obtained  in  the  uncertain  struggle  for  eco- 
nomic standing  which  members  of  the  middle  class  have  to  wage. 
The  road  to  professional  and  political  preferment  lies  through 
the  preserves  of  the  ruling  oligarchy,  whose  wardens  allow  no 
one  to  pass,  save  servants  in  livery.  Every  material  ambition  of 
youth  is  to  be  gratified  in  the  service  of  the  oligarchy,  which 
shows,  generally,  an  astuteness  in  the  selection  of  talent  that 
would  do  credit  to  a  bureaucrat  or  a  Jesuit.^^ 

Of  late  years  the  ruling  classes  in  the  countries  under  a  demo- 

"  Ludwig  Borne,  Aus  meinem  TagebucJie,  Eeclam,  Leipzig,  p.  57. 

^^  BenlcwiirdigTceiten  des  Fiirsten  Eohenlohe,  ed.  cit.,  p.  376. 

^^  Nicolas  Salmeron  y  Garcia,  L  'etat  espagnol  et  la  SoUdarite  catalane, 
"Le  Courier  Europeen, "  iv,  No.  23. 

^^  Austin  Lewis,  The  Rise  of  the  American  Froletarian,  Charles  H.  Kerr 
&  Co.,  Chicago,  1907,  pp.  189-190. 


176  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

cratic  regime  have  hoped  to  impose  obstacles  in  the  way  of  the 
revolutionary  labour  movement  by  conceding  posts  in  the  min- 
istry to  its  most  conspicuous  leaders,  thus  gaining  control  over 
the  revolutionary  impulse  of  the  proletariat  by  allowing  its  lead- 
ers to  participate  in  power,  though  cautiously  and  in  an  ex- 
tremely restricted  measure.  The  oligarchy  which  controls  the 
modern  democratic  party  has  often  employed  the  same  means 
to  tame  the  opposition.  If  the  leaders  of  the  opposition  within 
the  party  are  dangerous  because  they  have  a  large  following 
among  the  masses,  and  if  they  are  at  the  same  time  few  in  num- 
ber, the  old  party-leaders  endeavour  to  hold  them  in  check  and 
to  neutralize  their  influence  by  the  conciliatory  methods  just  de- 
scribed. The  leaders  of  the  opposition  receive  high  offices  and 
honours  in  the  party,  and  are  thus  rendered  innocuous — all  the 
more  so  seeing  that  they  are  not  admitted  to  the  supreme  offices, 
but  are  relegated  to  posts  of  the  second  rank  which  give  them 
no  notable  influence,  and  they  are  without  hope  of  one  day  be- 
coming a  majority.  On  the  other  hand,  they  divide  with  their 
ancient  adversaries  the  serious  weight  of  responsibility  which  is 
generated  by  common  deliberations  and  manifestations,  so  that 
their  activities  become  confounded  with  those  of  the  old  leaders.^^ 
In  order  to  avoid  having  to  divide  their  power  with  new  ele- 

*^  The  history  of  the  socialist  party  alike  in  Austria  and  in  Germany 
affords  numerous  examples  of  minorities  which  were  at  first  pugnacious  and 
rebellious,  but  which  have  allowed  themselves  to  be  disarmed  in  this  man- 
ner. The  leaders  of  the  opposition  to  the  party  executive  at  the  Salzburg 
congress  of  the  Austrian  socialists  in  1904,  and  also  those  at  the  Bremen 
congress  of  the  German  socialists  held  in  the  same  year,  have  since  then 
become  members  of  the  superior  order  of  leaders  and  have  been  elected 
deputies  to  the  parliaments  of  their  respective  countries.  Simultaneously 
they  have  abandoned  their  attitude  of  opposition.  The  most  typical  ex- 
ample, however,  occurred  among  the  Dutch  socialists  in  the  spring  of 
1909.  Here  the  reformist  majority  endeavoured  to  gain  control  of 
the  party  executive  through  the  criticism  which  was  levelled  against  the  re- 
formists by  some  of  the  particularly  hardy  members  of  the  opposition. 
These  latter,  the  so-called  Marxist  group  of  the  "Niewe  Tijd, "  had  their 
own  organ,  an  independent  and  private  review;  now  the  reformist  leaders 
of  the  party  proposed  to  create  a  joint  review,  edited  by  the  party  and 
therefore  subject  to  the  control  of  the  party,  on  condition  that  the  Marxists 
should  renounce  the  "Niewe  Tijd,"  This  was  an  extremely  ingenious 
scheme  for  drawing  their  opponents'  teeth.  The  democratic  parties  in 
America  exhibit  analogous  phenomena.  Ostrogorsky  writes:  "La  machine 
est  prete  a  tout  faire,  meme  a  faire  aux  recalcitrants  une  place  sur  le 
tiquet"  (Ostrogorsky,  Organisation  de  la  Democratie,  etc.,  ed.  cit.,  vol.  ii,  p. 
363). 


RIVALRY  OF  LEADERS  177 

ments,  especially  such  as  are  uncongenial  by  tendency  or  mental 
characteristics,  the  old  leaders  tend  everywhere  with  greater  or 
less  success  to  acquire  the  right  of  choosing  their  own  colleagues, 
thus  depriving  the  masses  of  the  privilege  of  appointing  the 
leaders  they  themselves  prefer.^'* 

The  path  of  the  new  aspirants  to  power  is  always  beset  with 
difficulties,  bestrewn  with  obstacles  of  all  kinds,  which  can  be 
overcome  only  by  the  favour  of  the  mass.  Very  rarely  does  the 
struggle  between  the  old  leaders  and  the  new  end  in  the  com- 
plete defeat  of  the  former.  The  result  of  the  process  is  not  so 
much  a  circulation  des  elites  as  a  reunion  des  elites,  an  amalgam, 
that  is  to  say,  of  the  two  elements.  Those  representing  the  new 
tendency,  as  long  as  their  footing  is  still  insecure,  seek  all  sorts 
of  side  paths  in  order  to  avoid  being  overthrown  by  the  powers- 
that-be.  They  protest  that  their  divergence  from  the  views  of 
the  majority  is  trifling,  contending  that  they  are  merely  the 
logical  advocates  of  the  ancient  and  tried  principles  of  the  party, 
and  express  their  regret  that  the  old  leaders  display  a  lack  of 
true  democratic  feeling.  Not  infrequently  it  happens  that  they 
avert  the  blows  directed  against  them  by  craftily  creeping  be- 
hind the  backs  of  their  established  and  powerful  opponents  who 
are  about  to  annihilate  them,  solemnly  declaring,  when  wrathful 
blows  are  directed  against  them,  that  they  are  in  complete  ac- 
cord with  the  old  leaders  and  approve  of  all  their  actions,  so 
that  the  leaders  seem  to  be  beating  the  air.  On  many  occasions 
in  the  recent  history  of  the  socialist  parties,  the  reformist  minor- 
ities, in  order  to  avoid  destruction,  have  bowed  themselves  be- 
neath the  yoke  of  the  so-called  revolutionary  majorities  by  voting 
(with  a  fine  practical  and  tactical  sense,  but  with  an  entire  lack 
of  personal  pride  and  political  loyalty)  resolutions  which  were 
drafted  precisely  in  order  to  condemn  the  political  views  dear  to 
the  minority.^^    In  two  cases  only  does  it  sometimes  happen  that 

"  The  reader 's  attention  may  be  recalled  to  what  has  been  said  on  pp. 
103,   104. 

^°  At  the  Dresden  congress,  1903,  the  German  reformists  found  no  difficulty 
in  voting  for  the  so-called  "Dresden  resolution,"  which  subsequently  at- 
tained an  international  status,  having  been  brought  forward  by  the  French 
Marxists  at  the  international  congress  of  Amsterdam,  1904,  where  it  was 
solemnly  reconfirmed.  It  is  indisputable  that  this  motion  was  directed 
against  the  reformists,  since  it  expressly  condemns  all  participation  by 
socialists  in  the  government.  Eleven  only  among  the  268  reformist  delegates 
bad  a  sense  of  duty  and  political  honesty  or  personal  rectitude  sufficiently 
strong  to  induce  them  to  vote  against  the  resolution.     (Cf.  the  remarks  on 


178  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

the  relationships  between  the  two  tendencies  become  strained  to 
the  breaking-point.  In  the  first  place  this  may  happen  when  the 
leaders  of  one  of  the  two  factions  possess  a  profound  faith  in 
their  own  ideas,  and  are  characterized  at  once  by  tactical  fanati- 
cism and  theoretical  irreconcilability — or,  in  other  words,  when 
the  objective  reasons  which  divide  them  from  their  opponents  are 
felt  with  an  unaccustomed  force  and  are  professed  with  an  un- 
wonted sincerity.  In  the  second  place  it  may  happen  when  one  of 
the  parties,  in  consequence  of  offended  dignity  or  reasonable  sus- 
ceptibility, finds  it  psychologically  impossible  to  continue  to  live 
with  the  other,  and  to  carry  on  within  the  confines  of  the  same 
association  a  continued  struggle  for  dominion  over  the  masses. 
The  party  will  then  break  up  into  two  distinct  organisms,  and 
in  each  of  these  there  will  be  renewed  the  oligarchical  phenomena 
we  have  been  describing. 

One  of  the  most  interesting  chapters  in  the  history  of  the  strug- 
gles between  leaders  deals  with  the  measures  which  these  leaders 
adopt  within  their  own  closed  corporations  in  order  to  maintain 
discipline — that  is  to  say,  in  order  to  preserve  the  cementing 
force  of  the  will  of  the  majority.  In  the  struggle  which  the  va- 
rious groups  of  leaders  carry  on  for  the  hegemony  of  the  party, 
the  concept  of  democracy  becomes  a  lure  which  all  alike  employ. 

this  matter  of  Lily  Braun,  Memoiren  einer  Sozialistin.  Kampfjahre, 
Langen,  Munich,  1911,  p.  512).  The  Austrian  socialist,  Victor  Adler,  whose 
views  are  most  closely  akin  to  the  reformists  of  the  German  party,  wrote 
in  the  Viennese  "Arbeiter  Zeitung"  concerning  the  stratagem  adopted  by 
the  majority  of  the  reformists:  "Secondly,  the  vote  means  that  those 
who  are  termed  reformists  regard  the  moment  as  unfavourable  for  the 
decisive  and  open  declaration  of  their  opinions  and  still  more  unfavourable 
for  the  display  of  the  smallness  of  their  numbers.  They  are  indeed  so  few 
that  the  minority  has  preferred  to  hide  itself  by  mingling  with  the  major- 
ity" (from  the  reprint  in  the  "Mainzer  Volkszeitung, "  1903,  No.  225). 
A  counterpart  to  this  is  furnished  by  the  action  of  the  Italian  reformists 
at  the  socialist  congress  at  Eome,  1906.  Here  the  reformists  avoided  a  de- 
feat only  by  associating  themselves  (although  their  adhesion  was  repu- 
diated by  the  majority)  with  a  resolution  brought  forward  by  the  integral- 
ists  under  the  leadership  of  Ferri,  a  resolution  which  was  expressly  directed 
against  them  and  which  contained  various  matters  irreconcilable  with  the 
reformist  theory.  Thus  they  met  the  attack  against  them  by  running 
away.  Among  the  Italian  reformists  there  were  not  wanting  some  who 
regarded  this  action  as  inconsistent  and  politically  dishonourable  (Besoconto 
stenografico  del  IX  Congresso  Nasionale  a  Boma,  1906,  Mongini,  Eome, 
1907,  pp.  275  et  seq.).  Among  those  who  voted  against  the  resolution 
were  such  men  as  Antonio  Graziadei  and  Alessandro  Tasca  di  Cut6,  be- 
longing to  the  old  aristocracy  of  birth,  and  perhaps  for  this  reason  in- 
clined to  take  a  more  elevated  view  of  human  dignity. 


RIVALRY,  OF  LEADERS  179 

All  means  are  good  for  the  conquest  and  preservation  of  power. 
It  is  easy  to  see  this  when  we  read  the  discussions  concerning 
the  system  to  be  employed  for  the  appointment  of  the  party  ex- 
ecutive. The  various  tendencies  manifested  in  this  connection 
all  aim  at  the  same  end,  namely,  at  safeguarding  the  dominance 
of  some  particular  group.  Thus  in  France  the  Guesdists,  whose 
adherents  are  numerous  but  who  control  a  small  number  only 
of  the  groups,  advocate  a  system  of  proportional  representation ; 
the  Jauressists,  on  the  other  hand,  who  are  more  influential  in 
respect  of  groups  than  of  members,  and  also  the  Herveists,  op- 
pose proportional  representation  within  the  party,  for  they  fear 
that  this  would  give  the  Guesdists  group  too  great  a  facility  for 
the  enforcement  of  its  own  special  methods  of  action,  and  they 
propose  to  maintain  the  system  of  local  representation  or  of  rep- 
resentation by  delegation.^" 

In  the  American  Congress,  each  party  possesses  a  special  com- 
mittee which  exercises  a  control  over  the  attendance  of  its  mem- 
bers at  the  sessions,  and  which  on  the  occasion  of  decisive  votes 
issues  special  summonses  or  "whips."  When  an  interesting  bill 
is  before  the  house,  the  party  committee  also  summons  a  caucus, 
that  is  to  say,  a  private  meeting  of  the  parliamentary  group,  and 
this  decides  how  the  congressmen  are  to  vote.  All  members  of 
the  party  are  bound  by  the  decision  of  such  a  caucus.  Naturally 
no  immediate  punishment  is  possible  of  those  who  rebel  against 
the  authority  of  the  caucus;  but  at  the  next  election  the  inde- 
pendent congressman  is  sure  to  lose  his  seat,  for  the  party-man- 
agers at  Washington  will  not  fail  to  report  to  their  colleagues, 
the  bosses  of  the  local  constituency,  the  act  of  insubordination 
committed  by  the  congressman  concerned.  The  most  vital  of  all 
the  caucuses  is  that  which  precedes  the  election  of  the  speaker 
of  the  congress.  The  ideas  and  sympathies  of  the  speaker  have 
a  decisive  influence  upon  the  composition  of  the  committees  and 
therefore  upon  the  whole  course  of  legislation.  For  this  reason 
his  election  is  of  fundamental  importance,  and  is  preceded  for 
several  weeks  by  intrigues  and  vote-hunting  campaigns.  Doubt- 
less it  is  not  in  every  case  that  the  votes  are  decided  in  advance 
at  a  meeting  of  the  group.  Where  laws  of  minor  importance  are 
concerned,  every  member  of  Congress  is  free  to  vote  as  he  pleases. 
But  in  times  of  excitement  obedience  is  exacted,  not  only  to  the 
decisions  of  the  caucus,  but  also  to  the  authority  of  the  party 

*°  Cf .  the  Paris  corre^ondence  of  *  *  Avanti, ' '  anno  xv,  No.  16. 


180  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

leaders.  This  last  applies  especially  to  Congress,  for  in  the  Sen-  • 
ate  the  members  are  extremely  jealous  of  their  absolute  equality. 
On  the  other  hand,  the  caucus  has  an  even  greater  importance  in 
the  case  of  the  Senate,  for  here  the  groups  are  smaller  and  the 
caucus  can  therefore  function  more  efficiently.  The  groups  in 
.4,  Congress  may  number  more  than  two  hundred  members,  whereas 
those  of  the  Senate  rarely  exceed  fifty.^'^ 

The  parliamentary  group  of  the  German  social  democracy  is 
likewise  dominated,  as  far  as  its  internal  structure  is  concerned, 
by  a  most  rigorous  application  of  the  principle  of  subordination. 
The  majority  of  the  parliamentary  group  decides  the  action  of 
all  its  members  on  the  various  questions  submitted  to  the  Reichs- 
tag or  to  the  diets,  exercising  what  is  known  as  the  Fraktion- 
szwang  (group  coercion).  No  individual  member  has  the  right 
to  independent  action.  Thus  the  parliamentary  group  votes  as 
a  single  entity,  and  this  not  merely  in  questions  of  a  distinctively 
socialist  bearing,  but  also  in  those  which  are  independent  of  so- 
cialist ideas,  and  which  each  might  decide  according  to  his  own 
personal  conceptions.  It  was  very  different  in  the  French  parlia- 
ment during  the  fratricidal  struggle  between  the  Jauressists  and 
the  Guesdists  before  the  attainment  of  socialist  unity  in  France, 
for  at  that  time  each  deputy  used  to  vote  as  he  pleased.  But 
the  German  example  shows  that  liberty  of  opinion  no  longer  ex- 
ists where  the  organization  demands  common  action  and  where 
it  has  some  force  of  penetration  in  political  life. 

In  certain  cases,  however,  all  these  preventive  measures  fail 
of  their  effect.  This  happens  when  the  conflict  is  not  simply  be- 
tween a  minority  and  a  majority  within  the  group,  but  between 
the  group  and  one  single  member  who  possesses  outside  parlia- 
ment, in  certain  sections  of  the  party,  the  full  support  of  the 
subordinate  leaders.  When  a  conflict  occurs  in  such  conditions, 
the  deputy,  though  isolated,  is  sure  of  victory.  The  electors,  in 
fact,  usually  follow  with  great  docility  the  oscillations  and  evo- 
lutions of  their  parliamentary  representatives,  and  they  do  this 
even  in  constituencies  where  socialist  voters  predominate.  The 
ministers  Briand,  Viviani,  and  Millerand  have  been  expelled 
from  the  French  socialist  party,  but  the  former  members  of  the 
socialist  organizations  in  their  constituencies  have  remained  faith- 
ful to  these  leaders,  resigning  from  the  socialist  party,  and  con- 
tinuing as  electors  to  give  the  ex-socialists  their  support.    Anal- 

^'Bryce,    The  American   Commonwealth,   abridged  ed.,   Macmillan,   New 
York,  1907,  pp.  152-3. 


RIVALRY  OF  LEADERS  181 

ogous  were  the  eases  of  John  Burns  in  England  (Battersea)  and 
of  Enrico  Ferri  in  Italy  (Mantua).  It  was  enough  in  Ferri's 
case  that  at  an  appropriate  moment  he  should  reveal  a  new  truth 
to  produce  immediately  a  collective  change  in  the  political  opin- 
ions of  an  entire  region.  Having  first  been,  with  Ferri,  revo- 
lutionary and  irreconcilable,  this  region  became  converted  in  a 
single  night,  always  following  Ferri,  to  the  principle  of  class 
co-operation  and  of  participation  in  ministerial  activity.^*  In 
Germany,  the  party  executive  had  to  make  use  of  all  its  author- 
ity in  order,  at  the  last  minute,  to  induce  the  comrades  of  Chem- 
nitz to  withdraw  their  support  from  their  deputy  Max  Schippel, 
and  those  of  Mittweida  from  Otto  Gohre,  when  these  two  depu- 
ties had  displayed  heterodox  leanings. 

The  tendency  of  the  deputy  to  set  himself  above  his  party  is 
most  plainly  manifest  precisely  where  the  party  is  strongly  or- 
ganized ;  especially,  therefore,  in  the  modern  labour  parties ;  and 
within  these,  again,  more  particularly  in  the  reformist  sections. 
The  reformist  deputies,  as  long  as  they  have  not  upon  their  side 
a  majority  within  the  party,  carry  on  an  unceasing  struggle  to 
withdraw  themselves  from  the  influence  of  the  party,  that  is  to 
say,  from  the  mass  of  the  workers  who  are  organized  as  a  party. 
In  this  period  of  their  evolution  they  transfer  their  dependence 
upon  the  organized  mass  of  the  local  socialist  section  to  the  elec- 
tors of  the  constituency,  who  constitute  a  grey,  unorganized,  and 
more  or  less  indifferent  mass.  Thus  from  the  organized  masses, 
who  may  be  under  the  influence  of  their  opponents  within  the 
party,  they  appeal  to  the  mass  of  the  electors,  with  the  conten- 
tion that  it  is  to  these  latter  alone,  or  at  least  chiefly,  that  they 
have  to  give  an  account  of  their  political  conduct.  It  is  right 
to  recognize  that  this  appeal  to  the  electorate  as  the  body 
which  has  conferred  a  political  mandate  is  frequently 
based  upon  genuinely  democratic  sentiments  and  principles. 
Thus,  at  the  international  socialist  congress  of  London  (1893), 
the  four  French  socialist  deputies  refused  to  make  use  of  the 

**  Cf .  a  polemic  article  wherein  Giovanni  Zibordi  gives  an  account  of  a 
visit  made  by  Ferri  to  Mantua  after  his  political  volte-face.  Zibordi  speaks 
of  the  ' '  triumphal  tour ' '  of  the  adored  leader,  and  deplores  how  Ferri  and 
Gatti  "passed  through  the  region  of  Mantua.  .  .  amid  the  hurrahs  of  the 
workers  who  knew  no  better,  while  accompanied  by  the  impotent  disdain  and 
grief  of  the  socialists  who  saw  thus  installed  a  dangerous  dictatorship,  a 
personal  dominion  which  is  the  negation  of  our  principles  and  our  methods" 
(Giovanni  Zibordi,  Quel  die  succede  nel  Mantovano,  "Avanti,"  anno 
XV,  No.  119). 


182  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

mandates  which  had  been  conferred  upon  them  by  political  or 
corporative  groups,  thus  defying  the  rules  of  admission  to  the 
congress.  After  extremely  violent  discussions  they  were  ulti- 
mately admitted  simply  as  deputies,  having  raised  the  question 
of  principle  whether  an  important  constituency  capable  of  re- 
turning a  socialist  deputy  to  the  Chamber  should  not  have  the 
same  rights  which  are  granted  to  a  local  socialist  or  trade-union 
branch,  especially  when  it  is  remembered  that  such  a  branch  may 
consist  of  a  mere  handful  of  members.^'*  It  is  true  that  in  cer- 
tain circumstances  a  constituency  inspired  by  socialist  sentiment, 
even  if  it  be  not  socialistically  organized,  constitutes  a  better  ba- 
sis, in  the  democratic  sense,  for  political  action  than  a  small  so- 
cialist branch  whose  members  are  mostly  petty  bourgeois  or  law- 
yers ;  ^°  and  even  if  a  large  local  organization  exists,  the  constit- 
uency as  a  whole  is  a  better  basis  than  a  badly  attended  party 
meeting  for  the  selection  of  a  candidate.^^ 

From  our  study  of  the  intricate  struggles  which  proceed  be- 
tween the  leaders  of  the  majority  and  those  of  the  minority,  be- 
tween the  executive  organs  and  the  masses,  we  may  draw  the 
following  essential  conclusions. 

Notwithstanding  the  youth  of  the  international  labour  move- 
ment, the  figures  of  the  leaders  of  that  movement  are  more  im- 
posing and  more  imperious  than  those  displayed  in  the  history 
of  any  other  social  class  of  modern  times.  Doubtless  the  labour 
movement  furnishes  certain  examples  of  leaders  who  have  been 
deposed,  who  have  been  abandoned  by  their  adherents.  Such 
eases  are,  however,  rare,  and  only  in  exceptional  instances  do 
they  signify  that  the  masses  have  been  stronger  than  the  lead- 
ers. As  a  rule,  they  mean  merely  that  a  new  leader  has  entered 
into  conflict  with  the  old,  and,  thanks  to  the  support  of  the  mass, 

"Hubert  Lagardelle,  Les  Origines  du  Syndicalisme  en  France,  "Mouve- 
ment  Socialiste, "  anno  xi,  Nos.  215-216,  p.  249. 

'"  It  is  weU  to  remind  English  readers  that  on  the  Continent,  and  especially 
in  France  and  Italy,  barristers  play  a  conspicuous  part  in  the  oligarchy  of 
socialism,  corresponding  with  that  which  in  England  they  play  in  the  old 
political  parties. — Translators'  Note. 

^^  Einaldo  Rigola,  the  socialist  secretary  of  the  Italian  General  Confedera- 
tion of  Labour,  describes  the  socialist  party  as  an  oligarchy,  and  therefore 
contests  its  right  to  present  candidatures  for  the  elections  and  to  decide 
the  policy  of  the  proletariat.  In  his  view,  these  functions  should  rather 
be  allotted  to  the  labour  organizations,  whose  membership  is  far  more  ex- 
tensive and  which  could  constitute  themselves  into  a  Labour  Party  (Einaldo 
Eigola,  Discutendo  di  un  Fartito  del  Lavoro,  "Avanti, "  anno  xiv,  No.  172). 


RIVALRY  OF  LEADERS  183 

has  prevailed  in  the  struggle,  and  has  been  able  to  dispossess  and 
replace  the  old  leader.^-  The  profit  for  democracy  of  such  a  sub- 
stitution is  practically  nil. 

Whenever  the  Catholics  are  in  a  minority,  they  become  fer- 
vent partisans  of  liberty.  In  proof  of  this  we  need  merely  refer 
to  the  literature  issued  by  the  Catholics  during  the  Kulturkampf 
under  the  Bismarckian  regime  and  during  the  struggle  between 
Church  and  State  which  went  on  a  few  years  ago  in  France.  In 
just  the  same  way  the  leaders  of  the  minority  within  the  social- 
ist party  are  enthusiastic  advocates  of  liberty.  They  declaim 
against  the  narrowness  and  the  authoritative  methods  of  the 
dominant  group,^^  displaying  in  their  own  actions  genuine  demo- 
cratic inclinations.^* 

^  Kichard  Calwer,  in  a  declaration  to  the  socialist  press,  gives  the  fol- 
lowing account  of  his  dethronement  as  a  party  leader:  "  'Vorwarts'  and 
the  'Leipziger  Volkszeitung '  accept  as  a  matter  of  principle  the  resolution 
of  the  party  conference  of  the  third  Reichstag-constituency  of  Brunswick, 
by  which  it  was  decided  to  repudiate  my  candidature  in  future.  They  do 
this  without  reflecting  upon  the  moral  poverty  which  the  decision  exhibits 
for  the  party.  The  dissatisfaction  of  the  comrades  in  the  constituency 
with  my  economic  views  is  supposed  to  have  increased  gradually,  and  at 
length  to  have  become  overwhelming.  It  is  strange  that  during  the  entire 
sixteen  years  during  which  I  have  been  a  candidate  in  this  constituency 
there  was  not  until  about  a  year  ago  the  slightest  manifestation  of  dis- 
satisfaction among  the  comrades  in  the  electorate.  Yet  never  throughout 
this  period  have  I  made  any  secret  of  my  views.  The  local  comrades  have 
been  familiar  with  them  from  the  first  and  have  never,  for  this  reason, 
wished  to  remove  their  confidence.  The  alleged  divergencies  *in  matters 
of  principle'  date  from  no  more  than  a  year  back,  having  begun  precisely 
at  the  moment  when  comrade  Antrick  came  to  Brunswick  as  secretary. 
What  reasons  there  were  to  induce  this  comrade  to  attack  me  'on  principle,' 
I  do  not  know.  In  any  case,  I  neither  had  nor  have  inclination  or  time 
to  trouble  myself  about  personal  quarrels  and  to  dispute  with  comrade 
Antrick"  (" Volksstimme,"  August  15,  1907). 

^Cf.,  for  example,  the  pamphlet  issued  by  the  displaced  members  of 
the  staff  of  "Vorwarts, "  Ber  Vorwdrtslconflikt,  Gesamm^lte  Aktenstiicke 
(Birk,  Munich  1905),  in  which  we  read:  "We  are  not  here  concerned 
merely  with  the  moral  position  of  the  journalists  within  the  party;  the 
present  conflict  is  a  matter  of  decisive  importance  to  the  internal  wellbeing 
of  the  German  labour  movement.  The  question  at  issue  is  that  of  the 
dignity  of  all  the  responsible  persons  in  the  confidence  of  the  democracy. 
What  has  to  be  decided  is  whether  a  system  of  absolute  publicity  is 
to  be  replaced  by  a  secret  method  of  jurisdiction;  whether  open  discus- 
sion is  to  yield  to  the  crafty  dissemination  of  suspicions;  whether  obscure 
intrigue  is  to  oust  comradely  confidence;   whether  blind  caprice  is  to  be 

^  Cf .  p.  18. 


184  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

As  soon  as  the  new  leaders  have  attained  their  ends,  as  soon  as 
they  have  succeeded  (in  the  name  of  the  injured  rights  of  the 
anonymous  masses)  in  overthrowing  the  odious  tyranny  of  their 
predecessors  and  in  attaining  to  power  in  their  turn,  we  see  them 
undergo  a,  transformation  which  renders  them  in  every  respect 
similar  to  the  dethroned  tyrants.^^  Such  metamorphoses  as 
these  are  plainly  recorded  throughout  history.  In  the  life  of 
monarchical  states,  an  opposition  which  is  headed  by  hereditary 
princes  is  rarely  dangerous  to  the  crown  as  an  institution.  In 
like  manner,  the  opposition  of  the  aspirants  to  leadership  in  a 
political  party,  directed  against  the  persons  or  against  the  system 
of  the  old  leaders,  is  seldom  dangerous.  The  revolutionaries  of 
to-day  become  the  reactionaries  of  to-morrow. 

more  effective  than  reasoned  conviction;  whether  arbitrary  opinion  is  to 
be  more  influential  than  established  fact — whether,  in  a  word,  a  regime 
of  glib  demagogy,  of  personal  ambition,  and  the  most  unscrupulous  place- 
hunting,  is  to  be  established  in  the  German  social  democracy !  ' ' 

^ ' '  When  he  has  the  power  in  his  own  hands,  he  ignores  the  laws  which 
were  made  for  his  restraint"  (Giambattista  Casti,  Gli  Animali  'parlanti, 
Poema,  Tip.  Vanelli  e  Comp.,  Lugano,  1824,  vol,  i,  p.  30). 


CHAPTER   VII 

BUREAUCRACY.    CENTRALIZING   AND 
DECENTRALIZING   TENDENCIES. 

The  organization  of  the  state  needs  a  numerous  and  compli- 
cated bureaucracy.  This  is  an  important  factor  in  the  complex 
of  forces  of  which  the  politically  dominant  classes  avail  them- 
selves to  secure  their  dominion  and  to  enable  themselves  to  keep 
their  hands  upon  the  rudder. 

The  instinct  of  self-preservation  leads  the  modern  state  to  as- 
semble and  to  attach  to  itself  the  greatest  possible  number  of 
interests.  This  need  of  the  organism  of  the  state  increases  pari 
passu  with  an  increase  among  the  multitude,  of  the  conviction 
that  the  contemporary  social  order  is  defective  and  even  irra- 
tional— in  a  word,  with  the  increase  of  what  the  authorities  are 
accustomed  to  term  discontent.  The  state  best  fulfils  the  need 
for  securing  a  large  number  of  defenders  by  constituting  a  nu- 
merous caste  of  officials,  of  persons  directly  dependent  upon  the 
state.  This  tendency  is  powerfully  reinforced  by  the  tendencies 
of  modern  political  economy.  On  the  one  hand,  from  the  side  of 
the  state,  there  is  an  enormous  supply  of  official  positions.  On 
the  other  hand,  among  the  citizens,  there  is  an  even  more  exten- 
sive demand.  This  demand  is  stimulated  by  the  ever-increasing 
precariousness  in  the  position  of  the  middle  classes  (the  smaller 
manufacturers  and  traders,  independent  artizans,  farmers,  etc.) 
since  there  have  come  into  existence  expropriative  capitalism  on 
the  grand  scale,  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  organized  working 
classes  on  the  other — for  both  these  movements,  whether  they 
wish  it  or  not,  combine  to  injure  the  middle  classes.  All  those 
whose  material  existence  is  thus  threatened  by  modern  economic 
developments  endeavour  to  find  safe  situations  for  their  sons, 
to  secure  for  these  a  social  position  which  shall  shelter  them  from 
the  play  of  economic  forces.  Employment  under  the  state,  with 
the  important  right  to  a  pension  which  attaches  to  such  employ- 
ment, seems  created  expressly  for  their  needs.  The  immeasur- 
able demand  for  situations  which  results  from  these  conditions,  a 

185 


186  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

demand  which  is  always  greater  than  the  supply,  creates  the  so- 
called  ** intellectual  proletariat."  The  numbers  of  this  body  are 
subject  to  great  fluctuations.  From  time  to  time  the  state,  em- 
barrassed by  the  increasing  demand  for  positions  in  its  service, 
is  forced  to  open  the  sluices  of  its  bureaucratic  canals  in  order 
to  admit  thousands  of  new  postulants  and  thus  to  transform 
these  from  dangerous  adversaries  into  zealous  defenders  and  par- 
tisans. There  are  two  classes  of  intellectuals.  One  consists  of 
those  who  have  succeeded  in  securing  a  post  at  the  manger  of 
the  state,  whilst  the  other  consists  of  those  who,  as  Scipio  Sighele 
puts  it,  have  assaulted  the  fortress  without  being  able  to  force 
their  way  in.^  The  former  may  be  compared  to  an  army  of  slaves 
who  are  always  ready,  in  part  from  class  egoism,  in  part  for  per- 
sonal motives  (the  fear  of  losing  their  own  situations),  to  under- 
take the  defence  of  the  state  which  provides  them  with  bread. 
They  do  this  whatever  may  be  the  question  concerning  which 
the  state  has  been  attacked  and  must  therefore  be  regarded  as  the 
most  faithful  of  its  supporters.  The  latter,  on  the  other  hand, 
are  sworn  enemies  of  the  state.  They  are  those  eternally  restless 
spirits  who  lead  the  bourgeois  opposition  and  in  part  also  assume 
the  leadership  of  the  revolutionary  parties  of  the  proletariat.  It 
is  true  that  the  state  bureaucracy  does  not  in  general  expand  as 
rapidly  as  do  the  discontented  elements  of  the  middle  class.  None 
the  less,  the  bureaucracy  continually  increases.  It  comes  to  as- 
sume the  form  of  an  endless  screw.  It  grows  ever  less  and  less 
compatible  with  the  general  welfare.  And  yet  this  bureaucratic 
machinery  remains  essential.  Through  it  alone  can  be  satisfied 
the  claim  of  the  educated  members  of  the  population  for  secure 
positions.  It  is  further  a  means  of  self-defence  for  the  state. 
As  the  late  Amilcare  Puviani  of  the  University  of  Perugia,  the 
political  economist  to  whom  we  are  indebted  for  an  important 
Avork  upon  the  legend  of  the  state,  expresses  it,  the  mechanism  of 
bureaucracy  is  the  outcome  of  a  protective  reaction  of  a  right 
of  property  whose  legal  basis  is  weak,  and  is  an  antidote  to  the 
awakening  of  the  public  conscience.^ 

The  political  party  possesses  many  of  these  traits  in  common 
with  the  state.  Thus  the  party  in  which  the  circle  of  the  elite 
is  unduly  restricted,  or  in  which,  in  other  words,  the  oligarchy  is 
composed  of  too  small  a  number  of  individuals,  runs  the  risk  of 

^Scipio  Sighele,  L'Intelligenza  della  Folia,  Bocca,  Turin,  1903,  p.  160. 
"  Amilcare  Puviani,  Teoria  della  Illusione  finanziaria,  R.  Sandron,  Milan- 
Naples-Palermo,  1903,  pp.  258  et  seq. 


BUREAUCRACY  187 

being  swept  away  by  the  masses  in  a  moment  of  democratic  effer- 
vescence. Hence  the  modern  party,  like  the  modern  state,  en- 
deavours to  give  to  its  own  organization  the  widest  possible  base, 
and  to  attach  to  itself  in  financial  bonds  the  largest  possible  num- 
ber of  individuals.^  Thus  arises  the  need  for  a  strong  bureau- 
cracy, and  these  tendencies  are  reinforced  by  the  increase  in  the 
tasks  *  imposed  by  modern  organization.^ 

As  the  party  bureaucracy  increases,  two  elements  which  consti- 
tute the  essential  pillars  of  every  socialist  conception  undergo  an 
inevitable  weakening:  an  understanding  of  the  wider  and  more 
ideal  cultural  aims  of  socialism,  and  an  understanding  of  the 
international  multiplicity  of  its  manifestations.  Mechanism  be- 
comes an  end  in  itself.  The  capacity  for  an  accurate  grasp  of  the 
peculiarities  and  the  conditions  of  existence  of  the  labour  move- 
ment in  other  countries  diminishes  in  proportion  as  the  individ- 
ual national  organizations  are  fully  developed.  This  is  plain 
from  a  study  of  the  mutual  international  criticisms  of  the  social- 
ist press.  In  the  days  of  the  so-called  ' '  socialism  of  the  emigres, ' ' 
the  socialists  devoted  themselves  to  an  elevated  policy  of  prin- 
ciples, inspired  by  the  classical  criteria  of  internationalism.  Al- 
most every  one  of  them  was,  if  the  term  may  be  used,  a  special- 
ist in  this  more  general  and  comprehensive  domain.  The  whole 
course  of  their  lives,  the  brisk  exchange  of  ideas  on  unoccupied 
evenings,  the  continued  rubbing  of  shoulders  between  men  of  the 
most  different  tongues,  the  enforced  isolation  from  the  bourgeois 
world  of  their  respective  countries,  and  the  utter  impossibility  of 
any  "practical"  action,  all  contributed  to  this  result.  But  in 
proportion  as,  in  their  own  country,  paths  of  activity  were 
opened  for  the  socialists,  at  first  for  agitation  and  soon  after- 
wards for  positive  and  constructive  work,  the  more  did  a  recog- 
nition of  the  demands  of  the  everyday  life  of  the  party  divert 

*  The  governing  body  of  Tammany  in  New  York  consists  of  four  hun- 
dred persons.  The  influence  of  this  political  association  is  concentrated 
in  a  sub-committee  of  thirty  persons,  the  so-called  Organization  Committee 
(Ostrogorsky,  La  Democratie  etc.,  ed.  cit.,  vol,  ii,  p.  199). 

*  Cf .  pp.  33  et  seq. 

"  Inquiries  made  by  Lask  have  shown  how  deeply  rooted  in  the  psychology 
of  the  workers  is  the  desire  to  enter  the  class  of  those  who  receive  pensions. 
A  very  large  number  of  proletarians,  when  asked  what  they  wished  to  do 
with  their  sons,  replied :  "To  find  them  employment  which  would  give 
right  to  a  pension,''  Doubtless  this  longing  is  the  outcome  of  the  serious 
lack  of  stability  characteristic  of  the  social  and  economic  conditions  of 
the  workers  (Georg  v.  Schulze-Gaevernitz,  Nochmals:  "Marx  oder 
Kant?,"  "Archiv  fiir  Sozialwiss., "  xxx,  fasc.  2,  p,  520). 


188  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

their  attention  from  immortal  principles.  Their  vision  gained  in 
precision  but  lost  in  extent.  The  more  cotton-spinners,  boot  and 
shoe  operatives^  or  brush-makers  the  labour  leader  could  gain 
each  month  for  his  union,  the  better  versed  he  was  in  the  tedious 
subtleties  of  insurance  against  accident  and  illness,  the  greater 
the  industry  he  could  display  in  the  specialized  questions  of  fac- 
tory inspection  and  of  arbitration  in  trade  disputes,  the  better 
acquainted  he  might  be  with  the  system  of  checking  the  amount 
of  individual  purchases  in  co-operative  stores  and  with  the  meth- 
ods for  the  control  of  the  consumption  of  municipal  gas,  the 
more  difficult  was  it  for  him  to  retain  a  general  interest  in  the 
labour  movement,  even  in  the  narrowest  sense  of  this  term.  As 
the  outcome  of  inevitable  psychophysiological  laws,  he  could  find 
little  time  and  was  likely  to  have  little  inclination  for  the  study 
of  the  great  problems  of  the  philosophy  of  history,  and  all  the 
more  falsified  consequently  would  become  his  judgment  of  inter- 
national questions.  At  the  same  time  he  would  incline  more  and 
more  to  regard  every  one  as  an  "incompetent,"  an  "outsider," 
an  "unprofessional,"  who  might  wish  to  judge  questions  from 
some  higher  outlook  than  the  purely  technical ;  he  would  incline 
to  deny  the  good  sense  and  even  the  socialism  of  all  who  might 
desire  to  fight  upon  another  ground  and  by  other  means  than 
those  familiar  to  him  within  his  narrow  sphere  as  a  specialist. 
This  tendency  towards  an  exclusive  and  all-absorbing  specializa- 
tion, towards  the  renunciation  of  all  far-reaching  outlooks,  is  a 
general  characteristic  of  modern  evolution.  With  the  continuous 
increase  in  the  acquirements  of  scientific  research,  the  polyhistor 
is  becoming  extinct.  His  place  is  taken  by  the  writer  of  mono- 
graphs. The  universal  zoologist  no  longer  exists,  and  we  have 
instead  ornithologists  and  entomologists ;  and  indeed  the  last  be- 
come further  subdivided  into  lepidopterists,  coleopterists,  myrme- 
cologists. 

To  some  of  the  "non-commissioned  officers"  who  occupy  the 
inferior  grades  of  the  party  bureaucracy  may  be  aptly  applied 
what  Alfred  "Webber  said  of  bureaucracy  in  general  at  the  con- 
gress of  the  Verei7i  fiir  SozialpoUtik  held  at  Vienna  in  1909.® 

'Cf.  Protokoll,  pp.  283  et  seq. — The  Dutch  Christian  socialist  S.  J. 
Visser  has  made  a  scientific  attempt  to  defend  the  bureaucracy  which  would 
be  installed  by  the  socialist  state,  basing  this  defence  upon  the  dangers 
inherent  in  private  bureaucracy;  but  his  defence  must  be  considered  a 
complete  failure  (S.  J.  Visser,  Over  Socialisme,  M.  Nyhoff's  Gravenhage. 
See  Chap.  II,  " Functionnarisme  en  Demokratie, "  pp.   116-165), 


BUREAUCRACY  189 

Bureaucracy  is  the  sworn  enemy  of  individual  liberty,  and  of  all 
bold  initiative  in  matters  of  internal  policy.  The  dependence 
upon  superior  authorities  characteristic  of  the  average  employee 
suppresses  individuality  and  gives  to  the  society  in  which  em- 
ployees predominate  a  narrow  petty-bourgeois  and  philistine 
stamp.  The  bureaucratic  spirit  corrupts  character  and  engen- 
ders moral  poverty.  In  every  bureaucracy  we  may  observe  place- 
hunting,  a  mania  for  promotion,  and  obsequiousness  towards 
those  upon  whom  promotion  depends ;  there  is  arrogance  towards 
inferiors  and  servility  towards  superiors.  Wolfgang  Heine,  who 
in  the  German  socialist  party  is  one  of  the  boldest  defenders  of 
the  personal  and  intellectual  liberty  of  the  members,  who  is  al- 
ways in  the  breach  to  denounce  ''the  tendency  to  bureaucracy 
and  the  suppression  of  individuality,"  goes  so  far,  in  his  strug- 
gle against  the  socialist  bureaucracy,  as  to  refer  to  the  awful 
example  of  the  Prussian  state.  It  is  true,  he  says,  that  Prussia 
is  governed  in  accordance  with  homogeneous  principles  and  by  a 
bureaucracy  which  must  be  considered  as  a  model  of  its  kind; 
but  it  is  no  less  true  that  the  Prussian  state,  precisely  because  of 
its  bureaucratic  characteristics,  and  notwithstanding  its  external 
successes,  is  essentially  retrogressive.  If  Prussia  does  produce 
any  distinguished  personalities,  it  is  unable  to  tolerate  their  ex- 
istence, so  that  Prussian  politics  tend  more  and  more  to  degener- 
ate into  a  spiritless  and  mechanical  regime,  displaying  a  lively 
hostility  to  all  true  progress.'^  We  may  even  say  that  the  more 
conspicuously  a  bureaucracy  is  distinguished  by  its  zeal,  by  its 
sense  of  duty,  and  by  its  devotion,  the  more  also  will  it  show 
itself  to  be  petty,  narrow,  rigid,  and  illiberal. 

Like  every  centralizing  system,  bureaucracy  finds  its  justifica- 
tion in  the  fact  of  experience  that  a  certain  administrative  unity 
is  essential  to  the  rapid  and  efficient  conduct  of  affairs.  A  great 
many  functions,  such  as  the  carrying  out  of  important  statistical 
inquiries,  can  never  be  satisfactorily  effected  in  a  federal  system. 

The  outward  form  of  the  dominion  exercised  by  the  leaders 
over  the  rank  and  file  of  the  socialist  party  has  undergone  numer- 
ous changes  pari  passu  with  changes  in  the  historical  evolution 
of  the  labour  movement. 

In  Germany,  the  authority  of  the  leaders,  in  conformity  with 
the  characteristics  of  the  nation  and  with  the  insufficient  educa- 
tion of  the  masses,  was  at  first  displayed  in  a  monarchical  form ; 

'Wolfgang    Heine    Demokratische    BandbevierJcungen    sum    Fall    Golire, 
"Soz.  Monatsh.,"  viii  (x),  fasc.  4. 


190  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

there  was  a  dictatorship.  The  first  labour  organization  on  Ger- 
man soil  was  the  AUgemeiner  Deutscher  Arheiterverein  of  Ferdi- 
nand Lassalle.  This  organization  was  founded  in  1873  and  lasted 
until  1875,  when  it  became  fused  with  the  internationalist  and 
Marxist  section  of  German  socialism,  the  "Eisenachers."  The 
personal  creation  of  a  man  of  extraordinary  force  of  character, 
it  received  even  in  its  smallest  details  the  stamp  of  his  personal- 
ity. It  has  been  contended  that  Lassalle 's  association  was 
founded  upon  the  model  of  the  Nationalverein,  a  German  national 
league  which  was  extremely  influential  at  that  epoch.  This  may 
be  true  in  respect  of  the  base  of  the  Arheiterverein,  but  is  cer- 
tainly not  true  of  its  summit.  The  Arheiterverein,  like  the  Na- 
tionalverein,  was  a  unitary  society  whose  members  were  dispersed 
throughout  Germany  and  did  not  form  any  properly  organized 
local  branches.  The  membership  was  not  local  but  national,  each 
member  being  directly  dependent  upon  the  central  organization. 
But  whereas  in  the  Nationalverein  the  central  executive  was  a 
committee  of  several  members,  the  Arheiterverein  was  autocrati- 
cally ruled  by  a  single  individual,  Ferdinand  Lassalle,  who  exer- 
cised, as  did  his  successor  Johann  Baptist  von  Schweitzer,  as 
president  of  the  party  of  German  workers,  a  power  comparable 
with  that  of  the  doge  of  the  Venetian  Republic,  and  indeed  a 
power  even  more  unrestricted,  since  the  president's  power  was 
not,  as  was  that  of  the  doge,  subject  to  any  kind  of  control 
through  oligarchical  institutions.  The  president  was  an  absolute 
monarch,  and  at  his  own  discretion  nominated  his  subordinate 
officials,  his  plenipotentiaries,  and  even  his  successor.  He  com- 
manded, and  it  was  for  the  others  to  obey.  This  structure  of  the 
organization  was  not  the  outcome  merely  of  the  personal  quali- 
ties of  Lassalle,  of  his  insatiable  greed  for  power,  and  of  that 
egocentric  character  ^  which  made  him,  despite  his  genius,  so 
poor  a  judge  of  men ;  it  corresponded  also  to  his  theoretical  view 

'Already  in  his  student  career  Lassalle  displayed  a  thoroughly  imperious 
and  egoistic  character.  In  Berlin  he  offered  a  distant  relative,  a  young  man 
of  slender  means,  the  privilege  of  sharing  a  dwelling  whose  cost  was  be- 
yond his  own  purse,  but  in  which  he  had  a  great  desire  to  live.  Subsequently 
he  boasted  of  having  found  a  "sort  of  valet"  in  this  unlucky  youth.  He 
threatened  the  young  man  (who  was  as  far  as  his  means  permitted  paying 
his  share  towards  the  expenses  of  the  joint  establishment)  that  he  would 
evict  him  without  ceremony  if  he  should  prove  lazy  or  ill-behaved,  or  should 
in  any  way  provoke  Lassalle 's  displeasure.  (Cf.  a  letter  from  Lassalle  to 
his  father,  dated  Berlin,  April  24,  1844.  Intime  Brief e  Ferdinand  Lassalles 
an  Eltcrn  u.  Schtvester,  Buchhandlung  "Vorwarts, "  Berlin,  1905,  p.  23.) 


BUREAUCRACY  191 

of  the  aim  of  all  party  organization.  In  his  famous  speech  at 
Konsdorf  he  said:  "Wherever  I  have  been  I  have  heard  from 
the  workers  expressions  of  opinion  which  may  be  summarized  as 
follows :  '  We  must  forge  our  wills  into  a  single  hammer,  and 
place  this  hammer  in  the  hands  of  a  man  in  whose  intelligence, 
character,  and  goodwill  we  have  the  necessary  confidence,  so 
that  he  can  use  this  hammer  to  strike  with!'  .  .  .  The  two 
contrasts  which  our  statesmen  have  hitherto  believed  incapable 
of  being  united,  freedom  and  authority,  whose  union  they  have 
regarded  as  the  philosopher's  stone — these  contrasts  are  most 
intimately  united  in  our  Verein,  which  thus  represents  in  minia- 
ture the  coming  social  order ! "  °  Thus  in  the  eyes  of  the  presi- 
dent his  dictatorship  was  not  simply  a  sad  necessity  temporarily 
forced  upon  a  fighting  organization,^"  but  dictatorship  was  the 
ultimate  aim  of  the  labour  movement.^^  In  the  days  of  Lassalle, 
the  labour  movement  in  Germany  was  still  weak,  and,  like  a 
little  boy,  was  still  urgently  in  need  of  paternal  guidance.  When 
the  father  came  to  die  he  made  testamentary  arrangements  for 
the  provision  of  a  guardian  (for  the  German  labour  movement 
could  still  be  an  object  of  testamentary  depositions).  After 
Lassalle 's  death,  the  decisive  executive  power,  the  quintessence 
(if  the  term  be  permitted)  of  the  structure  of  the  young  labour 
movement,  continued  to  rest  at  the  almost  absolute  disposal  of  a 
single  individual,  Schweitzer.^-  This  authoritative  tendency  was 
an  outcome,  not  so  much  of  the  historical  necessity  of  the  mo- 
ment, as  of  the  traditions  and  of  the  racial  peculiarities  of  the 
German  stock.  With  the  lapse  of  time  this  characteristic  has 
been  notably  attenuated  by  theoretical  and  practical  democracy, 
and  by  the  varying  necessities  of  the  case ;  above  all,  by  the  ap- 
pearance of  a  typically  southern  socialism,  less  rigid  than  that  of 
Prussia  and  of  Saxony,  and  jealous  of  its  own  autonomy.  But 
the  tendency  has  not  disappeared,  nor  can  it  disappear. 

Whilst  there  was  thus  forming  in  Germany  the  massive  organ- 
ization of  the  followers  of  Lassalle,  the  leaders  of  the  Interna- 
tional Association  adopted  a  different  form  of  organization.  The 
International  Workingmen's  Association  was  characterized  by 

^  Ferdinand  Lassalle,  Die  Agitation  des  AUgemeinen  DeutscJien  Arbeiter- 
vereins  u.  das  Versprechen  des  Konigs  von  Freussen,  ed.  cit.,  p.  40. 

"  Cf .  pp.  41  et  soq. 

"  Cf .  Gustav  Mayer,  J.  B,  von  Schweitzer,  etc.,  ed.  cit.,  p.  256. 

"Cf.  also  Hermann  Oncken,  Lassalle,  Frommann  (E.  Hauff),  Stuttgart, 
1904,  p.   397. 


192  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

mutual  jealousy  on  the  part  of  the  various  national  sections,  and 
this  was  a  potent  obstacle  in  the  way  of  any  tendency  towards 
dictatorship.  Thus  there  came  into  existence  in  London  the 
General  Council,  the  supreme  authority  of  the  International, 
consisting  of  a  handful  of  members  belonging  to  the  different 
countries  represented  in  the  organization.  But  the  powers  of 
this  executive  were  in  many  respects  hardly  less  restricted  than 
those  of  the  president  of  the  Allgemeiner  Deutscher  Arbeiter- 
verein.  The  General  Council  forbade  the  associations  which  were 
affiliated  to  it  to  elect  presidents,  regarding  this  as  contrary  to 
democratic  principles.^^  Yet  as  far  as  concerned  itself,  it  proudly 
asserted,  through  the  mouth  of  the  most  conspicuous  among  its 
members,  that  the  working  class  had  now  discovered  a  ' '  common 
leadership.""  It  nominated  from  among  its  own  members  the 
officers  necessary  for  the  general  conduct  of  its  business,  such  as 
the  treasurer,  the  general  secretary,  and  the  corresponding  sec- 
retaries for  the  different  countries,^^  nor  did  it  hesitate,  on  occa- 
sions, to  allot  several  offices  to  the  same  individual.  Engels, 
though  a  German,  was  for  some  time  secretary'  for  four  different 
countries — Spain,  Italy,  Portugal,  and  Denmark.^*^  It  may  be 
added  that  the  secretariat  carried  with  it  important  prerogatives, 
such  as  the  right  of  recognizing  newly  constituted  sections,  the 
right  to  grant  or  refuse  pecuniary  subsidies,  and  the  adjustment 
of  disputes  among  the  comrades.^^  It  is  unquestionable  that  for 
several  years  the  General  Council  was  subject,  in  respect  of  all  its 
most  significant  practical  and  theoretical  manifestations,  to  the 
iron  will  of  one  single  man,  Karl  Marx.^*     The  conflict  in  the 


^'Cf.  Compte-Eendu  du  4^  Congres  International  tenu  a  Bale  en  sept.  1869, 
D.  Brismee,  Brussels,  1869,  p.  172. 

"(Marx),  L' Alliance  de  la  Democratie  Socialiste  et  l' Association  Int. 
des  Travailleurs,  Rapports  et  Documents,  London-Hamburg,  1873,  p.  25. 

"Karl  Stegmann  and  C.  Hugo  (H.  Lindemann),  Handbuch  des  Socialis- 
miis,  J.  Schabelitz,  Zurich,   1897,  p.  342. 

"Letter  from  F.  Engels  to  Sorge,  March  17,  1872  (Brief e  u.  Ausziige 
aus  Briefen  von  Joh.  Phil.  BecTcer,  Jos.  Dietsgcn,  Fried.  Engels,  Karl 
Marx,  u.  A.  an  F.  A.  Sorge  u.  A.,  Dietz  Nachf.,  Stuttgart,  1906,  p.  54). 

"  Compte-Bendu  du  4e  Congres,  p.  172. 

"  "  A  provisional  General  Council  was  elected,  and  the  soul  of  this  body, 
as  of  all  subsequent  General  Councils  down  to  the  Hague  congress  of  1872, 
was  Marx  himself.  Their  history  is  related  elsewhere.  In  this  place  it 
suffices  to  say  that  Marx  edited  almost  all  the  documents  issued  by  the 
General  Council,  from  the  inaugural  address  of  1864  down  to  the  address 
dealing  with  the  civil  war  in  France  in  1871"  (Stegmann  u.  Hugo,  op. 
cit.,  p.  500). 


BUREAUCRACY  193 

General  Council  between  the  oligarchy  de  jure  and  the  mon- 
archy de  facto  was  the  inner  cause  of  the  rapid  decline  of  the 
Old  International.  The  General  Council  and  especially  Marx 
were  accused  of  being  the  negation  of  socialism  because,  it  was 
said,  in  their  disastrous  greed  for  power,  they  had  introduced  the 
principle  of  authority  into  the  politics  of  the  workers.^®  At 
first  these  accusations  were  directed  from  without,  coming  from 
the  groups  that  were  not  represented  on  the  General  Council :  the 
accusers  were  Bakunin,  the  Italians,  and  the  Jurassians.  The 
General  Council,  however,  easily  got  the  upper  hand.  At  the 
Hague  congress  in  1872,  the  "authoritarians,"  making  use  of 
means  characteristic  of  their  own  tendencies  (the  hunting  of 
votes,  the  calling  of  the  congress  in  a  town  which  was  little  ac- 
cessible to  some  of  the  opponents  and  quite  inaccessible  to 
others),^"  obtained  a  complete  victory  over  the  anti-authorita- 
rians. Before  long,  however,  voices  were  raised  within  the  Coun- 
cil itself  to  censure  the  spirit  of  autocracy.  ]\Iarx  was  aban- 
doned by  most  of  his  old  friends.  The  French  Blanquists  osten- 
tatiously separated  themselves  from  him  when  he  had  arbitrarily 
transferred  the  General  Council  to  New  York,  The  two  influen- 
tial leaders  of  the  English  trade  unions  who  were  members  of 
the  General  Council,  Odger  and  Lucraft,  quarrelled  with  Marx 
because  they  had  not  been  consulted  about  the  manifesto  in  fa- 
vour of  the  Paris  Commune  to  which  their  signatures  were  at- 
tached. The  German  refugees  in  England,  Jung  and  Eccarius, 
declared  that  it  was  impossible  to  work  with  persons  as  dicta- 
torial as  Marx  and  Engels.  Thus  the  oligarchs  destroyed  the 
larval  monarchy. 

In  1889  the  so-called  New  International  was  founded.     The 
socialist  parties  of  the  various  countries  agreed  to  undertake 


^' James  Guillaume,  L' Internationale,  Documents  et  Souvenirs,  Cornelj, 
Paris,  1907  vol.  ii. 

'"Idem,  p.  327;  cf.  also  a  letter  from  Mars  to  Sorge,  dated  London,  June 
21,  1872,  in  which  Marx  begs  Sorge  to  send  him  a  number  of  blank  voting 
cards  for  certain  friends  in  America  whom  he  mentions  by  name  {Brief e 
u.  Ausziige  aus  Brief  en,  ed.  cit.,  p.  33). — The  locale  of  the  congress  was  a 
convenient  one  for  the  English,  the  French,  and  the  Germans,  who  were 
on  the  whole  favourable  to  the  General  Council,  but  extremely  inconvenient 
for  the  Swiss,  the  Spaniards,  and  the  Italians,  who  were  on  the  side  of 
Bakunin.  Bakunin  himself,  who  was  living  in  Switzerland,  was  unable  to 
attend  the  congress,  for  to  reach  The  Hague  he  must  have  crossed  Ger- 
many or  France,  and  in  both  these  countries  he  was  liable  to  immediate 
arrest. 


194  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

common  deliberations,  and  to  meet  from  time  to  time  in  con- 
gresses for  this  purpose.  Therewith  the  ''idea  of  international- 
ism" (to  quote  a  phrase  employed  by  Jaeckh)  underwent  a  trans- 
formation. The  Old  International  had  worked  along  the  lines  of 
the  greatest  possible  centralization  of  the  international  prole- 
tariat, "so  that  it  might  be  possible,  at  any  place  at  which  the 
economic  class-struggle  became  especially  active,  to  throw  there 
immediately  into  the  scale  the  organized  power  of  the  working 
class.""  The  New  International,  on  the  other  hand,  took  the 
form  of  an  extremely  lax  system,  a  union  of  elements  which  were 
strangers  one  to  another ;  these  elements  were  national  organi- 
zations of  a  very  rigid  form,  each  confined  within  the  limits  of 
its  own  state.  In  other  words,  the  New  International  is  a  con- 
federation of  autonomous  states,  and  lacks  any  unitary  and 
homogeneous  organization.-^  The  Old  International  was  an  indi- 
vidual dictatorship,  masquerading  as  an  oligarchy.  The  New 
International  may  be  compared  to  the  old  States  General  of  the 
Netherlands;  it  is  a  federal  republic,  consisting  of  several  inde- 
pendent oligarchies.  The  General  Council  of  London  was  all- 
powerful.  The  modern  Secretariat  Socialiste  International, 
whose  seat  is  in  Brussels,  is  nothing  but  an  office  for  the  exchange 
of  letters,  devoid  of  all  authority.  It  is  true  that  the  interna- 
tional socialist  congresses  have  sometimes  furnished  an  oppor- 
tunity for  thoroughly  self-conscious  and  vigorous  national  oli- 
garchies to  attempt  usurpations  in  the  international  field.  Thus, 
in  particular,  the  German  social  democracy,  when  forced  upon 
the  defensive  at  the  Stuttgart  congress  of  1907,  endeavoured,  and 
not  without  success,  to  impose  upon  the  other  socialist  parties  its 
own  particular  tactics,  the  verbal  revolutionarism  which  had 
originated  in  the  peculiar  conditions  of  Germany.^^  The  inter- 
national unification  of  tactics  has  always  been  limited  by  the 
varying  needs  of  the  different  national  oligarchies.  In  other 
words,  whilst  national  supremacies  are  still  possible  in  the  con- 

"^  Cf.  Gustav  Jaeckh,  Die  Internationale,  Leipz.  Buchdr.  Akt.  Ges.,  Leip- 
zig, 1904,  p.  218. 

"  Cf .  speech  by  Wilhelm  Liebknecht  to  the  Int.  Cong,  Paris,  1889  (Proto- 
Tcoll,  deutsche  Uebersetzung,  Worlein,  Nuremberg,  1890,  p.  7). 

^Cf.  E.  Michels,  Die  deutsche  SozialdemoJcratie  im  Internationalen  Ver- 
hande,  "Arch,  fiir  Sozialwiss., "  anno  1907).  This  is  a  detailed  study 
of  the  conditions  of  fact  and  the  complex  of  causes  which  rendered  it 
possible  for  the  German  party  to  exercise  such  a  pressure  upon  the  other 
parties  in  the  International;  it  deals  also  with  the  subsequent  decline  of  its 
hegemony. 


BUREAUCRACY  195 

temporary  socialist  International,  it  is  no  longer  possible  for  the 
socialist  party  of  one  country  to  exercise  a  true  hegemony  over 
the  other  national  parties.  The  dread  of  being  dominated  in- 
creases in  each  national  party  in  proportion  as  it  becomes  firmly 
established,  consolidating  its  own  existence  and  rendering  itself 
independent  of  other  socialist  parties.  International  concentra- 
tion is  checked  by  the  competition  of  the  various  national  concen- 
trations. Each  national  party  stands  on  guard  to  prevent  the 
others  from  extending  their  sphere  of  influence.^*  The  result  is 
that  the  international  efficiency  of  the  resolutions  voted  at  the 
international  congresses  is  almost  insignificant.  At  the  inter- 
national socialist  congress  of  Amsterdam,  in  1904,  the  Belgian 
Anseele  made  it  clear  that  he  would  not  regard  himself  as  bound 
by  an  international  vote  forbidding  socialists  to  participate  in 
bourgeois  governments."^  Thus,  again,  Vollmar,  with  the  ap- 
proval of  the  Germans,  speaking  at  the  international  socialist 
congress  at  Stuttgart  in  1907,  repudiated  any  interference  on 
the  part  of  the  French  in  the  military  policy  of  the  German 
socialists,  protesting  in  advance  against  any  international  reso- 
lution regulating  the  conduct  of  the  socialists  of  all  countries  in 
case  of  war.^*'  Considered  from  close  at  hand  the  international 
German  principalities  of  the  eighteenth  century,  consisting  of 
nobles,  ecclesiastics,  and  a  few  burgomasters,  assemblies  whose 
chief  preoccupation  was  to  avoid  yielding  to  the  prince  a  jot  of 
their  ' '  freedoms, ' '  that  is  to  say  of  their  peculiar  privileges.  In 
just  the  same  way,  the  various  national  socialist  parties,  in  their 
international  congresses,  defend  with  the  most  jealous  care  all 
their  prerogatives  and  their  national  particularism,  being  all 
determined  to  yield  not  an  inch  of  ground  in  favour  of  His  Maj- 
esty the  International.^^ 

^*  Eduard  Bernstein  expressed  himself  similarly  as  long  ago  as  1893. 
Cf.  Zur  Geschichte  u.  Theorie  des  Sosialismus,  Edelheim,  Berlin-Berne,  1901, 
p.  143. 

^  Cf .  speech  by  Edouard  Anseele,  ProtoTcoll  des  internat.  Soz.  Congress, 
1904,  "Vorwarts,"  Berlin,  1904,  pp.  47-9, 

^  Cf.  speech  by  Georg  von  Vollmar,  ProtoTcoll  des  internas.  Sos.  Congress, 
1907,  "Vorwarts,"  Berlin,  1907,  p.  93. 

^  Hence  all  coherency  of  tactics  is  lacking  to  international  socialism,  so 
that  alike  theoretically  and  practically  every  national  "section"  works 
in  accordance  with  its  own  will  and  pleasure.  One  advocates  protection, 
another  free  trade;  one  adheres  to  the  Kulturham'pf ,  whilst  others  agitate 
for  the  repeal  of  the  laws  against  the  Jesuits.  (Cf.  E.  Michels,  Le  In- 
coerense  internasionali  nel  Socialismo  contemporaneo,  "Eiforma  Sociale," 
xiii,  fasc.  8.) 


196  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

The  national  oligarchies  are  willing  to  recognize  the  authority 
of  international  resolutions  only  when  by  an  appeal  to  the  au- 
thority of  the  International  they  can  quell  a  troublesome  faction 
in  their  own  party.  Sometimes  the  leaders  of  the  minority  se- 
cure an  international  bull  to  authenticate  the  purity  of  their  so- 
cialist sentiments  as  contrasted  with  the  majority,  whom  they 
accuse  of  heresy.  Sometimes,  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  the  leaders 
of  the  majority  who  endeavour,  on  the  international  field,  to  gain 
a  victory  over  the  leaders  of  the  minority,  whom  they  have  been 
unable  to  subdue  within  the  limits  of  their  national  organization, 
A  typical  example  of  the  former  case  is  furnished  by  the  action 
of  the  Guesdist  minority,  at  the  congress  of  Amsterdam  in  1904, 
which  endeavoured  to  discredit  in  the  opinion  of  the  Interna- 
tional the  ideas  of  their  great  cousin  Jaures  in  matters  of  internal 
policy.  The  manoeuvre  proved  effective,  for  the  Guesdists  suc- 
ceeded in  attaching  Jaures  to  their  chariot,  and  in  holding  him 
prisoner  within  the  serried  ranks  of  the  unified  French  party.^^ 
An  example  of  the  second  mode  of  action  is  afforded  by  the  con- 
duct of  the  Italian  and  German  socialist  parties  in  appealing  to 
the  decisions  of  the  international  congresses  (Paris,  1889;  Zu- 
rich, 1893 ;  London,  1895)  in  order  to  get  rid  of  their  anti-parlia- 
mentary and  anarchist  factions. 

Side  by  side  with  this  international  decentralization,  we  see 
to-day  a  vigorous  national  centralization.  Certain  limitations, 
however,  must  be  imposed  on  this  generalization. 

In  the  modern  labour  movement,  within  the  limits  of  the  na- 
tional organizations,  we  see  decentralizing  as  well  as  centralizing 
tendencies  at  work.  The  idea  of  decentralization  makes  continu- 
ous progress,  together  with  a  revolt  against  the  supreme  author- 
ity of  the  central  executive.  But  it  would  be  a  serious  error  to 
imagine  that  such  centrifugal  movements  are  the  outcome  of  the 
democratic  tendencies  of  the  masses,  or  that  these  are  ripe  for 
independence.  Their  causation  is  really  of  an  opposite  char- 
acter. The  decentralization  is  the  work  of  a  compact  minority  of 
leaders  who,  when  forced  to  subordinate  themselves  in  the  cen- 
tral executive  of  the  party  as  a  whole,  prefer  to  withdraw  to  their 
own  local  spheres  of  action  (minor  state,  province,  or  commune). 
A  group  of  leaders  which  finds  itself  in  a  minority  has  no  love 
for  strong  national  centralization.  Being  unable  to  rule  the 
whole  country,  it  prefers  to  rule  at  home,  considering  it  better 

^'^Cf.  the  explanations  of  Bebel  at  the  German  congress  of  Bremen,  1904 
{Protol-oll,  Berlin,  1904,  p.  308). 


BUREAUCRACY  197 

to  reign  in  hell  than  serve  in  heaven.  Vollmar,  for  example,  who 
in  his  own  land  possesses  so  great  an  influence  that  he  has  been 
called  the  uncrowned  king  of  Bavaria,  cannot  consent  to  play 
second  fiddle  in  the  German  national  organization.  He  would 
rather  be  first  in  Munich  than  second  in  Berlin ! 

The  rallying  cry  of  the  majority  is  centralization,  while  that 
of  the  minority  is  autonomy.  Those  of  the  minority,  in  order 
to  gain  their  ends,  are  forced  to  carry  on  a  struggle  which  often 
assumes  the  aspect  of  a  genuine  fight  for  liberty,  and  this  is 
reflected  in  the  terminology  of  the  leaders,  who  declare  them- 
selves to  be  waging  war  against  the  new  tyranny.  When  the 
leaders  of  the  minority  feel  themselves  exceptionally  strong,  they 
push  their  audacity  to  the  point  of  attempting  to  deny  the  right 
to  existence  of  the  majority,  as  impersonated  in  the  central  ex- 
ecutive. At  the  Italian  socialist  congress  held  at  Imola  in  1902, 
the  leader  of  the  Italian  reformists,  Filippo  Turati,  joined  with 
his  friends  in  putting  forward  a  formal  proposal  to  suppress  the 
central  executive.  It  was  necessary,  he  said,  to  substitute  for 
this  obsolete,  dictatorial,  and  decrepit  institution  the  complete 
autonomy  of  the  local  organizations,  or  at  least  to  replace  it  by 
a  purely  administrative  and  executive  organism  consisting  of 
three  specialist  employees.  He  added  that  it  was  a  form  of 
jacobinism  to  wish  to  govern  the  whole  party  from  above.  The 
opponents  of  this  democratic  conception  rejoined  with  an  effec- 
tive argument  when  they  pointed  out  that  if  the  central  execu- 
tive were  abolished,  the  parliamentary  deputies  would  remain 
the  sole  and  uncontrolled  masters  of  the  party.  Consequently, 
whenever  it  became  necessary  to  take  action  upon  some  urgent 
question,  when  time  was  lacking  to  make  a  direct  reference  to 
the  party  as  a  whole,  it  would  be  the  parliamentary  group,  de- 
riving its  authority  not  from  the  party  but  from  the  electorate, 
which  would  decide  upon  the  line  of  conduct  to  be  pursued. ^'^  If 
we  accept  the  hypothesis  that  a  true  democracy  may  exist  within 
the  party,  the  tendency  to  the  subdivision  of  powers  is  unques- 
tionably anti-democratic,  while  centralization  is,  on  the  other 
hand,  the  best  way  of  giving  incontestable  validity  to  the  will  of 
the  masses.  From  this  point  of  view,  Enrico  Ferri  was  per- 
fectly right  when  he  told  the  reformists  that  the  proposed  abo- 

'^  Such  was  the  view  put  forward  by  Ferri,  Longobardi,  and  others. 
When  a  vote  was  taken,  the  numbers  were  equal,  and  the  central  executive 
was  retained  (Rendiconto  del  VII  Congresso  Nasionale  del  P.  S.  I.,  Iviola, 
Settembre,  1902,  Libr.  Soc.  Ital.,  Eome,  1903,  p.  79). 


198  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

lition  of  the  central  executive  would  be  equivalent  to  the  sup- 
pression of  the  sovereignty  of  the  members  in  general,  since  the 
executive  is  the  legitimate  expression  of  the  mass-will,  and  de- 
rives its  rights  from  the  party  congresses.^" 

This  decentralizing  movement  which  manifests  itself  within 
the  various  national  socialist  parties  does  not  conflict  with  the 
essential  principle  of  oligarchy.  The  minority  in  opposition, 
which  has  been  thus  careful  to  withdraw  itself  from  the  control 
of  the  central  executive,  proceeds  within  its  own  sphere  of  do- 
minion to  constitute  itself  into  a  centralized  power  no  less  un- 
restricted than  the  one  against  which  it  has  been  fighting.  Thus 
such  movements  as  we  have  been  considering  represent  no  more 
than  an  attempt  to  effect  a  partition  of  authority,  and  to  split 
up  the  great  oligarchies  into  a  number  of  smaller  oligarchies.  In 
France  and  in  Italy  every  socialist  deputy  endeavours  to  be- 
come as  independent  as  possible  of  the  central  executive  of  his 
party,  making  himself  supreme  in  his  local  organization.  A  sim- 
ilar process  may  be  observed  in  Germany,  where  the  persistence 
of  numerous  petty  states,  mutually  independent,  and  each  gov- 
erned by  its  own  parliament,  has  hitherto  prevented  the  consti- 
tutional and  administrative  unification  of  the  party  throughout 
the  country,  and  has  greatly  favoured  decentralizing  tendencies.^'- 
In  consequence  of  this  state  of  affairs  we  find  in  Germany  that 
all  the  parties  in  the  separate  states,  from  Bavaria  to  Hesse,  de- 
sire autonomy,  independence  of  the  central  executive  in  Berlin. 
But  this  does  not  prevent  each  one  of  them  from  exercising  a 
centralized  authority  within  its  own  domain. 

The  decentralizing  currents  in  German  socialism,  and  more 
particularly  those  of  the  German  south,  are  adverse  to  centraliza- 
tion only  as  far  as  concerns  the  central  executive  of  Berlin,  whilst 
within  their  own  spheres  they  resist  federalism  with  the  utmost 
emphasis. ^^     Their  opposition  to  the   centralization  in  Berlin 

^Idem,  p.  79. 

*  Certain  theorists  cover  these  decentralizing  tendencies  with  the  mantle 
of  science.  Cf.  Arthur  Schulz,  Oekonomische  und  politische  EntwicTclungs- 
tendenzen  in  Deutschland,  Birth,  Munich,  1909,  p.  95.  The  sub-title  of  this 
interesting  work  is  Ein  Versuch  die  Autonomieforderung  der  suddeutsch- 
en  sosialdemokratiscJien  Landesorganisationen  thcoretisch  zu  Begriinden. 
Thus  the  work  is  in  effect  an  attempt  to  provide  a  theoretical  foundation 
for  the  claims  to  autonomy  advanced  by  the  socialist  organizations  in 
the  various  states  of  southern  Germany. 

^'  This  was  pointed  out  by  Adolf  Braun  at  the  Bavarian  socialist  congress 
held  at  Schweinfurt  in  1906. 


BUREAUCRACY  199 

takes  the  form  of  a  desire  in  the  local  parties  to  retain  financial 
independence  of  the  central  treasury.  At  the  Schweinfurt  con- 
gress in  1906,  Ehrhart,  socialist  deputy  to  the  Bavarian  diet, 
said :  "It  comes  to  this,  the  central  executive  has  the  manage- 
ment of  the  money  which  goes  to  Berlin,  but  it  is  for  us  to  decide 
how  we  shall  spend  the  money  which  is  kept  here."^^  Hugo 
Lindemann  of  Wiirtemberg,  one  of  the  most  ardent  adversaries 
of  the  Prussianization  of  the  party  and  an  advocate  of  federal- 
ism, has  declared  that  it  is  undesirable  to  deplete  the  local 
finances  of  the  South  German  states  in  favour  of  the  central 
treasury  in  Berlin,  where  the  executive  is  always  inclined  to  a 
policy  of  hoarding  money  for  its  own  sake.^* 

The  struggles  within  the  modern  democratic  parties  over  this 
problem  of  centralization  versus  decentralization  are  of  great 
scientific  importance  from  several  points  of  view.  It  would  be 
wrong  to  deny  that  the  advocates  of  both  tendencies  bring  for- 
ward a  notable  array  of  theoretical  considerations,  and  occasion- 
ally make  valid  appeals  to  moral  conceptions.  We  have,  how- 
ever, to  disabuse  our  minds  of  the  idea  that  the  struggle  is  really 
one  for  or  against  oligarchy,  for  or  against  popular  sovereignty 
or  the  sovereignty  of  the  party  masses.  The  tendency  to  decen- 
tralization of  the  party  rule,  the  opposition  to  international  cen- 
tralization (to  the  far-reaching  authority  of  international  bu- 
reaux, committees,  congresses),  or  to  national  centralization  (to 
the  authority  of  the  party  executives),  has  nothing  to  do  with 
the  desire  for  more  individual  liberty. 

The  democratic  tendency  may  be  justified  by  practical  rea- 
sons, and  in  particular  by  differences  in  the  economic  or  social 
situation  of  the  working  classes  in  the  various  districts,  or  by 
other  local  peculiarities.  The  tendencies  to  local,  provincial,  or 
regional  autonomy  are  in  fact  the  outcome  of  effective  and  in- 
eradicable differences  of  environment.]  In  Germany,  the  social- 
ists of  the  south  feel  themselves  to  be  divided  as  by  an  ocean 
from  their  comrades  of  the  north.  They  claim  the  right  of  self- 
government  and  participation  in  government  because  they  live 
in  countries  where  parliamentarism  already  possesses  a  glorious 
history  dating  from  more  than  a  century  back,  whereas  Prussia 
is  still  thoroughly  imbued  with  the  authoritarian  and  feudal 
spirit.     They  claim  it  also  because  in  the  south  agiuculture  is 

""Volksstimme"  of  Frankfort,  Marcli  6,  1906. 

**  Hugo  Lindemann,  Centralismus  u.  Fdderalisrmis  in  der  Sosidldemokratie, 
"Soz.  Monatsh.,"  viii  (x),  No.  4. 


200  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

carried  on  mainly  under  a  system  of  petty  proprietorship,  where- 
as in  the  central  and  eastern  provinces  of  Germany  large  landed 
estates  predominate.  The  result  is  that  class  differences,  with 
their  consequent  differences  of  mental  outlook,  are  less  conspic- 
uous in  the  south  than  in  the  north,  so  that  the  opposition  to 
the  socialists  is  of  a  different  character  in  the  two  regions.  In 
the  struggles  between  the  northern  and  the  southern  leaders 
within  the  socialist  party,  struggles  which  are  often  lively  and 
at  times  extremely  violent,  each  section  levels  the  same  accusa- 
tion against  the  other,  declaring  it  to  belong  to  a  country  in 
which  civilization  is  comparatively  backward  and  where  theoret- 
ical conceptions  are  obsolete.  The  socialists  of  the  north  con- 
tend that  those  of  the  south  are  still  living  in  a  petty  bourgeois, 
pacific,  countrified  environment,  whereas  they  themselves,  in  the 
land  of  large-scale  manufacture,  represent  the  future.  The  men 
of  the  south  proudly  reply  that  it  is  they  who  live  in  conditions 
to  which  their  comrades  of  the  north  have  yet  to  attain,  by  abol- 
ishing the  large  landed  estates  and  by  suppressing  the  class  of 
junkers.^^ 

Similar  environmental  differences  divide  the  Italian  socialists. 
Here  also  the  socialists  of  the  south  demand  complete  autonomy, 
contending  that  the  theoretical  basis  of  socialism  in  the  south  is 
different  from  that  in  the  north.  They  say  that  in  the  former 
kingdom  of  Naples  the  actual  conditions  of  production  and  dis- 
tribution are  not  such  as  to  establish  a  sharp  distinction  between 
the  two  classes  which  according  to  classical  socialism  exist  every- 
where in  strife.  Consequently  the  introduction  into  this  region 
of  the  Marxist  revolutionary  propaganda  would  marshal  against 
socialism,  not  the  great  and  medium  landowners  alone,  but  also 
the  petty  proprietors.^^  "Whilst  the  socialists  of  the  plain  of  the 
Po  fiercely  oppose  a  duty  upon  grain  because  this  would  increase 
the  cost  of  living  for  the  labouring  masses  agglomerated  in  great 
cities,  the  socialists  of  the  south  have  on  several  occasions  de- 
clared in  favour  of  the  existing  protectionist  system,  because  its 
suppression  would  bring  about  a  crisis  in  production  in  a  region 
where  proletarians  and  employers  all  alike  live  by  agriculture.^^ 

'^Arthur  Schulz,  Oelconomische  u.  PoUtische  EntwicTclungstendenzen,  ed. 
cit.,  pp.  11,  25,  67. 

^Francesco  Ciccotti,  Socialismo  e  Cooperativismo  agricolo  nelV  Italia 
Meridionale,  Nerbini,  Florence,  1900,  p.  8. 

"  Cf.  a  speech  by  Gaetano  Salvemini  at  the  socialist  congress  of  Florence, 
September  21,  1908  (^Besoconto,  p.  122). 


BUREAUCRACY  201 

Again,  in  the  north,  where  manufacturing  industry  is  dominant, 
the  socialists  disapproved  of  the  Tripolitan  campaign,  whereas 
in  the  south,  where  they  are  for  the  most  part  agriculturists,  an 
enthusiastic  sentiment  in  favour  of  territorial  expansion  pre- 
vailed. In  addition  to  these  reasons,  which  may  be  termed  in- 
trinsic because  they  derive  from  the  objective  differences  between 
the  north  and  the  south,  we  find  that  an  opposition  between  the 
socialists  of  the  two  areas  arises  from  the  attitude  of  the  govern- 
ment in  the  respective  regions.  The  Italian  Government  is  dou- 
ble-faced, being  liberal  in  the  north,  but  often  very  much  the 
reverse  in  the  south,  for  here  it  is  largely  in  the  hands  of  local 
coteries  which,  in  a  region  where  the  voters  are  scattered,  become 
the  sole  arbiters  in  times  of  election.  In  the  year  1902,  when 
Giolitti  was  in  power,  this  duplex  attitude  of  the  government 
gave  rise  to  a  serious  difference  within  the  socialist  party,  for 
the  socialists  of  the  north  did  not  disguise  their  ardent  desire  to 
participate  in  government,  whilst  those  of  the  south  (although 
their  tendencies  were  rather  reformist  than  revolutionary)  a1^ 
tacked  the  government  fiercely .^^ 

Thus,  as  has  been  shown  at  length,  the  various  tendencies  to- 
wards decentralization  which  manifest  themselves  in  almost  all 
the  national  parties,  whilst  they  suffice  to  prevent  the  formation 
of  a  single  gigantic  oligarchy,  result  merely  in  the  creation  of  a 
number  of  smaller  oligarchies,  each  of  which  is  no  less  powerful 
within  its  own  sphere.  The  dominance  of  oligarchy  in  party  life 
remains  unchallenged. 

^Cf.  Alessandro  Tasca  di  Cuto,  Dell'  Opera  antisociale  del  Ministero  nel 
Meszogiorno,  and  Sincerita,  "Avanti,"  December  4  and  11,  1902. 


PART   THREE 

THE   EXERCISE   OF  POWER  AND   ITS   PSYCHOLOGI- 
CAL REACTION  UPON   THE   LEADERS 


i 


CHAPTER   I 

PSYCHOLOGICAL    METAMORPHOSIS    OF    THE 

LEADERS 

The  apathy  of  the  masses  and  their  need  for  ^idance  has  as  its 
counterpart  in  the  leaders  a  natural  greed  for  power.  Thus  the 
development  of  the  democratic  oligarchy  is  accelerated  by  the 
general  characteristics  of  human  nature.  Wliat  was  initiated  by 
the  need  for  organization,  administration,  and  strategy  is  com- 
pleted by  psychological  determinism. 

The  average  leader  of  the  working-class  parties  is  morally  not 
lower,  but  on  the  whole  higher,  in  quality  than  the  average  leader 
of  the  other  parties.^  This  has  sometimes  been  unreservedly  ad- 
mitted by  the  declared  adversaries  of  socialism.-  Yet  it  cannot 
be  denied  that  the  permanent  exercise  of  leadership  exerts  upon 
the  moral  character  of  the  leaders  an  influence  which  is  essen- 
tially pernicious.  Yet  this  also,  from  a  certain  point  of  view,  is 
perhaps  good.  The  bitter  words  which  La  Bruyere  applied  to  the 
great  men  of  the  court  of  Louis  XIV,  that  the  imitative  mania 
and  veneration  exhibited  towards  them  by  the  masses  would  have 
grown  into  an  absolute  idolatry,  if  it  had  occurred  to  any  of 
them  to  be  simply  good  men  as  well  as  great  ones — these  words, 
mutatis  mutandis,  could  be  applied  with  equal  truth  to  the  lead- 
ers of  the  vast  democratic  movements  of  our  own  days.^ 

In  the  majority  of  instances,  and  above  all  at  the  opening  of 
his  career,  the  leader  is  sincerely  convinced  of  the  excellence  of 
the  principles  he  advocates.  Le  Bon  writes  with  good  reason: 
"Le  meneur  a  d'abord  ete  le  plus  souvent  un  mene.     II  a  lui- 

^  For  documentary  proof  of  this  assertion  as  far  as  the  Italian  labour 
movement  is  concerned  cf.  E.  Miehels,  II  Proletariato  e  la  Borghesia  nel 
Movimento  socialista  Italiano,  Bocca,  Turin,  1908,  pp.  28-58,  68-76,  106-14, 
265-391;  also  E.  Miehels,  Der  ethische  Faktor  in  der  ParteipolitiJc  Italiens, 
"Zeitschrift  fiir  Politik, "  vol.  iii,  fase.  1,  pp.  56-91. 

*Vilfredo  Pareto,  Les  Systemes  socialistes,  ed.  cit.,  vol.  i,  p.  61;  W.  Som- 
bart,  Bennoch!  zur  Theorie  u.  Geschichte  der  gewerlcschaftlichen  Arbeiter- 
tewegung,  Fischer,  Jena,  1900,  p.  107. 

'La  Bruyere,  Caracteres,  Penaud,  Paris,  p.  156. 

205 


206  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

meme  ete  hypnotise  par  I'idee  dont  il  est  ensuite  devenu 
I'apotre."*  In  many  cases  the  leader,  at  first  no  more  than  a 
single  molecule  of  the  mass,  has  become  detached  from  this  in- 
voluntarily, without  asking  whither  his  instinctive  action  was 
leading  him,  without  any  personal  motive  whatever.  He  has 
been  pushed  forward  by  a  clearer  vision,  by  a  profounder  senti- 
ment, and  by  a  more  ardent  desire  for  the  general  good ;  he  has 
been  inspired  by  the  elasticity  and  seriousness  of  his  character 
and  by  his  warm  sympathy  for  his  fellows.^  It  is  obvious  that 
this  will  be  true  above  all  where  the  leader  does  not  find  already 
established  a  solid  organization  capable  of  offering  remunerative 
employment,  but  where  his  first  step  must  be  to  found  his  own 
party.  But  this  must  not  be  taken  to  mean  that  wherever  a 
well-organized  party  already  exists  the  leader  seeks  at  the  out- 
set to  gratify  his  personal  interests. 

It  is  by  no  means  always  by  deliberate  desire  that  people  be- 
come officers  of  the  masses.  Using  familiar  French  terms,  we 
may  express  this  more  clearly  by  saying  that  not  every  arrive 
was  at  first  an  arriviste.  But  he  who  has  once  attained  to  power 
will  not  readily  be  induced  to  return  to  the  comparatively  ob- 
scure position  which  he  formerly  occupied.*^  The  abandonment 
of  a  public  position  obtained  at  the  cost  of  great  efforts  and 
after  many  years  of  struggle  is  a  luxury  which  only  a  "grand 
seigneur"  or  a  man  exceptionally  endowed  with  the  spirit  of  self- 
sacrifice  can  afford.  Such  self-denial  is  too  hard  for  the  average 
man. 

The  consciousness  of  power  always  produces  vanity,  an  undue 
belief  in  personal  greatness.  The  desire  to  dominate,  for  good 
or  for  evil,  is  universal.^  These  are  elementary  psychological 
facts.     In  the  leader,  the  consciousness  of  his  personal  worth, ^ 

*  Gustave  le  Bon,  Psychologic  des  Foules,  ed.  cit.,  p.  106.  Cf .  also  S.  G. 
Hobson,  Boodle  and  Cant,  ' '  International  Socialist  Eeview, ' '  Chicago,  1902, 
ii,  No.  8,  p.  585. 

"  Ettore  Ciccotti,  Montec'itorio,  ed.  cit.,  p.  54. 

*  Pio  Viazzi,  one  of  the  most  trusted  deputies  in  the  Italian  Chamber,  a 
member  of  the  republican  party,  has  declared  that  any  one  who  has  once 
been  elected  to  parliament  will  henceforward  do  aU  he  can  to  secure  re- 
election (Pio  Viazzi,  Le  Gioie  della  Deputazione,  ' '  Eivista  Populare, ' '  anno 
XV,  No.  9). 

' "  L  'amour  de  la  puissance  ainsi  que  1  'amour  de  1  'independance  et  de 
la  liberte,  sont  des  passions  inherentes  a  I'horame"  (Holbach,  Systemes 
sociales,  ou  Frincipes  naturelles  de  la  Morale  et  de  la  Politique,  Niogret, 
Paris,  1822,  vol.  i,  p.  196). 

*"  Beyond  question  individuality  is  indispensable  wherever  it  is  requi- 


METAMORPHOSIS  OF  LEADERS     207 

and  of  the  need  which  the  mass  feels  for  guidance,  combine  to 
induce  in  his  mind  a  recognition  of  his  own  superiority  (real  or 
supposed),  and  awake,  in  addition,  that  spirit  of  command  which 
exists  in  the  germ  in  every  man  born  of  woman."  We  see  from 
this  that  every  human  power  seeks  to  enlarge  its  prerogatives. 
He  who  has  acquired  power  will  almost  alwaj^s  endeavour  to 
consolidate  it  and  to  extend  it,  to  multiply  the  ramparts  which 
defend  his  position,  and  to  withdraw  himself  from  the  control  of 
the  masses.  Bakunin,  the  founder  of  anarchizing  socialism,  con- 
tended that  the  possession  of  power  transformed  into  a  tyrant 
even  the  most  devoted  friend  of  liberty.^"  It  is  certain  that  the 
exercise  of  power  produces  a  profound  and  ineffaceable  change  in 
the  character.  This  is  admirably  described  by  Alphonse  Daudet 
when  he  writes:  *'Bien  vite,  s'il  s'agit  de  I'aff reuse  politique, 
nos  qualites  tcurnent  au  pire :  I'enthousiasme  devient  hypocrisie ; 
I'eloquence,  faconde  et  boniment;  le  scepticisme  leger,  escro- 
querie ;  1  'amour  de  ce  qui  brille,  f ureur  du  lucre  et  du  luxe  a 
tout  prix ;  la  sociabilite,  le  besoin  de  plaire,  se  font  lachete,  fai- 
blesse,  et  palinodie."  ^^    To  retain  their  influence  over  the  masses 

site  to  incite  deliberately  to  conscious  acts  of  volition,  Man  derives  pleas- 
ure from  the  expression  of  his  individuality  in  the  activities  which,  thanks 
to  it,  are  brought  to  pass.  We  should  none  of  us  be  willing  to  exchange 
our  own  individualities  for  those  of  others,  just  as  we  should  be  unwilling 
to  change  our  physiognomy.  This  inclination  results  in  part  from  habit, 
but  in  part  from  self-love.  The  individual  is  used  to  his  own  defects  and 
would  not  like  to  be  deprived  of  his  merits"  (Eduard  von  Hartmann, 
Gedanken  iiber  Individualismus,  *  *  Tiirmer- Jahrbuch, "  Stuttgart,  1903,  p. 
215). 

'Cf.  the  psychological  reflections  of  Ugo  Foscolo  on  the  evolution  of 
Napoleon  I,  Ultime  Lettere  di  Giacopo  Ortio,  Perino,  Rome,  1892,  p.  143. 

"Bakunin,  II  Soeialismo  e  Maszini,  F.  Serantoni,  Eome-Florence,  1905, 
p.  22. — Similarly  Herzen  writes:  "Donnez  a  Proudhon  le  portefeuille  des 
finances,  ou  faites-le  president,  et  il  sera  une  espece  de  Bonaparte"  (Alex- 
andre Herzen,  De  I'autre  Bive,  Geneva,  1871,  3rd  ed.,  p.  186). — Shelley's 
lines  on  this  subject  are  singularly  apposite: — 

"...   The  man 
Of  virtuous  soul  commands  not,  nor  obeys. 
Power,  like  a  desolating  pestilence. 
Pollutes  whate'er  it  touches;  and  obedience, 
Bane  of  all  genius,  virtue,  freedom,  truth. 
Makes  slaves  of  men,  and,  of  the  human  frame, 
A  mechanized  automaton," 

— Queen  Mob,  §  iii,  11,  174-80, 

"Leon  Daudet,  Alphonse  Daudet,  ed.  cit.,  p.  179, 


208  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

the  leaders  study  men,  note  their  weaknesses  and  their  passions, 
and  endeavour  to  turn  these  to  their  own  advantage.^- 

When  the  leaders  are  not  persons  of  means  and  when  they 
have  no  other  source  of  income,  they  hold  firmly  to  their  posi- 
tions for  economic  reasons,  coming  to  regard  the  functions  they 
exercise  as  theirs  by  inalienable  right.  Especially  is  this  true  of 
manual  workers  who,  since  becoming  leaders,  have  lost  aptitude 
for  their  former  occupation.  For  them,  the  loss  of  their  posi- 
tions would  be  a  financial  disaster,  and  in  most  cases  it  would  be 
altogether  impossible  for  them  to  return  to  their  old  way  of  life.^^ 
They  have  been  spoiled  for  any  other  work  than  that  of  propa- 
ganda.^* Their  hands  have  lost  the  callosities  of  the  manual 
toiler,  and  are  likely  to  suffer  only  from  writer's  cramp. 

Those  leaders,  again,  who  are  refugees  from  the  bourgeoisie 
are  used  up  after  having  devoted  a  few  years  to  the  service  of 
the  socialist  party.  It  was  as  youthful  enthusiasts  that  they 
joined  the  organized  workers  and  soon  attained  to  dominant  po- 
sitions. The  life  they  then  had  to  lead,  however  great  may  have 
been  its  advantages  in  certain  respects,  was  one  full  of  fatigue 
and  hardship,  and,  like  all  careers  in  which  fame  can  be  ac- 
quired, was  extremely  exhausting  to  the  nervous  system.  Such 
men  grow  old  before  their  time.  What  are  they  to  do?  They 
have  become  estranged  from  their  original  profession,  which  is 
altogether  out  of  relation  with  their  chosen  vocation  of  profes- 
sional politician.  A  barrister,  indeed,  can  continue  to  practise 
his  profession,  and  may  even  devote  almost  all  his  time  to  it, 
without  being  forced  to  abandon  the  party.  The  political  strug- 
gle and  the  life  of  the  lawyer  have  more  than  one  point  of  con- 
tact, for  is  not  the  political  struggle  a  continuous  act  of  ad- 
vocacy? The  barrister  who  plays  a  leading  part  in  public  life 
will  find  many  opportunities  for  the  gratification  of  his  love  of 
oratory  and  argument,  and  will  have  no  lack  of  chances  for  the 
display  of  the  power  of  his  lungs  and  the  expressiveness  of  his 

"  Ostrogorsky,  La  Deviocratie,  etc.,  ed.  cit.,  ii,  p.  344. 

"  Cf .  Part  IV,  chap.  v. 

^*  This  is  not  merely  true  of  ' '  those  lazy  fellows  who  are  good  for  noth- 
ing more  than  the  parrot-like  repetition  of  a  few  phrases  culled  from  the 
party  literature,  and  of  those  whose  only  equipment  is  to  have  a  voice 
like  that  of  a  bull,"  from  whose  influence  Sombart  would  like  to  see 
the  workers  freed,  and  for  whose  eradication  he  recommends,  in  especial, 
attention  to  the  practical  work  of  the  trade  unions  (Werner  Sombart,  Den- 
noch!,  ed.  cit.,  p.  91) — but  it  applies  with  equal  force  to  the  trade-union 
officials  destined  to  replace  the  type  to  which  he  objects. 


METAMORPHOSIS  OF  LEADERS     209 

gestures.  It  is  very  different  with  men  of  science.  These,  if 
they  play  an  active  part  in  the  life  of  the  party,  be  it  as  journal- 
ists, as  propagandists,  or  as  parliamentary  deputies,  find  that 
their  scientific  faculties  undergo  a  slow  but  progressive  atrophy. 
Having  become  absorbed  in  the  daily  political  round,  they  are 
dead  for  their  discipline,  for  they  no  longer  have  time  for  the 
serious  study  of  scientific  problems  and  for  the  continuous  de- 
velopment of  their  intellectual  faculties. 

There  are,  however,  additional  reasons  for  the  mental  trans- 
formation which  the  leaders  undergo  as  the  years  pass. 

As  far  as  concerns  the  leaders  of  bourgeois  origin  in  the 
working-class  parties,  it  may  be  said  that  they  have  adhered  to 
the  cause  of  the  proletariat  either  on  moral  grounds,  or  from  en- 
thusiasm, or  from  scientific  conviction.^^  They  crossed  the  Rubi- 
con when  they  were  still  young  students,  still  full  of  optimism 
and  juvenile  ardour.  Having  gone  over  to  the  other  side  of  the 
barricade  to  lead  the  enemies  of  the  class  from  which  they 
sprang,  they  have  fought  and  worked,  now  suffering  defeats  and 
now  gaining  victories.  Youth  has  fled ;  their  best  years  have 
been  passed  in  the  service  of  the  party  or  of  the  ideal.  They 
are  ageing,  and  with  the  passing  of  youth,  their  ideals  have  also 
passed,  dispersed  by  the  contrarieties  of  daily  struggles,  often, 
too,  expelled  by  newly  acquired  experiences  which  conflict  witli 
the  old  beliefs.  Thus  it  has  come  to  pass  that  many  of  the  lead- 
ers are  inwardly  estranged  from  the  essential  content  of  social- 
ism. Some  of  them  carry  on  a  difficult  internal  struggle  against 
their  own  scepticism;  others  have  returned,  consciously  or  un- 
consciously, to  the  ideals  of  their  pre-socialist  youth. 

Yet  for  those  who  have  been  thus  disillusioned,  no  backward 
path  is  open.  They  are  enchained  by  their  own  past.  They 
have  a  family,  and  this  family  must  be  fed.  Moreover,  regard 
for  their  political  good  name  makes  them  feel  it  essential  to 
persevere  in  the  old  round.  They  thus  remain  outwardly  faith- 
ful to  the  cause  to  which  they  have  sacrificed  the  best  years  of 
their  life.  But,  renouncing  idealism,  they  have  become  oppor- 
tunists. These  former  believers,  these  sometime  altruists,  whose 
fervent  hearts  aspired  only  to  give  themselves  freely,  have  been 
transformed  into  sceptics  and  egoists  whose  actions  are  guided 
solely  by  cold  calculation. 

As  we  have  previously  seen,  these  new  elements  do  not  join  the 

"  Cf .  Part  IV,  chap.  ii. 


210  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

party  with  the  declared  or  even  the  subconscious  aim  of  attain- 
ing one  day  to  leadership;  their  only  motives  have  been  the 
spirit  of  sacrifice  and  the  love  of  battle.  Visionaries,  they  see  a 
brother  in  every  comrade  and  a  step  towards  the  ideal  in  every 
party  meeting.^^  Since,  however,  in  virtue  of  their  superiority 
(in  part  congenital  and  in  part  acquired),  they  have  become 
leaders,  they  are  in  the  course  of  years  enslaved  by  all  the  appe- 
tites which  arise  from  the  possession  of  power,  and  in  the  end 
are  not  to  be  distinguished  from  those  among  their  colleagues 
who  became  socialists  from  ambition,  from  those  who  have  from 
the  first  deliberately  regarded  the  masses  as  no  more  than  an 
instrument  which  they  might  utilize  towards  the  attainment  of 
their  own  personal  ambitions. 

It  cannot  be  denied  that  the  factor  of  individuality  plays  its 
part  in  all  this,  for  different  individualities  react  differently  to 
the  same  environment.  Just  as  women  and  girls  in  similar  erotic 
situations  act  differently  in  accordance  with  their  varying  de- 
grees of  congenital  sexual  irritability  and  with  the  differences 
that  have  been  induced  in  them  by  moral  education,  remaining 
immaculate,  becoming  demi-vierges,  or  yielding  to  advances^  so 
also  the  specific  qualities  of  the  leaders,  in  so  far  as  these  are 
acquired  and  not  immanent,  manifest  themselves  differently  in 
different  individuals  in  face  of  the  numerous  temptations  to 
which  they  are  exposed  in  party  life.^^  The  sense  of  satiety 
which  arises  in  those  who  have  attained  their  end  varies  greatly 
in  intensity  from  person  to  person.  There  are  similar  variations 
in  adaptability  to  a  new  and  anti-democratic  environment,  or  to 

**  This  may  be  seen  in  the  accounts  which  many  socialists  have  given  of 
their  first  adhesion  to  the  party.  For  instance:  "And  from  these  as- 
semblies come  forth  the  new  converts  from  the  bourgeoisie,  freed  from 
their  last  doubts,  having  attained  to  a  new  state  of  mind,  to  a  peace  hitherto 
unknown;  the  younger  men  full  of  thoughts  unfamiliar  to  their  heedless 
youth;  the  older  ones  rejuvenated  in  heart  and  spirit;  all  filled  with  a 
profound  sense  of  complacency,  as  if  in  the  meeting  they  have  attended 
there  had  not  been  talk  merely,  but  action,  labour  for  the  good  of  the 
world,  dispersing  for  the  future  the  blessed  seed  of  truth,  benevolence, 
and  justice"  (Edmondo  de  Amicis,  Le  Discordie  sociaUste,  "Avanti," 
anno  viii.  No.  2665,  1907).  As  regards  Holland,  F.  Domela  Nieuwenhuia 
writes  in  similar  terms  in  Van  Christen  Tot  Anarchist,  ed.  eit.,  p.  100.  As 
Turati  well  expresses  it,  this  is  ' '  the  golden  age,  the  age  of  apostolic,  pure, 
and  immaculate  spirits"  (Filippo  Turati,  II  Partito  socialista  italiano,  ed. 
eit.,  p.  10). 

"  This  is  admitted  by  Arturo  Labriola,  Biforme  e  Eivoluzione  sociale,  ed. 
eit.,  p.  225. 


METAMORPHOSIS  OF  LEADERS     211 

an  environment  hostile  to  the  ideas  which  the  individual  has  at 
heart.  Some  socialists,  for  instance,  are  so  greatly  intimidated 
by  the  parliamentary  milieu  that  they  are  ashamed  in  that 
milieu  to  make  use  of  the  expressions  "class  struggle"  and  "col- 
lectivism," ^^  although  it  is  to  the  unwearying  insistence  upon 
these  ideas  that  they  owe  their  present  position.  Others  among 
their  comrades  find  amid  all  the  circumstances  of  their  new  life 
that  right  feeling  and  that  old  courage  of  conviction  which  can- 
not be  prescribed  by  any  formal  rules.  It  is  absurd  to  maintain, 
as  does  Giuseppe  Prezzolini,  that  in  the  parliamentary  atmos- 
phere it  is  as  impossible  for  a  deputy  to  preserve  his  socialist 
purity  as  it  would  be  for  a  Joseph  to  remain  chaste  while  fre- 
quently visiting  brothels.^^  Such  a  view  is  false,  if  only  for  the 
reason  that  here,  as  in  all  social  phenomena,  we  have  to  consider 
the  personal  as  well  as  the  environmental  factor.  It  is  neverthe- 
less true  that  in  the  course  of  party  evolution,  as  the  led  becomes 
a  subordinate  leader,  and  from  that  a  leader  of  the  first  rank,  he 
himself  undergoes  a  mental  evolution,  which  often  effects  a  com- 
plete transformation  in  his  personality.^"  When  this  happens, 
the  leader  often  sees  in  his  own  transformation  nothing  more 
than  a  reflex  of  a  transformation  in  the  surrounding  world.  The 
times  have  changed,  he  tells  us,  and  consequently  a  new  tactic 
and  a  new  theory  are  necessary.  A  greater  maturity  of  judg- 
ment corresponds  to  the  greater  maturity  of  the  new  age.  The 
reformist  and  revisionist  theory  in  the  international  socialist 
party  is  largely  the  outcome  of  the  psychological  need  to  furnish 
an  explanation  and  an  excuse  for  the  metamorphosis  w^hich  has 
taken  place  in  the  leaders.  A  few  years  ago,  one  of  the  leaders 
of  the  Italian  clericals,  after  declaring  that  triumphant  reform- 

'*Cf.  Ettore  Ciccotti,  Psicologia  del  Movimenio  socialista,  ed.  eit.,  p.  292. 

"  G.  Prezzolini,  La  Teoria  sindacalista,  Perrella,  Naples,  1909,  p.  65. 

**At  the  German  socialist  congress  of  Frankfort  (1894)  it  was  above 
all  the  present  leaders  of  the  great  German  trade  unions,  such  as  Bomel- 
burg,  Legien,  and  Timm,  who  contended  that  the  salaries  of  the  employees 
of  the  labour  movement  should  be  restricted  to  a  very  moderate  figure  {Pro- 
tokoll,  p.  69).  In  the  seventies,  Eugene  Fourniere  actively  opposed  Louis 
Blanc,  the  former  maintaining  the  socialist  principle  that  the  socialist 
deputies  ought  to  pay  over  to  the  party  treasury  the  whole  of  the  9,000 
francs  which  was  at  that  time  the  deputy's  salary  (Jean  Allemane,  Le 
SociaUsme  en  France,  Imp.  Ouviere,  rue  St.  Sauveur,  Paris,  1900,  p.  7). 
Thirty  years  later,  this  same  Fourniere,  now  himself  a  deputy,  when  a 
party  congress  decided  that  a  portion  of  the  salary  of  the  socialist  depu- 
ties (meanwhile  increased  to  15,000  francs)  must  be  paid  over  to  the 
party  treasury,  declared  that  he  could  not  spare  any  of  it. 


212  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

ism,  having  an  evolutionary  and  legalist  character,  was  in  these 
respects  preferable  to  strict  syndicalism,  went  on  to  say  that  in 
his  view  the  basis  of  reformist  socialism  was  still  the  materialist 
conception  of  man,  of  life,  and  of  history,  but  further  corrupted 
by  contact  with  the  utilitarian  and  Epicurean  spirit  of  the  free- 
thinking  bourgeoisie,  and  that  it  was  consequently  even  more 
profoundly  anti-Christian  than  the  ideas  of  the  ultra-revolution- 
ists.^^ There  is  a  kernel  of  truth  in  this  idea.  However  much 
we  are  forced  to  recognize  that  reformism  sometimes  manifests 
itself  as  a  sane  rebellion  against  the  apriorism  of  orthodox  Marx- 
ist dogma,  and  as  a  scientific  reaction  against  the  phraseology  of 
pseudo-revolutionary  stump-orators,  it  is  nevertheless  incontest- 
able that  reformism  has  a  logical  and  causal  connection  with  the 
insipid  and  blase  sciolism  and  with  the  decadent  tendencies  which 
are  so  plainly  manifest  in  a  large  section  of  the  modern  bour- 
geois literary  world.  In  many  instances,  in  fact,  reformism  is 
no  more  than  the  theoretical  expression  of  the  scepticism  of  the 
disillusioned,  of  the  outwearied,  of  those  who  have  lost  their 
faith ;  it  is  the  socialism  of  non-socialists  with  a  socialist  past. 

It  is  above  all  the  sudden  passage  from  opposition  to  partici- 
pation in  power  which  exercises  a  powerful  influence  on  the  men- 
tality of  the  leaders.  It  is  evident  that  in  a  period  of  proscrip- 
tions and  persecutions  of  the  new  doctrine  and  its  advocates  on 
the  part  of  society  and  of  the  state,  the  morality  of  the  party- 
leaders  will  maintain  itself  at  a  much  higher  level  than  in  a 
period  of  triumph  and  of  peace,  if  only  for  the  reason  that  in 
the  former  conditions  those  of  egotistic  temperament  and  those 
inspired  by  narrow  personal  ambition  will  hold  aloof  from  the 
party  since  they  have  no  desire  for  the  martyr 's  crown.^^  These 
considerations  apply,  not  merely  to  the  old  leaders  who  have  been 
members  of  the  party  during  its  days  of  tribulation,  and  whose 
qualities,  if  not  completely  corrupted  by  the  sun  of  governmental 

"  Filippo  Meda,  II  Partito  socialista  in  Italia  dell '  Internationale  al 
Biformismo,  Lib.   ed.   Florentina,   Florence,   1909,  p.   46. 

^^  In  troublous  times  the  socialists  are  glad  to  avail  themselves  of  refer- 
ences to  the  high  ethical  qualities  of  their  leaders  as  a  means  of  agitation. 
A  pamphlet  issued  in  1894  by  the  Rhenish  socialist  Wilhelm  Gewehr,  Warum 
der  Eampf  gegen  die  Sozialdemolcratie?  (Grimpe,  Elberfeld,  p.  32),  closes 
with  the  words:  "Let  him  who  has  honourable  and  loyal  intentions 
towards  the  poor  place  himself  on  the  side  of  the  socialists,  who  are  fighting 
and  sacrificing  themselves  on  behalf  of  the  ideal !  "  In  times  of  struggle 
such  utterances  have  no  ludicrous  flavour. — Regarding  Italian  conditions, 
cf.  R.  Michels,  Der  ethische  Faktor,  etc.,  ed.  cit.,  pp.  68  et  seq. 


I 


METAMORPHOSIS  OF  LEADERS      218 

favour  (so  as  to  lead  them  to  abandon  the  cause  of  the  prole- 
tariat) ,  are  yet  so  greatly  changed  as  to  render  them  almost  un- 
recognizable by  the  masses;  but  it  is  equally  true  of  the  new 
leaders  who  do  not  put  in  an  appearance  until  the  sun  has  begun 
to  shine  upon  the  party. 

As  long  as  the  struggle  on  behalf  of  the  oppressed  brings 
to  those  engaged  in  it  nothing  more  than  a  crown  of  thorns, 
those  members  of  the  bourgeoisie  who  adhere  to  socialism  must 
fulfil  functions  in  the  party  exacting  great  personal  disinter- 
estedness. Bourgeois  adherents  do  not  become  a  danger  to 
socialism  until  the  labour  movement,  abandoning  its  principles, 
enters  the  slippery  paths  of  a  policy  of  compromise. 

At  the  international  congress  of  Amsterdam,  Bebel  exclaimed 
with  perfect  truth,  in  answer  to  Jaures:  "When  a  socialist 
party  forms  an  alliance  with  a  section  of  the  bourgeoisie,  and 
institutes  a  policy  of  co-operation  with  the  government,  not  only 
does  it  repel  its  own  best  militants,  driving  them  into  the  ranks 
of  the  anarchists,  or  into  isolated  action,  but  it  also  attracts  to 
itself  a  swarm  of  bourgeois  of  very  dubious  value."  ^^  In  Italy, 
during  the  period  of  persecutions,  all  scientific  investigators 
bore  striking  witness  to  the  high  moral  qualities  of  the  socialist 
leaders.  No  sooner,  however,  had  the  socialist  party  (towards 
1900)  begun  to  display  friendship  for  the  government  than 
voices  were  heard  on  all  hands  deploring  a  deterioration  in  the 
composition  of  the  party,  and  denouncing  the  numerous  elements 
entering  the  party  simply  because  they  regarded  it  as  the  best 
means  by  which  they  could  secure  a  share  in  the  loaves  and 
fishes  of  public  administration.^* 

Wherever  the  socialists  have  gained  control  of  the  munici- 

'^From  the  report  in  "Het  Volk,"  v,  No.  1341.  In  the  German  Pro- 
tokoll  (which,  be  it  remarked  in  passing,  is  extremely  inadequate)  this 
passage  is  not  reported.  Bebel 's  observation  is  in  flat  contradiction  with 
what  he  has  frequently  said  in  the  Eeichstag,  that  in  his  view  the  carrying 
of  socialism  into  effect  after  the  victory  would  be  greatly  facilitated  by 
the  inevitable  adhesion  to  the  various  branches  of  the  new  administration 
of  numerous  competent  elements  from  the  official  bureaucracy.  (Cf. 
August  Bebel,  Zukunftstaat  und  Sosialdemolratie,  p.  13 ;  speech  in  Eeichs- 
tag, February  3,  1893.) 

^'^Cf.  E.  Miehels,  II  Proletariaio  e  la  Borghesia,  etc.,  ed.  cit.,  p.  348; 
Eomeo  Soldi,  Die  politisclie  Lage  in  Italien,  "Neue  Zeit,"  xxi.  No.  30,  p. 
116;  Giovanni  Lerda,  SuW  Organizzasione  politica  del  Partito  socialista 
italiano,  a  report  to  the  Italian  socialist  congress  of  1902,  Coop.  Tip. -Ed., 
Imola,  1902,  p.  10;  Filippo  Turati,  II  Partito  socialista  e  I'attuale  Momento 
politico,  "Critica  Sociale, "  Milan,  3rd  ed.,  1901. 


214  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

palities,  wherever  they  run  people's  banks  and  distributive  co- 
operative societies,  wherever  they  have  remunerative  posts  at 
their  disposal,  we  cannot  fail  to  observe  a  notable  decline  in 
their  moral  level,  and  to  see  that  the  ignorant  and  the  self- 
seeking  now  constitute  the  majority  among  them. 


» 


CHAPTER   II 

BONAPARTIST   IDEOLOGY 

Napoleon  I,  as  head  of  the  state,  desired  to  be  regarded  as  the 
chosen  of  the  people.  In  his  public  activities,  the  emperor 
boasted  that  he  owed  his  power  to  the  French  people  alone. 
After  the  battle  of  the  Pyramids,  when  his  glory  began  to  at- 
tain its  acme,  the  general  imperiously  demanded  that  there  should 
be  conferred  on  him  the  title  of  premier  representant  du  peuple, 
although  hitherto  the  style  of  "popular  representative"  had  been 
exclusively  reserved  for  members  of  the  legislative  bodies.^ 
Later,  when  by  a  plebiscite  he  had  been  raised  to  the  throne  of 
France,  he  declared  that  he  considered  his  power  to  repose  ex- 
clusively upon  the  masses.^  The  Bonapartist  interpretation  of 
popular  sovereignty  was  a  personal  dictatorship  conferred  by 
the  people  in  accordance  with  constitutional  rules.^ 

The  Cffisarism  of  Napoleon  III  was  founded  in  still  greater 
measure  upon  the  principle  of  popular  sovereignty.  In  his  letter 
to  the  National  Assembly  written  from  London  on  May  24,  1848, 
the  pretender  to  the  crown  recognized  the  French  Republic  which 
was  the  issue  of  the  February  revolution  and  was  founded  upon 
universal  suffrage.  At  the  same  time  he  claimed  for  himself,  and 
at  the  expense  of  the  exiled  king  Louis  Philippe,  a  hereditary 
right  to  insurrection  and  to  the  throne.  This  recognition  and 
this  claim  were  derived  by  him  from  the  same  principle.  With 
simultaneous  pride  and  humility  he  wrote:    "En  presence  d'un 

^  Louis  Napoleon  Bonaparte,  Idees  napoleoniennes,  1839,  Italian  ed., 
Pelazza,  Turin,  1852,  p.  74. 

==  Ibid.,  p.  119. 

^  At  times,  indeed,  a  casuistical  significance  was  given  to  the  term  '  *  popu- 
lar sovereignty"  -which  deprived  it  of  all  practical  meaning.  Thus  in  St. 
Helena  Napoleon  said:  "Le  premier  devoir  du  prince  est  de  faire  ce  que 
veut  le  peuple;  mais  ce  que  veut  le  peuple  n'est  presque  jamais  ce  qu'il  dit; 
sa  volonte,  ses  besoins  doivent  se  trouver  moins  dans  sa  bouche  que  dans 
le  cceur  du  prince"  (Emmanuel  Augustin  Dieudonne  Las  Cases,  Memorial 
de  Ste-Helene,  Paris,  1821,  vol.  ii,  p.  82).  This  note  is  often  sounded  in 
the  public  utterances  of  modern  party  leaders  (cf.  pp.  152,  153). 

215 


216  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

roi  elu  par  deux  cents  deputes,  je  pouvais  me  rappeler  etre 
I'heritier  d'un  empire  fonde  sur  I'assentiment  de  quatre  millions 
de  frangais;  en  presence  de  la  souverainete  nationale  (resultante 
du  suffrage  universel),  je  ne  peux  et  ne  veux  revendiquer  que 
mes  droits  de  citoyen  frangais.  "^  But  Napoleon  III  did  not 
merely  recognize  in  popular  sovereignty  the  source  of  his  power, 
he  further  made  that  sovereignty  the  theoretical  basis  of  all  his 
practical  activities.  He  made  himself  popular  in  France  by  de- 
claring that  he  regarded  himself  as  merely  the  executive  organ 
of  the  collective  will  manifested  in  the  elections,  and  that  he 
was  entirely  at  the  disposition  of  that  will,  prepared  in  all 
things  to  accept  its  decisions.^  With  great  shrewdness,  he  con- 
tinually repeated  that  he  was  no  more  than  an  instrument,  a 
creature  of  the  masses.  While  still  president  he  declared  in  a 
speech  that  he  was  prepared  as  circumstances  might  dictate 
either  for  abnegation  or  for  perseverance,  or,  in  other  words,  that 
he  was  ready  to  go  or  to  remain.^  It  was  the  pure  Bonapartist 
spirit  which  was  expressed  by  Ollivier,  the  keeper  of  the  seals, 
when  in  the  Chamber,  in  one  of  the  stormy  sittings  of  the  sum- 
mer of  1870,  he  declared:  **Nous  vous  appartenons;  vous  nous 
reprendrez  quand  vous  voudrez,  nous  serous  toujours  la  pour 
subir  vos  reproches  et  vos  anathemes."  '^ 

Bonapartism  recognized  the  validity  of  the  popular  will  to 
such  an  extreme  degree  as  to  concede  to  that  will  the  right  of 
self-destruction :  popular  sovereignty  could  suppress  itself.  Yet 
if  we  look  at  the  matter  from  a  purely  human  point  of  view, 
popular  sovereignty  is  inalienable.  Moreover,  if  we  think  of 
succeeding  generations,  it  seems  illogical  and  unjust  that  those 
of  this  generation  should  claim  the  moral  right  of  renouncing  on 
behalf  of  their  descendants.  Consequently  the  democrats  of  the 
Napoleonic  epoch  insisted  most  energetically  that  the  power  of 
popular  sovereignty  was  limited  to  this  extent,  that  it  did  not 
carry  with  it  any  right  of  abdication.^  Bonapartism  is  the  theory 
of  individual  dominion  originating  in  the  collective  will,  but 

*  Eugene  Tenot,  Paris  en  Decemhre  1851.  Etudes  historiques  sur  le  Coup 
d'Etat,  Le  Chevalier,  Paris,  1868,  p.  10. 

*  Victor  Hugo,  Napoleon  le  Petit,  Jeffs,  London,  1852,  p.  54. 
"E.  Tenot,  Paris  en  Decemhre  1851,  ed.  cit.,  p.  26. 

'  Garnier  Pages,  L' Opposition  et  I'Empire.  Derniere  Seance  du  Corps 
Legislatif,  1870.     Bibl.  Democratique,  Paris,  1872,  p.  157. 

*G.  B.  A.  Godin,  La  Souverainete  et  les  Droits  du  Peuple,  Bibl.  Dem., 
Paris,  1874,  pp.  115  et  seq. 


BONAP ARTIST  IDEOLOGY;  217 

tending  to  emancipate  itself  of  that  will  and  to  become  sovereign 
in  its  turn.  In  its  democratic  past  it  finds  a  shield  against  the 
dangers  which  may  threaten  its  anti-democratic  present.^  In 
Bonapartisra,  the  rule  of  Caesar  (as  was  said  by  a  wit  of  the  last 
years  of  the  second  empire)  becomes  a  regular  organ  of  the  pop- 
ular sovereignty.  "II  sera  la  democratic  personnifiee,  la  nation 
faite  homme."^''  It  is  the  synthesis  of  two  antagonistic  con- 
cepts, democracy  and  autocracy.^^ 

*Emile  Littre,  in  his  Dictionnaire  de  la  Langue  frangaise  (Hachette, 
Paris,  1863),  under  the  word  Cesarisme,  speaks  of  ''princes  portes  au  gou- 
vernement  par  la  democratie,  mais  revetus  d'un  pouvoir  absolu"  (vol.  i, 
p.  534). 

^"Cf.  Edouard  Laboulaye,  Paris  en  Amerique,  Charpentier,  Paris,  1869, 
24th  ed.,  p.  381. — The  Bonapartist  conception  of  popular  sovereignty  is 
not  democratic,  while,  on  the  other  hand,  it  in  no  way  corresponds  with  the 
political  conception  of  legitimate  monarchy.  Jurieu,  a  Protestant  pastor, 
endeavoured  in  the  seventeenth  century  to  find  a  theoretic  foundation  for 
absolute  monarchy  in  popular  sovereignty,  but  without  success.  Bossuet, 
the  greatest  writer  on  the  idea  of  the  state  in  the  days  of  Louis  XIV, 
paraphrased  the  ideas  of  Jurieu  in  the  following  ironical  sentences:  "Le 
peuple  fait  les  souverains  et  donne  la  souverainete :  done  le  peuple  possede 
la  souverainete  et  la  possede  dans  un  degre  plus  eminent;  ear  celui  qui  com- 
munique doit  posseder  ee  qu'il  communique,  d'une  maniere  plus  par  faite, 
et  quoiqu'un  peuple  qui  a  fait  un  souverain  ne  puisse  plus  exercer  la  sou- 
verainete par  lui-meme,  c'est  pourtant  la  souverainete  du  peuple  qui  est 
exercee  par  le  souverain;  et  I'exercice  de  la  souverainete,  qui  se  fait  par 
un  seul,  n'empeche  pas  que  la  souverainete  ne  soit  dans  le  peuple  comma 
dans  sa  source,  et  comme  dans  son  premier  sujet"  (Bossuet,  Cinquieme 
Avertissement  aux  Protestants  sur  les  Lettres  de  M.  Jurieu  contre  I'Ristoire 
des  Variations,  CEuvres,  Paris,  1743,  vol.  iv,  p.  280). — Only  in  quite  recent 
times,  in  which,  as  we  have  seen,  certain  opportunists  have  endeavoured  to 
justify  monarchy  from  a  democratic  standpoint,  has  the  attempt  of  Julieu 
been  revived,  although  in  a  somewhat  different  form.  In  Germany,  Fried- 
rich  Naumann  issued  the  watchword  "Democracy  and  Emperordom" 
(DemoTcratie  und  Kaisertum).  In  Italy,  Ettore  Sacchi,  the  leader  of 
the  bourgeois-radical  party,  has  based  his  acceptance  of  the  monarchy  upon 
the  opinion  that  (in  Italy)  it  is  a  democratic  institution,  in  the  first  place 
because  it  has  been  expressly  sanctioned  by  the  people,  and  in  the  second 
place  because  the  monarchy  is  now  tacitly  accepted  by  all  (Giuseppe  Eensi, 
Gli,  "Ancien  Begime"  e  la  Bemocrasia  diretta,  Colombi,  Belinzona,  1902, 
p.  7).  It  may,  however,  be  pointed  out  that  in  the  plebiscite  of  1861,  in 
which  the  people  who  had  been  freed  from  their  princes  declared  themselves 
in  favour  of  the  rule  of  the  House  of  Savoy,  the  question  had  really  been 

"  Hohenlohe  relates  that  in  1874,  when  he  was  ambassador  in  Paris,  some 
one  said  to  him  that  the  Frenchman  is  democrate  and  autkoritaire.  Con- 
sequently the  empire  was  the  best  form  of  government  for  the  French  and 
was  the  hope  of  the  future,  for  this  form  of  government  satisfied  both 
these  popular  needs    (Denkwiirdiglceiten,  ed.  cit.,  vol.  ii,  p.   126).     Napo- 


218  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

Once  elected,  the  chosen  of  the  people  can  no  longer  be  op- 
posed in  any  way.  He  personifies  the  majority,  and  all  resist- 
ance to  his  will  is  antidemocratic.  The  leader  of  such  a  democ- 
racy is  irremovable,  for  the  nation,  having  once  spoken,  cannot 
contradict  itself. ^^  He  is,  moreover,  infallible,  for  "I'Elu  de  six 
millions  de  suffrages  execute  les  volontes  du  peuple,  il  ne  les 
trahi  pas."  It  is  reasonable  and  necessary  that  the  adversaries 
of  the  government  should  be  exterminated  in  the  name  of  popular 
sovereignty,  for  the  chosen  of  the  people  acts  within  his  rights 
as  representative  of  the  collective  will,  established  in  his  position 
by  a  spontaneous  decision.^^  It  is  the  electors  themselves,  we 
are  assured,  who  demand  from  the  chosen  of  the  people  that  he 

put  in  such  a  way  as  to  leave  no  other  choice,  for  the  alternatives  proposed 
were  the  kingdom  versus  nothing  at  all.  Further,  if  we  were  to  accept  the 
principle  that  tacit  endurance  signifies  approval,  every  political  situation 
would,  apart  from  open  rebellion  of  the  ruled,  be  established  upon  a  granite 
foundation  of  democracy.  But  such  an  idea  of  democracy  is  illogical,  as 
false  as  is  the  logic  of  those  bad  governments  which,  as  Macaulay  says  in 
one  of  his  speeches,  justify  themselves  by  appealing  to  the  aphorism:  if 
the  people  is  unruly,  it  is  not  ripe  for  liberty;  while  if  it  is  quiet,  it  does 
not  desire  liberty. 

leon  III  admirably  characterized  the  nature  of  Bonapartism  when  he  de- 
clared of  his  system  that  it  was  based  on  democracy,  since  all  its  powers 
were  conferred  by  the  people,  whilst  in  organization  it  was  hierarchical, 
since  such  an  organization  was  essential  to  stimulate  the  capacities  slum- 
bering in  the  various  degrees  of  society  (Idees  Napoleoniennes,  ed.  cit.,  p. 
83). 

"  In  the  time  of  Napoleon  I  a  subtle  distinction  was  made  between  the 
terms  emaner  and  resider.  In  1814,  Count  Mole  remarked  to  the  emperor 
that  in  the  declaration  of  the  Council  there  were  certain  dangerous  words 
which  recalled  nothing  so  much  as  the  principles  of  1793:  "Elle  com- 
mence par  'toute  souverainete  reside  dans  le  peuple.'  Avec  ce  principe  le 
peuple  peut  changer  de  gouvernement  et  de  monarque  tons  les  jours;  il 
donne  et  retire  a  son  gre  la  couronne,  il  pourra  la  refuser  a  votre  fils; 
encore,  s'il  y  avait  emane;  on  pourrait  dire  qu'en  deleguant  a  jamais  a  un 
homme  et  a  sa  race  la  souverainete  il  aliene  le  droit  de  la  lui  retirer,  mais 
reside  ne  laisse  pas  de  bornes  a  1 'instabilite  des  institutions  et  du  trone. " 
— "Votre  observation  est  tres  juste,  j 'en  suis  frappe,"  replied  the  em- 
peror (Comte  Mole,  Les  Cent-Jours,  Documents  inedits,  "Eevue  de  la  Kevo- 
lution,"  1888,  vol,  xi,  p.  95). 

"Such  were  the  expressions  used  by  Louis  Napoleon  in  a  speech  at 
Lyons,  immediately  after  he  had  been  elected  Life-President  of  the  Re- 
public (E.  Tenot,  Paris  en  Decembre  1851,  ed.  cit.,  p.  26). — When  he  first 
assumed  the  presidency  in  December  1848,  Louis  Napoleon,  speaking  to  the 
Chamber,  solemnly  enunciated  the  principle:  "Je  verrai  des  ennemis  de 
la  Patrie  dans  tons  ceux  qui  tenteraient  de  changer  par  des  voies  illegales  ce 
que  la  France  entiere  a  etabli"  (V.  Hugo,  Napoleon  le  Petit,  ed.  cit.,  p.  16). 


BONAP ARTIST  IDEOLOGY  219 

should  use  severe  repressive  measures,  should  employ  force, 
should  concentrate  all  authority  in  his  own  hands.^*  One  of  the 
consequences  of  the  theory  of  the  popular  will  being  subsumed 
in  the  supreme  executive  is  that  the  elements  which  intervene 
between  the  latter  and  the  former,  the  public  officials,  that  is  to 
say,  must  be  kept  in  a  state  of  the  strictest  possible  dependence 
upon  the  central  authority,  which,  in  its  turn,  depends  upon 
the  people.^^  The  least  manifestation  of  liberty  on  the  part  of 
the  bureaucracy  would  be  tantamount  to  a  rebellion  against  the 
sovereignty  of  the  citizens.  The  most  characteristic  feature  of 
this  view  is  the  idea  that  the  power  of  the  chief  of  the  state 
rests  exclusively  upon  the  direct  will  of  the  nation.  Bonapartism 
does  not  recognise  any  intermediate  links.  The  coup  d'etat  of 
December  2,  1851,  was  represented  as  an  emancipation  of  the 
people  from  the  yoke  of  parliament,  and  as  having  for  its  nec- 
essary corollary  a  plebiscite.  Victor  Hugo  compared  the  rela- 
tionship between  the  parliament  and  the  ministry  under  Na- 
poleon III  to  the  relationship  between  master  and  servants,  the 
master  (the  ministry)  being  appointed  by  the  emperor,  and  the 
servants  (the  parliament)  being  elected  by  the  people.^^  This 
affirmation,  though  incontestable  in  fact,  is  theoretically  inexact. 
In  theory,  every  act  of  Bonapartism  was  perfectly  legitimate, 
even  if  it  led  to  the  shedding  of  the  blood  of  the  citizens.  The 
plebiscite  was  a  purifying  bath  which  gave  legitimate  sanction 
to  every  illegality.  Napoleon  III,  when  he  received  the  formal 
announcement  of  his  triumph  in  the  plebiscite,  declared  that  if 
in  the  coup  d'etat  he  had  infringed  the  laws  it  was  only  in 
order  to  reenter  the  paths  of  legality:  "Je  ne  suis  sorti  de  la 
legalite  que  pour  rentrer  dans  le  droit. ' '  He  was  granted  abso- 
lution by  seven  million  votes.^'^  This  sanction  by  plebiscite, 
three  times  repeated  by  the  French  people,  and  given  to  the 
illegal  government  of  the  third  Napoleon — confirmed  as  it  was 
by  innumerable  and  noisy  demonstrations  of  popular  sympathy 
— gave  to  accommodating  republicans  a  ready  pretext  for  passing 
from  the  side  of  the  opposition  to  that  of  the  monarchy.    Was 

"  Napoleon  III  maintained  that  it  was  only  on  account  of  the  demo- 
cratic instincts  of  the  first  Napoleon  that  the  emperor  had  not  abolished 
the  legislative  bodies.  The  people  would  have  had  no  objection  to  their 
abolition  (Idees  Napoleoniennes,  ed.  cit.,  p.  71). 

"76id.,  p.  38. 

"V.  Hugo,  Napoleon  le  Petit,  ed.  cit.,  pp.  79,  80. 

"  E.  Tenot,  Paris  en  Decembre,  1851,  ed.  cit,,  pp.  206,  207. 


220  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

not  this  plebiscitary  CfBsarism  established  upon  the  same  foun- 
dation as  the  republic  of  their  dreams?  Emile  Ollivier  divided 
the  forms  of  government  into  the  two  great  categories  of  per- 
sonal and  national  government.  The  ruler  in  the  case  of  a  na- 
tional government  is  no  more  than  "un  delegue  de  la  nation 
pour  1  'exercice  des  droits  sociaux. "  ^^  In  this  manner  his  re- 
publican conscience  was  tranquillized  and  his  conversion  to 
Bonapartism  could  present  itself  as  logical  and  in  conformity 
with  his  principles. 

The  history  of  modern  democratic  and  revolutionary  parties 
and  trade  unions  exhibits  phenomena  similar  to  those  we  have 
been  analysing.  The  reasons  are  not  far  to  seek.  In  demo- 
cratic crowds,  Bonapartism  finds  an  eminently  favourable  soil, 
for  it  gives  the  masses  the  illusion  of  being  masters  of  their 
masters;  moreover,  by  introducing  the  practice  of  delegation  it 
gives  this  illusion  a  legal  colour  which  is  pleasing  to  those  who 
are  struggling  for  their  "rights."  Delegation,  and  the  abdi- 
cation by  the  people  of  the  direct  exercise  of  power,  are  accom- 
plished in  strict  accordance  with  all  the  rules,  by  a  deliberate 
act  of  the  popular  will,  and  without  that  metaphysical  divine 
intervention  vaunted  on  its  own  behalf  by  the  detested  heredi- 
tary and  legitimate  monarchy.  The  chosen  of  the  people  thus 
seems  to  be  invested  in  his  functions  by  a  spontaneous  act  of 
the  popular  will;  he  appears  to  be  the  creature  of  the  people. 
This  way  of  looking  at  the  relations  between  the  masses  and 
the  leaders  is  agreeable  to  the  amour  propre  of  every  citizen, 
who  says  to  himself :  ' '  Without  me  he  would  not  be  what  he  is ; 
I  have  elected  him;  he  belongs  to  me." 

There  is  another  reason,  at  once  psychological  and  historical, 
why  the  masses  accept  without  protest  a  certain  degree  of  tyr- 
anny on  the  part  of  their  elected  leaders :  it  is  because  the  crowd 
submits  to  domination  more  readily  when  each  one  of  its  units 
shares  the  possibility  of  approximating  to  power,  and  even  of 
acquiring  some  power  for  himself.  The  bourgeois  and  the 
French  peasants  in  the  middle  of  the  nineteenth  century,  im- 
bued with  democratic  ideas,  detested  legitimate  monarchy,  but 
they  gladly  gave  their  votes  to  the  third  Napoleon,  remembering 
how  readily  many  of  their  fathers  had  become  great  dignitaries 
under  his  glorious  uncle.^'' 

"Emile  Ollivier,  Le  19  Janvier.  Compte  Bendu  aux  Electeurs  de  la  111° 
Circonscription  de  la  Seine,  Paris,  1869,  7th  eel.  p.  119. 

"Alexandre  Herzen,  Be  V autre  Bive,  Geneva,  1871,  Srd  ed.,  p.  119. — In 


BONAP ARTIST  IDEOLOGY  221 

Similarly  in  the  case  of  political  parties,  the  weight  of  an 
oligarchy  is  rarely  felt  when  the  rights  of  the  masses  are  codi- 
fied, and  when  each  member  may  in  the  abstract  participate  in 
power. 

In  virtue  of  the  democratic  nature  of  his  election,  the  leader 
of  a  democratic  organization  has  more  right  than  the  born  leader 
of  the  aristocracy  to  regard  himself  as  the  emanation  of  the  col- 
lective will,  and  therefore  to  demand  obedience  and  submission 
to  his  personal  will.  As  a  socialist  newspaper  puts  it:  "The 
party  executive  is  the  authority  imposed  by  the  party  as  a  whole 
and  thus  incorporating  the  party  authority.  The  first  demand 
of  democratic  discipline  is  respect  for  the  executive."^"  The 
absolute  obedience  which  the  organized  mass  owes  to  its  leaders 
is  the  outcome  of  the  democratic  relationships  existing  between 
the  leaders  and  the  mass,  and  is  merely  the  collective  submis- 
sion to  the  collective  will.^^ 

The  leaders  themselves,  whenever  they  are  reproached  for  an 
anti-democratic  attitude,  appeal  to  the  mass-will  from  which 
their  power  is  derived  by  election,  saying:  "Since  the  masses 
have  elected  us  and  re-elected  us  as  leaders,  we  are  the  legiti- 
mate expression  of  their  will  and  act  only  as  their  representa- 
tives. "  -^  It  was  a  tenet  of  the  old  aristocracy  that  to  disobey 
the  orders  of  the  monarch  was  to  sin  against  God.  In  modern 
democracy  it  is  held  that  no  one  may  disobey  the  orders  of  the 
oligarchs,  for  in  so  doing  the  people  sin  against  themselves,  de- 
fying their  own  will  spontaneously  transferred  by  them  to  their 
representatives,^^  and  thus  infringing  democratic  principle.    In 

the  light  comedy  Le  Gamin  de  Paris  by  Bayard  and  Vanderburgh  the  words 
of  the  general  typify  the  role  of  Napoleonism  among  the  French  common 
people:  "Nous  etions  des  enfants  de  Paris  .  .  .  des  imprimeurs  .  .  • 
des  fils  de  charrons,  nous  avions  du  cceur  .  .  .  nous  voulions  faire  notre 
chemin  .  .  .  nous  serious  peutetre  restes  en  route  .  .  .  sans  I'Empereur! 
.  .  .  qui  s'est  trouve  la  .  .  .  qui  nous  a  emportes  dans  son  tourbillon. 
...   La  chance  etait  tout!"   (Velhagen,  Bielefeld,  1861,  4th  ed.,  p.  77). 

^°  "  Diisseldorf er  Volkszeitung, "  November  13,  1905. 

"This  idea  is  admirably  expressed  by  Eienzi  (Van  Kol),  Socialisme  et 
Liberie,  ed.  cit.,  p.  249. 

"  This  argument  is  repeatedly  employed  by  socialist  speakers.  Their 
reasoning  is  that  the  very  fact  that  the  leaders  are  still  leaders  proves  that 
they  have  the  support  of  the  masses — otherwise  they  would  not  be  where 
they  are.  (Cf .  Karl  Legien  's  speech  at  the  socialist  congress  of  Jena 
(Protokoll,  "Vorwarts,"  Berlin,  1905,  p.  265);  also  P.  J.  Troelstra,  In- 
safce  Parti jleiding.     Toelichtingen  en  Gegevens,  ed.  cit.,  p.  97.) 

"  During  the  second  empire  the  like  reasoning  was  applied  to  defend 


222  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

democracies,  the  leaders  base  their  right  to  command  upon  the 
democratic  omnipotence  of  the  masses.  Every  employee  of  the 
party  owes  his  post  to  his  comrades,  and  is  entirely  dependent 
upon  their  goodwill.  We  may  thus  say  that  in  a  democracy 
each  individual  himself  issues,  though  indirectly,  the  orders 
which  come  to  him  from  above. ^*  Thus  the  reasoning  by  which 
the  leaders'  claim  to  obedience  is  defended  and  explained  is, 
in  theory,  clear  and  unanswerable.  In  practice,  however,  the 
election  of  the  leaders,  and  above  all  their  re-election,  is  effected 
by  such  methods  and  under  the  influence  of  suggestions  and 
other  methods  of  coercion  so  powerful  that  the  freedom  of  choice 
of  the  masses  is  considerably  impaired.^^  In  the  history  of  party 
life  it  is  undeniable  that  the  democratic  system  is  reduced,  in 
ultimate  analysis,  to  the  right  of  the  masses,  at  stated  intervals, 
to  choose  masters  to  whom  in  the  interim  they  owe  unconditional 
obedience. 

Under  these  conditions,  there  develops  everywhere  in  the 
leaders,  alike  in  the  democratic  political  parties  and  in  the  trade 
unions,  the  same  habit  of  thought.  They  demand  that  the  masses 
should  not  merely  render  obedience,  but  that  they  should  blindly 
and  without  murmuring  carry  out  the  orders  which  they,  the 
leaders,  issue  deliberately  and  with  full  understanding  of  the 
circumstances.  To  the  leaders  it  is  altogether  inconceivable  that 
the  actions  of  the  supreme  authority  can  be  subjected  to  criti- 
cism, for  they  are  intimately  convinced  that  they  stand  above 
criticism,  that  is  to  say  above  the  party.  Engels,  who  was  en- 
dowed with  an  extremely  keen  sense  of  the  essence  of  democracy, 
regarded  it  as  deplorable  that  the  leaders  of  the  German  socialist 
party  could  not  accustom  themselves  to  the  idea  that  the  mere 
fact  of  being  installed  in  office  did  not  give  them  the  right  to 
be  treated  with  more  respect  than  any  other  comrade.^® 

the  plebiscitary  emperordom.  For  instance,  Edmond  About,  one  of  the 
few  distinguished  democratic  writers  who  had  gone  over  to  the  Napoleonic 
camp,  wrote:  "Ce  n'est  pas  obeir  que  de  se  conformer  aux  lois  qu'on  a 
f aites,  de  remplir  ses  engagements  envers  les  chefs  qu  'on  a  choisis :  c  'est  se 
commander  a  soi-meme"  (Edmond  About,  Le  Progres,  Hachette,  Paris, 
1864,  p.  67). 

^*We  owe  to  Georges  Sorel  the  rediscovery  of  the  relationships  between 
democracy  in  general  and  absolutism,  and  their  point  of  intersection  in 
centralization.  Cf.,  for  instance,  his  Les  Illusions  du  Progres,  Eiviere, 
Paris,  1908,  pp.  9  et  seq. 

"  Cf .  pp.  156  et  seq. 

'^F.  Engels,  in  a  letter  dated  March  21,  1891;  also  Karl  Marx,  in  a  let- 


BONAPARTIST  IDEOLOGY  223 

It  is  especially  exasperating  to  the  leaders  when  the  com- 
rades are  not  content  with  mere  criticism,  but  act  in  opposition 
to  the  leaders'  advice.^'^  When  they  speak  of  their  differences 
with  those  whom  they  regard  as  inferiors  in  education  and  in- 
telligence, they  are  unable  to  restrain  their  moral  indignation  at 
such  a  profound  lack  of  disciplined^  When  the  masses  "kick 
against  the  advice  of  the  leaders  they  have  themselves  chosen," 
they  are  accused  of  a  great  lack  of  tact  and  of  intelligence.  In 
the  conference  of  trade-union  executives  held  from  February 
19  to  23,  1906 — a  conference  which  marks  an  important  stage  in 
the  history  of  the  German  labour  movement — Paul  Miiller,  em- 
ployee of  a  trade  union,  complained  bitterly  that  his  revolu- 
tionary comrades  of  the  socialist  party  were  endeavouring  "to 
estrange  the  members  of  the  unions  from  the  leaders  they  had 
chosen  for  themselves.  They  have  been  directly  incited  to  rebel- 
lion. They  have  been  openly  urged  to  breaches  of  discipline. 
What  other  expressions  can  be  used  when  in  meetings  we  are 
told  that  the  members  ought  to  fight  against  their  leaders  ? ' '  ^* 

ter  dated  September  19,  1879  {Brief  e  u.  Aussuge  aus  Brief  en,  etc.,  ed.  cit., 
pp.  361  and  166). 

^^  Sometimes  the  members  of  the  rank  and  file  are  officially  exhorted  to 
respect  the  authority  of  their  elected  representatives.  In  a  Belgian  trade- 
union  journal  we  read  among  the  "Ten  Commandments"  drawn  up  for 
the  organized  workers  the  following  admonitions:  "1.  De  la  propagande 
tu  feras,  pour  grouper  les  indifferents;  2.  Aux  assembles  tu  assisteras,  pour 
devenir  intelligent;  3.  Ta  cotisation  tu  payeras,  tous  les  mois  regulierement; 
4.  Dans  les  cabarets  tu  ne  critiqueras,  ce  qui  n' arrive  que  trop  souvent" 
("Journal  des  Gorrespondances, "  Organe  officiel  des  Syndicats  affilies  a  la 
Commission  Syndicale,  Brussels,  1905,  ii.  No.  9). 

**  Here  is  a  typical  example.  The  socialist  leaders  of  Chemnitz  in  Saxony 
had  proposed  to  raise  the  price  of  subscription  to  the  local  organ  of  the 
party,  but  the  majority  of  the  socialist  assembly  of  the  constituency  re- 
jected this  proposition.  Here  are  the  remarks  upon  the  subject  made  by 
one  of  the  leaders:  "An  increase  in  the  monthly  price  of  subscription 
by  10  pfennig  would  have  saved  the  situation.  But  the  great  moment  did 
not  find  those  ready  to  seize  it.  Neither  the  detailed  report  of  the  business 
manager,  Comrade  Landgraf,  nor  yet  the  magnificent  expositions  of  Com- 
rades Noske  and  Heldt,  of  Zeisig  and  Eiemann,  the  members  of  the  press 
committee,  and  others,  who  in  the  course  of  many  years'  active  work  have 
acquired  a  profound  knowledge  of  journalistic  enterprise,  sufficed  to  con- 
vince the  majority  of  the  assembly  that  it  was  absolutely  essential  to  in- 
crease the  monthly  subscription  by  10  pfennig.  The  leaders  had  to  submit 
to  the  indignity  of  seeing  their  proposal  voted  down"  (" Volksstimme" 
of  Frankfort,  anno  xxi,  No.  37). 

^  Partei  u.  GewerTcschaften,  textual  reprint  from  the  $$  P.  and  G.  of  the 
Protokoll,  p.  4. 


224  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

Whenever  a  new  current  of  opposition  manifests  itself  within 
the  party,  the  leaders  immediately  endeavour  to  discredit  it  with 
the  charge  of  demagogy.  If  those  of  the  comrades  who  are  dis- 
contented with  the  leaders  make  a  direct  appeal  to  the  masses, 
this  appeal — however  lofty  may  be  its  motives,  however  sincere 
the  convictions  of  those  who  make  it,  however  much  they  may 
be  justified  by  a  reference  to  fundamental  democratic  rights — 
is  repudiated  as  inexpedient,  and  is  even  censured  as  a  wicked 
attempt  to  break  up  the  party,  and  as  the  work  of  vulgar  in- 
triguers.^" We  have  to  remember,  in  this  connection,  that  the 
leaders,  who  hold  in  their  hands  all  the  mechanism  of  power, 
have  the  advantage  of  being  able  to  assume  an  aureole  of  legal- 
ity, whereas  the  masses,  or  the  subordinate  leaders  who  are  in 
rebellion,  can  always  be  placed  in  an  unfavourable  light  of  ille- 
gality. The  magic  phrase  with  which  the  leaders  invariably  suc- 
ceed in  stifling  embarrassing  opposition  in  the  germ  is  "the  gen- 
eral interest."  In  such  circumstances  they  exhibit  a  notable 
fondness  for  arguments  drawn  from  the  military  sphere.  They 
maintain,  for  instance,  that,  if  only  for  tactical  reasons,  and  in 
order  to  maintain  a  necessary  cohesion  in  face  of  the  enemy, 
the  members  of  the  party  must  never  refuse  to  repose  perfect 
confidence  in  the  leaders  they  have  freely  chosen  for  themselves. 
It  is  in  Germany,  above  all,  that  in  the  trade-union  organizations 
the  authoritarian  spirit  is  developed  with  especial  force,  and 
that  the  leaders  are  prone  to  attribute  to  their  adversaries  the 
"criminal  intention"  of  attempting  "to  dissolve  trade-union 
discipline."  ^^  Even  the  socialist  leaders  make  similar  charges 
against  their  opponents.  If  we  translate  such  an  accusation 
from  the  language  of  the  trade-union  leaders  into  that  of  gov- 
ernment officials,  the  charge  becomes  one  of  "inciting  to  revolt 
against  constituted  authority."  If  the  critics  are  not  officials 
of  the  party,  if  they  are  mere  sympathizers  or  friends,  they  are 
then  in  the  eyes  of  the  attacked  leaders  intrusive  and  incompe- 
tent persons,  without  any  right  whatever  to  form  an  opinion  on 
the  matter.  "On  no  account  must  the  faith  of  the  people  be 
disturbed!     Such  is  the  principle  in  accordance  with  which  all 

^"Cf.  pp.  171,  172. 

'^  At  the  conference  of  the  trade-union  executives,  February  19  to  23, 
1906,  Eexhauser  said :  ' '  The  poison  which  spreads  in  this  way  through  the 
masses  corrodes  everything,  and  when  one  day  you  want  to  unite  for  some 
decisive  action,  you  find  that  discipline  has  gone  to  the  devil,  and  that 
the  rank  and  file  will  not  obey  their  leaders"  {Protokoll,  pp.  23-4). 


BONAP ARTIST  IDEOLOGY  225 

lively  criticism  of  the  objective  errors  of  the  movement  are  stig- 
matized as  an  attack  on  the  movement  itself,  whilst  the  elements 
of  opposition  within  the  party  are  habitually  execrated  as  ene- 
mies who  wish  to  destroy  the  party. ' '  ^^ 

The  general  conduct  of  the  leaders  of  democratic  parties  and 
the  phraseology  typically  employed  by  them  (of  which  our  ex- 
amples might  be  multiplied  a  hundredfold)  suffice  to  illustrate 
how  fatal  is  the  transition  from  an  authority  derived  from  "the 
favour  of  the  people"  to  a  right  based  upon  "the  grace  of  God" 
— in  a  word,  to  the  system  which  in  French  history  we  know  by 
the  name  of  Bonapartism.  A  right  of  sovereignty  born  of  the 
plebiscite  soon  becomes  a  permanent  and  inviolable  dominion. 

"Eosa  Luxemburg,  writing  of  the  trade-union  leaders  in  MassensireiJc, 
Partei  u.  Gewerkschaften,  ed.  cit.,  p.  61. 


CHAPTER   III 

IDENTIFICATION  OF  THE  PARTY  WITH  THE  LEADER 
("LE  PARTI  C'EST  MOI") 

We  have  shown  that  in  their  struggle  against  their  enemies 
within  the  party  the  leaders  of  the  labour  movement  pursue  a 
tactic  and  adopt  an  attitude  differing  very  little  from  those  of 
the  "bourgeois"  government  in  its  struggle  with  "subversive" 
elements.  The  terminology  which  the  powers-that-be  employ  is, 
mutatis  mutandis,  identical  in  the  two  cases.  The  same  accusa- 
tions are  launched  against  the  rebels,  and  the  same  arguments 
are  utilized  in  defence  of  the  established  order:  in  one  case  an 
appeal  is  made  for  the  preservation  of  the  state;  in  the  other, 
for  that  of  the  party.  In  both  cases,  also,  there  is  the  same 
confusion  of  ideas  when  the  attempt  is  made  to  define  the  rela- 
tionships between  thing  and  person,  individual  and  collectivity. 
The  authoritarian  spirit  of  the  official  representatives  of  the 
German  socialist  party  (a  spirit  which  necessarily  characterizes 
every  strong  organization)  exhibits  several  striking  analogies 
with  the  authoritarian  spirit  of  the  official  representatives  of 
the  German  empire.  On  the  one  side  we  have  William  II,  who 
advises  the  "malcontents,"  that  is  to  say  those  of  his  subjects 
who  do  not  consider  that  all  is  for  the  best  in  the  best  of  all 
possible  empires,  to  shake  the  dust  off  their  feet  and  go  else- 
where. On  the  other  side  we  have  Bebel,  exclaiming  that  it  is 
time  to  have  done  once  for  all  with  the  eternal  discontents  and 
sowings  of  discord  within  the  party,  and  expressing  the  opinion 
that  the  opposition,  if  it  is  unable  to  express  itself  as  satisfied 
with  the  conduct  of  affairs  by  the  executive,  had  better  "clear 
out. ' '  ^  Between  these  two  attitudes,  can  we  find  any  difference 
other  than  that  which  separates  a  voluntary  organization  (the 
party),  to  which  one  is  free  to  adhere  or  not  as  one  pleases, 
from  a  coercive  organization  (the  state),  to  which  all  must  be- 
long by  the  fact  of  birth  ?  ^ 


*  August  Bebel,  speech  to  the  Dresden  congress,  Frotol'oll,  p.  308. 
*In  the  text,  the  writer  has  repeatedly  mentioned  the  name  of  Bebel 

226 


LE  PARTI  C'EST  MOI  227 

It  may  perhaps  be  said  that  there  is  not  a  single  party  leader 
who  fails  to  think  and  to  act,  and  who,  if  he  has  a  lively  tempera- 
ment and  a  frank  character,  fails  to  speak,  after  the  example  of 
Le  Roi  Soleil,  and  to  say  Le  Parti  c'est  moi.^ 

when  he  has  wished  to  illustrate  by  typical  examples  the  conduct  of  th' 
leaders  towards  the  masses.  Yet  it  would  be  erroneous  to  regard  Beb"  1 
as  a  typical  leader.  He  was  raised  above  the  average  of  leaders,  not  only 
by  his  great  intellectual  gifts,  but  also  by  his  profound  sincerity,  the  out- 
come of  a  strong  and  healthy  temperament,  which  often  led  him  to  say 
things  openly  which  others  would  have  left  unsaid  and  to  do  things  openly 
which  others  would  have  left  concealed.  It  was  for  this  reason  that 
"Kaiser  Bebel"  was  frequently  exposed  to  the  suspicion  of  being  excep- 
tionally autocratic  in  his  conduct  and  undemocratic  in  his  sentiments. 
Nevertheless,  a  thorough  analysis  of  Bebel 's  character  and  of  his  conduct 
on  various  memorable  occasions  would  establish  that,  side  by  side  with  a 
marked  tendency  to  self-assertion  and  a  taste  for  the  intrinsic  forms  of 
rule,  he  exhibited  strong  democratic  leanings,  which  distinguished  him 
from  the  average  of  his  colleagues,  just  as  much  as  he  was  distinguished 
from  them  by  the  frankness  with  which  he  always  displayed  his  dictatorial 
temperament.  This  is  not  the  place  for  such  an  analysis,  but  the  writer  felt 
it  was  necessary  to  guard  against  a  false  interpretation  of  his  references 
to  Bebel  by  a  brief  allusion  to  the  complexity  of  character  of  this  re- 
markable man.  In  ultimate  analysis,  Bebel  was  no  more  than  a  represen- 
tative of  his  party,  but  he  was  one  in  whom  the  individual  note  was  never 
suppressed  by  the  exigencies  of  leadership  or  of  demagogy. 

'We  learn  this  from  a  study  of  all  the  great  party  leaders.  As  regards 
Marx,  of.  Michels,  Storia  del  Marxismo  in  Italia,  Boeca,  Turin,  1909,  pp. 
19  et  seq. — As  regards  Lassalle,  cf.  Julius  Vahlteich,  Ferdinand  Lassalle, 
ed.  cit.,  pp.  42  et  seq. — Liebknecht's  official  biographer  tells  us  that  he 
was  not  always  able,  owing  to  his  strong  and  lively  individuality,  to  dis- 
tinguish between  persons  and  things  (Kurt  Eisner,  Willielm  LiehknecM, 
"Vorwarts,"  Berlin,  1906,  2nd  ed.,  p.  100).— Of  Bebel,  von  Gerlach,  one 
of  his  admirers,  wrote:  "He  lives  only  for  the  party,  identifying  himself 
fully  with  the  party.  This  is  his  strength,  but  often  also  it  is  his  weakness. 
Just  as  Bismarck  regarded  every  attack  upon  Bismarck  as  an  attack  upon 
the  well-being  of  the  German  empire,  so  Bebel  sees  in  every  attack  upon 
Bebel  an  attack  upon  the  party  interests.  Thus  his  intervention  is  ex- 
traordinarily weighty,  but  often  it  is  extremely  unjust.  Very  rarely  has 
he  been  fair  to  his  opponents,  and  least  of  all  to  his  opponents  within  the 
party.  .  .  .  He  always  regards  himself  as  the  guardian  of  the  party  in- 
terests, and  his  personal  adversaries  as  the  enemies  of  the  party.  His 
subjectivity  is  really  terrible"  (Helmuth  von  Gerlach,  August  Bebel.  Ein 
biographische  Essay,  Albert  Langen,  Munich,  1909,  pp.  59,  60).  Cf.  also 
the  speech  against  Bebel  delivered  by  Vollmar  at  the  Dresden  congress, 
1903  (Protoholl,  pp.  321  et  seq.). — Vollmar 's  speech  reminds  us  of  Zi- 
bordi's  bitter  criticism  of  Enrico  Ferri:  "This  man  speaks  of  himself, 
of  himself,  of  himself;  of  his  mother,  his  wife,  his  children,  always  with 
reference  to  himself;  of  his  own  talents,  of  his  own  career,  of  his  enemies, 
of  his  forecasts,  of  his  goodness,  of  his  health.     The  workers,  socialism. 


228  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

The  bureaucrat  identifies  himself  completely  with  the  organi- 
zation, confounding  his  own  interests  with  its  interests.  Ail 
objective  criticism  of  the  party  is  taken  by  him  as  a  personal 
affront.  This  is  the  cause  of  the  obvious  incapacity  of  all  party 
leaders  to  take  a  serene  and  just  view  of  hostile  criticism.*  The 
..^ader  declares  himself  personally  offended,  doing  this  partly  in 
good  faith,  but  in  part  deliberately,  in  order  to  shift  the  battle- 
ground, so  that  he  can  present  himself  as  the  harmless  object  of 
an  unwarrantable  attack,  and  arouse  in  the  minds  of  the  masses 
towards  his  opponents  in  matters  of  theory  that  antipathy  which 
is  always  felt  for  those  whose  actions  are  dictated  by  personal 
rancour.^  If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  leader  is  attacked  per- 
sonally, his  first  care  is  to  make  it  appear  that  the  attack  is  di- 
rected against  the  party  as  a  whole.  He  does  this  not  only  on 
diplomatic  grounds,  in  order  to  secure  for  himself  the  support 
of  the  party  and  to  overwhelm  the  aggressor  with  the  w^eight  oi' 
numbers,  but  also  because  he  quite  ingenuously  takes  the  p>.iu 

proletarian  politics,  the  nation,  are  always  discussed  by  him  as  centering 
in  hia  own  personality"  (G,  Zibordi,  La  "  Tour  nee"  oratorio  di  E.  Ferri, 
"Secolo, "  April  25,  1911).  Yet  this  way  of  speaking  must  not  be  at- 
tributed to  personal  vanity;  it  is  rather  the  inevitable  consequence  of 
Ferri 's  absolute  conviction  of  his  sovereign  power  over  the  masses. 

*  Here  are  typical  examples.  The  leaders  of  the  Italian  socialists  in  the 
early  part  of  1870,  well-to-do  idealists  ready  for  sacrifice  and  for  martyr- 
dom, derived  for  the  most  part  from  the  upper  bourgeois  and  aristocratic 
circles,  were  described  by  Marx  as  a  crowd  of  rascally  students  seeking 
careers  in  the  International.  The  reason  for  this  outburst  of  spleen  was 
that  the  Italians  had  without  exception  supported  Bakunin  and  opposed 
Marx  (cf.  E.  Michels,  Proletariato  e  Borghesia,  ed.  cit.,  pp.  63-76).  Engels, 
again,  speaking  of  the  opposition  within  the  party,  of  the  group  known  as 
die  Jungcn,  to  which  Hans  Miiller,  Paul  Ernst,  Bruno  Wille,  Paul 
Kampffmeyer,  O.  E.  Hartleben,  etc.,  belonged,  qualified  them  in  the  fol- 
lowing terms:  "Unquestionably  there  are  some  among  them  in  the  pay 
of  the  police;  others  are  masked  anarchists  who  wish  to  make  roernits 
from  among  our  ranks;  the  rest  are  blockheads,  students  s\vollen  with  con- 
ceit, would-be  candidates,  and  self-seekers  of  all  kinds"  {Brief e  u.  Aus- 
siige,  ed.  cit.,  p.  370). 

°  In  a  polemic  against  the  Marxists  of  the  party,  the  trade-union  leader 
H.  Jochade  writes :  ' '  We  have  to  ask  ourselves  seriously  what  is  the  mean- 
ing of  this  new  campaign.  Is  it  dictated  by  the  love  of  scandal,  by  the 
excess  of  zeal  of  a  few  quill-drivers,  or  have  malice  and  cunning  anything 
to  do  with  the  matter?  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  all  these  influences  are 
at  work  in  originating  the  attack  upon  the  trade-union  employees"  (Erieg 
gegen  die  Gewerlcschaftsheamten,  "  Korrespondenzblatt  der  Generalkom- 
mission  der  Gewerkschaften  Deutschlands, "  anno  xviii,  No.  51,  December 
19,  1908,  p.  810). 


LE  PARTI  C'EST  MOI  229 

for  the  whole.  This  is  frequently  the  outcome,  not  merely  of 
blind  fanaticism,  but  of  firm  conviction.  According  to  Netcha- 
jeff,  the  revolutionary  has  the  right  of  exploiting,  deceiving, 
robbing,  and  in  case  of  need  utterly  ruining,  all  those  who  do 
net  agree  unconditionally  with  his  methods  and  his  aims,  for 
he  need  consider  them  as  nothing  more  than  chair  a  conspiration. 
His  sole  objective  must  be  to  ensure  the  triumph  of  his  essen- 
tially individual  ideas,  without  any  respect  for  persons — La 
Revolution  c'est  moi!  Bakunin  uttered  a  sound  criticism  of  this 
mode  of  reasoning  when  he  said  that  its  hidden  source  was  to 
be  found  in  Netchajeff  's  unconscious  but  detestable  ambition.*' 

The  despotism  of  the  leaders  does  not  arise  solely  from  a  vul- 
gar lust  of  power  or  from  uncontrolled  egoism,  but  is  often  the 
outcome  of  a  profound  and  sincere  conviction  of  their  own  value 
and  of  the  services  which  they  have  rendered  to  the  common 
cause.  The  bureaucracy  which  is  most  faithful  and  most  effi- 
cient in  the  discharge  of  its  duties  is  also  the  most  dictatorial. 
To  quote  Wolfgang  Heine:  ''The  objection  is  invalid  that  the 
incorruptibility  and  efficiency  of  our  party  officials,  and  their 
love  for  the  great  cause,  would  suffice  to  raise  a  barrier  against 
the  development  of  autocracy  within  the  party.  The  very  op- 
posite is  true.  Officials  of  high  technical  efficiency  who  unself- 
ishly aim  at  the  general  good,  like  those  whom  we  are  fortunate 
enough  to  possess  in  the  party,  are  more  than  all  others  inclined, 
being  well  aware  of  the  importance  of  their  own  services,  to 
regard  as  inalterable  laws  whatever  seems  to  them  right  and 
proper,  to  suppress  conflicting  tendencies  on  the  ground  of  the 
general  interest,  and  thus  to  impose  restraints  upon  the  healthy 
progress  of  the  party. ' '  ^  Similarly,  where  we  have  to  do  with 
excellent  and  incorruptible  state  officials  like  those  of  the  Ger- 
man empire,  the  megalomaniac  substitution  of  thing  for  person 
is  partly  due  to  the  upright  consciences  of  the  officials  and  to 
their  great  devotion  to  duty.^    Among  the  members  of  such  a 

•James  Guillaume,  L' Internationale,  ed.  eit.,  vol.  ii,  p.  62. 

'W.  Heine,  DemoJcratische  Eandhemerhungen  sum  Fall  Golire,  "Soz. 
Monatsh.,"  viii   (x),  fasc.  iv,  p.  284. 

*"The  [Prussian]  state  tends  to  become  a  republic  of  official  employees, 
in  which  the  employees  are  the  only  fully  qualified  citizens,  whilst  all  oth- 
ers, notwithstanding  the  apparent  possession  of  constitutional  rights,  exist 
simply  in  order  to  be  ruled  and  to  provide  the  cost  of  working  the  govern- 
mental machine.  The  danger  is  not  lessened  by  the  fact  that  the  bureau- 
cracy  does  not  merely  make  a  profession  of  working  for  the  general  good, 
but  is  honestly  convinced  that  it  is  endeavouring  to  secure  it.    Every  official 


230  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

bureaucracy,  there  is  hardly  one  who  does  not  feel  that  a  pin- 
prick directed  against  his  own  person  is  a  crime  committed 
against  the  whole  state.  It  is  for  the  same  reason  that  they  all 
hold  together  comme  les  doigts  de  la  main.  Each  one  of  them 
regards  himself  as  an  impersonation  of  a  portion  of  the  whole 
state,  and  feels  that  this  portion  will  suffer  if  the  authority  of 
any  other  portion  is  impaired.''  Further,  the  bureaucrat  is  apt 
to  imagine  that  he  knows  the  needs  of  the  masses  better  than 
these  do  themselves,^"  an  opinion  v/hich  may  be  sound  enough  in 
individual  instances,  but  which  for  the  most  part  is  no  more 
than  a  form  of  megalomania.  Undoubtedly  the  party  official  is 
less  exposed  than  the  state  official  to  the  danger  of  becoming 
fossilized,  for  in  most  cases  he  has  work  as  a  public  speaker,  and 
in  this  way  he  maintains  a  certain  degree  of  contact  with  the 
masses.  On  the  other  hand,  the  applause  which  he  seeks  and 
receives  on  these  occasions  cannot  fail  to  stimulate  his  personal 
vanity. 

When  in  any  organization  the  oligarchy  has  attained  an  ad- 
vanced stage  of  development,  the  leaders  begin  to  identify  with 
themselves,  not  merely  the  party  institutions,  but  even  the  party 
property,  this  phenomenon  being  common  both  to  the  party  and 
to  the  state.  In  the  conflict  between  the  leaders  and  the  rank 
and  file  of  the  German  trade  unions  regarding  the  right  to  strike, 
the  leaders  have  more  than  once  maintained  that  the  decision 
in  this  matter  is  morally  and  legally  reserved  for  themselves, 
because  it  is  they  who  provide  the  financial  resources  which  en- 
able the  workers  to  remain  on  strike."  This  view  is  no  more 
than  the  ultimate  consequence  of  that  oligarchical  mode  of 
thought  which  inevitably  leads  to  a  complete  forgetfulness  of 
true  democratic  principles.  In  Genoa,  one  of  the  labour  leaders, 
whose  influence  had  increased  pari  passu  with  the  growing 
strength  of  the  organized  proletariat  of  the  city,  and  who,  en- 

who  seeks  to  maintain  his  own  power  persuades  himself  that  he  does  this 
for  the  benefit  of  the  ruled"  (W.  Heine,  Die  Beamten  Eepublik,  "Marz," 
anno  iii,  fasc.  21,  p.  175). 

*  Edmond  About,  Le  Progres,  Hachette,  Paris,  1864,  p.  232. 

"Max  Weber,  for  instance,  in  a  discussion  upon  municipal  enterprise  at 
the  Vienna  congress  of  the  Verein  fur  Sozialpolitik  declared:  "I  should 
think  myself  a  very  poor  bureaucrat  indeed,  if  I  did  not  believe  myself  to 
know  better  than  these  blockheads  what  is  really  good  for  them"  {Pro- 
toTcoll,  p.  285). 

"  Cf .  "  Korrespondenzblatt  der  Gewerkschaf ten  Deutschlands, ' '  anno  vii. 
No.  28. 


LE  PARTI  C'EST  MOI  231 

joying  the  unrestricted  confidence  of  his  comrades,  had  acquired 
the  most  various  powers  and  had  filled  numerous  positions  in 
the  party,  regarded  himself  as  justified,  when  as  a  representa- 
tive of  the  workers  he  made  contracts  with  capitalists  and  con- 
cluded similar  affairs,  in  feathering  his  own  nest  in  addition  to 
looking  after  the  workers'  interests.^^ 

"  Thia  was  the  barrister,  Gino  Murialdi,  who  in  youth  had  made  many 
sacrifices  for  the  movement.  He  was  in  receipt  of  a  regular  salary  from 
the  trade  unions  and  cooperative  societies,  but  this  did  not  prevent  him 
from  accepting  money  from  the  employers  when  he  was  negotiating  with 
them  as  the  workers'  representative.  When  taken  to  task  on  this  account, 
he  said  that  by  his  exertions  he  had  obtained  such  brilliant  advantages  for 
the  workers,  that  he  saw  no  reason  why  he  should  not  secure  for  himself 
a  little  extra  profit  at  the  cost  of  the  employers.  Murialdi 's  actions  led 
to  a  violent  quarrel  between  him  and  the  other  leaders  in  Genoa,  and  ul- 
timately caused  his  expulsion  from  the  socialist  party.  Cf .  ' '  Avanti, ' '  anno 
xiii  (1909),  Nos.  1  and  24. 


PART  FOUR 
SOCIAL  ANALYSIS   OF  LEADERSHIP 


CHAPTER   I 

INTRODUCTORY.      THE    CLASS    STRUGGLE    AND    ITS 

DISINTEGRATING  INFLUENCE  UPON  THE 

BOURGEOISIE 

The  masses  are  not  easily  stirred.  Great  events  pass  before 
their  eyes  and  revolutions  are  accomplished  in  economic  life 
without  their  minds'  undergoing  profound  modifications.  Very 
slowly  do  they  react  to  the  influence  of  new  conditions. 

For  decades^  and  even  for  centuries,  the  masses  continue  to 
endure  passively  outworn  political  conditions  which  greatly  im- 
pede legal  and  moral  progress.^  Countries  which  from  the  eco- 
nomic point  of  view  are  fairly  well  advanced,  often  continue  to 
endure  for  lengthy  periods  a  political  and  constitutional  regime 
which  derives  from  an  earlier  economic  phase.  This  is  espe- 
cially noteworthy  in  Germany,  where  an  aristocratic  and  feudal 
form  of  government,  the  outcome  of  economic  conditions  which 
the  country  has  outlived,  has  not  yet  been  able  to  adapt  itself 
to  an  economic  development  of  the  most  advanced  capitalist 
character. 

These  historical  phenomena,  which  at  first  sight  appear  para- 
doxical, arise  from  causes  of  two  different  orders.  In  the  first 
place  it  may  happen  that  classes  or  sub-classes  representing  an 
extinct  economic  form  may  survive  from  a  time  in  which  they 
were  the  authentic  exponents  of  the  then  dominant  economic  re- 
lationships; they  have  been  able  to  save  from  the  wreck  a  suffi- 
ciency of  moral  prestige  and  effective  political  force  to  maintain 
their  dominion  in  the  new  phase  of  economic  and  civil  develop- 
ment, and  to  do  this  even  in  opposition  to  the  expressed  will  of 
the  majority  of  the  people.    These  classes  succeed  in  maintain- 

^ ' '  Unreflectingly,  sometimes  with  a  sigh,  but  often  without  a  thought 
of  the  possibility  of  better  things,  the  nations  have  borne  for  centuries,  and 
continue  to  bear,  all  the  burdens  and  all  the  shames  imposed  upon  them 
by  tyranny,  like  the  lower  animals,  who  with  satisfaction  and  even  grati- 
tude accept  a  bare  subsistence,  from  the  hand  of  the  master  to  whom  they 
belong,  and  who  makes  use  of  them  and  chastises  them  at  his  will"  (Carl 
von  Kotteck,  Allgemeine  Geschichte,  etc.,  ed.  cit.,  p.  81). 

235 


236  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

ing  themselves  in  power  by  the  strength  of  their  own  political 
energy  and  with  the  assistance  of  numerous  elements  essentially 
foreign  to  themselves,  but  which  they  can  turn  to  their  own  ad- 
vantage by  suggestive  influences.  Most  commonly,  however,  we 
find  that  the  classes  representing  a  past  economic  order  continue 
to  maintain  their  social  predominance  only  because  the  classes 
representing  the  present  or  future  economy  have  as  yet  failed 
to  become  aware  of  their  strength,  of  their  political  and  eco- 
nomic importance,  and  of  the  wrongs  which  they  suffer  at  the 
hands  of  society.  Moreover,  a  sense  of  fatalism  and  a  sad  con- 
viction of  impotence  exercise  a  paralysing  influence  in  social  life. 
As  long  as  an  oppressed  class  is  influenced  by  this  fatalistic 
spirit,  as  long  as  it  has  failed  to  develop  an  adequate  sense  of 
social  injustice,  it  is  incapable  of  aspiring  towards  emancipation. 
It  is  not  the  simple  existence  of  oppressive  conditions,  but  it  is 
the  recognition  of  these  conditions  "by  the  oppressed,  which  in 
the  course  of  history  has  constituted  the  prime  factor  of  class 
struggles.^ 

The  mere  existence  of  the  modern  proletariat  does  not  suffice 
per  se  to  produce  a  "social  problem."  The  class  struggle,  if  it 
is  not  to  remain  a  nebulous  theory,  in  which  the  energy  is  for 
ever  latent,  requires  to  be  animated  by  class  consciousness. 

It  is  the  involuntary  work  of  the  bourgeoisie  to  arouse  in  the 
proletariat  that  class  consciousness  which  is  necessarily  directed 
against  the  bourgeoisie  itself.  History  is  full  of  such  ironies. 
It  is  the  tragical  destiny  of  the  bourgeoisie  to  be  instructor  of 
the  class  which  from  the  economic  and  social  point  of  view  is 
its  own  deadly  enemy.  As  Karl  Marx  showed  in  his  Communist 
Manifesto,  the  principal  reason  for  this  is  found  in  the  unceas- 
ing struggle  which  the  bourgeoisie  is  forced  to  carry  on  "at  once 
with  the  aristocracy,  with  those  sections  of  its  own  class  whose 
interests  are  opposed  to  industrial  progress,  and  with  the  bour- 
geoisie of  all  foreign  countries."  Unable  to  carry  on  this  strug- 
gle effectively  by  its  own  unaided  powers,  the  bourgeoisie  is 
continually  forced  "to  appeal  to  the  proletariat,  to  demand  its 
aid,  and  thus  to  launch  the  proletariat  into  the  political  melee, 
thus  putting  into  the  hands  of  the  proletariat  a  weapon  which 


*  This  is  now  generally  recognized,  as,  for  instance,  even  by  so  guarded 
a  writer  as  Johannes  Conrad  in  his  Grundriss  sum  Studium  der  politischen 
Oekonomie,  Part  II,  Volkswirtschaftspolitik,  Fischer,  Jena,  1898,  2nd  ed., 
p.  48. 


THE  CLASS  STRUGGLE  237 

the  latter  will  turn  against  the  bourgeoisie  itself.^  Under  yet 
another  aspect  the  bourgeoisie  appears  as  the  instructor,  as  the 
fencing-master  of  the  working  class.  Through  its  daily  contact 
with  the  proletariat  there  results  the  detachment  from  its  own 
body  of  a  small  number  of  persons  who  devote  their  energies  to 
the  service  of  the  working  classes,  in  order  to  inflame  these  for 
the  struggle  against  the  existing  order,  to  make  them  feel  and 
understand  the  deficiencies  of  the  prevailing  economic  and  social 
regime.  It  is  true  that  the  number  of  those  who  are  detached 
from  the  bourgeoisie  to  adhere  to  the  cause  of  the  proletariat  is 
never  great.  But  those  who  thus  devote  themselves  are  among 
the  best  of  the  bourgeoisie ;  they  may,  in  a  sense,  be  regarded  as 
supermen,  raised  above  the  average  of  their  class,  it  may  be  by 
love  of  their  neighbours,  it  may  be  by  compassion,  it  may  be  by 
moral  indignation  against  social  injustice  or  by  a  profound  the- 
oretical understanding  of  the  forces  at  work  in  society,  or, 
finally,  by  a  greater  energy  and  logical  coherence  in  the  transla- 
tion of  their  principles  into  practice.  In  any  case,  they  are  ex- 
ceptional individualities,  these  bourgeois  who,  deserting  the  class 
in  which  they  were  born,  give  a  deliberate  direction  to  the  in- 
stincts still  slumbering  in  the  proletariat,  and  thus  hasten  the 
emancipation  of  the  proletarian  class  as  a  whole. 

The  proletarian  mass  is  at  first  aware  by  instinct  alone  of  the 
oppression  by  which  it  is  burdened,  for  it  entirely  lacks  the  in- 
struction which  might  give  a  clue  to  the  understanding  of  that 
historical  process  which  is  in  appearance  so  confused  and  laby- 
rinthine. It  would  seem  to  be  a  psychologico-historical  law  that 
any  class  which  has  been  enervated  and  led  to  despair  in  itself 
through  prolonged  lack  of  education  and  through  deprivation  of 
political  rights,  cannot  attain  to  the  possibility  of  energetic  ac- 
tion until  it  has  received  instruction  concerning  its  ethical  rights 
and  politico-economical  powers,  not  alone  from  members  of  its 
own  class,  but  also  from  those  who  belong  to  what  in  vulgar  par- 
lance are  termed  a  "higher"  class.  Great  class-movements  have 
hitherto  been  initiated  in  history  solely  by  the  simple  reflection : 
it  is  not  we  alone,  belonging  to  the  masses  without  education  and 
without  legal  rights,  who  believe  ourselves  to  be  oppressed,  but 
that  belief  as  to  our  condition  is  shared  by  those  who  have  a 
better  knowledge  of  the  social  mechanism  and  who  are  therefore 

^Karl  Marx,  The  Communist  Manifesto,  ''Vorwarts,"  Berlin,  1901,  6th 
ed.,  p.  16. 


238  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

better  able  to  judge;  since  the  cultured  people  of  the  upper 
classes  have  also  conceived  the  ideal  of  our  emancipation,  that 
ideal  is  not  a  mere  chimera.* 

The  socialist  theory  has  arisen  out  of  the  reflections  of  philos- 
ophers, economists,  sociologists,  and  historians.  In  the  socialist 
programmes  of  the  different  countries,  every  word  represents  a 
synthesis  of  the  work  of  numerous  learned  men.^  The  fathers 
of  modern  socialism  were  with  few  exceptions  men  of  science 
primarily,  and  in  the  second  place  only  were  they  politicians  in 
the  strict  sense  of  the  term.  It  is  true  that  before  the  days  of 
such  men  there  were  spontaneous  proletarian  movements  initi- 
ated by  an  instinctive  aspiration  towards  a  higher  intellectual 
and  economic  standard  of  life.  But  these  movements  manifest 
themselves  rather  as  the  mechanical  outcome  of  an  unreflecting 
though  legitimate  discontent,  than  as  the  consequence  of  a  genu- 
ine sentiment  of  revolt  inspired  by  a  clear  consciousness  of  op- 
pression. It  was  only  when  science  placed  itself  at  the  service 
of  the  working  class  that  the  proletarian  movement  became 
transformed  into  a  socialist  movement,  and  that  instinctive,  un- 
conscious, and  aimless  rebellion  was  replaced  by  conscious  as- 
piration, comparatively  clear,  and  strictly  directed  towards  a 
well-defined  end. 

Similar  phenomena  are  apparent  in  all  earlier  class  struggles. 
Every  great  class-movement  in  history  has  arisen  upon  the  insti- 
gation, with  the  co-operation,  and  under  the  leadership  of  men 
sprung  from  the  very  class  against  which  the  movement  was  di- 
rected. Spartacus,  who  urged  the  slaves  to  revolt  on  behalf  of 
their  freedom,  was,  it  is  true,  of  servile  origin,  but  he  was  a 
freedman,  a  Thracian  property-owner.  Thomas  Miinzer,  to 
whose  agitation  the  Thuringian  Peasants'  War  was  largely  due, 

*  This  sequence  of  ideas  is  so  obvious  that  its  recognition  has  been  gen- 
eral. Otto  von  Leixner,  for  instance,  notwithstanding  the  superficiality  of 
his  studies,  refers  to  it  in  his  psychological  sketches  upon  the  labour  move- 
ment in  Berlin.  (Cf.  Sosiale  Brief e  aus  Berlin,  1888-91,  Pfeilstlicker,  Ber- 
lin, 1891,  p.  147.) 

^  This  is  admitted  even  by  the  opponents  of  socialism.  Oldenberg,  for 
instance,  writes:  "From  the  historical  point  of  view,  socialism  is  an  ideal- 
ist fantasy,  mechanically  transplanted  into  the  heads  of  the  proletarian 
masses  from  the  highest  spheres  of  philosophical  and  scientific  thought. 
It  is  from  the  outset  a  misalliance,  described  by  Lassalle  as  'the  alliance 
between  science  and  the  workers'  "  (Karl  Oldenberg,  Die  Ziele  der 
deutscJien  Sozialdemokratie  in  Evangelisch-sosiale  Zeitfragen,  Grunow, 
Leipzig,  1891,  p.  58). 


THE  CLASS  STRUGGLE  239 

was  not  a  peasant  but  a  man  of  learning.  Florian  Geier  was  a 
knight.  The  most  distinguished  leaders  of  the  movement  for  the 
emancipation  of  the  tiers  etat  at  the  outset  of  the  French  Revolu- 
tion, Lafayette,  Mirabeau,  Roland,  and  Sieyes,  belonged  to  the 
privileged  classes,  and  Philippe-Egalite,  the  regicide,  was  even 
a  member  of  the  royal  house.  The  history  of  the  modern  labour 
movement  furnishes  no  exception  to  this  rule.  When  the  Ger- 
man historian,  Theodor  Lindner,  affirms  "  that  the  contemporary 
socialist  movement  is  always  ' '  called  to  life ' '  by  non- workers^  we 
must  indeed  criticize  the  statement,  which  recalls  to  our  mind 
the  working  of  the  necromancer 's  magic  wand :  ' '  Let  there  be 
a  labour  movement !  And  there  was  a  labour  movement. ' '  Lind- 
ner's  statement  is  likewise  inexact  and  incomplete,  because  it 
fails  to  recognize  that  this  "calling  to  life"  cannot  produce 
something  out  of  nothing,  and  that  it  cannot  be  the  work  of  one 
of  those  famous  "great  men"  whom  a  certain  school  of  his- 
torians make  the  corner-stone  of  their  theory  of  historical  causa- 
tion— for  the  coming  into  existence  of  the  labour  movement 
necessarily  presupposes  a  given  degree  of  social  and  economic 
development,  without  which  no  movement  can  be  initiated.  But 
Lindner's  view,  though  badly  formulated,  is  to  this  extent  true, 
that  the  heralds  of  the  modern  labour  movement  are  chiefly  de- 
rived from  the  ' '  cultured  classes. ' '  "^  The  great  precursors  of 
political  socialism  and  leading  representatives  of  philosophical 
socialism,  Saint-Simon,  Fourier,  and  Owen ;  the  founders  of 
political  socialism,  Louis  Blanc,  Blanqui,  and  Lassalle;  the 
fathers  of  economic  and  scientific  socialism,  Marx,  Engels,  and 
Rodbertus,  were  all  bourgeois  intellectuals.  Of  comparatively 
trifling  importance  in  the  international  field,  alike  in  respect  of 
theory  and  of  practice,  were  Wilhelm  Weitling,  the  tailor's  ap- 
prentice, and  Pierre  Leroux,  the  self-taught  philosopher.  It  is 
only  Proudhon,  the  working  printer,  a  solitary  figure,  who  at- 
tains to  a  position  of  superb  grandeur  in  this  field.  Even  among 
the  great  orators  who  during  recent  years  have  been  devoted  to 
the  cause  of  labour,  ex-bourgeois  constitute  the  great  majority, 
while  men  of  working-class  origin  are  altogether  exceptional. 
Pages  could  be  filled  with  the  names  of  leading  socialist  politi- 

*  Theodor  Lindner,  GescMchtsphilosophie,  Cotta,  Stuttgart,  1904,  2nd  ed., 
p.  132. 

^  This  was  pointed  out  by  Heinrich  von  Sybel  as  long  ago  as  1872.  Cf . 
Die  Lehren  des  heutigen  Sozialismus  u.  Kommunismus,  M.  Cohen,  Bonn, 
1872,  p.  91. 


240  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

cians  sprung  from  the  bourgeoisie,  whereas  in  a  single  breath  we 
could  complete  the  list  of  political  leaders  of  truly  working-class 
origin  whose  names  will  be  immortalized  in  the  history  of  their 
class.  We  have  Benoit  Malon,  August  Bebel,  and  Eduard  An- 
seele;  but  not  one  of  these,  although  they  are  great  practical 
leaders  of  the  working  class  and  potent  organizers,  is  numbered 
among  the  creative  theorists  of  socialism. 

The  presence  of  bourgeois  elements  in  the  proletarian  move- 
ment organized  to  form  a  political  party  is  a  historical  fact,  and 
one  which  may  be  noted  wherever  the  political  movement  of  the 
international  working  class  is  attentively  observed.®  This  phe- 
nomenon reproduces  itself  wherever  the  socialist  tree  throws  out 
new  branches^  as  may  be  seen,  for  example,  in  Japan  and  Brazil.^ 

Moreover,  this  phenomenon  must  be  considered  as  a  logical 
consequence   of  historical  evolution.     Nay  more,   it  has  been 

*In  studies  relating  to  individual  countries  this  has  been  made  almost 
everywhere  apparent.  Regarding  Italy,  cf.  Michels,  Proletariato  e  BorgJie- 
sia  nel  Movimento  Socialista  Italiano,  ed.  cit.,  pp.  19-118.  Regarding  Eng- 
land, cf.  Eduard  Bernstein,  Die  Arheiterhewegung,  ed.  cit.,  p.  144;  W.  E. 
H.  Lecky,  Democracy  and  Liberty,  Longmans,  London,  1899,  vol.  ii,  p.  370. 
Regarding  Russia,  cf.  Eine  geheime  Den'kschrift  iiber  die  nihilistischen 
Umtriebe  vom  Jahre  1875,  compiled  from  the  official  reports  of  the  Russian. 
Minister  of  Justice,  Count  von  der  Pahlen,  "Deutsche  Rundschau,"  anno 
vii  (1881),  fasc.  9;  and  from  the  revolutionary  side,  Bericht  an  den  Inter- 
nationalen  Sosialistischen  Congress  in  Paris,  1900,  Ueber  die  russische 
SozialdemoTcratische  Bewegung,  Geschrieben  im  Auftrage  des  Bundes  rus- 
sischer  Sosialdemokraten  von  der  Eedalction  der  Babotscheje  Djelo,  by  Boris 
Kricewski,  in  which  we  are  told  that  "the  propagandist  group  of  the  Rus- 
sian social  democracy  during  the  years  1890-5  consisted  almost  exclusively 
of  intellectuals  (p.  5).  Regarding  France,  Mermeix,  La  France  socialiste, 
Notes  d'un  Contemiiorain,  Fetscherin  and  Chuit,  Paris,  1886,  3rd  ed.,  p.  52. 
In  Holland,  the  bourgeois  elements  in  the  socialist  party  are  so  numerous, 
that  the  adversaries  of  socialism  have  taken  advantage  of  the  fact  to 
coin  a  nickname  for  the  party.  Its  official  name  is  Sociaal-Demokratische 
Arbeiders  Parti j,  known  for  short  as  S.D.A.P.  In  the  nickname,  the  ini- 
tials are  expanded  into  Studenten  Dorainees  en  Advokaten  Partij.  (Cf. 
Schaper,  Op.  de  Bres.  Alfabetisch  Strijdschrift  voor  de  Sociaal-Demo- 
Tcratie,  Stuffers,  The  Hague,  1905,  p.  23.) 

"Regarding  the  origin  of  socialism  in  Japan,  see  the  study  by  Gustav 
Eckstein,  Die  Arbeiterbewegung  im  modernen  Japan,  "Neue  Zeit, "  anno 
xxii,  vol,  i,  pp.  667  et  seq. — In  Brazil,  at  the  second  congress  of  the  So- 
cialist Workers  of  Brazil  held  at  Sao  Paulo  in  1902,  where  the  party  first 
became  firmly  organized  and  established  its  programme,  of  the  seven  per- 
sons constituting  the  party  executive,  no  less  than  three  bore  the  title  of 
"Doctor."  (Cf.  Paul  Lobe,  Die  sosialistische  Partei  Brasiliens,  "Neue 
Zeit,"  anno  xx,  vol.  ii,  p.  529.)  As  far  as  the  writer  is  aware,  the  two 
members  of  the  executive  of  Italian  origin  were  also  intellectuals. 


THE  CLASS  STRUGGLE  241 

shown  that  not  merely  the  presence  of  ex-bourgeois  in  the  party 
of  the  fighting  proletariat,  but  further  the  leading  role  which 
these  play  in  the  movement  for  proletarian  enfranchisement,  is 
the  outcome  of  historical  necessity. 

The  question  might  arise,  and  it  has  in  fact  been  mooted, 
whether  the  presence  of  a  large  number  of  bourgeois  refugees 
among  the  proletarian  militants  does  not  give  the  lie  to  the  the- 
ory of  the  class  struggle.  In  other  words,  we  have  to  ask  whether 
the  desired  future  social  order  in  which  all  class  distinctions  are 
to  be  abolished  (for  this  is  the  common  aim,  more  or  less  dis- 
tinctly formulated,  of  all  socialists  and  other  advanced  reform- 
ers, ethical  culturists,  anarchists,  neo-Christians,  etc.)  may  not 
come  to  be  realized  by  a  gradual  psychical  transformation  of  the 
bourgeoisie,  which  will  become  increasingly  aware  of  the  injus- 
tice of  its  peculiar  economic  and  social  privileges.  This  consid- 
eration naturally  leads  us  to  ask  whether  the  sharp  line  of  cleav- 
age which  exists  on  the  political  field  between  class-parties  rep- 
resenting class-interests  is  really  necessary,  or  whether  it  is  not 
a  sort  of  cruel  sport,  and  therefore  useless  and  injurious.  Ru- 
dolph Penzig,  editor  of  ' '  Ethische  Kultur, "  in  a  controversy  with 
the  present  writer,  went  so  far  as  to  claim  that  the  deserters 
from  the  bourgeoisie  to  the  socialist  ranks  were  ' '  precursors. ' '  ^° 
Now  this  expression  logically  involves  the  belief  that  these  bour- 
geois pioneers  will  be  followed  by  the  whole  mass  of  the  bour- 
geoisie, who  will  thus  come  over  to  the  camp  of  those  who  eco- 
nomically and  socially  are  their  moral  enemies.  We  might  be 
inclined  to  speak  of  this  as  a  theory  of  hara-kiri,  did  we  not 
know  that  hara-kiri  is  not  usually  practised  as  a  deliberate  vol- 
untary act,  but  is  effected  in  obedience  to  orders  from  above,  to 
coercion  from  without.  Let  us  briefly  examine  the  soundness  of 
the  theory  in  question. 

The  socialist  poet  Edmondo  de  Amicis  enumerates  the  factors 
which  he  regards  as  working  most  effectively  for  the  ultimate  vic- 
tory of  socialism.  There  is  the  general  sense  of  weariness  which, 
in  his  opinion,  follows  a  great  industrial  crisis,  and  the  utter 
disgust  felt  by  the  possessing  classes  with  the  unending  strug- 
gle; there  is  the  anxiety  felt  by  these  same  classes  to  avoid  aU 
all  costs  a  revolution  in  which  they  are  destined  to  perish  mis- 
erably, overcome  by  fire  and  sword ;  there  is,  finally,  the  indefi- 

^^  Eudolph  Penzig,  Die  TJnvernunft  des  KJassenlcampf es,  written  in  an- 
swer to  E.  Michels,  Endziel,  Intransigens ,  Ethik,  "Ethische  Kultur,"  De- 
cember 26,  1903,  xii,  No.  52. 


X 


242  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

nite  need,  with  which  the  bourgeoisie  is  also  affected,  for  rejuve- 
nation and  idealism,  and  for  avoiding  ' '  the  horror  of  living  amid 
the  ruins  of  an  expiring  world.""  A  similar  train  of  thought 
was  expressed  fifty  years  earlier  by  Heinrich  Heine,  who  lacked 
to  make  him  a  fighter  for  socialism  merely  the  courage  to  give 
open  expression  to  his  political  ideas.  In  his  letters  from  Paris 
upon  politics,  art,  and  national  life  he  writes,  under  date  June 
15,  1843:  "I  wish  here  to  draw  especial  attention  to  the  point 
that  for  communism  it  is  an  incalculable  advantage  that  the  en- 
emy against  which  the  communists  contend  has,  despite  all  his 
power,  no  firm  moral  standing.  Modern  society  defends  itself 
simply  because  it  must  do  so,  without  any  belief  in  its  own 
rights,  and  even  without  any  self-respect,  just  like  that  ancient 

society  which  crumbled  to  ruin  at  the  coming  of  the  carpenter's 
son."  12 

In  many  respects,  the  views  of  these  two  poets  may  be  ac- 
cepted. And  yet  it  seems  more  than  questionable  whether  a  dy- 
ing bourgeois  society  would  not  defend  itself  to  the  last,  and 
endeavour  to  maintain  by  force  of  arms,  if  need  be,  its  property 
and  its  prerogatives,  however  greatly  these  might  be  undermined 
and  threatened,  in  the  hope  that  the  final  victory  of  the  prole- 
tariat might  at  least  be  postponed.  Unquestionably,  too,  Heine's 
opinion  in  1843  that  in  the  bourgeoisie  of  his  day  there  was  a 
widespread  lack  of  confidence,  is  open  to  criticism,  seeing  that, 
as  we  all  know,  the  bourgeois  resistance  is  to  this  day  animated 
by  a  vigorous  belief  in  his  own  rectitude.  But  the  fundamental 
thought  of  de  Amicis  and  Heine  is  so  far  sound,  in  that  a  society 
which  lacks  a  lively  faith  in  its  own  rights  is  already  in  its 
political  death-agony.  A  capacity  for  the  tough  and  persevering 
defence  of  privilege  presupposes  in  the  privileged  class  the  ex- 
istence of  certain  qualities,  and  in  especial  of  a  relentless  energy, 
which  might  thrive,  indeed,  in  association  with  cruelty  and  un- 
eonscientiousness,  but  which  is  enormously  more  prosperous  if 
based  upon  a  vigorous  faith  in  its  own  rectitude.  As  Pareto  has 
said,^^  the  permeation  of  a  dominant  class  by  humanitarian 
ideas,  which  lead  that  class  to  doubt  its  own  moral  right  to  exist- 
ence, demoralizes  its  members  and  makes  them  inapt  for  defence. 

The  same  law  operates  likewise  where  men  are  absolutely  con- 

"Edmondo  de  Amicis,  Lotte  civili,  Nerbini,  Florence,  1899,  p.  294. 
>- Heinrich    Heine,    Lutetia   in   Sdmtliche    Werlce,    Hoffmann   u.    Kampe, 
Hamburg,  1890,  x,  p.  93. 
"  Vilfredo  Pareto,  Les  Systemes  sociaUstes,  ed.  cit.,  vol.  i,  pp.  37  and  57. 


THE  CLASS  STRUGGLE  243 

vineed  of  their  sacred  right  to  existence.  It  is  equally  valid  of 
national  aggregates.  Where  a  nation  lacks  the  sense  of  such  a 
right,  decadence  and  ruin  inevitably  ensue.  We  may  regard  it 
as  an  established  historical  law  that  races,  legal  systems,  institu- 
tions, and  social  classes,  are  inevitably  doomed  to  destruction 
from  the  moment  they  or  those  who  represent  them  have  lost 
faith  in  their  own  future.  The  Poles,  widely  dispersed,  and  dis- 
membered among  three  separate  powers,  have  preserved  their 
nationality  and  their  faith  in  themselves  and  in  their  rights.  No 
power  in  the  world,  not  to  mention  the  Prusso-Russian  micro- 
cosm, can  annihilate  the  Polish  people  whilst  their  brains  still 
cherish  the  consciousness  of  their  right  to  national  existence. 
The  Wends,  on  the  other  hand,  a  Slav  people  like  the  Poles, 
owing  to  the  nature  of  the  historical  epoch  in  which  they  were 
subdued  and  to  the  peculiar  circumstances  under  which  this 
historical  occurrence  took  place,  did  not  succeed  in  retaining  in- 
tact the  consciousness  of  their  national  existence — if  they  ever 
possessed  one.  Even  where,  as  in  the  Spreewald,  they  have  re- 
tained their  language,  they  have  been  thoroughly  absorbed  into 
the  German  system,  and  are  in  our  day,  as  Wends,  completely 
expunged  from  the  history  of  civilization.  Although  they  in- 
habit quite  a  large  area  of  Germany,  they  have  in  many  cases 
so  utterly  lost  all  sense  of  their  Slav  origin  as  to  have  become 
the  most  ardent  Pan-Germanists,  although  they  are  in  reality 
Germans  only  in  virtue  of  the  legal  fiction  of  the  state  and  of 
the  customs  and  speech  which  have  been  imposed  upon  them  by 
their  ancient  conquerors. 

No  social  struggle  in  history  has  ever  been  permanently  won 
unless  the  vanquished  has  as  a  preliminary  measure  been  mor- 
ally weakened.  The  French  Revolution  was  rendered  possible 
only  because  the  ardent  pre-revolutionary  writers,  Voltaire, 
D'Alembert,  Rousseau,  Holbach,  Diderot,  etc.,  who  made  so 
plainly  manifest  the  "immorality"  of  the  economic  privileges 
possessed  by  the  ruling  classes  of  the  old  regime,  had  already 
demoralized  (in  the  psychological  sense  of  the  word)  a  conspic- 
uous portion  of  the  nobility  and  the  clergy.  Louis  Blanc  re- 
marked, apropos  of  the  French  Revolution  :  ' '  Sortie  vibrante  de 
I'Encyclopedie,  ce  grand  laboratoire  des  idees  du  XVIIP  siecle, 
elle  n'avait  plus  en  1789,  qu'a  prendre  materiellement  possession 
d'un  domaine  deja  eonquis  moralement. "  ^*     The  unification  of 

"Louis  Blanc,  Organisation  du  Travail,  Camille,  Paris,  1845,  4th  ed.,  p. 
ziiL 


244  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

Italy,  previously  broken  up  into  seven  states,  was  effected  with 
a  minimal  shedding  of  blood  (if  we  except  the  deaths  that  re- 
sulted in  the  struggle  against  foreigners),  and  after  the  founda- 
tion of  the  kingdom  there  was  hardly  a  single  inhabitant  of  the 
peninsula  who  shed  any  tears  over  the  fate  of  the  fallen  dy- 
nasties, this  attitude  of  mind  forming  a  strong  contrast  to  what 
happened  in  Germany  in  the  corresponding  historical  period. 
The  reason  for  the  difference  was  that  in  Italy  the  unification  of 
minds  had  long  preceded  the  unification  of  administration.^^  In 
the  war  of  secession  in  the  United  States  of  America,  it  was  not 
merely  the  armed  strength  of  the  Northern  states  which  decided 
the  issue,  but  also  the  consciousness  of  moral  error  which  to- 
wards the  end  of  the  war  began  to  spread  among  a  large  number 
of  the  slave-owners  of  the  Southern  states.^^  Examples  of  this 
nature  could  be  multiplied  at  will. 

The  aim  of  agitation  is  to  shake  the  opponent's  self-confidence, 
to  convince  adversaries  of  the  higher  validity  of  our  own  argu- 
ments. Socialism  can  least  of  all  afford  to  underrate  the  enor- 
mous force  of  rhetoric,  the  compelling  power  of  persuasion,  for 
it  is  to  these  means  that  socialism  owes  its  great  successes.  But 
the  force  of  persuasion  has  a  natural  limit  imposed  by  social 
relationships.  Where  it  is  used  to  influence  the  convictions  of 
the  popular  masses  or  of  social  classes  to  Induce  them  to  take 
part  in  a  movement  which  is  directed  towards  their  own  libera- 
tion, it  is  easy,  under  normal  conditions,  to  attain  to  positive 
results.  But  attempts  at  persuasion  fail  miserably,  as  we  learn 
again  and  again  from  the  history  of  social  struggles,  when  they 
are  addressed  to  privileged  classes,  in  order  to  induce  these  to 

"  In  the  Pontifical  State,  even  in  the  last  years  of  its  existence,  a  peti- 
tion of  the  Jewish  community  against  the  severity  of  tlie  taxation  imposed 
upon  them  was  rejected  on  the  express  ground  that  the  Jews  deserved  to 
be  specially  taxed  because  they  had  killed  the  Saviour  of  mankind.  At 
popular  festivals  the  Jews  had  to  furnish  a  pig,  which  for  the  enjoyment 
of  the  people  was  rolled  down  from  the  Testaccio;  until  Clement  IX  gra- 
ciously modified  the  observance,  it  had  been  a  Jew  and  not  a  pig!  Not- 
withstanding these  practices,  which  bear  witness  to  the  contempt  felt  for 
the  Jews,  the  Komans,  immediately  after  the  incorporation  of  the  Pontif- 
ical State  into  the  kingdom  of  Italy,  elected  a  considerable  number  of 
their  Jewish  fellow-citizens  as  municipal  councillors,  provincial  councillors, 
and  parliamentary  deputies.  "The  revolution  which  had  taken  place  in 
opinion  was  sufficient  to  remove  all  obstacles"  (Aristide  Gabelli,  Boma  e  i 
Momani,  "Nuova  Antologia, "  anno  xvi,  p,  420). 

"  Woodrow  Wilson,  A  History  of  the  American  People,  Harper,  New 
York  and  London,  1903,  vol.  iv,  p.  311. 


BOURGEOISIE  AND  CLASS  STRUGGLE  245 

abandon,  to  their  own  disadvantage,  as  a  class  and  as  individ- 
uals, the  leading  positions  they  occupy  in  society. 

The  individual  human  being  is  not  an  economic  automaton. 
His  life  consists  of  a  perennial  conflict  between  his  financial 
needs  and  the  interests  which  bind  him  to  a  given  class  or  caste, 
on  the  one  hand,  and,  on  the  other,  those  tendencies  which  are 
outside  class  considerations,  outside  the  orbit  of  social  struggles, 
and  which  may  arouse  in  his  mind  passions  capable  of  diverting 
him  from  a  purely  economic  path,  attracting  him  within  the 
sphere  of  influence  of  some  ideal  sun,  leading  him  to  act  in 
ways  more  consonant  with  his  own  individual  character.  But  all 
this  applies  only  to  the  individual  human  being.  The  mass,  if 
we  leave  out  of  consideration  certain  pathological  influences  to 
which  it  is  exposed,  and  which  may  lead  its  members  into  ac- 
tivities conflicting  with  purely  material  advantage,  is  unques- 
tionably an  economic  automaton.  The  coimnon  manifestations 
of  its  members  are  stamped  with  the  seal  of  the  economic  inter- 
ests of  the  mass,  just  as  the  individual  sheep  of  a  flock  bear  the 
mark  of  their  owner.  Consequently  the  seal  need  not  necessarily 
be  useful  to  the  individual  who  bears  it,  nor  correspondent  with 
his  ends;  any  more  than  is  the  imprint  upon  the  back  of  the 
sheep,  which  often  consigns  the  animal  to  slaughter.  But  in  the 
human  herd  the  economic  imprint  extends  its  influence  into  the 
physical  life.  The  kind  of  work  and  of  interests  imposed  by 
economic  conditions  makes  spirit  and  body  alike  dependent  on 
occupation. 

It  is  doubtless  true  that  the  socialist  doctrine  has  won  over 
many  children  of  bourgeois  families,  penetrating  their  minds  so 
profoundly  as  to  lead  them  to  abandon  everything  else — to  leave 
father  and  mother,  friends  and  relatives,  social  position  and  re- 
spect. Without  regret  and  without  hesitation  they  have  conse- 
crated their  lives  to  the  emancipation  of  humanity  as  conceived 
by  socialism.  But  we  have  here  to  do  with  isolated  instances 
only,  and  not  with  compact  groups  representing  an  entire  eco- 
nomic class.  The  class  to  which  the  deserters  belong  is  no  wise 
weakened  by  the  desertion.  A  class  considered  as  a  whole  never 
spontaneously  surrenders  its  position  of  advantage.  It  never 
recognizes  any  moral  reason  sufficiently  powerful  to  compel  it 
to  abdicate  in  favour  of  its  ''poorer  brethren."  Such  action  is 
prevented,  if  by  nothing  else,  by  class  egoism,^'^  a  natural  attri- 

"From  class  egoism  arises  the  only  form  of  solidarity  known  to  us  in 


246  political;  parties 

bute  of  the  proletarian  as  of  other  social  classes,  with  the  dif- 
ference that,  in  the  case  of  the  proletariat,  class  egoism  comes 
in  ultimate  analysis  to  coincide — in  abstracto,  at  least — with  the 
ideal  of  a  humanity  knowing  nothing  of  classes.^^  It  will  not  he 
denied  that  in  the  various  strata  of  the  dominant  and  possessing 
classes  there  are  considerable  differences  in  the  extent  to  which 
this  class  egoism  is  developed.  There  are  certain  representatives 
of  landed  property,  and  above  all  the  Prussian  junkers,  who 
bluntly  declare  even  to-day  that  we  should  treat  as  criminals  or 
lunatics  all  who  claim  political,  economic,  or  social  rights  by 
which  their  own  class-privileges  are  endangered.  There  are 
other  classes  in  modern  society  less  hostile  to  reforms  and  less 
crassly  egoistic  than  the  numerically  small  class  of  the  Prussian 
junkers;  but  these  too  are  not  accessible  to  considerations  of 
social  justice,  except  in  so  far  as  no  sensible  injury  is  offered 
to  their  instinctive  class-interests.^^    The  proletariat  is  therefore 

addition  to  the  coercive  (that  of  the  state,  the  army,  etc.).  Collective  life 
arises  only  out  of  the  need  for  defence  against  common  enemies.  (Cf. 
Michels,  La  Solidarite  en  Allemagne,  a  report  to  the  International  Congress 
of  Sociology  held  at  Berne,  August,  1909,  and  published  in  "Annales  de 
I'Institut  International  de  Sociologie, "  Giard  et  Briere,  Paris,  1910,  vol. 
xii.) — At  the  same  time  it  is  unquestionable  that  with  increasing  class  con- 
sciousness the  social  sentiment  becomes  narrowed  in  all  classes,  and  that 
the  morality  of  conduct  towards  the  members  of  other  classes  diminishes, 
whilst  morality  towards  other  members  of  the  same  class  is  enhanced.  This 
was  pointed  out  quite  recently  by  one  of  the  Dutch  socialists,  amid  storms 
of  dissent  from  bourgeois  and  even  from  socialist  moralists  (Herman 
Gorter,  Het  Historisch  Materialisme,  Voor  Arheiders  verklaard,  "De  Tri- 
bune," Amsterdam,   1909,  p.    72). 

""All  earlier  classes  which  attained  to  dominion  endeavoured  to  secure 
the  position  they  had  conquered  by  subjecting  the  whole  of  society  to  the 
conditions  of  their  system  of  exploitation.  The  proletariat,  on  the  other 
hand,  can  effect  a  conquest  of  the  social  productive  forces  only  by  abol- 
ishing the  existing  mode  of  appropriation  and  therewith  all  previously 
existing  modes  of  appropriation.  Proletarians  have  no  property  of  their 
own  to  safeguard"  (Marx,  Communist  Manifesto,  ed.  cit.,  p.  17). 

"  It  is  by  this  that  firm  and  unalterable  limits  are  imposed  upon  so-called 
social  reforms.  The  Prussian  conservatives,  constituting  the  party  of  the 
great  landed  proprietors,  favoured  laws  for  the  protection  of  the  workers 
until  they  perceived  that  an  increase  in  the  number  of  manufacturing  oper- 
atives was  leading  to  a  dearth  of  labour  in  the  rural  districts.  Thencefor- 
ward they  showed  themselves  hostile  to  all  measures  for  the  improvement 
of  the  condition  of  the  industrial  workers,  (Cf.  the  brief  but  brilliant 
essay  by  the  Baroness  Elisabeth  von  Eichthofen,  at  one  time  factory  inspec- 
tor at  Heidelberg,  Ueber  die  historisclie  Wandlung  in  der  SteUmig  der 
autoritdren  Parteien  zur  Arbeiterschutsgesetzgebung,  und  die  Motive  dieser 
Wandlungen,  Kossler,  Heidelberg,  1901.) 


BOURGEOISIE  AND  CLASS  STRUGGLE  247 

perfectly  logical  in  constituting  itself  into  a  class  party,  and 
in  considering  that  the  struggle  against  the  bourgeoisie  in  all  its 
gradations,  viewed  as  a  single  class,  is  the  only  possible  means  of 
realizing  a  social  order  in  which  knowledge,  health,  and  property 
shall  not  be,  as  they  are  to-day,  the  monopolies  of  a  minority. 

There  is  no  contradiction  whatever  between  the  necessity 
which  leads  the  proletariat  to  fight  the  bourgeoisie  on  the  lines 
of  the  class  struggle  and  the  necessity  which  leads  it  to  lay  so 
mueh  stress  upon  the  general  principle  of  human  rights.  Un- 
questionably, in  pursuit  of  the  conquest  of  power,  persuasion 
is  an  excellent  means  to  employ,  for,  as  has  already  been  pointed 
out,  a  class  which  has  been  convinced  even  against  its  will  that 
its  adversary's  ideal  is  based  upon  better  reasons  than  its  own 
and  is  inspired  by  loftier  moral  aims,  will  certainly  lack  force 
to  continue  the  struggle ;  it  will  have  lost  that  faith  in  its  own 
rights  which  alone  confers  upon  resistance  a  moral  justification. 
Persuasion,  however,  does  not  suffice,  for  a  class,  even  if  par- 
tially paralysed  by  its  recognition  of  the  fact  that  the  right  of 
the  hostile  class  is  superior  to  its  own,  would  none  the  less,  hyp- 
notized by  its  own  class  egoism,  continue  the  struggle,  and 
would  in  the  end  yield  to  the  force,  not  of  words,  but  of  facts. 
The  writer  believes  that  all  these  considerations  suffice  to  es- 
tablish as  an  axiom  that  the  entrance  of  bourgeois  elements  into 
the  ranks  of  the  workers  organized  as  a  class  party  is  determined 
mainly  by  psychological  motives,  and  that  it  represents  a  process 
of  spontaneous  selection.  It  must  be  regarded  as  a  logical  con- 
■  sequence  of  the  historical  phase  of  development  through  which 
w^e  are  now  passing,  but  in  view  of  the  special  conditions  which 
induce  it  there  is  no  reason  to  interpret  it  as  a  preliminary 
symptom  of  a  spontaneous  and  general  dissolution  of  the  bour- 
geoisie. To  sum  up,  the  issue  of  the  struggle  which  is  proceed- 
ing between  the  two  great  classes  representing  conflicting  eco- 
nomic interests  cannot  possibly  be  decided  by  the  passage  of 
individual  or  isolated  molecules  from  one  side  to  the  other. 


CHAPTER  II 

ANALYSIS   OF  THE  BOURGEOIS  ELEMENTS  IN  THE 
SOCIALIST  LEADERSHIP 

Socialist  leaders,  considered  in  respect  of  their  social  origin, 
may  be  divided  into  two  classes,  those  who  belong  primarily  to 
the  proletariat,  and  those  derived  from  the  bourgeoisie,  or  rather 
from  the  intellectual  stratum  of  the  bourgeoisie.  The  lower 
middle  class,  that  of  the  petty  bourgeois,  the  minor  agricultur- 
ists, independent  artisans,  and  shopkeepers,  have  furnished  no 
more  than  an  insignificant  contingent  of  socialist  leaders.  In 
the  most  favourable  conditions,  the  representatives  of  this  lower 
middle  class  follow  the  labour  movement  as  sympathetic  onlook- 
ers, and  at  times  actually  join  its  ranks.  Hardly  ever  do  they 
become  numbered  among  its  leaders. 

Of  these  two  classes  of  leaders,  the  ex-bourgeois,  although  at 
the  outset  they  were  naturally  opposed  to  socialism,  prove 
themselves  on  the  average  to  be  animated  by  a  more  fervent 
idealism  than  the  leaders  of  proletarian  origin.  The  difference 
is  readily  explained  on  psychological  grounds.  In  most  cases  the 
proletarian  does  not  need  to  attain  to  socialism  by  a  gradual 
evolutionary  process;  he  is,  so  to  speak,  born  a  socialist,  born  a 
member  of  the  party — at  least,  this  happens  often  enough,  al- 
though it  does  not  apply  to  all  strata  of  the  proletariat  and  to 
all  places.  In  the  countries  where  capitalist  development  is  of 
long  standing,  there  exists  in  certain  working-class  milieux  and 
even  in  entire  categories  of  workers  a  genuine  socialist  tradi- 
tion. The  son  inherits  the  class  spirit  of  the  father,  and  he 
doubtless  from  the  grandfather.  "With  them,  socialism  is  **in 
the  blood."  To  this  it  must  be  added  that  actual  economic  re- 
lationships (with  the  class  struggle  inseparable  from  these,  in 
which  every  individual,  however  refractory  he  may  be  to  so- 
cialist theory,  is  forced  to  participate)  compel  the  proletarian  ta 
join  the  labour  party.  Socialism,  far  from  being  in  opposi- 
tion to  his  class  sentiment,  constitutes  its  plainest  and  most  con- 
spicuous expression.     The  proletarian,  the  wage-earner,  the  en- 

248 


BOURGEOIS  LEADERS  249 

rolled  member  of  the  party,  is  a  socialist  on  the  ground  of  di- 
rect personal  interest.  Adhesion  to  socialism  may  cause  him 
grave  material  damage,  such  as  the  loss  of  his  employment,  and 
may  even  make  it  impossible  for  him  to  gain  his  bread.  Yet 
his  socialist  views  are  the  spontaneous  outcome  of  his  class  ego- 
ism, and  he  endures  the  hardships  to  which  they  may  lead  all 
the  more  cheerfully  because  he  is  suffering  for  the  common 
cause.  He  is  comforted  by  the  more  or  less  explicit  recognition 
or  gratitude  of  his  comrades.  The-  action  of  the  socialist  prole- 
tarian is  a  class  action,  and  in  many  cases  it  may  notably  favour 
the  immediate  interests  of  the  individual.^ 

Very  different  is  the  case  of  socialists  of  bourgeois  origin. 
Hardly  any  of  these  are  born  in  a  socialist  milieu.  On  the  con- 
trary, in  their  families  the  tradition  is  definitely  hostile  to  the 
workers,  or  at  least  full  of  disdain  for  the  aspirations  of  modern 
socialism.  Among  the  bourgeois,  just  as  much  as  among  the 
proletarians,  the  son  inherits  the  spirit  of  the  father,  but  in  this 
case  it  is  the  class  spirit  of  the  bourgeoisie.  The  young  bour- 
geois has  "in  the  blood"  not  socialism,  but  the  capitalist  men- 
tality in  one  of  its  numerous  varieties,  and  he  inherits  in  addi- 
tion an  intellectualism  which  makes  him  proud  of  his  supposed 
superiority.  We  have  further,  on  the  one  hand,  to  take  into  ac- 
count the  economic  conditions  in  w'hich  the  bourgeois  child  is 
born  and  grows  to  maturity,  and  on  the  other  the  education 
which  he  receives  at  school,  all  of  which  predisposes  him  to  feel 
nothing  but  aversion  for  the  struggles  of  a  working  class  pur- 
suing socialist  aspirations.  In  his  economic  environment  he 
learns  to  tremble  for  his  wealth,  to  tremble  when  he  thinks  of 
the  shock  his  class  will  one  day  have  to  sustain  when  attacked 
by  the  organized  masses  of  the  quatrieme  etat.  Thus  his  class 
egoism  becomes  more  acute,  and  is  even  transformed  into  an 
implacable  hatred.  His  education,  based  upon  official  science, 
contributes  to  confirm  and  to  strengthen  his  sentiments  as  a 
member  of  the  master  class.  The  influence  which  the  school  and 
the  domestic  environment  exercise  upon  the  youthful  scion  of 
the  bourgeoisie  is  of  such  potency  that  even  when  his  parents 
are  themselves  socialist  sympathizers  and  on  moral  and  intellec- 
tual grounds  devoted  to  the  cause  of  the  workers,  it  most  com- 
monly happens  that  his  bourgeois  instincts  gain  the  upper  hand 
over  the  socialist  traditions  of  his  family.    TVe  learn  from  actual 

^  Cf .  Part  rV,  chap.  iv. 


250  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

experience  that  it  is  very  rare  for  the  children  of  socialists, 
when  they  have  received  the  education  of  intellectuals,  to  fol- 
low in  their  parents'  footsteps.  The  cases  of  the  children  of 
IMarx,  Longuet^  Liebknecht,  and  Molkenbuhr,  remain  altogether 
exceptional.  It  cannot  be  doubted  that  the  rarity  of  such  in- 
stances is  due  to  the  methods  of  education  which  usually  prevail 
in  a  socialist  family,  methods  which  have  nothing  in  common 
with  socialism.  Even  when  it  is  otherwise,  when  the  immediate 
family  environment  is  not  opposed  to  the  development  of  the 
socialist  consciousness,  the  young  man  of  bourgeois  origin  is 
strongly  influenced  by  the  milieu  in  which  he  is  brought  up. 
Even  after  he  has  joined  the  socialist  party,  he  will  retain  a 
certain  solidarity  with  the  class  from  which  he  has  sprung;  for 
example,  in  his  relations  with  the  servants  in  his  household  he 
will  remain  always  an  employer,  an  '  *  exploiter, ' '  in  the  sociologi- 
cal if  not  in  the  coarser  sense  of  the  latter  term.  For  the  bour- 
geois, adhesion  to  socialism  signifies  an  estrangement  from  his 
own  class,  in  most  cases  extensive  social  and  ideal  injury,  and 
often  actual  material  loss.  In  the  case  of  the  petty  bourgeois, 
the  evolution  towards  socialism  may  occur  peacefully,  for  by  his 
intellectual  and  social  conditions  the  petty  bourgeois  is  closely 
approximated  to  the  proletarian,  and  above  all  to  the  better  paid 
manual  worker,  from  whom  he  is  in  many  cases  separated  by 
purely  imaginary  barriers  composed  of  all  kinds  of  class  preju- 
dices. But  the  wealthier  the  family  to  which  the  bourgeois  be- 
longs, the  more  strongly  it  is  attached  to  its  family  traditions, 
the  higher  the  social  position  that  it  occupies,  the  more  difficult 
is  it  for  him,  and  the  more  painful,  to  break  with  his  surround- 
ings, and  to  adhere  to  the  labour  movement. 

For  the  son  of  a  wealthy  capitalist,  of  an  official  in  the  higher 
ranks,  or  for  a  member  of  the  old-established  landed  aristocracy, 
to  join  the  socialists  is  to  provoke  a  catastrophe.^  He  is  free  to 
give  himself  up  to  vague  and  harmless  humanitarian  dreams, 
and  even  in  private  conversation  to  speak  of  himself  as  a  "so- 
cialist." But  as  soon  as  he  displays  the  intention  of  becoming 
an  active  member  of  the  socialist  party,  of  undertaking  public 
work  on  its  behalf,  of  enrolling  himself  as  an  actual  member  of 
the  "rebel"  army,  the  deserter  from  the  bourgeoisie  is  regarded 

'Cf.,  for  example,  the  first  volume  of  Memoiren  einer  Sosialistin,  by 
Lily  Braun,  the  daughter  of  the  German  general  von  Kretsehmann  (Lan- 
gen,  Munich,  1909),  where  we  find  an  admirable  description  of  the  con- 
ditions to  which  reference  has  been  made  in  the  text. 


BOURGEOIS  LEADERS  251 

by  his  own  class  as  either  a  knave  or  a  fool.  His  social  prestige 
falls  below  zero,  and  so  great  is  the  hostility  displayed  towards 
him  that  he  is  obliged  to  break  off  all  relations  with  his  family. 
The  most  intimate  ties  are  abruptly  severed.  His  relatives  turn 
their  backs  upon  him.  He  has  burned  his  boats  and  broken 
with  the  past. 

What  are  the  motives  which  may  lead  the  intellectual  to  de- 
sert the  bourgeoisie  and  to  adhere  to  the  party  of  the  workers? 
Among  those  who  do  this  we  may  distinguish  two  fundamental 
types. 

There  is  first  of  all  the  man  of  science.  The  ends  which  he 
pursues  are  of  an  objective  character,  but  to  the  vulgar  these 
seem  at  first  sight  devoid  of  practical  utility,  and  even  fantasti- 
cal and  extravagant.  The  stimulus  which  drives  him  is  ideal- 
istic in  this  sense,  that  he  is  capable  of  sacrificing  all  other  goods 
to  science  and  its  gains.  In  thus  acting,  he  obeys  the  powerful 
impulse  of  his  egoism,  though  it  is  an  egoism  ennobled.  Scien- 
tific coherency  is  an  inborn  need  of  his  nature.  Psychology 
teaches  us  that  in  human  beings  every  free  exercise  of  faculty 
produces  a  sentiment  of  pleasure.  Consequently  the  sacrifices 
which  the  socialist  man  of  science  makes  for  the  party  serve  to 
increase  the  sum  of  his  personal  satisfaction.  Notwithstanding 
all  the  material  injuries  he  will  suffer  as  a  bourgeois  in  joining 
the  socialist  party,  he  will  have  gained  a  greater  inward  content 
and  will  have  a  more  tranquil  conscience.  In  some  cases,  too, 
his  sentiments  will  take  the  form  of  an  ambition  to  render  signal 
services  to  the  cause.  In  his  case,  of  course,  this  ambition  is 
very  different  from  the  grosser  ambition  of  those  who  look 
merely  for  an  increase  in  personal  well-being — for  a  career, 
wealth,  and  the  like. 

The  second  category  consists  of  those  who  are  inspired  with 
an  intense  sentimental  attachment  to  socialism,  who  burn,  so  to 
speak,  with  the  sacred  fire.  Such  a  man  usually  becomes  a  so- 
cialist when  he  is  quite  young,  before  material  considerations  and 
precautions  have  erected  a  barrier  in  the  way  of  obedience  to 
the  impulses  of  his  sanguine  and  enthusiastic  temperament.  He 
is  inspired  with  the  ardour  of  the  neophyte  and  the  need  for 
devoting  himself  to  the  service  of  his  kind.^    The  principal  mo- 

'  There  are  numerous  Italian  novels  describing  the  conversion  of  the 
young  man  of  family  to  the  principles  of  modern  socialism,  and  im  these 
the  conversion  is  always  attributed  to  sentiments  of  generosity  and  com- 
passion.    Cf.  Edmondo  de  Amicis,  Lotte  civili  (Nerbini,  Florence,  1899), 


252  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

tives  which  animate  him  are  a  noble  disdain  for  injustice  and  a 
love  for  the  weak  and  the  poor,  a  delight  in  self-sacrifice  for  the 
realization  of  great  ideas,  for  these  are  motives  which  often  give 
courage  and  love  of  battle  to  the  most  timid  and  inert  charac- 
ters.* With  all  this,  there  is  usually  found  in  the  socialist  en- 
thusiast of  bourgeois  origin  a  considerable  dose  of  optimism,  a 
tendency  to  overestimate  the  significance  of  the  moral  forces  of 

and  especially  the  admirable  sketch  in  this  volume  (pp.  53  et  seq.)  entitled 
A  una  Signora;  G.  B.  Bianchi  (pseudonym  of  the  psychiatrist  Pietro 
Petrazzani)  in  his  romance  of  Emilian  life  II  prima  Maggio  (La  Poligra- 
fica,  Milan,  1901);  Vincenzo  Vacirca  in  his  novel  L'Apostata  ("Parola  del 
Soeialisti, "  Eavenna,  1905). — In  the  best-known  Dutch  socialist  novel, 
entitled  Barthold  Meryan,  by  Baroness  Cornelie  Huygens  (Van  Kampen, 
5th  ed.),  the  hero  is  a  young  bourgeois  intellectual  inspired  by  a  lofty  spirit 
of  self-denial. — To  the  same  motive  has  been  attributed  the  adhesion  to 
socialism  comparatively  late  in  life  of  the  Swedish  poet  Gustaf  af  Geijer- 
stam.  Under  date  July  11,  1910,  the  "Frankfurter  Zeitung"  writes  as 
follows:  "What,  then,  were  the  motives  that  led  Geijerstam,  a  man  of 
thoroughly  conservative  spirit,  and  proud  of  his  rank,  into  the  socialist 
camp?  On  the  one  hand,  unquestionably  there  were  operative  the  influ- 
ences of  Strindberg's  circle,  to  which  Geijerstam  belonged  in  his  youth; 
but  his  principal  reason  was  his  tenderness  of  conscience.  There  has  been 
a  general  awakening  of  the  social  conscience  in  all  countries,  but  in  Sweden 
and  in  the  work  of  Geijerstam  this  awakening  attained  its  climax." — The 
generous  impulse  of  the  receptive  youthful  mind  is  often  extremely  strong. 
It  is  true  that  sometimes  the  direction  of  this  impulse  becomes  transferred 
to  some  smaller  but  nearer  goal  which  has  nothing  in  common  with  the  orig- 
inal aim.  Eead,  for  example,  the  description  given  in  his  Tagebuch  (Lan- 
gen,  Munich,  1907)  by  Otto  Erich  Hartleben  of  his  own  development,  a  de- 
scription in  which  he  confesses  himself  with  perfect  frankness.  "For  a 
long  period  in  my  life  I  was  ashamed  of  my  natural  love  of  pleasure.  I 
"was  never  indeed  a  Christian,  but  I  sometimes  believed  it  to  be  my  duty 
to  become  a  socialist,  and  regarded  it  as  essential  to  devote  my  energies 
to  the  service  of  some  good  cause.  I  have  put  all  this  behind  me.  I  have 
learned  that  one  is  one's  own  good  cause,  and  I  now  endeavour  to  employ 
my  energies  in  my  own  service"  (p.  228).  This  is  termed  by  Hartleben  the 
"inner  evolution  towards  the  ultimate  acquirement  of  a  joyful  faith  in  one- 
self." 

*"As  you  see,  I  have  the  physique  neither  of  an  athlete  nor  of  a  l-ion. 
In  the  moral  sphere,  too,  I  lack  the  qualities  of  the  fighter.  In  the  bottom 
of  my  soul  I  love  peace  and  quietness,  and  I  should  remain  utterly  inactive 
if  it  were  not  that  the  socialist  faith  forces  me  in  spite  of  myself  to  take 
part  in  the  struggles  of  our  time — that  faith  which  inculcates  a  profound 
hatred  of  injustice  and  privilege,  a  no  less  strong  conviction  that  they 
must  be  abolished,  and  an  irresistible  desire  to  do  all  that  we  can  to  attain 
this  end. ' '  Such  are  the  confessions  of  Camillo  Prampoliui,  one  of  the 
most  distinguished  figures  of  modern  Italian  socialism.  (Cf.  his  Besistete 
agli  Arhitrii!  [Cosa  avrei  detto  ai  giurati],  Libreria  Gavagnani  e  Pagliani, 
Modena,  1900,  p.  11) 


BOURGEOIS  LEADERS  253 

the  movement,  and  sometimes  an  excessive  faith  in  his  own  self- 
abnegation,  with  a  false  mode  of  conceiving  the  rhythm  of  evo- 
lution, the  nearness  of  the  final  victory,  and  the  ease  with  which 
it  will  be  attained.  The  socialist  faith  is  also  in  many  cases 
nourished  by  esthetic  sensibilities.  Those  endowed  with  poetical 
aptitudes  and  with  a  fervent  imagination  can  more  readily  and 
intuitively  grasp  the  extent  and  the  depth  of  human  suffering; 
moreover,  the  greater  their  own  social  distance  from  the  imag- 
ined objects,  the  more  are  they  able  to  give  their  fancies  free 
rein.^  It  is  for  this  reason  that  among  the  ranks  of  those  who 
are  fighting  for  the  emancipation  of  labour  we  find  so  many 
poets  and  imaginative  writers,  and  so  many  persons  of  fiery^  im- 
passioned, and  impulsive  dispositions.^ 

The  question  arises,  which  category  is  the  more  numerous, 
that  of  those  who  become  socialists  from  reasoned  conviction,  or 
that  of  those  who  are  guided  by  sentimental  considerations.  It 
is  probable  that  among  those  who  become  socialists  in  youth 
the  sentimentalists  predominate,'^  whereas  among  those  who  go 
over  to  socialism  when  they  have  attained  maturity,  the  change 
is  usually  dictated  by  scientific  conviction.  But  in  most  cases 
mixed  motives  are  at  work.  Very  numerous,  in  fact,  are  the 
bourgeois  who  have  always  given  a  moral  approval  to  socialism, 
who  have  held  that  it  is  the  only  solution  of  the  social  problem 
which  conforms  to  the  demands  of  justice,  but  who  do  not  make 
their  effective  adhesion  to  the  doctrine  until  they  acquire  the 
conviction  (which  at  times  seizes  them  quite  unexpectedly)  that 
the  aspirations  of  their  heart  are  not  merely  just  and  beautiful, 
but  also  realizable  in  practice.^    Thus  the  socialist  views  of  these 

"  Of.  also  Ettore  Ciccotti,  Psicologia  del  Movimento  Socialista,  ed.  cit.,  pp. 
45-6  and  85. 

"  A  few  only  of  the  most  notable  of  such  persons,  who  are  or  who  have 
been  active  workers  on  behalf  of  socialism,  may  be  mentioned  here:  Wil- 
liam Morris,  Bernard  Shaw,  H.  G.  Wells,  Jack  London,  George  D.  Herron, 
Upton  Sinclair ;  J.  B.  Clement,  Clovis  Hugiies,  Anatole  France,  Jules  Des- 
tree;  Cornelie  Huygens,  Hermann  Gorter,  Henriette  Roland-Hoist;  Georg 
Herwegh,  Wilhelm  Holzamer,  Karl  Henkell,  Emil  Eosenow;  Edmondo  de 
Amicis,  Mario  Rapisardi,  Diego  Garoglio,  Angelo  Cabrini,  G.  Romualdi, 
Virgilio  Brocchi,  Tomaso  Monicelli;   Maxim  Gorki;   Gustav  af  Geijerstam. 

'  Such  is  also  the  opinion  of  Hubert  Lagardelle,  as  expressed  in  his  pam- 
phlet Les  Intellectuels  devant  le  Socialisme,  "Cahiers  de  la  Quinzaine, " 
Paris,  1900,  p.  57. 

* ' '  Take  the  case  of  an  idealist  who  aims  in  theory  at  the  triumph  of 
good,  but  who  through  insufficient  knowledge  of  the  real  state  of  affairs  ar- 
rives at  theoretical  conclusions  and  advocates  practical  expedients  which 


254  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

persons  are  a  synthesis  of  sentiment  and  science.  In  1894,  an 
inquiry  was  made  as  to  tlie  attitude  towards  socialism  of  the 
most  distin^ished  Italian  artists  and  men  of  learning.  They 
were  asked  whether  their  sympathy  with  socialist  aims,  their 
indifference  to  socialism,  or  their  hostility  to  the  doctrine,  was 
the  outcome  of  a  concrete  investigation  of  socialist  problems,  or 
whether  their  feelings  were  of  a  purely  sentimental  character. 
The  majority  of  those  who  replied  declared  that  their  attitude 
towards  socialism  was  the  outcome  of  a  psychical  predisposition, 
reinforced  by  objective  convictions.'^     A  similar  answer  might 

tend  to  consecrate  the  triumph  of  evil.  Can  we  say  here  that  he  is  guided 
by  the  suggestions  of  personal  interest?  Where  does  self-interest  come 
in?  The  suggestions  at  work  arise  from  errors  of  the  intelligence.  Sim- 
ilarly the  increase  in  the  number  of  thinkers  and  idealists  who  in  critical 
periods  devote  themselves  to  the  service  of  the  revolutionary  classes,  may 
in  part,  and  in  the  case  of  many  of  them,  be  due  to  the  conscious  or  un- 
conscious suggestions  of  self-interest;  but  to  a  large  extent,  and  in  many, 
this  action  is  determined  by  the  influence  of  ideal  aspirations  which  at  one 
time  they  believed  incapable  of  realization,  but  which  now,  under  the 
new  conditions,  they  regard  as  realizable.  ...  To  the  historian  of  the 
social  movement,  these  psychological  distinctions  may  appear  of  secondary 
importance;  not  so  to  the  moralist"  (Benedetto  Croce,  Materialismo  storico 
ed  Economia  marxistica,  Saggi  Critici,  Eemo  Sandron,  Milan-Palermo, 
1900,  p.  57).  Bernstein  gives  a  similar  analysis  of  the  motives  which 
influence  the  various  adherents  to  socialism,  but  touches  on  the  question 
rather  lightly  (E.  Bernstein,  Zur  GeschicMe  u.  Theorie  des  Sosialisimis, 
Diimmler,  Berlin,  1904,  4th  ed.,  vol.  iii,  pp.  42  et  seq.). 

®  II  Socialismo  giudicato  da  Letterati,  Artisti  e  Sciensiati  italiani.  In- 
chiesta,  con  Prefazione  di  Gustavo  Macchi,  Carlo  Aliprandi,  Milan,  1895. — 
Gustavo  Macchi,  who  was  himself  at  one  time  a  member  of  the  Interna- 
tional, enquired  of  twenty-one  socialists  belonging  without  exception  to 
cultured  circles,  for  what  reason  they  had  become  socialists.  Nine  de- 
clared that  they  had  taken  this  step  solely  on  ethical  grounds,  many  of 
them  adding  that  their  socialist  convictions  had  been  subsequently  rein- 
forced by  scientific  studies;  four  stated  that  they  had  been  turned  towards 
socialism  by  the  "simultaneous"  influence  of  sentimental  and  scientific 
considerations;  one  (the  novelist  Giovanni  Cena)  said  simply  that  he  was 
himself  a  child  of  the  proletariat;  another  (the  poet  Diego  Garoglio)  said 
that  he  had  received  the  first  impulse  towards  socialism  through  observing 
the  life-activities  of  his  father,  who  was  a  judge,  but  that  he  had  in  part 
been  influenced  by  Christian  considerations;  Enrico  Ferri's  answer  dis- 
played the  influence  of  mixed  motives  ("humanitarian  sentiment  by  pre- 
disposition, progressively  reinforced  by  a  study  of  the  question,  leading 
finally  to  a  profound  scientific  conviction");  five  only  claimed  to  have 
attained  to  socialist  convictions  chiefly  or  exclusively  upon  scientific  grounds. 
Among  the  members  of  this  last  group  one,  Arturo  Graf,  declared  that 
his  adhesion  to  socialism  was  solely  the  outcome  of  study  and  conviction, 
in  conflict  with  various  opposing  conditions,  and  in  especial  with  his  per- 


BOURGEOIS  LEADERS  255 

doubtless  be  given  by  the  Marxists,  notwithstanding  their  superb  | 
disdain  for  all  ideology  and  sentimental  compassion,  and  not- 
withstanding the  materialism  with  which  they  love  to  dress 
their  windows.  In  so  far  as  they  are  not  completely  absorbed  in 
party  life,  or  rather  so  long  as  they  have  not  been  completely 
overpowered  by  the  ties  of  party  life,  they  display  a  strictness  of 
principle  which  is  essentially  idealist.^" 

Not  all  those,  indeed,  who  sympathize  with  socialism  or  have 
a  rational  conviction  of  the  truth  of  socialist  principles  become 
effective  members  of  the  socialist  party.  Many  feel  a  strange 
repugnance  at  the  idea  of  intimate  association  with  the  unknown 
crowd,  or  they  experience  an  sesthetic  disgust  at  the  thought  of 
close  contact  with  persons  who  are  not  always  clean  or  sweet- 
smelling."  Still  more  numerous  are  those  held  back  by  lazi- 
ness or  by  an  exaggerated  fondness  for  a  quiet  life,  or,  again,  by 
the  more  or  less  justified  fear  that  open  adhesion  to  the  party 
will  react  unfavourably  upon  their  economic  position.  Some- 
times the  impulse  to  join  the  party  is  given  by  some  external 
circumstance,  insignificant  in  itself,  but  sufficient  to  give  the 
last  impetus  to  resolution :  it  may  be  a  striking  instance  of  social 
injustice  which  stirs  a  collective  emotion;  it  may  be  some  per- 
sonal wrong  inflicted  upon  the  would-be  socialist  himself  or  upon 
one  of  those  dear  to  him,^^  when  a  sudden  explosion  of  egoism 
finishes  the  slow  work  of  altruistic  tendencies.  In  other  cases 
it  is  a  necessity  of  fate,  or  the  outcome  of  the  ill-will  and  stu- 
pidity of  human  beings,  which  forces  the  man  who  has  been  a 

sonal  inclinations,  with  his  tastes,  and  his  mode  of  life;  another,  Olindo 
Malagodi,  now  editor  of  the  ' '  Tribuna, ' '  said  that  towards  socialism  he 
"was  "normally  sympathetic"  but  "pathologically  indifferent";  a  third, 
Giovanni  Lerda,  made  the  sound  observation  that  those  who  become  social- 
ists exclusively  from  sentimental  reasons  and  without  any  scientiiic  under- 
standing of  the  doctrine  are  undesirable  adherents;  Filippo  Turati  eluded 
the  question  with  the  remark  that  he  had  never  found  it  possible  "to 
separate  sentiment  from  reason. ' ' 

" ' '  lis  ont  garde  la  fidelite  au  but  propose,  la  fidelite  quand  meme,  sans 
se  soucier  des  difficultes  du  chemin  a  parcourir. — '  En  avant !  advienne  que 
pourra' — disent  les  materialistes  ayant  les  yeux  constamment  fixe  sur  leur 
ideal  superieur.  Ce  n  'est  plus  1  'idealisme  verbal,  enivrant  et  sterile.  C  'est 
1  'idealism  en  action.  C  'est  la  vie  quotidienne  elargie,  agrandie,  eclairee  par 
une  conception  superieure"  (Charles  Eappoport,  La  Philosophie  de  I'His- 
toire  comme  Science  de  I'Evolution,  Jacques,  Paris,  1903,  p.  v). 

"  The  present  writer  has  frequently  heard  people  say :  "I  have  every 
sympathy  with  socialism — if  only  there  were  not  any  socialists !  ' ' 

"  Ettore  Ciccotti,  Fsicologia  del  Movimento  socialista,  ed.  cit.,  p.  47. 


256  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

secret  socialist  to  cross  the  Rubicon,  almost  by  inadvertence. 
For  example,  something  may  happen  which  discredits  him  in 
the  eyes  of  the  members  of  his  own  class,  displaying  to  all  the 
socialist  ideas  which  he  has  hitherto  jealously  concealed.  Many 
a  person  does  not  join  the  party  of  the  workers  until,  after  some 
imprudent  manifestation  of  his  own,  an  enemy  has  denounced 
him  in  the  bourgeois  press,  thus  placing  him  in  a  dilemma:  he 
must  either  make  a  shameful  retreat,  at  the  cost  of  a  humiliating 
retraction,  or  else  must  make  public  acknowledgment  of  the  ideas 
which  he  has  hitherto  held  secret.^^  Such  persons  become  mem- 
bers of  the  socialist  party  as  young  women  sometimes  become 
mothers,  without  having  desired  it.  The  Russian  nihilist  Net- 
chajeff  made  the  idea  of  unmasking  these  timid  revolutionary- 
minded  persons  the  basis  of  a  scheme  of  revolutionary  agitation. 
He  contended  that  it  was  the  revolutionist's  duty  to  compromise 
all  those  who,  whilst  they  shared  most  of  his  ideas,  did  not  as 
yet  share  them  all;  in  this  way  he  would  force  them  to  break 
definitely  with  the  enemy,  and  would  gain  them  over  completely 
to  the  "sacred  cause. "^* 

It  has  often  been  asserted  that  the  receptivity  to  socialist 
ideas  varies  in  the  different  liberal  professions.  It  is  said  that 
the  speculative  sciences  (in  the  strictest  sense  of  the  term), 
such  as  philosophy,  history,  political  economy,  theology,  and  ju- 
risprudence, are  so  profoundly  imbued  with  the  spirit  of  the 
past  that  those  engaged  in  their  study  are  refractory  a  prion 
to  the  reception  of  all  subversive  ideas.  In  the  legal  profession, 
in  particular,  it  is  contended  there  is  inculcated  a  love  of  order, 
an  attachment  to  the  thing  which  is,  a  sacred  respect  for  form, 
a  slowness  of  procedure,  and,  if  you  will,  a  certain  narrowness 
of  view,  which  are  all  supposed  to  constitute  natural  correctives 
to  the  errors  inherent  in  democracy.^'^     In  a  general  sense,  we 

^ '  *  An  article  in  a  newspaper  may  be  for  you,  as  bourgeois,  a  sentence 
of  death.  Do  you  regard  this  as  a  small  matter?  Once  compromised,  you 
will  find  yourself  quite  alone;  you  will  suddenly  become  aware  that  no 
one  will  have  anything  more  to  do  with  you.  You  may  be  clever,  and  hand- 
some, talented  and  free-handed,  cheerful  and  helpful;  but  once  thoroughly 
compromised  you  have  become  a  social  leper;  everyone  who  sits  beside  you 
in  a  public  place,  who  walks  with  you  in  the  street,  who  talks  with  you 
in  a  restaurant,  will  become  compromised  in  his  turn,  and  for  this  reason 
carefully  avoids  you"  (Max  Tobler,  Ihr,  die  Ihr  den  Weg  finden  sollt!, 
"Polls,"  anno  ii,  No.  1,  p.  10). 

"James  Guillaume,  L 'Internationale,  etc.,  ed.  cit.,  vol.  ii,  p.  62. 

^Eoscher,  Politik,  ed.  cit.,  p.  385. 


BOURGEOIS  LEADERS  257 

are  told,  the  deductive  and  abstract  sciences  are  authoritative 
and  aristocratic  in  spirit,  and  those  who  pursue  these  paths  of 
study  incline  to  reactionary  and  doctrinaire  views.  Those,  on 
the  other  hand,  engaged  in  the  study  of  the  experimental  and 
inductive  sciences  are  led  to  employ  their  faculties  of  observa- 
tion, which  conduct  them  gradually  to  wider  and  wider  generali- 
zations, and  they  must  thus  be  easy  to  win  over  to  the  cause  of 
progress.^ '^  The  doctor,  above  all,  whose  profession  is  a  con- 
tinued struggle  against  human  misery,  must  carry  in  his  mind 
the  germs  of  the  socialist  eonception.^'^ 

An  analysis  of  the  professions  of  the  intellectuals  belonging 
to  the  various  socialist  parties  does  not  confirm  this  theory.  It 
is  in  Italy  and  France  alone  that  we  find  a  considerable  number 
of  medical  men  in  the  socialist  ranks,  and  even  here  they  are 
less  numerous  than  the  devotees  of  pure  science,  and  conspicu- 
ously less  numerous  than  the  lawyers.^*  In  Germany,  the  rela- 
tions between  the  socialist  workers  and  those  medical  men  who 
are  least  well-to-do  (the  doctors  of  the  insurance-bureaux)  are 
far  from  cordial.  To  sum  up,  it  may  be  said  in  general  terms 
that  the  doctor's  attitude  towards  socialism  is  colder  and  more 
hostile  than  that  of  the  abstract  philosopher  or  the  barrister. 
One  reason  for  this  may  perhaps  be  that  among  doctors,  more 
than  among  other  intellectuals,  there  prevails,  and  has  prevailed 
for  the  past  forty  years,  a  materialistically  conceived  and  rigidly 
held  Darwinism  and  Haeckelism.  A  supplementary  cause  may  be 
found  in  the  cynicism,  often  pushed  to  an  ego  centric  extreme, 
by  which  many  doctors  are  affected,  as  a  natural  reaction  against 
the  smell  of  the  mortuary  which  attends  their  life-work  and  as 

^*  Michael  Bakunin,  Les  Endormeurs,  Imp.  Jean  Alemane,  Paris,  1900, 
p.  11. — Ettore  Ciccotti,  Psicliol.  del  Mov.  Soc,  ed.  cit.,  p.  51. 

"  Ciccotti,  ibid.  p.  52. 

*^  In  the  parliamentary  socialist  group  in  Germany  and  Holland,  although 
there  will  be  found  a  fair  number  of  lawyers,  there  are  no  medical  men 
nor  any  men  engaged  in  the  study  of  natural  science.  The  Italian  socialist 
group,  indeed,  contained  in  1904  four  medical  men,  but  at  the  same  time 
there  were  seventeen  lawyers;  moreover,  among  the  four  doctors,  two  were 
engaged  in  university  teaching,  and  were  thus  theorists  rather  than  prac- 
titioners. (Cf.  detailed  examination  by  Michels,  Proletariato  e  Borghesia, 
ed.  cit.,  pp.  90  et  seq.)  The  French  parliamentary  group  of  the  Socialistes 
Unifies  contained  in  the  year  1910 :  manual  workers  and  employees  (for  the 
most  part  employees  of  trade  unions),  31;  small  farmers,  7;  schoolmasters, 
3;  manufacturers  and  shopkeepers,  5;  university  professors,  8;  journalists, 
7;  engineers,  1;  chemists,  1;  barristers,  7;  doctors  and  pharmacists,  6 
X"L'Humanite,"  June  1,  1910). 


258  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

an  outcome  of  their  experience  of  the  wickedness^  the  stupidity, 
and  the  frailty  of  the  human  material  with  which  their  prac- 
tice brings  them  in  contact. 

In  certain  Protestant  countries,  in  Holland,  Switzerland, 
Great  Britain,  and  America,  we  find  a  considerable  number  of 
the  clergy  among  the  socialists  (but  this  is  not  the  case  in  Ger- 
many, where  the  state  is  vigilant  and  powerful  whilst  the  Luther- 
an Church  is  strict  and  intolerant).  These  ministers,  we  are 
told,  make  their  adhesion  to  socialism  on  account  of  an  elevated 
sense  of  duty  towards  their  neighbour,^^  but  perhaps  in  addition 
there  is  operative  the  need  which  is  no  less  strong  in  the  preacher 
than  in  the  popular  orator,  to  be  listened  to,  followed,  and  ad- 
mired by  the  crowd — it  is  of  little  importance  whether  by  be- 
lievers or  unbelievers. 

Here  some  reference  may  be  made  to  the  abundance  of  Jews 
among  the  leaders  of  the  socialist  and  revolutionary  parties. 
Specific  racial  qualities  make  the  Jew  a  born  leader  of  the 
masses,  a  born  organizer  and  propagandist.  First  among  these 
qualities  comes  that  sectarian  fanaticism  which,  like  an  infec- 
tion, can  be  communicated  to  the  masses  with  astonishing  fre- 
quency; next  we  have  an  invincible  self-confidence  (which  in 
Jewish  racial  history  is  most  characteristically  displayed  in  the 
lives  of  the  prophets)  ;  there  are  remarkable  oratorical  and  dia- 
lectical aptitudes,  a  still  more  remarkable  ambition,  an  irresist- 
ible need  to  figure  in  the  lime-light,  and  last  but  not  least  an 
almost  unlimited  power  of  adaptation.  There  has  not  during  the 
last  seventy -five  years  been  any  new  current  agitating  the  popu- 
lar political  life  in  which  Jews  have  failed  to  play  an  eminent 
part.  Not  a  few  such  movements  must  be  distinctively  consid- 
ered as  their  work.  Jews  organize  the  revolution ;  and  Jews 
organize  the  resistance  of  the  state  and  of  society  against  the 
subversive  forces.  Socialism  and  conservatism  have  been  forged 
by  Jewish  hands  and  are  impregnated  with  the  Jewish  spirit. 
In  Germany,  for  example,  we  see  on  the  one  side  Marx  and  Las- 
salle  fanning  the  flames  of  revolution,  and  on  the  other,  after 
1848,  Julius  Stahl  working  as  the  brilliant  theorist  of  the  feudal 
reaction.  In  England,  the  Jew  Disraeli  reorganized  the  forces 
of  the  conservative  party.  "We  find  Jews  at  the  head  of  the 
movements  which  marshal  against  one  another  the  nationalities 

"  Cf .  the  interesting  study,  detailed  and  well-furnished  with  evidence  by 
Karl  Vorlander,  Sosialdemokratische  Pfarrer,  "Archiv  fiir  Sozialwiss., " 
vol.  xxx,  f  asc.  2. 


BOURGEOIS  LEADERS  259 

ianimated  by  a  reciprocal  hate.  At  Venice,  it  was  Daniel  Manin 
who  raised  the  standard  of  liberty  against  the  Austrians.  Dur- 
ing the  Franco- German  war,  the  work  of  national  defence  was 
organized  by  Gambetta.  In  England,  Disraeli  was  the  inventor 
of  the  watchword  '  *  the  integrity  of  the  British  Empire, ' '  whilst 
in  Germany,  the  Jews  Eduard  Simson,  Bamberger,  and  Lasker, 
were  the  leading  champions  of  that  nationalist  liberalism  which 
played  so  important  a  part  in  the  foundation  of  the  empire.  In 
Austria,  Jews  constitute  the  advance-guard  of  almost  all  the 
strongly  nationalist  parties.  Among  the  German  Bohemians, 
the  Italian  irredentists,  the  Polish  nationalists,  and  in  especial 
among  the  Magyars,  the  most  fanatical  are  persons  of  Jewish 
race.  The  Jews,  in  fact,  are  capable  of  organizing  every  kind  of 
movement;  even  among  the  leaders  of  antisemitism  there  are 
not  wanting  persons  of  Jewish  descent. 

The  adaptability  and  the  intellectual  vivacity  of  the  Jews 
do  not,  however,  suffice  to  explain  the  quantitative  and  quali- 
tative predominance  of  persons  of  Hebrew  race  in  the  party  of 
the  workers.  In  Germany,  above  all,  the  influence  of  Jews  has 
been  conspicuous  in  the  labour  movement.  The  two  first  great 
leaders,  Ferdinand  Lassalle  and  Karl  Marx,  were  Jews,  and  so 
was  their  contemporary  Moses  Hess.  The  first  distinguished  pol- 
itician of  the  old  school  to  join  the  socialists,  Johann  Jacoby, 
was  a  Jew.  Such  also  was  Karl  Hochberg,  the  idealist,  son  of  a 
rich  merchant  in  Frankfort-on-the-Main,  founder  of  the  first 
socialist  review  published  in  the  German  language.  Paul  Singer, 
who  was  almost  invariably  chairman  of  the  German  socialist 
congresses,  was  a  Jew.  Among  the  eighty-one  socialist  deputies 
sent  to  the  Eeichstag  in  the  penultimate  general  election,  there 
were  nine  Jews,  and  this  figure  is  an  extremely  high  one  when 
compared  with  the  percentage  of  Jews  among  the  population  of 
Germany,  and  also  with  the  total  number  of  Jewish  workers  and 
with  the  number  of  Jewish  members  of  the  socialist  party.  Four 
of  the  nine  were  still  orthodox  Jews  (Stadthagen,  Singer,  Wurm, 
and  Haase).  In  various  capacities,  Jews  have  rendered  ines- 
timable services  to  the  party:  Eduard  Bernstein,  Heinrich 
Braun,  Jakob  Stern,  Simon  Katzenstein,  and  Bruno  Schonlank, 
as  theorists;  Gradnauer,  Eisner,  and  Josef  Bloch,  the  editor  of 
the  ' '  Sozialistische  Monatshefte, ' '  as  journalists ;  Hugo  Heimann, 
in  the  field  of  municipal  politics;  Leo  Arons,  as  a  specialist  in 
electoral  affairs ;  Ludwig  Frank,  as  organizer  of  the  socialist 
youth.     In  Austria,  the  predominance  of  Jews  in  the  socialist 


260  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

movement  is  conspicuous;  it  suffices  to  mention  the  names  of 
Victor  Adler,  Ellenbogen,  Fritz  Austerlitz,  Max  Adler,  F.  Hertz, 
Therese  Schlesinger-Eckstein,  Dr.  Diamand,  Adolf  Braun,  etc. 
In  America  we  have  Morris  Hillquit,  A.  M.  Simons,  M.  Unter- 
mann.  In  Holland,  we  have  Henri  Polak,  the  leader  of  the  dia- 
mond workers,  D.  J.  Wijnkoop,  the  independent  Marxist,  and 
M.  Mendels.  In  Italy,  Elia  Musatti,  Claudio  Treves,  G.  E. 
Modigliani,  Riccardo  and  Adolfo  Momigliano,  R.  L.  Foa,  and 
the  man  of  science  Cesare  Lombroso.  Even  in  France,  although 
here  the  role  of  the  Jews  is  less  conspicuous,  we  may  mention 
the  names  of  Paul  Louis,  Edgard  Milhaud,  and  the  shareholders 
of  "I'Humanite"  in  1904.  The  first  congress  of  the  Parti 
Ouvrier  in  1879  was  rendered  possible  by  the  liberal  financial 
support  of  Isaac  Adolphe  Cremieux,  who  had  been  governor  of 
Algeria  under  Gambetta.-" 

In  many  countries,  in  Russia  and  Roumania  for  instance,  but 
above  all  in  Hungary  and  in  Poland,  the  leadership  of  the  work- 
ing-class parties  (the  Russian  Revolutionary  Party  excepted)  is 
almost  exclusively  in  the  hands  of  Jews,  as  is  plainly  apparent 
from  an  examination  of  the  personality  of  the  delegates  to  the 
international  congresses.  Besides,  there  is  a  great  spontaneous 
export  from  Russia  of  Jewish  proletarian  leaders  to  foreign 
socialist  parties:  Rosa  Luxemburg  and  Dr.  Israel  Helphant 
(Parvus)  have  gone  to  Germany;  Charles  Rappoport  to  France; 
Anna  Kulishoff  and  Angelica  Balabanoff  to  Italy;  the  brothers 
Reichesberg  to  Switzerland;  M.  Beer  and  Theodor  Rothstein  to 
England.  Finally,  to  bring  this  long  enumeration  to  a  close,  it 
may  be  mentioned  that  among  the  most  distinguished  leaders  of 
the  German  anarchists  there  are  many  Jews,  such  as  Gustav 
Landauer,  Siegfried  Nacht,  Pierre  Ramus,  Senna  Hoj  (Johannes 
Holzmann). 

The  origin  of  this  predominant  position  (which,  be  it  noted, 
must  in  no  sense  be  regarded  as  an  indication  of  "  Judaization," 
as  a  symptom  of  dependence  of  the  party  upon  the  money  of 
Jewish  capitalist  comrades)  is  to  be  found,  as  far  at  least  as 
concerns  Germany  and  the  countries  of  eastern  Europe,  in  the 
peculiar  position  which  the  Jews  have  occupied  and  in  many  re- 
spects still  occupy.  The  legal  emancipation  of  the  Jews  has  not 
here  been  followed  by  their  social  and  moral  emancipation.  In 
large  sections  of  the  German  people  a  hatred  of  the  Jews  and 

^"Mermeix,  La  France  Socialiste,  ed.  cit.,  p.  69. 


BOURGEOIS  LEADERS  261 

the  spirit  of  the  Jew-baiter  still  prevail,  and  contempt  for  the 
Jews  is  a  permanent  feeling.  The  Jew's  chances  in  public  life 
are  injuriously  affected ;  he  is  practically  excluded  from  the  ju- 
dicial profession,  from  a  military  career,  and  from  official  em- 
ployment. Yet  everywhere  in  the  Jewish  race  there  continues 
to  prevail  an  ancient  and  justified  spirit  of  rebellion  against  the 
wrongs  from  which  it  suffers,  and  this  sentiment,  idealist  in  its 
origin,  animating  the  members  of  an  impassioned  race,  becomes 
in  them  more  easily  than  in  those  of  Germanic  blood  transformed 
into  a  disinterested  abhorrence  of  injustice  in  general  and  ele- 
vated into  a  revolutionary  impulse  towards  a  grandly  conceived 
world-amelioration.-^ 

Even  when  they  are  rich,  the  Jews  constitute,  at  least  in  east- 
ern Europe,  a  category  of  persons  who  are  excluded  from  the 
social  advantages  which  the  prevailing  political,  economic,  and 
intellectual  system  ensures  for  the  corresponding  portion  of  the 
Gentile  population.  Society,  in  the  narrower  sense  of  the  term, 
is  distrustful  of  them,  and  public  opinion  is  unfavourable  to 
them.  Besides  the  sentiment  which  is  naturally  aroused  in  their 
minds  by  this  injustice,  they  are  often  affected  by  that  cosmo- 
politan tendency  which  has  been  highly  developed  in  the  Jews 
by  the  historical  experiences  of  the  race,  and  these  combine  to 
push  them  into  the  arms  of  the  working-class  party.  It  is  owing 
to  these  tendencies  that  the  Jews,  guided  in  part  by  reason  and 
in  part  by  sentimental  considerations,  so  readily  disregard  the 
barriers  which  the  bourgeoisie  endeavours  to  erect  against  the 
rising  flood  of  the  revolution  by  the  accusation  that  its  advocates 
are  des  sans  patrie. 

For  all  these  reasons,  the  Jewish  intelligence  is  apt  to  find  a* 
shorter  road  to  socialism  than  the  Gentile,  but  this  does  not! 
diminish  the  obligations  of  the  socialist  party  to  the  Jewish  in- 
tellectuals.    Only  to  the  intellectuals,  indeed,  for  the  Jews  who 

^Liebkneeht  declared  in  a  speech:  "Slavery  does  not  merely  demoralize; 
it  illuminates  the  mind,  elevates  the  strong,  creates  idealists  and  rebels. 
Thus  we  find  that  in  the  more  powerful  and  nobler  natures  among  the  Jews 
a  sense  of  freedom  and  justice  has  been  inspired  by  their  unworthy  situa- 
tion and  a  revolutionary  spirit  has  been  cultivated.  The  result  is  that 
there  is  proportionately  a  much  larger  amount  of  idealism  among  Jews  than 
among  non-Jews"  (Wilhelm  Liebknecht,  Ueher  den  Kolner  Parteitag  mit 
hesonderer  Beruclcsichtigung  der  GewerTcschaftshewegung,  Buchdruckerei 
Volkswacht,  Bielefeld,  1893,  p.  33). — Eegarding  the  revolutionary-idealist- 
fanatical  tendencies  of  Judaism,  see  also  the  brilliant  analysis  by  Guglielmo 
Ferrero  in  L'Europa  giovane,  Treves,  Milan,  1897,  pp.  358  et  seq. 


262  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

belong  to  the  wealthy  trading  and  manufacturing  classes  and 
also  the  members  of  the  Jewish  petty  bourgeoisie,  whilst  often 
voting  socialist  in  the  elections,  steadily  refuse  to  join  the  social- 
ist party.  Here  the  interests  of  class  prevail  over  those  of  race. 
It  is  very  different  with  the  Jewish  intellectuals,  and  a  statisti- 
cal enquiry  would  certainly  show  that  not  less  than  2  to  3  per 
cent,  of  these  are  members  of  the  socialist  party.  If  the  socialist 
party  has  always  manifested  an  unhesitating  resistance  to  anti- 
semite  sentiment,  this  is  due  not  merely  to  the  theoretical  social- 
ist aversion  for  all  ''nationalism"  and  all  racial  prejudices,  but 
also  to  the  consciousness  of  all  that  the  party  owes  to  the  Jewish 
intellectuals. 

"Antisemite  socialism"  made  its  first  appearance  about  1870. 
Eugen  Diihring,  at  that  time  Privatdozent  at  the  University  of 
Berlin,  inaugurated  a  crusade  in  favour  of  a  "  German ' '  social- 
ism as  opposed  to  the  "Jewish"  socialism  of  Marx  and  his  col- 
laborators.22  This  movement  was  inspired  by  patriotic  motives, 
for  Diihring  held  that  the  victory  of  Marxian  socialism  could 
not  fail  to  result  in  the  complete  subordination  of  the  people  to 
the  state,  to  the  advantage  of  the  prominent  Jews  and  their 
acolytes.^^  Towards  1875,  Diihring  became  the  centre  of  a  small 
group  of  Berlinese  socialists  of  which  Johann  Most  and  the  Jew 
Eduard  Bernstein  were  members.  The  influence  of  this  group, 
however,  did  not  survive  the  great  polemic  which  Diihring  had 
to  sustain  with  Friedrich  Engels,  the  spiritual  brother  of  ' '  Marx 
the  Jew."-*  Diihring 's  influence  upon  the  socialist  masses  in 
fact  declined  in  proportion  as  his  antisemitism  became  accentu- 
ated, and  towards  1878  it  was  extinct.  In  1894  another  attempt 
was  made  to  give  socialism  an  antisemite  tendency.  This  was 
the  work  of  Eichard  Calwer,  another  socialist  of  strongly  na- 
tionalist views,  at  that  time  on  the  staff  of  the  ' '  Braunschweiger 
Volksfreund. "  "For  every  good  Jewish  writer,"  he  declared, 
"there  will  be  found  at  least  half  a  dozen  who  are  altogether 
worthless,  but  who  possess  an  extraordinary  power  of  self-asser- 
tion and  an  inexhaustible  flow  of  words,  but  no  real  understand- 
ing of  socialism."  2^    Calwer 's  campaign  had,  however,  no  better 

*'Cf.  Eugen  Diihring,  Kritische  GescMchte  der  NationaloeJconomie  u.  der 
Sosialismus,  Th.  Grieben,  Berlin,  1871,  pp.  589  et  seq. 

'^  Eugen  Duhring,  Sache,  Leben  u.  Feinde,  Carlsruhe,  1882,  p.  207. 

^*Cf.  Engels'  work,  Herrn  Eugen  Diihrings  Vmioalsung  der  WissenscTiaft, 
first  published  in  1877  in  the  Leipzig  "Vorwarts. " 

*K.  Calwer,  Das  KommunistiscJw  Manifest,  ed.  eit.,  p.  41. 


BOURGEOIS  LEADERS  263 

success  tlian  that  of  Diihring.  A  year  before,  when  petty  bour- 
geois antisemitism  was  spreading  through  the  country  as  an 
anti-capitalist  movement  which  was  forming  itself  into  a  politi- 
cal party  and  making  victims  everywhere,  the  Cologne  congress 
(October  1893)  took  up  a  definite  position  towards  this  new  po- 
litical movement.  Bebel's  report  (which  in  antisemite  circles 
had  been  anticipated  with  satisfaction),  although  far  from  ex- 
haustive, was  inspired  throughout  by  a  sentiment  friendly  to- 
wards the  Jews.  Bebel  said  :  * '  The  Jewish  student  is  as  a  rule 
industrious  during  the  greater  part  of  his  university  career, 
whereas  the  'Germanic'  student  most  commonly  spends  his  time 
in  the  drinking-bars  and  restaurants,  in  the  fencing-schools,  or 
in  other  places  which  I  will  not  here  more  particularly  specify 
(laughter)." ^^  Wilhelm  Liebknecht,  in  his  well-known  speech 
at  Bielefeld,^'''  notably  reinforced  the  impression  hostile  to  anti- 
Semitism  produced  by  the  congress.  Since  that  time  (if  we  ex- 
cept certain  observations  made  at  the  Liibeck  congress  in  1901  by 
the  barrister  Wolfgang  Heine  in  a  polemic  against  Parvus  and 
Eosa  Luxemburg  ^^ — remarks  that  were  maladroit  rather  than 
expressions  of  principle,  and  at  the  worst  foolish  reminiscences 
of  a  youth  passed  as  a  leader  in  the  Verein  deutscher  Studenten) 
the  German  socialists  have  remained  immune  to  the  virus  of  I 
race  hatred,  and  have  shown  themselves  quite  unconcerned  when] 
ignorant  opponents  have  endeavoured  to  arouse  popular  preju-] 
dice  against  them  by  speaking  of  them  as  a  party  of  ' '  Jews  anc 
their  satellites.  "29 

We  may  now  add  certain  observations  upon  the  frequent  ad- 
hesion to  socialism  of  members  of  the  plutocracy,  an  adhesion 
which  at  first  sight  seems  so  strange.  Certain  persons  of  a  gentle 
and  charitable  disposition,  abundantly  furnished  with  everything 
that  can  satisfy  their  desires,  are  sometimes  inspired  by  the 
need  of  undertaking  propagandist  activities.  They  wish,  for 
example,  to  make  their  neighbours  share  in  the  well-being  which 
they  themselves  enjoy.  These  are  the  rich  philanthropists.  In 
most  cases  their  conduct  is  the  outcome  of  hypersensitiveness  or 

"^  ProtoTcoll,  p.  234. 

"  Quoted  above,  p.  261. 

^FrotoTcoll,  p.   195. 

*'At  election  times  the  German  antisemites  make  it  a  regular  practice 
to  exploit  the  barbarous  race-prejudices  with  which  the  common  people 
are  still  animated,  endeavouring  in  this  way  to  render  suspect  as  a  Jew, 
or  at  least  as  a  protege  of  the  Jews,  every  socialist  candidate  whose  nam© 
might  suggest  a  Jewish  origin,  such  as  David,  or  even  Auer. 


264  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

sentimentalism ;  they  cannot  endure  the  sufferings  of  others,  not 
so  much  because  they  experience  a  genuine  pity  for  the  sufferers, 
but  because  the  sight  of  pain  arouses  pain  in  themselves  and 
shocks  their  aesthetic  sense.  They  thus  resemble  the  majority  of 
human  beings,  who  cannot  bear  to  see  pigeons  slaughtered  but 
whose  sentiments  in  this  respect  do  not  impair  their  relish  for  a 
pigeon-pie. 

In  the  sick  brains  of  certain  persons  whose  wealth  is  exceeded 
only  by  their  love  of  paradox,  there  has  originated  the  fantastic 
belief  that  in  view  of  the  imminence  of  the  revolution  they  can 
preserve  their  fortunes  from  the  confiscatory  fury  of  the  revolu- 
tionists only  by  making  profession  of  the  socialist  faith,  and  by 
thus  gaining  the  powerful  and  useful  friendship  of  its  leaders. 
It  is  this  ingenuous  belief  which  has  thrown  them  into  the  arms 
of  the  socialists.  Others,  again,  among  the  rich,  hasten  to  enrol 
themselves  as  members  of  the  socialist  party,  in  the  dread  lest 
their  lives  should  be  threatened  through  the  exasperation  of  the 
poor.^°  More  frequently,  however,  as  has  been  well  shown  by 
Bernard  Shaw,  the  rich  man  is  drawn  towards  socialism  because 
he  finds  the  greatest  possible  difficulty  in  procuring  for  himself 
any  new  pleasures.  He  begins  to  feel  a  disgust  for  the  bourgeois 
world,  and  in  the  end  this  may  stifle  his  class  consciousness,  or 
at  least  may  suppress  the  instinct  which  has  hitherto  led  him  to 
[fight  for  self-preservation  against  the  proletariat.^^ 

It  is  a  very  striking  phenomenon  how  large  is  the  percentage 
of  Jewish  rentiers  who  become  members  of  the  socialist  party.^^ 
In  part  this  may  be  due  to  the  racial  characteristics  of  the  Jew 
to  which  reference  has  already  been  made.  In  part,  however,  it 
is  the  outcome  of  the  psychological  peculiarities  of  the  wealthy 
man  afflicted  with  satiety.  In  certain  cases,  again,  the  strongly 
developed  love  of  acquisition  characteristic  of  the  Jews  affords 
the  explanation,  where  the  possibility  has  been  recognized  of 
making  a  clever  investment  of  capital  even  in  working-class  un- 
dertakings. 

^°  "  O  riches,  une  solidarite  de  celeste  origine  vous  enchalne  a  leur  misere 
[la  misere  des  proletaires]  par  la  peur,  et  vous  lie  par  votre  interet  meme 
a  leur  delivrance  future"  (Louis  Blanc,  Organisation  du  Travail,  ed.  cit., 
p.  25). 

**  Bernard  Shaw,  Socialism  for  Millionaires,  Fabian  Society,  London, 
190L 

^-  This  fact  has  been  noted  by  various  writers,  among  others  by  G.  Sorel, 
Illusions  du  Progrcs,  ed  cit.,  pp.  206  et  seq.,  and  Domela  Nieuwenhuis, 
Van  Christen,  etc.,  ed.  cit.,  p.  322. 


BOURGEOIS  LEADERS  265 

It  may,  however,  be  said  without  fear  of  error  that  the  great 
majority  of  young  bourgeois  who  come  over  to  socialism  do  so,  to 
quote  an  expression  used  by  Felice  Momigliano,  in  perfect  sin- 
cerity and  inspired  by  ardent  goodwill.  They  seek  neither  pop- 
ular approbation,  nor  wealth,  nor  distinctions,  nor  well-paid  po- 
sitions. They  think  merely  that  a  man  must  set  himself  right 
with  his  own  conscience  and  must  affirm  his  faith  in  action.^^ 

These  men,  again,  may  be  classed  in  two  distinct  categories. 
We  have,  on  the  one  hand,  the  loving  apostles  of  wide  sympa- 
thies, who  wish  to  embrace  the  whole  of  humanity  in  their  ideal. 
On  the  other  hand  we  have  the  zealots,  fierce,  rigid,  austere,  and 
uncompromising.^* 

But  among  the  socialists  of  bourgeois  origin  we  find  other  and 
less  agreeable  elements.  Above  all  there  are  those  who  make  a 
profession  of  discontent,  the  neurasthenics  and  the  mauvais  cou- 
cheurs.  Yet  more  numerous  are  the  malcontents  from  personal 
motives,  the  charlatans,  and  the  ambitious.  Many  hate  the  au- 
thority of  the  state  because  it  is  inaccessible  to  them.^^  It  is  the 
old  story  of  the  fox  and  the  grapes.  They  are  animated  by  jeal- 
ousy, by  the  unassuaged  thirst  for  power ;  their  feelings  resemble 
those  of  the  younger  sons  of  great  families  who  are  inspired  with 
hatred  and  envy  towards  their  richer  and  more  fortunate  broth- 
ers. They  are  animated  by  a  pride  which  makes  them  prefer 
the  position  of  chief  in  proletarian  Gaul  to  that  of  subordinate 
in  aristocratic  Rome. 

There  are  yet  other  types  somewhat  similar  to  those  just 
enumerated.  First  of  all,  there  are  the  eccentrics.  It  seems 
natural  that  those  whose  position  is  low  should  attempt  to 
storm  the  heights.  But  there  are  some  whose  position  is  lofty 
and  who  yet  experience  an  irresistible  need  to  descend  from 
the  heights,  where  they  feel  that  their  movements  are  re- 
stricted, and  who  believe  that  by  descending  they  will  gain 
greater  liberty.     They  seek  ' '  sincerity ' ' ;  they  endeavour  to  dis- 

^  Momigliano,  in  an  article  which  appeared  in  the  ' '  Ragione ' '  of  Rome, 
reprinted  in  "Coenobium, "  anno  iv,  fasc.  i,  p.  139. 

^* "  Le  mepris  et  les  persecutions  ne  les  touchent  pas,  ou  ne  font  que  les 
exciter  d'avantage.  Interet  personnel,  famille,  tout  est  sacrifie.  L 'instinct 
de  la  conservation  lui-meme  est  annulle  chez  eux,  au  point  que  la  seule 
recompense  qu'ils  solieitent  souvent  est  de  devenir  des  martyrs"  (Gustave 
le  Bon,  Psychologie  des  Foules,  ed.  cit.,  p.  106). 

^  Cf .  Jules  Destree,  devolution  verhale  et  Bevolution  pratique,  "Le 
Peuple, "  Brussels,  1902,  p.  51;  also  Giorgio  Arcoleo,  Forme  vecchie,  Idee 
nuove,  Laterza,  Bari,  1909,  p.  19'6. 


266  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

cover  ' '  the  people ' '  of  whom,  they  have  an  ideal  in  their  minds ; 
they  are  idealists  to  the  verge  of  lunacy. 

There  may  be  added  all  those  disillusioned  and  dissatisfied 
persons  who  have  not  succeeded  in  gaining  the  attention  of  the 
bourgeoisie  to  an  extent  proportionate  to  their  own  conception  of 
their  genius.  Such  persons  throw  themselves  on  the  neck  of  the 
proletariat,^®  in  most  cases  with  the  vague  and  instinctive  hope 
of  attaining  a  speedier  success  in  view  of  the  deficient  culture  of 
the  working  classes,  of  gaining  a  place  in  the  limelight  and  play- 
ing a  leading  part.  They  are  visionaries,  geniuses  misunder- 
stood, apostates  of  all  kinds,  literary  bohemians,  the  unrecognized 
inventors  of  various  social  panaceas,  rates,  rapins,  cahotins, 
quack-salvers  at  the  fair,  clowns — all  persons  who  are  not  think- 
ing of  educating  the  masses  but  of  cultivating  their  own  egos. 

The  numerical  increase  of  the  party,  which  is  associated  with 
an  increasing  prestige  (in  the  popular  esteem,  at  least,  if  not  in 
the  official  world),  exercises  a  great  force  of  attraction.  In  such 
countries  as  Germany,  above  all,  where  the  gregarious  spirit  is 
highly  developed,  small  parties  are  condemned  to  a  stinted  and 
rickety  existence.^^  But  numerous  bourgeois  believe  that  they 
will  ''find  in  the  great  socialist  party  what  they  have  not  been 
able  to  find  in  the  bourgeois  parties,"  a  suitable  platform  for 
political  activity  upon  a  vast  scale.^^  For  this  reason,  and  above 
all  when  the  party  passes  from  opposition  to  governmental  col- 
laboration,2°  there  results  a  great  increase  in  the  number  of  those 
who  regard  the  party  as  a  mere  means  to  their  own  ends,  as  a 
pedestal  from  whose  elevation  they  can  better  satisfy  their  ambi- 
tion and  their  vanity,  those  who  regard  success  not  as  a  goal  to 
be  attained  for  the  good  of  the  cause,  or  as  the  reward  for  ardu- 
ous service  in  pursuit  of  ideal  aims,  but  one  coveted  on  its  own 
account  for  the  enlargement  of  their  own  personalities.  As  Ar- 
coleo  has  well  expressed  it,  we  dread  the  triumph  of  such  per- 
sons as  if  it  were  the  unchaining  of  hungry  wild  beasts,  but  on 
closer  examination  we  discover  that  after  all  they  are  no  more 
than  greedy  molluscs,  harmless  on  the  whole.*''    These  consider- 

^'Cf.  Giuseppe  Prezzolini  La  Teoria  sindacalista,  ed.  eit.,  p.  90. 

"  Cf .  letter  published  by  Fr.  Naumann  apropos  of  the  dissolution  of  the 
Nationalsozialer  Verein  after  the  elections  of  1904. 

^August  Bebel,  Bin  Nacliwort  sur  Viseprasidentenfrage  u.  Verwandtem, 
loc.  cit.,  "Neue  Zeit,"  1903   (Separatabzug),  pp.  20,  21. 

='Cf.  also  the  considerations  to  which  reference  has  been  made  on  pp. 
212-214. 

"G.  Arcoleo,  Forme  Vecchie,  Idee  Nuove,  ed.  cit.,  p.  80. 


BOURGEOIS  LEADERS  267 

ations  apply  to  petty  affairs  as  well  as  to  great  ones.  Whenever 
the  party  of  the  workers  founds  a  cooperative  society  or  a  peo- 
ple's bank  which  offers  to  intellectuals  an  assured  subsistence 
and  an  influential  position,  there  flock  to  the  scene  numerous 
professional  socialists  who  are  equally  devoid  of  true  socialist 
knowledge  and  genuine  socialist  sentiment.  In  democracy  as  I 
elsewhere  success  signifies  the  death  of  idealism.  I 


CHAPTER   III 

SOCIAL  CHANGES  RESULTING  FROM  ORGANIZATION 

The  social  changes  which  organization  produces  among  the 
proletarian  elements,  and  the  alterations  which  are  effected  in 
the  proletarian  movement  through  the  influx  of  those  new  influ- 
ences which  the  organization  attracts  within  its  orbit,  may  be 
summed  up  in  the  comprehensive  customary  term  of  the  emhour- 
geoisement  of  working-class  parties.  This  embourgeoisement  is 
the  outcome  of  three  very  different  orders  of  phenomena:  (1) 
the  adhesion  of  petty  bourgeois  to  the  proletarian  parties;  (2) 
labour  organization  as  the  creator  of  new  petty  bourgeois  strata ; 
(3)  capitalist  defence  as  the  creator  of  new  petty  bourgeois 
strata. 

1.     The  Adhesion  of  Petty  Bourgeois  to  the  Proletarian  Parties. 

For  motives  predominantly  electoral,  the  party  of  the  workers 
seeks  support  from  the  petty  bourgeois  elements  of  society,  and 
this  gives  rise  to  more  or  less  extensive  reactions  upon  the  party 
itself.  The  labour  party  becomes  the  party  of  the  ' '  people. ' '  Its 
appeals  are  no  longer  addressed  simply  to  the  manual  workers, 
but  to  "all  producers,"  to  the  "entire  working  population," 
these  phrases  being  applied  to  all  the  classes  and  all  the  strata 
of  society  except  the  idlers  who  live  upon  the  income  from  in- 
vestments.^ Both  the  friends  and  the  enemies  of  the  socialist 
party  have  frequently  pointed  out  that  the  petty  bourgeois 
members  tend  more  and  more  to  predominate  over  the  manual 
workers.  During  the  struggles  which  occurred  during  the  early 
part  o-f  1890  in  the  German  socialist  party  against  the  so-called 
"youths,"  the  assertion  that  during  recent  years  a  complete 
transposition  of  power  had  occurred  within  the  party  aroused  a 
veritable  tempest.  On  one  side  it  was  maintained  that  the  prole- 
tarian elements  were  to  an  increasing  extent  being  thrust  into 

1  Cf .  p.  16. 
268 


RESULTS  OF  ORGANIZATION        269 

the  background  by  the  petty  bourgeois.  The  other  faction  re- 
pudiated this  accusation  as  a  "calumny."  One  of  the  best  es- 
tablished generalizations  which  we  obtain  from  the  study  of  his- 
tory is  this,  that  political  parties,  even  when  they  are  the  advo- 
cates of  moral  and  social  ideas  of  profound  import,  find  it  very 
difficult  to  tolerate  the  utterance  of  inconvenient  truths.  We 
have  seen  that  the  most  unprejudiced  enquiries  are  apt  to  be 
regarded  as  the  outcome  of  a  vicious  tendency  to  fault-finding. 
The  truth  is,  however,  that  an  objective  and  searching  discussion 
of  the  question  leads  us  to  recognize  the  wrongheadedness  at  once 
of  those  who  are  content  flatly  to  deny  the  embourgeoisement  of 
the  socialist  party  and  also  of  those  who  are  content  to  sing  the 
praises  of  the  great  socialist  petty  bourgeois  party.  Neither 
view  is  sound.  The  processes  at  work  are  too  complex  for  solu- 
tion by  easy  phrase-making. 

It  may  sometimes  happen  (although  statistical  proof  of  this  is 
lacking)  that  in  South  Germany  in  certain  socialist  branches, 
and  still  more  in  certain  party  congresses,  the  petty  bourgeoisie, 
though  not  numerically  predominant,  can  yet  exercise  a  pre- 
ponderant influence.  It  may  even  be  admitted  that  under  cer- 
tain conditions  the  strength  of  the  petty  bourgeois  elements  and 
the  respect  which  is  paid  to  them  may  at  times  compromise  the 
proletarian  essence  of  the  party.  Even  so  rigid  a  Marxist  as 
Karl  Kautsky  is  of  opinion  that  the  attitude  of  socialists  to- 
wards distributive  cooperative  societies  must  depend  mainly 
upon  their  attitude  towards  the  minor  distributive  trade  in  gen- 
eral, so  that,  "on  political  grounds,"  socialists  must  oppose  the 
foundation  of  cooperative  societies  wherever,  as  often  happens, 
small  traders  offer  a  favourable  recruiting-ground  for  socialism.^ 

Wherever  it  has  been  possible  to  analyse  the  composition  of 
the  socialist  party,  and  to  ascertain  the  classes  and  the  profes- 
sions of  its  adherents,  it  has  generally  been  found  that  the  bour- 
geois and  petty  bourgeois  elements,  although  well  represented, 
are  far  from  being  numerically  preponderant.  The  official'  statis- 
tics of  the  Italian  socialist  party  present  the  following  figures : — • 
Industrial  workers,  42.27% ;  agricultural  labourers,  14.99% ; 
peasant  proprietors,  6.1%  ;  independent  artisans,  14.92% ;  em- 
ployees, 3.3%  ;  property  owners,  4.89% ;  students  and  members 
of  the  liberal  professions,  3.8%.^    As  regards  the  German  social- 

^Karl  Kautsky,  Ber  Parteitag  von  Eannover,  "Neue  Zeit,"  anno  xviii, 
No.  1. 
'Michels,  Froletariato  e  Borghesia,  etc.,  ed.  cit.,  p.  136. 


270  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

ist  party,  tlie  writer  lias  sliown  elsewhere  *  that  in  all  the 
branches  the  proportion  of  proletarians  is  yet  greater  than  in 
Italy,  ranging  from  77.4%  to  94.7%.  It  may  even  be  said,  with 
Blank,  that  if  there  is  a  party  in  which  the  proletarian  element 
predominates,  it  is  the  German  socialist  party — not  indeed  in  re- 
spect of  its  voting  strength,^  but  pre-eminently  in  respect  of  its 
inscribed  membership.  It  is  this  social  homogeneity  which  ren- 
ders the  socialist  party  so  great  an  electoral  force,  giving  to  it  a 
cohesion  unknown  to  the  other  political  parties,  and  especially 
to  the  other  parties  of  the  left.  German  liberalism  has  always 
been  (at  any  rate  since  the  unification  of  the  empire)  a  multi- 
coloured admixture  of  classes,  united  not  so  much  by  economic 
needs  as  by  common  ideal  aims.  Socialism,  on  the  other  hand, 
derives  its  human  materials  from  the  only  class  which  presents 
those  economic,  social,  and  numerical  conditions  requisite  to  fur- 
nish the  greatest  possible  vigour  for  the  struggle  to  overthrow 
the  old  world  and  to  instal  a  new  one  in  its  place.  Blind  indeed 
must  be  he  who  fails  to  recognize  that  the  spring  which  feeds 
the  socialist  party  in  Germany,  a  spring  which  shows  no  signs 
of  running  dry,  is  the  proletariat,  the  class  of  wage-labourers. 

"We  must  therefore  accept  with  all  reserve  the  statements  of 
those  anarchizing  socialists  and  bourgeois  radicals  who  accuse 
the  socialist  party  of  "embourgeoisement"  because  it  contains  a 
certain  number  of  small  manufacturers  and  small  traders.  The 
embourgeoisement  of  the  party  is  an  unquestionable  fact,  but  its 
causes  will  be  found  in  a  process  very  different  from  the  entry 
into  the  organizations  of  the  fighting  proletariat  of  a  few  hun- 
dred members  of  the  middle  class.  The  chief  of  these  causes  is 
the  metamorphosis  which  takes  place  in  the  leaders  of  working- 
class  origin,  with  the  resulting  embourgeoisement  of  the  whole 
atmosphere  in  which  the  political  activities  of  the  party  are 
carried  on.^ 

*  Miehels,  Die  deutsche  SozialdemoTcratie.  Parteimitgliedschaft  u.  soziale 
Zusammensetzung,  "Archiv  f.  Sozialwiss.,"  vol.  xxiii,  pp.  471-559. 

^R.  Blank,  Die  sociale  Zusammensetzung  der  sozialdemoTcratischen  Wah- 
lerschaft  Deutschlands,  ''Archiv  f.  Sozialwiss.,"  vol.  xs,  fase.  3;  but  the 
author  is  wrong  in  drawing  the  conclusion  (p.  535)  "that  the  German, 
social  democracy  is  not  a  class  party  in  respect  of  composition."  He 
should  have  said,  "In  respect  of  the  composition  of  the  socialist  elec- 
torate. ' ' 

'Parvus  writes:  "There  is  a  confusion  between  two  distinct  things:  the 
petty  bourgeois  existences  which  are  created  by  the  party  movement,  and 
the  entrance  of  petty  bourgeois  elements  into   the  party.     These  should 


RESULTS  OF  ORGANIZATION        271 

2.  Labour  Organization  as  the  Creator  of  New  Petty  Bourgeois 

Strata. 

The  class  struggle,  through  the  action  of  the  organs  whereby 
it  is  carried  out,  induces  modifications  and  social  metamorphoses 
in  the  party  which  has  come  into  existence  to  organize  and  con- 
trol the  struggle.  Certain  groups  of  individuals,  numerically 
insignificant  but  qualitatively  of  great  importance,  are  with- 
drawn from  the  proletarian  class  and  raised  to  bourgeois  dignity. 

Where,  as  in  Italy,  the  party  of  the  workers  contains  a  con- 
siderable proportion  of  bourgeois,  most  of  the  posts  which  the 
party  has  at  its  disposal  are  in  the  hands  of  intellectuals.  In 
England,  on  the  other  hand,  and  still  more  in  Germany,  it  is 
otherwise,  for  here  the  demand  on  the  part  of  the  socialist  move- 
ment for  employees  is  met  chiefly  by  a  supply  of  persons  from 
the  rank  and  file.  In  these  countries  the  party  leadership  is 
mainly  in  the  hands  of  the  workers,  as  is  shown  by  the  follow- 
ing table : — 

SOCIALIST  GROUP  IN  THE  EEICHSTAG,  1903-6. 

By  Origin.                                           By  Profession. 
I.  Intellectuals  and  Bourgeois. .  13       I.      Professional  men 17 


II.  Petty  Bourgeois 15       II.     Independent  means 2 

■ — -  Manufacturers   1 

Publishers 2 

Bourgeois 5 

III.  Proletarians:  III.  Petty  Bourgeois: 

Textile 3  Innkeepers 6 

Tobacco 8  Independent  artisans  and 

Printing 7  working  employers  ....     6 

Tailoring    ? 3  Small  shopkeepers 3 

Glass-blowing    2  Small  manufacturers  ....     5 

Masonry 1  Owners  of  printing  works.     4 

Lithography   1  — ■ 

Basket-work    1  Petty  bourgeois 24 

Glove-making   1 

be  separately  considered ' '  (Parvus,  Die  GewerTcscJiaften  und  die  Sosialdemo- 
Joratie  Eritischer  Bericht  iiber  die  Lager  u.  die  Aufgaben  der  deutschen 
Arbeit erbewegimg,  "Sachs.  Arbeiterzeitung, "  Dresden,  1896,  2nd  ed.,  p. 
65). 


272  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

III.  Proletarians  {continued) : 

Saddlery    1 

Stone-cutting    1 

Turning 1 

Carpet- weaving 1 

Bootmaking 1 

Wood-working 10        IV.  Employees     in     the     labour 

Bookbinding    1  movement 35 

Mining    2  — 

Metallurgy    6 

Brush-making    1 

Pottery 1 

Manual  worTcers 53 


By  Origin.  By  Profession. 

%  % 

13  intellectuals    and    bour-  17  professional  men =20.99 

geois r=  16.05  5  bourgeois =z    6.17 

15  petty  bourgeois =  18.52  24  petty   bourgeois =  29.63 

54  proletarians   (sMlled  35  employees    =  43.21 

worTcers)   =  65.43 

Consequently  an  entry  into  the  party  hierarchy  becomes  an 
aim  of  proletarian  ambition. 

An  ex-member  of  the  German  socialist  party  who  some  years 
ago,  having  entered  the  service  of  one  of  the  bourgeois  parties, 
amused  himself  by  caricaturing  his  former  comrades,  declared 
that  the  whole  party  organization  with  all  its  various  degrees  of 
propagandist  activity  was  ''cut  upon  the  military  model,"  and 
that  the  members  were  ' '  promoted  by  seniority. ' '  "^  There  is  at 
least  this  much  truth  in  Abel's  assertion,  that  to  every  member 
of  the  party  the  possibility  of  gradual  advance  remains  open, 
and  that  each  may  hope,  should  circumstances  prove  exception- 
ally favourable,  to  scale  the  olympian  heights  of  a  seat  in  the 
Reichstag. 

Proletarian  leaders  of  the  socialist  parties  and  of  the  trade 
unions  are  an  indirect  product  of  the  great  industry.  At  the 
dawn  of  the  capitalist  era  certain  workers,  more  intelligent  and 
more  ambitious  than  their  fellows,  succeeded,  through  indefat- 
igable exertions  and  thanks  to  favourable  circumstances,  in  rais- 
ing themselves  to  the  employing  class.  To-day,  however,  in  view 
of  the  concentration  of  enterprise  and  wealth  and  of  the  high 
cost  of  production,  such  a  transformation  can  be  observed  only  in 

^Abel,  quoted  by  "Vorwarts, "  August  5,  1904. 


RESULTS  OF  ORGANIZATION        273 

certain  parts  of  North  and  South  America  (which  explains,  it 
may  be  mentioned  in  passing,  the  insignificant  development  of 
socialism  in  the  New  World).     As  far  as  Europe  is  concerned, 
where  there  is  no  longer  any  virgin  soil  to  exploit,  the  "self- 
made  man"  has  become  a  prehistoric  figure.    Thus  it  is  natural 
that  enlightened  workmen  should  seek  some  compensation  for 
the  lost  paradise  of  their  dreams.     Numerous  are  to-day  the 
workers  whose  energies  and  aptitudes  are  not  fully  utilized  in 
the  narrow  circle  of  their  professional  occupations,  often  utterly 
uninteresting  and  demanding  purely  mechanical  labour.^    It  is 
chiefly  in  the  modern  labour  movement  that  such  men  now  seek 
and  obtain  the  opportunity  of  improving  their  situation,  an  op- 
portunity which  industry  no  longer  offers.     The  movement  rep- 
resents for  them  a  new  and  loftier  mode  of  life,  and  offers  at 
the  same  time  a  new  branch  of  employment,  with  a  chance,  which 
continually  increases  as  the  organization  grows,  that  they  will 
be  able  to  secure  a  rise  in  the  social  scale.    There  can  be  no  doubt 
that  the  socialist  party,  with  its  posts  of  honour,  which  are  al- 
most always  salaried,  exercises  a  potent  stimulus  upon  active- 
minded  youths  of  the  working  class  from  the  very  outset  of  their 
adhesion  to  its  ranks.    Those  wdio  are  keen  in  political  matters, 
and  also  those  among  the  workers  who  possess  talent  as  writers 
or  speakers,  cannot  fail  to  experience  the  magnetic  influence  of  a 
party  which  offers  so  rich  a  field  for  the  use  and  development  of 
their  talents.     Consequently  we  must  accept  as  a  logical  truth 
what  was  pointed  out  by  Guglielmo  Ferrero,  that  whilst  the  ad- 
hesion of  anyone  of  proletarian  origin  to  the  socialist  party  al- 
ways presupposes  a  certain  minimum  of  special  aptitudes  and 
favourable  circumstances,  yet  such  adhesion  must  be  considered 
desirable  and  advantageous,  not  only  upon  ideal  grounds  and 
from  motives  of  class  egoism,  but  also  for  speculative  reasons  of 
personal  egoism.     For  an  intelligent  German  workman  there  is 
hardly  any  other  way  which  offers  him  such  rapid  opportunities 
of  ''improving  his  condition"  as  service  in  the  socialist  army,^ 
One  of  the  first  persons  to  recognize  the  bearing  of  these  possi- 
bilities, and  to  utilize  them,  with  considerable  partisan  exag- 
geration, for  his  own  peculiar  political  ends,  was  Prince  Bis- 
marck.   During  the  violent  struggle  between  the  government  and 

'Heinrieh  Herkner,  Die  Arheiterfrage,  ed.  cit.,  p.,  186;  as  regards  Italy, 
Angelo  Mosso,  Vita  moderna  degli  Italiani,  Treves,  Milan,  1906,  pp.  249, 
262-3. 

®  Guglielmo  Ferrero,  L  'Europa  giovane,  ed.  cit.,  pp.  72  et  seq. 


274  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

the  socialist  party  he  declared :  ' '  The  position  of  socialist  agi- 
tator has  to-day  become  a  regular  industry,  just  like  any  other. 
A  man  becomes  an  agitator  or  a  popular  orator  as  in  former 
days  he  became  a  smith  or  a  carpenter.  One  who  adopts  this 
new  occupation  is  often  much  better  off  than  if  he  had  kept  at 
his  old  work,  gaining  a  more  agreeable  and  freer  life,  one  which 
in  certain  circles  brings  him  more  respect. ' '  "  The  allusion  to 
the  agreeable  and  free  life  of  the  socialist  agitator  recalls  a 
phrase  used  by  William  II,  who,  apropos  of  the  Krupp  affair, 
spoke  of  the  "safe  ambush"  from  which  socialist  editors  could 
shoot  their  carefully  aimed  arrows  of  calumny.  The  emperor's 
criticism  is  unjust,  for  the  socialist  editor  who  departs  from  the 
truth  is  always  exposed  to  the  risk  of  prosecution  and  punish- 
ment.   Bismarck  hit  the  right  nail  on  the  head. 

A  gigantic  and  magnificently  organized  party  like  the  Ger- 
man socialist  party  has  need  of  a  no  less  gigantic  apparatus  of 
editors,  secretaries,  bookkeepers,  and  mnnerous  other  employees, 
whose  sole  task  is  to  serve  this  colossal  machine.  Mutatis  mutan^ 
dis  the  same  is  true  of  the  other  great  branch  of  the  working- 
class  movement,  the  trade-union  organizations.  Now,  for  the  rea- 
sons that  have  previously  been  discussed,  there  are  available  for 
the  service  of  the  German  labour  movement  no  more  than  a  very 
small  number  of  refugees  from  the  bourgeoisie.  It  is  for  this 
reason  that  most  of  the  posts  are  filled  by  men  of  working-class 
origin,  who  by  zeal  and  by  study  have  succeeded  in  gaining  the 
confidence  of  their  comrades.  It  may,  then,  be  said  that  there 
exists  a  proletarian  elite  which  arises  spontaneously  by  a  process 
of  natural  selection  within  the  socialist  party,  and  that  its  mem- 
bers come  to  perform  functions  altogether  different  from  those 
which  they  originally  exercised.  To  make  use  of  a  phrase  which 
is  convenient  and  comprehensible  despite  its  lack  of  scientific 
precision,  we  may  say  that  such  men  have  abandoned  manual 
work  to  become  brain-workers.  For  those  who  make  such  a 
change  considerable  advantages  accrue,  altogether  independent 
of  the  advantages  which  attach  per  se  to  mental  work  when  com- 
pared to  manual.  The  manual  worker  who  has  become  an  official 
of  the  socialist  party  is  no  longer  in  a  position  of  strictly  per- 
sonal and  purely  mercenary  dependence  upon  his  employer  or 
upon  the  manager  of  the  factory;  he  has  become  a  free  man, 

"Speech  in  the  Reichstag,  October  9,  1878.  Cf.  Fiirst  Bismarck's  Beden, 
mit  verbind  gescMchtlicher  Darstellung  von  Philipp  Stein,  Eeclam,  Leip- 
zig, vol.  viii,  p.  110. 


( 


RESULTS  OF  ORGANIZATION        275 

engaged  in  intellectual  work  on  behalf  of  an  impersonal  enter- 
prise. Moreover,  he  is  bound  to  this  enterprise,  not  solely  by 
his  strongest  material  interests,  but  also  by  the  powerful  ties  of 
the  ideal  and  of  solidarity  in  the  struggle.  And  notwithstanding 
certain  exceptions  which  may  confuse  the  minds  of  the  profane, 
he  is  treated  far  more  humanely  than  by  any  private  employer. 
In  relation  to  the  party  the  employee  is  not  a  simple  wage- 
earner,  but  rather  a  profit-sharing  associate — not,  of  course,  a 
profit-sharer  in  the  industrial  sense,  since  the  party  is  not  a  com- 
mercial undertaking  for  the  earning  of  dividends,  but  a  profit- 
sharer  in  the  ideal  sense.  It  is  not  suggested  that  the  party 
employee  earns  his  bread  in  the  most  pleasant  way  in  the  world. 
On  the  contrary,  as  has  been  said  in  earlier  chapters,"  the  daily 
bread,  which  with  rare  exceptions  is  not  unduly  plentiful,  must 
be  earned  by  the  fulfilment  of  an  enormous  amount  of  labour, 
prematurely  exhausting  health  and  energy.  Nevertheless  the 
ex-manual  worker  can  live  with  dignity  and  comparative  ease. 
Since  he  has  a  fixed  salary,  his  position  is  more  secure,  and 
though  outwardly  more  stormy,  it  is  inwardly  more  tranquil, 
than  that  of  the  ordinary  wage-earner.  Should  he  be  imprisoned, 
the  party  cares  for  him  and  his  dependents,  and  the  more  often 
he  is  prosecuted  the  better  become  his  chances  of  rapid  advance- 
ment in  his  career  of  socialist  official  with  all  the  advantages 
attaching  to  the  position. 

We  may  here  consider  the  interesting  question,  What  is  the 
numerical  ratio  between  the  socialist  bureaucracy  and  the  organ- 
ized masses;  how  many  comrades  are  there  for  each  party  offi- 
cial? If  we  include  in  the  term  "official"  all  the  mandataries 
of  the  party  in  the  communes,  etc.,  most  of  whom  are  unpaid, 
we  sometimes  attain  to  surprising  results.  For  example,  the 
socialist  organization  of  the  grand  duchy  of  Baden,  with  a  mem- 
bership (  1905)  of  7,332,  had  more  than  1,000  municipal  coun- 
cillors.^2  According  to  these  figures,  every  seventh  member  of 
the  Badenese  party  had  the  honour  of  being  a  party  representa- 
tive. This  example,  however,  was  quoted  by  the  executive  in  its 
report  to  the  congress  of  Jena  precisely  on  account  of  its  abnor- 
mality. Even  though  it  may  not  be  unique  in  southern  Ger- 
many, it  does  not  in  truth  bear  upon  the  question  we  are  now 
considering,  which  is  the  numerical  relation  between  the  enrolled 

"  Cf .  pp.  57,  115. 

^ProtoJcoll  d.  Verhandl.  d.  Parteitags  su  Jena,  1905,  p.  16. 


276  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

membership  and  the  party  employees  in  the  strict  sense  of  the 
term,  considered  as  a  group  of  persons  permanently  and  directly 
engaged  in  the  service  of  the  collectivity.  The  following  figures 
give  some  idea  of  this  ratio.  According  to  a  notice  which  in  1904 
went  the  round  of  the  German  socialist  press/^  the  party  at  that 
time  employed,  in  addition  to  1,476  persons  engaged  in  the  party 
printing  establishment  (about  two-thirds  of  whom  enjoyed  the 
benefits  of  the  eight-hour  day,  whilst  many  also  had  the  right  to 
regular  holidays),  329  individuals  working  on  the  editorial  staff 
and  as  delivery  agents.  The  daily  socialist  press  had  in  1909  a 
circulation  of  one  million,  whilst  the  trade-union  journals,  weekly 
for  the  most  part,  had  a  far  higher  circulation.^^  Alike  in  the 
trade  unions  and  in  the  socialist  party  the  number  of  paid  em- 
ployees is  rapidly  increasing.  The  first  regularly  appointed  and 
paid  leaders  in  the  European  labour  movement  were  the  officials 
nominated  in  1840  by  the  English  Ironf ounders '  Society.  To-day 
in  the  trade-union  organizations  of  the  United  Kingdom  there 
are  more  than  one  thousand  salaried  employees.^^  In  Germany, 
in  the  year  1898,  the  number  of  trade-union  officials  was  104; 
in  1904  it  was  677,  of  whom  100  belonged  to  the  metal-workers 
and  70  to  the  bricklayers  and  masons'  union.  This  increase  in 
the  officialdom  is  accelerated,  not  merely  by  the  steady  increase 
in  the  membership,  but  also  by  the  increasing  complexity  of  the 
benefits  offered  by  the  organizations.  Almost  every  meeting  of 
the  central  executive  discusses  and  determines  upon  the  appoint- 
ment of  new  officials,  rendered  essential  by  the  further  differen- 
tiation of  the  trade-union  functions.^''  There  are  always  found 
advocates  for  the  creation  of  fresh  specialized  posts  in  the  la- 
bour movement,  to  fulfil  various  technical  offices,  to  keep  abreast 
of  new  discoveries  and  advances  in  methods  of  manufacture,  to 
check  the  returns  made  by  factory  employers,  to  act  as  econo- 
mists and  compile  trade  statistics.^'^ 

For  some  years  past  the  same  tendency  has  been  manifest  in 
the  German  socialist  party.  According  to  the  report  of  the  ex- 
ecutive for  the  year  1909,  very  many  district  organizations  now 
employ  salaried  secretaries.     The  number  of  district  secretaries 

"  '  *  Mitteldeutsche  Sonntagszeitung, "  xi,  No.  14. 

"Karl  Kautsky,  Ber  Weg  zur  MacJit,  "Vorwarts,"  Berlin,  1909,  p.  56. 

^Tausto  Pagliari,  Le  Organ,  e  i  loro  Impiegati,  ed.  cit.,  pp.  8-9. 

"  Ernst  Deinhardt,  Das  Beamtenelement  im  den  deutschen  GewerTcschaf- 
ten,  "Sozial  Monatsh.,"  ix  (xi),  fasc.  12,  p.  1019. 

"Adolph  Braun,  Gewerkschaftliche  Verfassungsfragen,  "Neue  Zeit," 
xsix,  No.  89. 


RESULTS  OF  ORGANIZATION        277 

is  43,  whilst  in  a  single  year  the  number  of  secretaries  of  con- 
stituencies increased  from  41  to  62.^^  There  is  a  mutual  aid  so- 
ciety for  officials  of  the  socialist  party  and  of  the  trade  unions, 
and  its  membership  continually  increases.  In  1902  it  had  433 
members;  in  1905,  1,095;  in  1907,  1,871 ;  and  in  1909,  2,474.  But 
there  must  be  officials  who  are  not  members  of  the  society.^® 

When  he  abandons  manual  work  for  intellectual,  the  worker 
undergoes  another  transformation  which  involves  his  whole  ex- 
istence. He  gradually  leaves  the  proletariat  to  become  a  member 
of  the  petty  bourgeois  class.  At  first,  as  we  have  seen,  there  is 
no  more  than  a  change  in  his  professional  and  economic  situa- 
tion. The  salaries  paid  by  the  party,  although  modest,  are  dis- 
tinctly greater  than  the  average  wage  which  the  worker  gained 
before  his  entry  into  the  socialist  bureaucracy,  and  are  calcu- 
lated to  enable  the  recipients  to  lead  a  petty  bourgeois  life.  In 
one  of  the  German  socialist  congresses,  Wilhelm  Liebknecht 
apostrophized  the  other  leaders  in  the  following  terms:  "You 
are  for  the  most  part  aristocrats  among  the  workers — aristocrats, 
I  mean,  in  respect  of  income.  The  workers  in  the  Erzgebirge  or 
the  weavers  of  Silesia  would  regard  the  salaries  you  earn  as  the 
income  of  a  Croesus."  ^°  It  is  true,  at  least  in  the  majority  of 
cases,  that  the  career  of  the  party  or  trade-union  employee  does 
not  positively  transform  the  ex-manual  worker  into  a  capitalist.^^ 
Yet  this  career  effects  a  notable  elevation  of  the  worker  above 
the  cl^ss  to  which  he  primarily  belonged,^'  and  in  Germany  there 

^^  Protokoll  d.  Ver.  d.  Parteitags  su  Leipzig,  "Vorwarts, "  Berlin,  1909, 
p.  20. — Similar  phenomena  may  be  observed  in  Italy,  cf.  supra,  p.  125. 

"  Adolf  Weber,  Eapital  und  Arbeit,  ed.  cit.,  p.  389. 

^^  Protokoll  des  Parteitags  su  Berlin,  1892,  p.  122. 

*^  It  may  be  noted  that  the  bourgeois  aspect  of  certain  positions  to  which 
the  former  manual  worker  attains,  thanks  to  the  party,  is  apparent  rather 
than  real.  Thus,  certain  German  socialist  leaders  are  described  as  being 
by  civil  status  ' '  owners  of  printing  works, ' '  when  they  are  in  reality  no 
more  than  the  legal  proprietors  of  undertakings  belonging  to  the  party, 
and  receive,  in  addition  to  the  salary  properly  payable  for  the  work  in 
which  they  are  engaged,  no  more  than  a  percentage  on  the  profits  of  the 
undertaking. 

-^  It  is  obvious  that  those  proletarians  who  have  become  members  of  the 
Eeichstag,  and  whose  speeches  display  a  technical  knowledge  of  working- 
class  life,  cannot  remain  manual  workers.  It  is  impossible  to  be  working 
as  a  bricklayer  at  three  o'clock  and  at  four  to  give  a  speech  in  parliament 
upon  stock-exchange  legislation.  Parliamentary  life  requires  study  and  ex- 
pert knowledge,  and  the  work  of  party  leadership  involves  a  man 's  whole 
activities.  For  economic  reasons,  too,  it  is  impossible  for  the  parliamentary 
representative  to  remain  in  the  working  class.     The  attempt  to  combine 


278  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

is  applied  to  the  existence  led  by  such  persons  the  sociologically 
precise  term  of  geJiohene  Arheiterexistenz  (a  working-class  life 
on  a  higher  scale).  Karl  Marx  himself  did  not  hesitate  to  class- 
ify the  working-class  leaders  under  two  heads,  as  lioJierklassige 
(workers  of  a  superior  class,  intellectual  workers)  and  Arbeit er 
(manual  workers  properly  speaking)  .^^  As  we  shall  show  in 
fuller  detail  in  a  subsequent  chapter,^*  the  manual  worker  of 
former  days  becomes  a  petty  bourgeois  or  even  a  bourgeois.  In 
addition  to  this  metamorphosis,  and  despite  his  frequent  contact 
with  the  mass  of  the  workers,  he  undergoes  a  profound  psycho- 
logical transformation.  The  paid  official,  living  at  a  higher  so- 
cial level,  will  not  always  possess  the  moral  strength  to  resist 
the  seductions  of  his  new  environment.  His  political  and  social 
education  will  seldom  suffice  to  immunize  him  against  the  new 
influences.  August  Bebel  repeatedly  drew  the  attention  of  the 
party  to  the  dangers  by  which  the  leaders  were  beset,  the  risks 
to  their  class  purity  and  to  their  unity  of  thought.  The  prole- 
tarian party-officials,  he  said,  are  ''persons  whose  life  has  be- 
come established  upon  a  comparatively  stable  basis.  "^^ 

A  closer  examination  will  show  that  the  phenomenon  here  con- 
sidered has  a  profound  social  significance,  and  that  neither  with- 
in nor  without  the  party  has  it  hitherto  received  the  attention  it 
deserves.  For  the  German  workers,  the  labour  movement  has  an 
importance  analogous  to  that  of  the  Catholic  Church  for  certain 
fractions  of  the  petty  bourgeoisie  and  of  the  rural  population. 
In  both  cases  we  have  an  organization  which  furnishes  oppor- 
tunities to  the  most  intelligent  members  of  certain  classes  to 
secure  a  rise  in  the  social  scale.  In  the  Church,  the  peasant's 
son  will  often  succeed  in  achieving  social  advance,  whose  equiv- 
alent in  all  the  other  liberal  professions  has  remained  the  mo- 
nopoly of  members  of  the  aristocracy  of  birth  or  of  wealth.  No 
one  of  peasant  birth  becomes  a  general  or  a  prefect,  but  not  a 
few  peasants  become  bishops.  Pope  Pius  X  was  of  peasant  ori- 
gin.   Now  that  which  the  Church  offers  to  peasants  and  to  petty 

manual  labour  with  parliamentary  has  always  failed.  Until  a  few  years 
ago,  until  June,  1906,  in  the  Badenese  diet  there  was  a  member  who  was 
still  engaged  as  a  factory  hand,  but  one  day  his  employer  said  that  he 
really  could  not  any  longer  find  employment  for  a  representative  of  the 
people. 

"  Karl  Marx,  Brief e  u.  Auszuge,  etc.,  ed.  cit.,  p.  159. 

^*Part  IV,  chap.  v. 

^  August  Bebel,  speaking  at  the  Dresden  congress,  1903.  ProtoTcoll  uber 
die  Verhandlungen  des  Parteitags,  "Vorwarts, "  Berlin,  1903,  p.  230. 


KESULTS  OF  ORGANIZATION        279 

bourgeois,  namely,  a  facility  for  ascent  in  the  social  scale,  is 
offered  to  intelligent  manual  workers  by  the  socialist  party. 

As  a  source  of  social  transformations  the  socialist  party  has 
many  affinities  with  another  institution,  namely,  the  Prussian 
military  organization.  The  son  of  a  bourgeois  family  who  adopts 
a  permanent  military  career  becomes  a  stranger  to  his  own  class. 
Should  he  attain  to  high  rank,  he  will  receive  a  title  from  the 
emperor.  He  loses  his  bourgeois  characteristics  and  adopts  the 
usages  and  opinions  of  his  new  feudal  environment.  It  is  true 
that  these  military  officers  are  only  manifesting  the  tendency  to 
the  attainment  of  "gentility"  in  which  the  whole  bourgeoisie  is 
involved,-"  but  in  their  case  this  process  is  greatly  accelerated, 
and  is  effected  with  a  full  consciousness  of  its  consequences. 
Every  year  hundreds  of  young  men  from  the  upper  and  middle 
strata  of  the  bourgeois  class  become  officers  in  the  army,  simply 
from  the  desire  to  secure  a  higher  position  and  more  social  con- 
sideration.^^ In  the  socialist  party  a  similar  effect  is  often  the 
result  of  necessity,  the  individual's  social  metamorphosis  taking 
place  independently  of  the  will.  But  the  general  results  are 
similar. 

Thus  the  socialist  party  gives  a  lift  to  certain  strata  of  the 
working  class.  The  more  extensive  and  the  more  complicated 
its  bureaucratic  mechanism,  the  more  numerous  are  those  raised 
by  this  machine  above  their  original  social  position.  It  is  the 
involuntary  task  of  the  socialist  party  to  remove  from  the  prole- 
tariat, to  deproletarianize,  some  of  the  most  capable  and  best 
informed  of  its  members.  Now,  according  to  the  materialist  con- 
ception of  history,  the  social  and  economic  metamorphosis  grad- 
ually involves  a  metamorphosis  in  the  realm  of  ideas.-®  The 
consequence  is  that  in  many  of  the  ex-workers  this  embourgeoise- 
ment  is  very  rapidlj^  effected.  Naturally  the  change  is  less  speedy 
in  proportion  as  socialist  theory  is  more  deeply  rooted  in  the 
mind  of  the  individual.  Numerous  are  those  manual  workers 
who,  having  attained  a  higher  social  and  economic  situation, 
none  the  less  remain  throughout  their  lives  profoundly  attached 

''^  Franz  Mehring:  "It  is  distressing  that  at  a  time  when  the  army  can- 
not exist  without  bourgeois  money  and  bourgeois  intelligence,  the  bourgeois 
youth  should  have  no  higher  ambition  than  to  force  his  way  into  the 
feudal  caste"  {Ber  Erieg  gegen  die  Troddeln,  "Leipziger  Volkszeitung, " 
xi,  No.  4). 

"  Cf.  supra,  p.  14. 

^Cf.  August  Bebel's  speech  to  the  Dresden  congress  to  which  refer* 
ence  has  already  been  made  {Frotolcoll,  loc.  cit.). 


280  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

to  the  socialist  cause.  In  this  case,  however,  the  ex-manual 
worker  is,  just  like  the  ex-bourgeois  socialist,  an  "ideologue," 
since  his  mentality  does  not  correspond  to  his  position  in  society. 
Sometimes,  again,  the  psychological  metamorphosis  we  are  con- 
sidering is,  as  it  were,  inhibited  by  a  tenacious  and  vigorous 
hereditary  socialist  mentality : 'here  we  see  the  children  and 
grandchildren  following  their  parents  as  whole-hearted  combat- 
ants on  behalf  of  the  labour  party,  notwithstanding  the  elevated 
position  to  which  they  have  attained.  Experience  shows,  how- 
ever, that  such  cases  are  exceptional.  Even  when  the  deprole- 
tarianized  socialist  remains  a  sincere  advocate  of  proletarian 
emancipation,  and  grows  grey  in  his  position  of  socialist  editor 
or  deputy,  his  children,  sons  as  well  as  daughters,  are  thorough- 
going members  of  the  higher  social  class  into  which  they  have 
been  removed  by  the  improvement  in  their  father's  social  posi- 
tion, and  this  not  merely  in  the  material  sense,  but  in  respect  of 
their  ideas,  so  that  it  becomes  impossible  to  distinguish  them  from 
their  fellow-bourgeois.-^  In  most  cases  the  only  bond  which  re- 
mains to  attach  the  father  to  the  working  class,  his  faith  in  the 
politico-social  dogma  of  socialism,  is  slackened  in  the  son  to  be- 
come an  absolute  indifference  and  sometimes  an  open  hostility  to 
socialism.  To  sum  up,  it  may  be  said  that  these  former  working- 
class  people,  considered  as  families  and  not  as  individuals,  are 
absorbed  sooner  or  later  into  the  new  bourgeois  environment. 
The  children  receive  a  bourgeois  education ;  they  attend  better 
schools  than  those  to  which  their  father  had  access ;  ^°  their  in- 
terests are  bourgeois  and  they  very  rarely  recall  the  revolution- 
ary and  anti-bourgeois  derivation  of  their  own  entrance  into  the 
bourgeoisie.  The  working-class  families  which  have  been  raised 
by  the  revolutionary  workers  to  a  higher  social  position,  for  the 

"  It  need  hardly  be  said  that  this  phenomenon  is  not  universal.  We 
observe  certain  cases  in  which  the  children  of  ex-manual  workers  who  have 
become  officials  of  the  socialist  party  either  desire  of  their  own  initiative  to 
become  ordinary  wage-earners  or  are  forced  to  do  so  by  the  insufficiency 
of  their  father's  salary,  which,  especially  when  the  family  is  a  large  one, 
does  not  suffice  to  give  the  children  an  education  "suitable  to  their  new 
status."  There  are  certain  socialist  deputies  and  journalists  whose  sons 
have  to  earn  their  living  as  factory  hands  and  whose  daughters  are  ballet- 
dancers. 

^°A  German  trade-union  employee  whose  education  had  been  greatly 
inferior  to  that  of  his  colleagues,  and  who,  as  he  himself  put  it,  had 
never  attained  to  any  ease  in  the  right  use  of  the  dative  and  accusative 
cases,  said  to  me  about  his  son:  "I  shall  be  able  to  send  him  to  the 
Eealgymnasium.     My  means  will  run  to  that  now ! ' ' 


RESULTS  OF  ORGANIZATION        281 

purpose  of  a  more  effective  struggle  against  the  bourgeoisie,  thus 
come  before  long  to  be  fused  with  the  bourgeoisie.^^ 

Eeference  has  previously  been  made  to  a  similar  phenomenon 
in  the  case  of  the  families  of  vrorking-class  leaders  who  are  refu- 
gees from  the  class  of  bourgeois  intellectuals.^^  The  final  result 
is  the  same,  the  only  difference  being  that  the  children  of  the 
ex-manual  workers  forget  their  class  of  origin,  whilst  the  chil- 
dren of  the  bourgeois  intellectuals  recall  it.  The  result  is  that 
in  the  history  of  the  labour  movement  we  may  observe  a  similar 
irony  to  that  which  may  be  seen  in  the  history  of  the  bourgeois 
resistance  to  the  workers.  The  bourgeoisie  has  not  been  able  to 
prevent  a  number  of  the  best  instructed,  most  capable,  and  most 
adroit  among  its  elements  from  placing  themselves  at  the  head 
of  the  mortal  enemies  of  the  bourgeoisie;  it  is  often  these  ex- 
bourgeois  who  stimulate  the  proletarians  to  resistance  and  organ- 
ize them  for  the  struggle.  The  proletariat  suffers  a  similar  fate. 
In  the  severe  struggle  it  has  undertaken  for  the  expropriation 
of  the  expropriators,  it  elevates  from  the  depths  of  its  own  class 
those  who  have  the  finest  intelligences  and  the  keenest  vision,  by 
serious  collective  sacrifices  gives  them  the  pen  to  use  in  place 
of  ruder  tools,  and  in  doing  so  it  throws  into  the  arms  of  the 
enemy  those  who  have  been  selected  with  the  express  purpose  of 
fighting  the  privileged  class.  If  the  chosen  combatants  do  not 
themselves  go  over  to  the  enemy,  their  children  at  least  will  do 
so.  This  is  indeed  a  tragical  destiny:  ex-bourgeois  on  the  one 
side,  and  ex-manual  workers  on  the  other.    The  imposing  politi- 

^  It  is  by  no  means  uncommon  to  find  that  the  sons  of  noted  socialist 
leaders,  when  they  do  not  avoid  all  political  activity  and  exhibit  a  disin- 
clination to  the  discussion  of  political  problems,  frequently  display  them- 
selves in  public  as  the  most  violent  opponents  of  socialism.  Among  such 
opponents,  in  Germany,  -we  have  a  son  of  the  socialist  deputy  Karl  Ulrich 
(who  was  a  metal-worker  before  he  entered  the  party  bureaucracy) ;  a  son 
of  the  late  socialist  leader  Wilhelm  Bracke,  the  barrister  Bracke  of  Breslau, 
who  belongs  to  the  extreme  right  and  is  a  member  of  the  Eeichsverband 
zur  Bekampfung  der  Sozialdemokratie  (anti-socialist  league) ;  and  there 
are  other  instances.  Sometimes  it  is  doubtless  the  outcome  of  unhappy 
family  relationships  that  the  children  of  socialists  follow  other  paths  than 
the  fathers:  the  bourgeois  family  of  the  socialist  leader  persists  in  its  old 
anti-socialist  views,  ia  which  the  pater-familias  has  been  unable  to  effect 
any  change.  The  wife  and  daughter  of  Jean  Jaures,  the  anti-clerical,  for 
example,  are  strict  Catholics.  The  daughter  for  a  long  time  cherished  the 
idea  of  entering  a  convent,  hoping  by  this  sacrifice  to  avert  God's  anger 
which  would  otherwise  be  visited  upon  her  father  on  account  of  his 
political  activities. 

^  Cf .  supra,  p.  250. 


282  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

cal  contest  between  the  classes  representing  respectively  capital 
and  labour  ends,  however  paradoxical  this  may  appear,  in  a 
manner  analogous  with  that  which  in  the  sphere  of  economic 
competition  is  determined  through  the  operation  of  supply  and 
demand,  speculation,  personal  adroitness,  etc. — in  a  social  ex- 
change among  the  classes.  It  is  hardly  necessary  to  repeat  that 
this  interchange  of  the  ripples  on  the  surface  of  the  waves  does 
not  weaken,  and  far  less  annul,  the  profundity  of  social  antag- 
onisms. It  is  obvious  that  the  process  of  social  exchange  can  on 
either  side  affect  no  more  than  infinitesimal  minorities.  But  it 
affects  the  most  influential,  and  herein  lies  its  sociological  im- 
portance.   It  affects  the  self-made  leaders. 

3.     Capitalist  Defence  as  the  Creator  of  New  Petty  Bourgeois 

Strata. 

The  embourgeoisement  of  certain  strata  of  the  working-class 
party  has  other  factors  in  addition  to  the  influence  of  the  bu- 
reaucratic apparatus  of  the  socialist  party,  the  trade  unions,  and 
the  cooperative  societies.     This  development,  which  is  a  neces- 
sary characteristic  of  every  movement  towards  emancipation,  is 
to  a  certain  extent  paralleled  by  the  constitution  of  a  petty  bour- 
geoisie of  strongly  proletarian  characteristics,  itself  also  devel- 
oped from  below  upwards,  itself  also  an  accessory  phenomenon 
of  the  struggle  of  the  organized  workers  for  social  emancipation, 
but  which  takes  place  outside  the  various  forms  of  socialist  or- 
ganization.   We  allude  to  those  proletarian  elements  which  be- 
come particularly  numerous  in  times  of  crisis,  when  the  labour 
organizations  are  still  weak  and  persecuted,  as  was  the  case  in 
Germany  during  the  days  of  the  anti-socialist  law.     At  such 
times  numerous  proletarians  are  victimized,  it  may  be  on  account 
of  their  passive  fidelity  to  party  or  trade  union,  it  may  be  be- 
cause   their    attitude    is    frankly    socialist    and    "subversive." 
Forced  by  necessity,  these  victims  of  capitalist  reprisals  have 
no  other  resource  than  to  adopt  some  form  of  independent  enter- 
prise.   Abandoning  their  ancient  handicraft,  they  open  a  small 
shop,  fruit  aiid  vegetables,  stationery,  grocery,  or  tobacco;  they 
become  pedlars,  keep  a  coffee-stall,  or  the  like.^^    In  most  cases 

^^Eichard  Calwer  {Bos  TcommunistiscJie  Manifest,  etc.,  ed.  cit.,  pp.  8  et 
seq.)  inveighs  with  especial  vigour  against  these  petty  bourgeois  socialists. 
He  makes  the  caustic  observation:  "To-day  a  man's  every  need,  from 
clothing  to  cigars,  can  be  supplied  at  petty  bourgeois  socialist  establish- 
ments."   No  doubt  he  is  aiming  also  at  the  cooperatives. 


RESULTS  OF  ORGANIZATION        283 

their  ancient  associates  support  them  with  admirable  solidarity, 
regarding  it  as  a  duty  to  assist  these  unfortunate  comrades  by 
giving  them  their  custom.  It  sometimes  happens  that  some  of 
these  new  petty  bourgeois  find  their  way  definitely  into  the  mid- 
dle class.  Thus  capitalist  resistance  has  automatically  created 
new  strata  of  petty  bourgeois. 

In  addition  to  these  victims  of  the  struggle  for  proletarian 
emancipation,  there  are  not  a  few  workers  who  leave  their  class, 
lot  from  necessity,  but  influenced  to  a  large  extent  by  the  love 
yf  speculation  and  the  desire  to  improve  their  social  position. 
Thus  there  has  come  into  existence  a  whole  army  of  ex-prole- 
tirians,  petty  bourgeois  and  small  shopkeepers,  who  all  claim, 
i\  virtue  of  a  superior  moral  right,  that  the  comrades  must  sup- 
port them  by  dealing  exclusively  at  their  establishments.  The 
m«de  of  life  of  these  small  traders  often  reduces  them,  despite 
all  their  good  wishes,  to  the  level  of  social  parasites ;  their  com- 
maid  of  capital  being  extremely  small,  the  goods  they  offer  to 
thar  customers,  that  is  to  say  to  the  organized  workers,  are  both 
bad  and  dear. 

Sill  more  important  in  German  socialism  is  the  role  of  those 
whc  are  termed  Parteihudiger,  that  is  to  say  tavern-keepers  who 
are  members  of  the  party.  During  the  prevalence  of  the  anti- 
socialist  law  their  political  mission  was  of  incontestable  impor- 
tarce.  In  many  small  towns  the  tavern-keepers  belonging  to 
the  party  still  exercise  multifarious  and  important  functions.  It 
is  in  their  houses  that  the  executive  committee  meets;  often 
th(se  are  the  only  places  where  socialist  and  trade-union  jour- 
nas  are  found  on  the  tables ;  and  in  many  cases,  since  the  own- 
en  of  other  halls  are  hostile  or  timid,  it  is  here  alone  that  public 
mtetings  can  be  held.  In  a  word,  they  are  necessary  instru- 
ments in  the  local  socialist  struggle.^*  In  the  more  important 
centres,  however,  these  places,  with  their  unhygienic  environ- 
ment, become  a  veritable  curse  to  the  party.  It  may  be  added 
that  the  brutal  struggle  for  existence  leads  the  petty  bourgeois 


2*  We  owe  to  the  pens  of  foreign  observers  some  vigorous  descriptions 
of  the  life  of  these  Parteilcneipen,  a  life  not  devoid  of  psychological  in- 
terest. Among  these  we  may  refer  to  La  Democratie  socialiste  allemande, 
by  Edgard  Milhaud,  professor  of  political  economy  at  the  University  of 
Geneva,  a  French  socialist  (pp.  148  et  seq.)  ;  also  to  the  work  of  Otto  Von 
Leixner,  which  dates  back  to  the  days  of  the  anti-socialist  law  (Soziale 
Briefe,  ed.  cit.,  p.  325)— but  this  writer  of  feuilletons  gives  us  a  picture 
■which  is  too  highly  coloured. 


284  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

tavern-keepers  to  exercise  improper  pressure  upon  the  socialist 
organizations.     They  enjoy  a  considerable  influence  among  the 
comrades,  and  this  pressure  is  commonly  exerted  in  a  manner 
directly  injurious  to  the  interests  of  the  proletariat.     The  at- 
tempts which  have  been  made  in  Germany,  especially  since  1890, 
to  induce  the  workers  to  abandon  the  unwholesome  rooms  of  the 
old  taverns  and  to  frequent  the  great  modern  establishment? 
with  fine  airy  halls,  have  led,  as  was  inevitable,  to  "a  vigorous 
opposition"  on  the  part  of  the  socialist  tavern-keepers.^^     Fa* 
many  years  the  members  of  the  party  whose  living  is  made  ly 
the  sale  of  drink  have  energetically  resisted  the  foundation  )f 
"People's  Houses";  notwithstanding  the  sympathy  for  such  n- 
stitutions  they  may  theoretically  possess,  they  dread  this  mw 
form  of  competition,  and  act  in  accordance  with  their  immedate 
personal  interests.     In  most  cases  their  opposition  has  prcved 
ineffectual.^^     Not  always,  however.     Even  to-day  there  cist 
German  towns  with  from  twenty  thousand  to  thirty  thouand 
inhabitants  in  which  the  existence  of  a  Parteikneipe  (whicl  de- 
spite its  name  of  "Party  tavern"  is  the  exclusive  property  of 
some  individual  member  of  the  party)  has  proved  an  insupcable 
obstacle  in  the  way  of  the  local  labour  organizations  when  they 
have  desired  to  build  a  place  of  their  own,  or  even  to  obtain 
from  other  and  non-socialist  innkeepers  the  use  of  a  more  cam- 
modious  hall  for  their  meetings.  I 

For  an  additional  reason,  these  socialist  taverns  are  calamibus 
in  their  influence  upon  the  party,  in  that  they  oppose  a  potent 
obstacle  to  the  extension  of  the  temperance  movement  which  has 
been  initiated  during  recent  years.^'^    It  is  no  secret  in  socialist 

^  E.  Calwer,  op.  cit.,  p.  9. 

*'The  "  Korrespondenzblatt "  of  the  General  Committee  published  in  1>06 
(No.  29)  statistics  regarding  the  activity  of  GewerJcschaftskartelle  (Tra(is' 
Councils),  from  which  we  cull  the  following  details.  A  GewerkscJiaftshius 
(an  establishment  belonging  to  the  trade  unions)  exists  in  the  foUowiig 
localities:  Berlin,  Brunswick,  Breslau,  Cassel,  Charlottenburg,  Cologne,  Dres- 
den, Elberfeld,  Feuerbach,  Frankfort-on-the-Main,  Hanau,  Heidelberg,  Kie", 
Leipzig,  Liegnitz,  Mannheim,  Miihlhausen  in  Thuringia,  Offenbach-on-the 
Main,  Plauen  in  Vogtland,  Solingen,  Stettin,  Stralsund,  Stuttgart,  Treves, 
Wilhelmshaven,  and  Zittau.  Even  when  these  places,  which  are  often 
called  "People's  Houses,"  are  not  the  exclusive  property  of  the  Trades 
Councils,  they  owe  their  existence  in  great  part  to  the  local  trade  unions, 
and  in  some  cases  also  to  the  socialist  party.  It  should  be  observed  that 
the  productive  and  distributive  cooperative  societies,  being  in  Germany 
strictly  neutral  in  political  matters,  play  no  part  in  these  undertakings. 

^'  To  the  delegates  at  the  socialist  congress  of  Jena  was  given  a  number 


RESULTS  OF  ORGANIZATION       285 

circles  that  long  before  the  congress  of  Essen  (1907)  the  party 
would  have  declared  openly  against  alcoholism,  and  that  after 
this  congress  it  would  have  applied  its  decisions  with  greater 
vigour,  had  not  the  party  leaders  been  restrained  by  the  fear 

of  ' '  Der  abstinente  Arbeiter, ' '  the  official  organ  of  tlie  League  of  Abstinent 
Workers,  edited  by  Georg  Davidsohn,  from  which  the  following  passage  may 
be  quoted:  "The  Socialist  Publicans'  Association  of  Berlin  has  been  asked 
on  two  occasions  whether  its  members  desired  a  conference  upon  the  sub- 
ject of  public-house  reform.  No  answer  was  ever  received! — Comrade  M. 
subsequently  enquired  on  three  separate  occasions  whether  the  Association 
would  not  like  to  take  part  in  such  a  conference,  imagining  that  he  had 
to  deal  with  impartial  and  objective-minded  comrades,  who  would  no  longer 
continue  to  ignore  a  question  so  closely  touching  their  own  interests,  unless 
they  wished  grave  misunderstandings  to  arise  between  two  organizations 
within  the  framework  of  the  party.    But  again  no  answer  was  received! 

* '  The  president  of  the  Charlottenburg  section  of  the  League  of  Free  Pub- 
licans was  in  favour  of  discussion  of  the  subject,  but  the  meeting  refused 
to  consider  it!  Do  the  dealers  in  alcohol  then  imagine  that  they  can  in  this 
way  prevent  the  spread  of  the  teetotal  movement,  that  they  can  set  back  the 
hands  of  the  world's  clock?  This  is  as  little  possible  to  them  as  it  is  to 
others,  and  if  they  continue  to  shut  their  eyes  to  the  forward  movement, 
it  is  they  alone  who  will  have  to  pay  the  price. 

' '  A  most  serious  incident,  which  throws  a  strong  light  upon  the  pernicious 
influence  exercised  upon  the  life  of  our  party  by  certain  socialist  publicans, 
may  be  described  in  a  few  plain  words.  On  August  22nd  was  held  in  Berlin 
the  party  meeting  to  decide  upon  the  subjects  for  discussion  at  the  Jena 
congress.  In  the  fourth  electoral  district  of  Berlin  our  comrades  had  been 
engaged  in  an  excellent  work  of  preparation,  distributing  among  those 
present  at  the  meeting  about  600  leaflets  and  a  number  of  pamphlets  upon 
the  drink  question.  Here  could  be  observed  a  thing  which  three  years  ago 
would  have  seemed  barely  conceivable.  On  almost  every  table  were  bottles 
of  seltzer  water  and  the  waiters  could  hardly  get  around  fast  enough  to 
supply  the  demand  for  this  beverage.  The  sentiment  of  the  meeting,  there- 
fore, could  not  fail  to  be  favourable  to  our  two  proposals  (one  presented 
by  district  167A,  whilst  the  other  was  backed  by  numerous  signatures  just 
obtained  from  among  those  present  at  the  meeting)  to  have  the  alcohol 
question  placed  upon  the  agenda  of  the  next  congress.  But  who  can  count 
upon  fortune!  One  proposal  after  another  was  read  and  discussed,  without 
any  mention  being  made  of  ours.  I  had  already  risen  to  propose  our 
motion.  All  of  a  sudden,  however,  the  chairman,  a  publican,  declared  that 
the  discussion  of  the  proposals  was  concluded  and  that  the  delegates  to 
the  congress  were  now  to  be  elected !  I  demanded  that  our  proposals  should 
be  read.  But  the  chairman  ruled  that  it  was  'too  late'  and  the  names  of 
delegates  were  already  being  sent  in.  Our  proposals,  which  were  differ- 
entiated from  the  others  by  being  printed  in  a  larger  format,  had  (both  of 
them  as  luck  would  have  it!)  been  'by  an  oversight'  slipped  beneath  a 
newspaper,  so  that  the  chairman  and  his  two  assessors  (all  of  whom  had 
read  the  proposals  before  the  meeting  was  opened)  had  overlooked  them 
and  forgotten  them !  In  answer  to  my  remonstrances  the  chairman  promised 
that  he  would  endeavour  to  bring  the  matter  up  for  discussion  after  the 


286  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

that  the  measures  recommended,  and  even  a  simple  temperance 
propaganda,  would  react  injuriously  upon  the  interests  of  an 
influential  category  of  the  members  of  the  party. 

It  is  impossible  to  determine  with  any  accuracy  the  number 
of  individuals  who  have  become  independent  petty  bourgeois  as 
the  outcome  of  the  struggles  of  the  workers  and  the  political 
reprisals  of  the  employers.  Tobacconists,  grocers,  etc.,  elude 
statistical  investigation.  The  only  definite  information  we  pos- 
sess relates  to  tavern-keepers.  In  the  parliamentary  group  we 
find  that  in  1892,  of  35  socialist  deputies,  4  were  publicans 
(11.4%);  in  1903,  of  58  socialist  deputies,  5  were  publicans 
(8.6%)  ;  and  in  1906,  of  81  socialist  deputies,  6  were  publicans 
(7.4%).  In  the  local  socialist  sections,  the  proportion  of  tavern- 
keepers  is  considerable.  At  Leipzig,  in  1887,  there  were  30 
Parteikneipen.  In  1900,  among  the  socialist  branches  of  the 
Leipzig  country  districts  with  4,855  members  there  were  84  res- 
taurant-keepers and  publicans  (1.7%);  in  Leipzig  city,  where 
the  socialists  numbered  1,681,  there  were  in  1900,  47  tavern- 
keepers,  and  in  1905,  63  (3.4%).  Offenbach,  in  1905,  1,668  mem- 
bers, 74  publicans  and  2  retailers  of  bottled  beer  (4.6%).  Mu- 
nich, in  1906,  6,704  members ;  milk-retailers,  tobacconists,  sellers 
of  cheese,  etc.,  and  publicans  (wine  merchants  not  included),  369 
(5.5%).  Frankfort-on-the-Main,  in  1906,  2,620  members,  25 
publicans  (12  retailers  of  bottled  beer  and  tobacconists  excluded 
—approximately  1%).  Marburg,  in  1906,  114  members,  2  pub- 
licans (1.8%).  Reinickendorf-Ost,  near  Berlin,  in  1906,  303 
members,  18  tavern-  and  restaurant-keepers  (5.9%).  These  fig- 
ures serve  to  show  that  in  certain  towns  there  is  a  socialist  pub- 
lican for  every  twenty  members.  Since  the  socialist  publican 
depends  mainly  upon  socialist  customers,  it  follows  that  these 
twenty  comrades  must  provide  the  chief  financial  resources  of 
the  enterprise. 

The  best  proof  of  the  numerical  strength  and  the  importance 

delegates  had  been  elected.  But  in  the  circumstances  this  was  impossible; 
it  was  already  after  midnight,  so  that  when  the  election  was  over,  and 
even  before  the  chairman  could  close  the  meeting,  the  comrades  were  all 
streaming  out  of  the  door.  The  only  thing  the  chairman  could  answer 
to  our  complaints  was:  'Oh,  well,  such  proposals  have  been  brought  for- 
ward in  vain  year  after  year;  they  would  have  been  rejected  again  as 
usual. '  Such  are  the  arguments  used  by  a  comrade  who  occupies  a  position 
of  trust  in  the  labour  movement.  What  a  perspective  does  this  open  when 
we  remember  that,  at  any  rate  here  in  East  Berlin,  the  majority  of  our 
parly  officials  are  publicans!"    (Anno  iii,  No.  18.) 


RESULTS  OF  ORGANIZATION        287 

of  this  category  of  the  members  of  the  party  is  that  they  have 
founded  at  Berlin  a  powerful  association,  the  Berlin  League 
of  Socialist  Publicans  and  Innkeepers.  It  must  not  be  forgotten 
that  this  association  has  largely  come  into  existence  from  the 
consideration  that  the  socialist  publicans  have  other  political 
tasks  to  fulfil  from  those  which  devolve  upon  their  "bourgeois" 
colleagues,  nor  can  it  be  denied  that  its  members  constitute  a 
category  of  chosen  socialists  of  tried  fidelity,  who  have  rendered 
important  services  to  the  party  in  its  political  campaigns  and 
agitations,  and  whose  socialist  clientele  is  actuated  by  a  high 
spirit  of  solidarity  in  giving  these  comrades  its  custom.  It  is 
inevitable,  however,  that  the  existence  of  such  an  organization, 
which  represents  peculiar  economic  interests,  should  in  certain 
cases  involve  inconveniences,  not  merely  for  its  competitors,  the 
bourgeois  publicans,  but  also  for  the  socialist  comrades,  and  that 
it  should  tend  to  assume  the  aspect  of  a  party  within  the  party. 
In  the  summer  of  1906,  the  increase  in  the  cost  of  production  of 
beer,  which  resulted  from  new  taxation  by  which  the  breweries 
were  especially  hard  hit,  led  the  publicans  to  raise  the  price  to 
the  consumers.  Thereupon  the  German  w^orkers  in  a  great  many 
towns  protested  most  energetically,  and  declared  what  was 
known  as  the  "beer  war,"  boycotting  certain  breweries  and  the 
publicans  who  had  raised  the  price — an  agitation  which  led  cer- 
tain foreign  socialists  to  observe  sarcastically  that  you  may  take 
anything  from  the  German  worker  except  his  beer.  In  this 
struggle,  which  was  in  many  places  conducted  with  great  ob- 
stinacy, the  organized  workers  encountered  resistance  from  a 
notable  proportion  of  socialist  publicans.  These,  adopting  a 
tactical  outlook  estranged  from  socialist  principles,  endeavoured 
to  alarm  the  comrades  by  insisting  upon  the  dangers  of  their 
campaign,  and  by  predicting  that  if  the  consumers  should  suc- 
ceed in  forcing  the  producers  to  bear  the  new  taxes,  the  govern- 
ment, delighted  to  find  that  these  taxes  were  not  pressing  upon 
the  masses  of  the  people  but  were  borne  only  by  a  restricted 
class  of  brewers  and  factory  owners,  would  hasten  to  introduce 
new  and  yet  heavier  taxation,  which  could  not  fail  to  affect  the 
consumers. 

TQ_sum  up,  it  may  be  said  that  the  petty  bourgeois  of  prole- 
tarian origin,  although  the  conditions  of  their  life  are  not  as  a 
rule  notably  better  than  those  of  the  proletarian  strata  from 
which  they  derive,  constitute  in  more  than  one  respect,  on  ac- 
count of  the  particular  interests  they  represent,  a  serious  ob- 


288  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

stacle  to  the  forward  march  of  the  working-class  legions.  More- 
over, it  has  to  be  remembered  that  the  influence  of  this  new 
stratum  impresses  upon  the  party  from  the  mental  point  of  view 
(in  consequence  of  the  new  place  which  these  elements  occupy- 
in  the  general  economic  process)  a  markedly  petty  bourgeois 
stamp. 


CHAPTER   IV 

THE  NEED  FOR  THE  DIFFERENTIATION  OF  THE 

WORKING  CLASS 

Every  individual  member  of  the  working  class  cherishes  the 
hope  of  rising  into  a  higher  social  sphere  which  will  guarantee 
to  him  a  better  and  less  restricted  existence.  The  workman's 
ideal  is  to  become  a  petty  bourgeois.^  To  non-initiates  and  to 
superficial  observers  the  working-class  members  of  the  socialist 
parties  seem  always  to  be  petty  bourgeois.  The  proletariat  has 
not  been  able  to  emancipate  itself  psychically  from  the  social 
environment  in  which  it  lives.  For  example,  the  German 
worker,  as  his  wages  have  increased,  has  acquired  the  disease 
which  is  in  the  blood  of  the  German  petty  bourgeoisie,  the  club- 
mania.  In  every  large  town,  and  not  a  few  small  ones,  there 
is  a  swarm  of  working-class  societies :  gymnastic  clubs,  choral  so- 
cieties, dramatic  societies ;  even  smokers '  clubs,  bowling  clubs, 
rowing  clubs,  athletic  clubs — all  sorts  of  associations  whose  es- 
sentially petty  bourgeois  character  is  not  destroyed  by  the  fact 
that  they  sail  under  socialist  colours.  A  bowling  club  remains 
a  bowling  club  even  if  it  assumes  the  pompous  name  of  "Sons 
of  Freedom  Bowling  Club." 

Just  as  little  as  the  bourgeoisie  can  the  socialist  workers  be 
regarded  as  a  great  homogeneous  grey  mass,  although  this  con- 
sideration does  not  modify  the  fact  that  since  proletarians  all 
live  by  the  sale  of  their  only  commodity,  labour,  the  organized 
socialist  workers  are,  at  least  in  theory,  conscious  of  their  own 
unity  in  their  common  opposition  to  the  owners  of  the  means  of 
production  and  to  the  governmental  representatives  of  these. 

^  According  to  Tullio  Eossi  Doria  (Le  Forze  Democratiche  ed  il  Pro- 
gramma  socialista,  "Avanti, "  anno  xiv,  No.  30),  every  struggle  for  higher 
wages  has  the  same  end  in  view.  But  as  a  rule  the  struggle  for  higher 
wages  is  carried  out  by  a'  trade  union,  and  the  aim  of  the  trade  unions 
is  to  secure  a  better  position  for  the  manual  workers,  not  to  make  them 
petty  bourgeois.  The  organized  workers  as  a  whole  desire  to  live  like  the 
petty  bourgeois,  but  not  to  fulfil  the  economic  function  of  these.  They 
wish  to  remain  manual  workers. 

289 


290  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

Yet  it  cannot  be  denied  that  the  actual  system  of  manufacture 
which  unites  under  the  same  roof  all  the  different  categories  of 
workers  employed  in  a  modern  establishment  for  the  production 
of  railway-carriages,  for  instance,  does  not  serve  to  overthrow 
the  barriers  which  separate  the  various  sub-classes  of  workers.- 
Nor  is  it  less  true,  looking  at  the  matter  from  the  other  side, 
that  there  exists  among  the  workers  the  sense  of  a  need  for 
differentiation  which  will  readily  escape  those  who  do  not  come 
in  personal  contact  with  them.  The  kind  of  work,  the  rate  of 
wages,  differences  of  race  and  climate,  produce  numerous  shades 
of  difference  alike  in  the  mode  of  life  and  in  the  tastes  of  the 
workers.  As  early  as  1860  it  was  said :  ' '  Entre  ouvriers  il  y  a 
des  categories  et  un  classement  aristocratique.  Les  imprimeurs 
prennent  la  tete;  les  chiffonniers,  les  vidangeurs,  les  egoutiers 
ferment  la  marche. ' '  ^  Between  the  compositor  and  the  casual 
labourer  in  the  same  country  there  exist  differences  in  respect 
of  culture  and  of  social  and  economic  status  more  pronounced 
than  those  between  the  compositor  in  one  country  and  the  small 
manufacturer  in  another.*  The  discrepancy  between  the  differ- 
ent categories  of  workers  is  plainly  displayed  even  in  the  trade- 
union  movement.  We  know,  for  example,  that  the  policy  of  the 
compositors'  unions  in  Germany,  France,  and  Italy  differs  from 
that  of  the  other  unions,  and  also  from  that  of  the  socialist 
party,  exhibiting  a  tendency  towards  the  right,  being  more  op- 
portunist and  more  accommodating.  In  Germany,  the  composi- 
tors' union  has  for  its  president  a  Rexhauser,  and  in  France  a 
Keufer.  We  observe,  too,  in  the  conduct  of  the  diamond-work- 
ers in  Holland  and  in  Belgium  the  same  unsocialistic,  unprole- 
tarian,  and  particularist  tendencies.  The  aristocratic  elements  of 
the  working  class,  the  best  paid,  those  who  approximate  most 
closely  to  the  bourgeoisie,  pursue  tactics  of  their  own.  In  the  ac- 
tive work  of  the  labour  movement,  the  division  of  the  organized 
masses  into  different  social  strata  is  often  plainly  manifest. 
Working-class  history  abounds  in  examples  showing  how  certain 
fractions  or  categories  of  the  proletariat  have,  under  the  influ- 
ence of  interests  peculiar  to  their  sub-class,  detached  themselves 

''Eudolf  Broda  and  Julius  Deutseh,  Das  moderne  Proletariat,  Eeimer, 
Berlin,  1910,  p.  73. 

*  Edmond  About,  Le  Progres,  ed.  cit.,  pp.  51-2. 

*  Cf .  the  interesting  communication  upon  the  increasing  differentiation  of 
the  working  classes  made  by  Hermann  Herkner  to  the  congress  of  the  Verein 
fiir  Sozialpolitik  held  at  Nuremberg  in  1911  (Protolcoll,  pp.  122  et  seq.). 


CLASS  DIFFERENTIATION  291 

from  the  great  army  of  labour  and  made  common  cause  with  the 
bourgeoisie.  Thus  it  happens,  generally  speaking,  that  the  work- 
ers in  armaments  factories  have  little  sympathy  with  anti-mili- 
tarist views.  In  the  London  congress  of  the  Independent  Labour 
Party  in  1910,  the  Woolwich  delegate,  largely  representing  the 
view  of  the  employees  at  Woolwich  arsenal,  expressed  strong 
dissent  from  the  opinion  of  those  delegates  who  had  brought 
forward  a  resolution  in  favour  of  a  restriction  of  armaments 
and  of  compulsory  arbitration  in  international  disputes.^  Again, 
the  check  which  was  sustained  at  Venice  by  the  general  strike  of 
protest  against  the  Tripolitan  campaign  was  due  to  the  opposi- 
tion of  a  section  of  the  arsenal  workers.*'  The  very  fact  that 
the  cessation  of  work  on  May  1st  is  but  a  partial  demonstration 
renders  it  possible  to  divide  the  workers  into  two  classes.  One 
consists  of  those  who,  thanks  to  better  conditions  of  life  and 
other  favourable  circumstances,  "can  allow  themselves  the  lux- 
ury" of  celebrating  the  Istjof  Mayj  the  other  comprises  those  <^^^^ 
who  by  poverty  or  ill-fortune^  are  compelled  to  remain  at  work.''    W   K    ^ 

"^  "  Volksstimme, "  1910,  No.  76,  fourth  supplement. 

'  Exaggeration  must  be  avoided  here,  and  it  is  desirable  to  point  out  that 
in  the  election  of  March  1912  in  the  Venetian  constituency  in  which  the 
arsenal  is  situated,  notwithstanding  all  kinds  of  adverse  pressure,  two 
thousand  electors  expressed  their  definite  disapproval  of  the  African  cam- 
paign hy  voting  for  the  intransigeant  socialist  Musatti  (''Avanti,"  anno 
xvi,   No.   85). 

'  The  phrase  quoted  in  the  text  is  used  by  a  correspondent  of  the  ' '  Volks- 
stimme, "  of  Frankfort  (Die  Maifeier  am  ersten  Maisonntag,  Manifest- 
Nummer,  1910,  seventh  supplement).  The  same  article  shows  from  how 
distinctively  capitalist  an  outlook  the  better-paid  workers  regard  the  May 
Day  celebration.  We  read  as  follows:  "Now  a  few  words  upon  the  pecuni- 
ary and  principal  question.  By  my  occupation  and  as  son  of  a  socialist 
publican  I  have  come  much  in  contact  with  working-class  circles,  and  have 
questioned  a  great  many  working  men  (many  of  them  organized  both 
politically  and  industrially,  and  some  of  them  earning  as  much  as  45s.  a 
week)  as  to  their  attitude  towards  the  May  Day  celebration.  I  am  con- 
vinced that  notwithstanding  all  their  idealism  and  willingness  for  self- 
sacrifice,  the  more  intelligent  workers  are  disinclined  to  lose  a  day's  wages 
on  behalf  of  May  Day.  The  pecuniary  sacrifice  has  no  adequate  relationship 
to  any  practical  or  ideal  aim!  It  would  even  seem  that  the  better-paid 
workers  would  be  foolish  to  abstain  from  work  on  the  1st  of  May;  for  one 
who  has  a  daily  earning  of  six  or  seven  shillings  will,  notwithstanding  any 
subsidy  he  may  receive  from  the  union,  have  to  sacrifice  a  great  deal  more 
(including  what  he  will  lose  by  being  locked  out!)  than  one  who  earns 
no  more  than  three  or  four  shillings  a  day.  The  money  devoted  by  the  trade 
unions  to  the  payment  of  subsidies  could  be  far  better  employed  in  giving 
a  more  brilliant  and  imposing  form  to  the  May  Day  celebration," — The 


292  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

The  need  for  differentiation  is  manifested  still  more  clearly 
when  we  consider  more  extended  groups  of  workers.  The  differ- 
ence between  skilled  and  unskilled  workers  is  primarily  and  pre- 
dominantly economic,  and  displays  itself  in  a  difference  of  work- 
ing conditions.  As  time  passes,  this  difference  becomes  trans- 
formed into  a  veritable  class  distinction.  The  skilled  and  better 
paid  workers  hold  aloof  from  the  unskilled  and  worse  paid  work- 
ers. The  former  are  always  organized,  while  the  latter  remain 
"free"  labourers;  and  the  fierce  economic  and  social  struggles 
which  occur  between  the  two  groups  constitute  one  of  the  most 
interesting  phenomena  of  modern  social  history.  This  struggle, 
which  by  the  physiologist  Angelo  IMosso  is  termed  ergomacliia, 
the  struggle  for  the  feeding-ground,^  is  waged  with  ever-increas- 
ing intensity.  The  organized  workers  demand  from  the  unor- 
ganized the  strictest  solidarity,  and  insist  that  the  latter  should 
abandon  work  whenever  they  themselves  are  in  conflict  with  the 
employers.  "When  this  demand  is  not  immediately  complied 
with,  they  insult  the  unorganized  workers  by  the  use  of  oppro- 
brious names  which  have  found  a  place  in  scientific  terminology. 
In  France,  in  the  days  of  Louis  Philippe,  they  were  called 
hourmont  and  ragusa.  At  the  present  day  they  are  in  Germany 
termed  Streikhreclier;  in  Italy,  krumiri;  in  England,  'blacklegs; 
in  America,  scabs;  in  Hainault,  gamhes  de  bos;  in  France, 
jaunes,  renards,  or  bedouins;^  in  Holland,  onderkruipers ;  and 
so  on.  It  is  incontestable  that  the  grievances  of  the  organized 
workers  against  the  unorganized  are  largely  justified.  On  the 
other  hand,  it  cannot  be  denied  that  in  the  working  class  this 
ergomachia  is  not  essentially  the  outcome  of  differences  between 
the  well-disposed  workers  and  the  ill-disposed,  as  masters  and 
men  naively  believe,  of  course  inverting  the  roles.  For  the  so- 
cialists, in  fact,  the  strikers  are  always  heroes  and  the  strike- 
breakers are  always  villains ;  whilst  for  the  employers  the  strike- 
breakers are  honest  and  hardworking  fellows,  whilst  the  strikers 
are  idle  good-for-nothings.  In  reality,  ergomachia  does  not  con- 
sist of  a  struggle  between  two  categories  distinguished  by  ethical 


writer  in  the  "  Volksstimme "  alludes  here  to  the  proposal  to  abandon  the 
idea  of  abstaining  from  work  on  May  1st,  and  to  celebrate  the  occasion 
in  the  evening  by  a  great  festival. 

®  Angelo  Mosso,  Vita  moderna  degli  Italiani,  ed.  cit.,  p.  178. 

'Similarly  in  Italy,  towards  1890,  the  term  heduini  was  employed.  Cf. 
Sombart,  Studien  zur  EntwicUungsgeschichte  des  italienischen  Proletariats, 
' '  Archiv  f  iir  Soz.  Gesetzg.  u.  Statistik, ' '  vol.  vi,  p.  235. 


CLASS  DIFFERENTIATION  293 

characteristics,  but  is  for  the  most  part  a  war  between  the  better- 
paid  workers  and  the  poorer  strata  of  the  proletariat.  The  lat- 
ter, from  the  economic  aspect,  consist  of  those  who  are  still  eco- 
nomically unripe  for  a  struggle  with  the  employers  to  secure 
higher  wages.  We  often  hear  the  most  poverty-stricken  workers, 
conscious  of  their  inferiority,  contend  that  their  wages  are  high 
enough,  whilst  the  better  paid  and  organized  workers  declare  that 
the  unorganized  are  working  at  starvation  rates.  One  of  the  most 
indefatigable  of  French  socialist  women ^^  has  well  said :  "On 
est  presque  tente  d'excuser  les  trahisons  de  ces  supplanteurs, 
quand  on  a  vu,  de  ses  propres  yeux  vu,  tout  le  tragique  du  prob- 
leme  des  sans-travail  en  Angleterre.  Dans  les  grands  ports  du 
sud  ou  de  I'ouest,  on  voit  ranges,  le  long  d'un  mur  de  quale,  des 
milliers  et  des  milliers  d'affames,  a  la  figure  have,  grelottants, 
qui  esperent  se  faire  embaucher  comme  debardeurs.  II  en  faut 
quelques  dizaines.  Quand  les  portes  s'ouvrent,  c'est  une  ter- 
rible ruee,  une  veritable  bataille.  Eecemment,  un  de  ces  hommes, 
les  cotes  presses,  mourut  etouife  dans  la  melee."  The  organ- 
ized workers,  on  their  side,  do  not  consider  themselves  obliged 
to  exhibit  solidarity  towards  the  unorganized,  even  when  they 
are  all  sharing  a  common  poverty  during  crises  of  unemploy- 
ment. The  German  trades  councils  often  demand  that  the  sub- 
sidies which  (in  accordance  with  the  so-called  Strasburg  system) 
are  provided  in  certain  large  towns  from  the  public  funds  to 
render  assistance  in  cases  of  unemployment,  should  be  reserved 
for  the  organized  workers,  declaring  that  the  unorganized  have 
no  claim  to  assistance.^'- 

The  more  fortunate  workers  do  not  only  follow  their  natural 
inclination  to  fight  by  all  available  means  against  their  less  well- 
to-do  comrades,  who,  by  accepting  lower  wages,  threaten  the 
higher  standard  of  life  of  the  organized  workers — using  in  the 
struggle,  as  always  happens  when  economic  interests  conflict, 
methods  which  disregard  every  ethical  principle.  They  also 
endeavour  to  hold  themselves  completely  aloof.  The  union  but- 
ton is  often,  as  it  were,  a  patent  of  nobility  which  distinguishes 

"Madame  Sorgue,  Betour  d' Angleterre,  "LaSociete  Nouvelle, "  xvi,  No. 
8,  p.  197. 

"  The  reader  will  find  a  more  copious  and  more  detailed  study  of  this 
matter  in  an  essay  compiled  by  the  present  writer  in  collaboration  with  his 
wife.  Michels,  Das  Problem  der  Arbeitslosiglceit  und  Hire  Bekdmpfung 
durch  die  deutschen  freien  Gewerlcschaften,  "Archiv  f.  Sozialw,,"  xxxi, 
September  2,  1910,  pp.  479-81. 


294  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

its  wearer  from  the  plebs.    This  happens  even  when  the  unor- 
ganized workers  would  like  nothing  better  than  to  make  com- 
mon cause  with  the  organized.    In  almost  all  the  large  British 
and  American  trade  unions  there  is  manifest  a  tendency  to  cor- 
poratism, to  the  formation  of  sharply  distinguished  working- 
class  aristocracies.^-    The  trade  unions,  having  become  rich  and 
powerful,  no  longer  seek  to  enlarge  their  membership,  but  en- 
deavour rather  to  restrict  it  by  imposing  a  high  entrance  fee,  by 
demanding  a  certificate  of  prolonged  apprenticeship,   and  by 
other  similar  means,  all  deliberately  introduced  in  order  to  re- 
tain certain  privileges  in  their  own  hands  at  the  expense  of  other 
workers  following  the  same  occupation.     The  anti-alien  move- 
ment is  the  outcome  of  the  same  professional  egoism,  and  is  es- 
pecially conspicuous  among  the  Americans  and  Australians,  who 
insist  upon  legislation  to   forbid  the   immigration  of   foreign 
workers.^^     The  trade  unions  in  such  cases  adopt  a  frankly 
''nationalist"  policy.    In  order  to  keep  out  the  "undesirables" 
they  do  not  hesitate  to  appeal  for  aid  to  the  ' '  class-state, ' '  and 
they  exercise  upon  the  government  a  pressure  which  may  lead 
their  country  to  the  verge  of  war  with  the  labour-exporting 
land.^*    In  Europe,  too,  we  may  observe,  although  here  to  a  less 
degree,  the  formation  within  the  labour  movement  of  closed 
groups  and  coteries  (and  it  is  in  this  that  the  tendency  to  oli- 
garchy consists),  which  arise  in  direct  conflict  with  the  theoreti- 
cal principles  of  socialism.    The  Avorkers  employed  at  the  Naples 
arsenal,  who  recently  demanded  of  the  government  that ' '  a  third 
of  the  new  places  to  be  filled  should  be  allotted  to  the  sons  of 
existing  employees  who  are  following  their  fathers'  trade, "^^ 
are  in  sentiment  by  no  means  so  remote  from  the  world  of  our 
day  as  might  at  first  be  imagined.    As  has  been  well  said,  "la 


^*  Cf.,  inter  alia,  Daniel  De  Leon,  The  Burning  Question  of  Trades  Union- 
ism, Labour  News  Co.,  New  York,  1906,  p.  13. 

1=  This  phenomenon  has  recently  been  well  expounded  by  an  Italian  polit- 
ical economist,  a  member  of  the  Conservative  party — Giuseppe  Prato,  II 
Proteszionismo  operaio  e  I'Esclusione  del  Lavoro  straniero,  Soc.  Tip-Editr. 
Nazionale,  Turin,  1910.  This  work,  however,  exhibits  a  certain  tendency  to 
over-statement,  and  inclines  to  ignore  the  opposing  ideological  and  social- 
ist tendencies  which  are  to-day  manifest  among  the  organized  workers  of 
continental  Europe. 

"  The  American  labour  organizations  have  played  a  notable  part  in  pro- 
ducing tension  between  the  United  States  and  Japan,  a  tension  which,  a 
few  years  ago,  nearly  culminated  in  war. 

^Angelo  Mosso,  Vita  moderna  degli  Italiani,  ed.  cit.,  p.  191. 


CLASS  DIFFERENTIATION  295 

lutte  de  classe  a  pour  objeetif  de  faire  monter  la  classe  inferieure 
au  niveau  de  la  superieure,  c'est  ainsi  que  les  revolutions  reus- 
sissent  souvent,  non  a  democratiser  les  eugeniques,  mais  a  eu- 
geniser  les  democrats. ' '  ^"^ 

The  policy  of  social  reform,  which  finds  its  most  definite  ex- 
pression in  labour  legislation,  does  not  entail  the  same  advan- 
tages for  all  sections  of  the  working  class.  For  example,  the 
law  which  raises  the  minimum  age  of  the  factory  worker  will 
have  varying  effects  according  as  may  vary  the  power  of  the 
labour  organizations,  the  rate  of  wages,  the  conditions  of  the  la- 
bour market,  etc.,  in  the  different  branches  of  industry  or  agri- 
culture. Thus  in  certain  categories  of  workers  the  effect  of  the 
law  will  be  a  transient  depression  of  the  standard  of  life,  whilst 
in  other  cases  it  will  lead  to  a  permanent  elevation  in  that  stand- 
ard.^" There  results  an  even  greater  accentuation  of  the  differ- 
entiation which  the  proletarian  groupings  already  present  as  the 
outcome  of  national,  local,  and  technical  differences. 

To^umjipj  it  may  be  affirmed  that  in  the  contemporary  work- 
ing class  there  is  already  manifest  a  horizontal  stratification. 
Within  the  quairieme  etat  we  see  already  the  movements  of  the 
embryonic  cinquieme  etat.  One  of  the  greatest  dangers  to  the 
socialist  movement,  and  one  which  must  not  be  lightly  disre- 
garded as  impossible,  is  that  gradually  there  may  come  into  ex- 
istence a  number  of  different  strata  of  workers,  as  the  outcome 
of  the  influence  of  a  general  increase  of  social  wealth,  in  con- 
junction with  the  efforts  made  by  the  workers  themselves  to  ele- 
vate their  standard  of  life ;  this  may  in  many  cases  enable  them 
to  secure  a  position  in  which,  though  they  may  not  completely 
lose  the  common  human  feeling  of  never  being  able  to  get 
enough,  from  which  even  millionaires  are  not  altogether  ex- 
empt, they  will  become  so  far  personally  satisfied  as  to  be  gradu- 
ally estranged  from  the  ardent  revolutionary  aspirations  of  the 
masses  towards  a  social  sj^stem  utterly  different  from  our  own — 

"Cf.  Eaoul  de  La  Gracerie,  Les  Luttes  Sociales,  "Annales  de  I'lnstitut 
intern,  de  Sociologie, "  vol.  xi,  p.  185. 

"  It  is  for  this  reason  that  in  debates  concerning  the  beneficial  or  in- 
jurious character  of  laws  for  the  protection  of  labour  and  for  the  improve- 
ment of  housing  conditions,  it  is  altogether  erroneous  to  answer  the  ques- 
tions involved  with  a  simple  yes  or  no.  In  Italy,  in  especial,  the  dispute  has 
been  conducted  from  a  restricted  outlook,  although  with  great  ardour  and 
brilliancy  of  thought.  Cf.,  for  example,  the  polemic  in  the  review  "II 
Socialismo"  during  the  year  1907  between  Giaa  Lombroso  and  TuUio  Kossi 
Doria. 


296  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

aspirations  born  of  privation.^^  Thus  the  working  class  will 
become  severed  into  two  unequal  parts,  subject  to  perpetual  fluc- 
tuations in  their  respective  size. 

" ' '  The  more  the  personal  well-being  of  the  workman  increases,  the  more 
harshly  practical  does  he  tend  to  become.  Whilst  still  paying  his  theoretical 
tribute  to  the  imperishable  memory  of  Marx,  what  really  interests  him  is 
to  gh-e  a  more  vigorous  support  to  his  union"  (F.  Naumann,  Das  Schicksal 
des  Marxismus,  "Die  Hilfe,"  iiv,  No.  41). 


CHAPTER  V 

LABOUR  LEADERS  OF  PROLETARIAN  ORIGIN 

Attempts  have  not  been  lacking  to  solve  the  insoluble  problem, 
how  to  obviate  the  leaders'  dominion  over  the  led.  Among  such 
attempts,  there  is  one  which  is  made  with  especial  frequency, 
and  which  is  advocated  with  considerable  heat,  to  exclude  all 
intellectuals  from  leadership  in  the  working-class  movement. 
This  proposal  reflects  the  dislike  of  the  intellectuals  which,  in 
varying  degrees,  has  been  manifested  in  all  countries  and  at  all 
times.  It  culminates  in  the  artificial  creation  of  authenticated 
working-class  leaders,  and  is  based  upon  certain  general  social- 
ist dogmas,  mutilated  or  imperfectly  understood,  or  interpreted 
with  undue  strictness — on  an  appeal,  for  instance,  to  the  prin- 
ciple enunciated  at  the  constitutive  congress  of  the  first  Interna- 
tional held  at  Geneva  in  1866,  that  the  emancipation  of  the  work- 
ers can  be  effected  only  by  the  workers  themselves. 

Above  all,  however,  such  proposals  are  based  upon  an  alleged 
greater  kinship  between  the  leaders  of  proletarian  origin  and 
the  proletarians  they  lead.  The  leaders  who  have  themselves 
been  manual  workers  are,  we  are  told,  more  closely  allied  to  the 
masses  in  their  mode  of  thought,  understand  the  workers  better, 
experience  the  same  needs  as  these,  and  are  animated  by  the 
same  desires.  There  is  a  certain  amount  of  truth  in  this,  inas- 
much as  the  ex-worker  can  not  only  speak  with  more  authority 
than  the  intellectual  upon  technical  questions  relating  to  his 
former  occupation,  but  has  a  knowledge  of  the  psychology  and 
of  the  material  details  of  working-class  life  derived  from  per- 
sonal experience.  It  is  unquestionably  true  that  in  the  leaders  of 
proletarian  origin,  as  compared  with  the  intellectuals,  we  see 
conspicuously  exhibited  the  advantages  of  leadership  as  well  as 
the  disadvantages,  since  the  proletarian  commonly  possesses  a 
more  precise  understanding  of  the  psychology  of  the  masses, 
knows  better  how  to  deal  with  the  workers.  From  this  circum- 
stance the  deduction  is  sometimes  made  that  the  ex- worker,  when 
he  has  become  immersed  in  the  duties  of  political  leadership,  will 

297 


298  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

continue  to  preserve  a  steady  and  secure  contact  with  the  rank 
and  file,  that  he  will  choose  the  most  practicable  routes,  and  that 
his  own  proletarian  experiences  will  afford  a  certain  safeguard 
against  his  conducting  the  masses  into  regions  and  by-paths  from 
which  they  are  by  nature  totally  estranged.^ 

The  central  feature  of  the  syndicalist  theory  is  found  in  the 
demand  for  direct  action  on  the  part  of  the  trade  union,  enfran- 
chised from  the  tutelage  of  socialist  leaders  predominantly  bour- 
geois in  origin,  the  union  being  self-sufficient  and  responsible  to 
itself  alone.  Direct  action  means  that  the  proletariat  is  to  pur- 
sue its  aims  without  the  intermediation  of  parliamentary  repre- 
sentation. Syndicalism  is  described  as  the  apotheosis  of  prole- 
tarian autonomy.  Everything  is  to  be  effected  by  the  energy, 
initiative,  and  courage  of  individual  workers.  The  organized 
proletariat  is  to  consist  of  an  army  of  franc-tireurs,  disembar- 
rassed of  the  impotent  general  staff  of  effete  socialist  bureau- 
crats, unhampered,  autonomous,  and  sovereign. ^  Passing,  how- 
ever, from  fiction  to  fact,  we  find  that  the  most  substantial  dif- 
ference between  syndicalism  and  political  socialism,  apart  from 
questions  of  tactics,  is  to  be  found  in  a  difference  of  social  ori- 
gin in  the  leaders  of  the  respective  tendencies.  The  trade  union 
is  governed  by  persons  who  have  themselves  been  workers,  and 
from  this  the  advocates  of  syndicalism  infer,  by  a  bold  logical 
leap,  that  the  policy  of  the  leaders  of  working-class  origin  must 
necessarily  coincide  with  the  policy  of  the  proletariat.^ 

The  syndicalist  leaders  are  to  be,  both  in  the  intellectual  and 
moral  sense,  chosen  manual  workers.*  The  leader  of  working- 
class  origin  is  regarded  as  the  IMessiah  who  will  cure  all  the  ills 
of  proletarian  organization;  he  is,  in  any  case,  the  best  of  all 
possible  leaders.^ 

^  It  was  this  consideration  which  led  the  Milanese  labour  party,  in  the 
year  1882  and  subsequently,  to  decide  that  it  would  accept  as  members 
none  but  manual  workers.  (Cf.  Michels,  Sine  exklusivistische  Arbeiter- 
partei  in  Italien  im  Jahre,  1882,  ' '  Archiv  fur  Sozialismus, ' '  Karl  Griinberg, 
Vienna,  anno  i,  fasc.  2,  pp.  291  et  seq. 

"  Edouard  Berth,  Les  iiouveaux  Aspects  du  Socialisme,  Eiviere,  Paris, 
1908,  p.  30. 

^  Emile  Pouget,  Le  Parti  du  Travail,  Bibl.  Syndiealiste,  Paris,  No.  3, 
p.   12. 

*  Fernand  Pelloutier,  Histoire  des  Bourses  du  Travail,  ed.  eit.,  p.  86. 

^  Among  the  great  majority  of  the  revisionist  and  reformist  socialists  we 
find  a  similar  tendency  to  overestimate  the  importance  of  leaders  of  working- 
class  origin. 


1 


PROLETARIANS  AS  LEADERS        299 

It  is  hardly  necessary  to  point  out  that  it  is  an  illusion  to 
imagine  that  by  entrusting  its  affairs  to  proletarian  leaders  the 
proletariat  will  control  these  affairs  more  directly  than  if  the 
leaders  are  lawyers  or  doctors.  In  both  cases,  all  action  is  ef- 
fected through  intermediaries.  In  the  modern  labour  movement 
it  is  impossible  for  the  leader  to  remain  in  actual  fact  a  manual 
worker.  Directly  a  trade  union  selects  one  of  the  comrades  in 
the  factory  to  minister  regularly  to  the  collective  interests  in 
return  for  a  definite  salary,  this  comrade  is,  consciously  or  not, 
lifted  out  of  the  working  class  into  a  new  class,  that  of  the  sal- 
aried employees.*^  The  proletarian  leader  has  ceased  to  be  a 
manual  worker,  not  solely  in  the  material  sense,  but  psychologi- 
cally and  economically  as  well.  It  is  not  merely  that  he  has 
ceased  to  quarry  stones  or  to  sole  shoes,  but  that  he  has  become 
an  intermediary  just  as  much  as  his  colleagues  in  leadership,  the 
lawyer  and  the  doctor.  In  other  words,  as  delegate  and  repre- 
sentative, the  leader  of  proletarian  origin  is  subject  to  exactly 
the  same  oligarchical  tendencies  as  is  the  bourgeois  refugee  who 
has  become  a  labour  leader.  The  manual  M'orker  of  former  days 
is  henceforward  a  declasse. 

Among  all  the  leaders  of  the  working  class,  it  is  the  trade- 
union  leaders  who  have  been  most  sympatheticaly  treated  in  the 
literature  of  the  social  sciences.  This  is  very  natural.  Books  are 
written  by  men  of  science  and  men  of  letters.  Such  persons 
are,  as  a  rule,  more  favourably  disposed  towards  the  leaders  of 
the  trade-union  movement  than  tow^ards  the  leaders  of  the  politi- 
cal labour  movement,  for  the  former  do  not,  as  do  so  often  the 
latter,  encroach  upon  the  writer's  field  of  activity,  nor  disturb 
his  circle  of  ideas  with  new  and  intrusive  theories.  It  is  for 
this  reason  that  often  in  the  same  learned  volume  we  find  praise 
of  the  trade-union  leader  side  by  side  with  blame  of  the  socialist 
leader. 

It  has  been  claimed  that  service  as  buffers  between  employers 
and  employed  has  led  in  the  leaders  to  the  development  of  ad- 
mirable and  precious  qualities;  adroitness  and  scrupulousness, 
patience  and  energy,  firmness  of  character  and  personal  honesty. 
It  has  even  been  asserted  that  they  are  persons  of  an  exception- 
ally chaste  life,  and  this  characteristic  has  been  attributed  to  the 
comparative  absence  of  sexual  desires  which,  in  accordance  with 
the  law  of  psychological  compensation  discovered  by  Guglielmo 
Ferrero,  is  supposed  to  characterize  all  persons  exceptionally  de- 

"Cf.  supra,  p.  277,  note  22. 


300  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

voted  to  duty.''  Two  qualities  in  which  most  of  the  trade-union 
leaders  unquestionably  excel  are  objective  gravity  and  individual 
good  sense  (often  united  with  a  lack  of  interest  in  and  under- 
standing of  wider  problems),  derived  from  the  exceptionally 
keen  sense  they  have  of  direct  personal  responsibility,  and  in 
part  perhaps  from  the  dry  and  predominantly  technical  and  ad- 
ministrative quality  of  their  occupations.^  The  trade-union 
leaders  have  been  deliberately  contrasted  with  the  verbal  revo- 
lutionists who  guide  the  political  labour  movement,  men  of  the 
type  of  the  loquacious  Eabagas  in  Sardou's  play,  and,  not  with- 
out exaggeration,  there  has  been  ascribed  to  the  former  a  sound 
political  sense  which  is  supposed  to  be  lacking  in  the  latter — an 
insight  into  the  extraordinary  complexity  of  social  and  economic 
life  and  a  keen  understanding  of  the  politically  practicable.* 
The  nucleus  of  truth  which  such  observations  contain  is  that 
the  trade-union  leaders   (leaving  out  of  consideration  for  the 

'  Arturo  Salucci,  La  Teoria  dello  Sciopero,  Libr.  Moderna,  Genoa,  1902,  p. 
151,  Salucci  goes  so  far  as  to  affirm  that  while  the  trade-union  leaders 
marry  quite  young,  marriage  is  for  them  not  so  much  a  union  for  sexual 
purposes  as  a  matter  of  '  *  comfort  to  them  in  their  lives  of  continual 
agitation."  The  analyses  produced  by  many  authors  of  the  psychology  of 
trade-union  leaders  remind  us  at  times  of  the  reports  of  travellers  in 
foreign  lands,  who  tell  us  of  human  beings  altogether  different  from  those 
with  whom  we  are  acquainted,  and  even  of  actions  which  appear  utterly 
opposed  to  nature.  Herein  we  have  a  criterion  which  leads  us  to  doubt  the 
trustworthiness  of  such  reports,  even  when  they  are  not  adorned  with  stories 
of  matters  demonstrably  false,  as  of  dragons,  centaurs,  and  other  mythical 
monsters.  (Cf.  David  Hume,  Enquiries  Concerning  tlie  Suman  Under- 
standing, ed.  Clar.  Press,  edited  by  Selby-Bigge,  Oxford,  1902,  p.  84). 

The  exaggeration  which  is  so  often  manifested  in  the  enumeration  and 
description  of  the  good  qualities  of  the  trade-union  leaders  can  be  explained 
on  political  grounds.  It  arises  from  the  satisfaction  felt  in  bourgeois  circles 
with  the  practical  tendencies  of  these  leaders,  and  from  the  hope  that  is 
placed  in  them  by  the  opponents  of  revolutionary  socialism. 

*  Even  the  opponents  of  such  men  in  the  labour  movement  do  not  deny 
what  is  said  in  the  text.  For  instance,  Ernesto  Cesare  Longobardi,  in  an 
article  criticizing  the  tactics  of  the  Italian  General  Confederation  of  Labour, 
admits  that  the  members  of  the  executive  committee  of  this  body  display 
technical  competence,  familiarity  with  the  problems  of  working-class  life, 
and  unremitting  industry  {La  Crisi  nelle  Organizsasioni  operaie,  "II  Vian- 
dante,"  anno  i.  No.  29). 

'Werner  Sombart,  Dennocli!  Aits  Theorie  u.  Geschichte  der  Gewerlcschaft- 
lichen  Arbeiterbewegung,  Fischer,  Jena,  1900,  pp.  90-1;  Salucci,  La  Teoria 
dello  Sciopero,  ed.  cit.,  p.  152;  Herkner,  Die  Arbeiterfrage,  ed.  cit.,  p.  156; 
Sidney  and  Beatrice  Webb,  Industrial  Democracy,  ed.  cit.,  p.  152;  Paul  de 
Eousiers,  Le  Trade-unionisme  en  Angleterre,  Colin,  Paris,  1897,  p.  368; 
Eduard  Bernstein^  Die  4rb^itprbewegung,  ed.  cit.,  p.  147. 


PROLETARIANS  AS  LEADERS       301 

present  those  of  syndicalist  tendency)  differ  in  many  respects 
from  the  leaders  of  political  socialism. 

Among  the  trade-union  leaders  themselves,  however,  there  are 
great  differences,  corresponding  to  the  different  phases  of  the 
trade-union  movement.  The  qualities  requisite  for  the  leadership 
of  an  organization  whose  finances  are  still  weak,  and  which  de- 
votes itself  chiefly  to  propaganda  and  strikes,  must  necessarily 
differ  from  those  requisite  for  the  leadership  of  a  trade  union 
supplying  an  abundance  of  solid  benefits  and  aiming  above  all 
at  peaceful  practical  results.     In  the  former  case  the  chief  re- 
quisites are  enthusiasm  and  the  talents  of  the  preacher.     The 
work  of  the  organizer  is  closely  analogous  to  that  of  the  rebel 
or  the  apostle.    According  to  certain  critics,  these  qualities  may 
well  be  associated,  above  all  in  the  early  days  of  the  proletarian 
movement,  with  the  crassest  ignorance.^"     During  this  period, 
propaganda  is  chiefly  romantic  and  sentimental,  and  its  objective 
is  moral  rather  than  material.     Very  different  is  it  when  the 
movement  is  more  advanced.     The  great  complexity  of  the  du- 
ties which  the  trade  union  has  now  to  fulfil  and  the  increasing 
importance  assumed  in  the  life  of  the  union  by  financial,  tech- 
nical, and  administrative  questions,  render  it  necessary  that  the 
agitator  should  give  place  to  the  employee  equipped  with  tech- 
nical knowledge.    The  commercial  traveller  in  the  class  struggle 
is  replaced  by  the  strict  and  prosaic  bureaucrat,  the  fervent 
idealist  by  the  cold  materialist,  the  democrat  whose  convictions 
are  (at  least  in  theory)  absolutely  firm  by  the  conscious  autocrat. 
Oratorical  activity  passes  into  the  background,  for  administra- 
tive aptitudes  are  now  of  the  first  importance.    Consequently,  in 
this  new  period,  while  the  leadership  of  the  movement  is  less 
noisy,  less  brilliant,  and  less  glorious,  it  is  of  a  far  more  solid 
character,  established  upon  a  much  sounder  practical  compe- 
tence.   The  leaders  are  now  differentiated  from  the  mass  of  their 
followers,  not  only  by  their  personal  qualities  as  specialists  en- 
dowed with  insight  and  mastery  of  routine,  but  in  addition  by 
the  barrier  of  the  rules  and  regulations  which  guide  their  own 
actions  and  with  the  aid  of  which  they  control  the  rank  and  file. 
The  rules  of  the  German  federation  of  metal-workers  occupy 
forty-seven  printed  pages  and  are  divided  into  thirty-nine  para- 
graphs, each  consisting  of  from  ten  to  twelve  sections.^^    Where 

"  Fausto  Pagliari,  Le  Organizzasioni  e  i  loro  Impiegati,  ed.  cit.,  p.  6. 
"  Herkner,  Die  Arbeiterfrage,  ed.  cit.,  p.  116. — It  may  be  noted  that  the 
abundance  of  rules  and  regulations  is  one  of  the  historical  causes  of  the 


302  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

is  the  workman  who  would  not  lose  himself  in  such  a  lahyrinth  ? 
The  modern  trade-union  official,  above  all  if  he  directs  a  federa- 
tion, must  have  precise  knowledge  of  a  given  branch  of  industry, 
and  must  know  how  at  any  moment  to  form  a  sound  estimate  of 
the  comparative  forces  of  his  own  organization  and  the  adver- 
saries'. 

He  must  be  equally  well  acquainted  with  the  technical  and 
with  the  economic  side  of  the  industry.  He  must  know  the 
cost  of  manufacture  of  the  commodities  concerned,  the  source 
and  cost  of  the  raw  materials,  the  state  of  the  markets,  the 
wages  and  conditions  of  the  workers  in  different  regions.  He 
must  possess  the  talents  at  once  of  a  general  and  those  of  a 
diplomatist.^^ 

These  excellent  qualities  of  the  trade-union  leader  are  not 
always  compatible  with  the  democratic  regime,  and  indeed  they 
often  conflict  unmistakably  with  the  conditions  of  this  regime. 

It  is  especially  in  the  ex-manual  worker  that  the  love  of  power 
manifests  itself  with  the  greatest  intensity.  Having  just  suc- 
ceeded in  throwing  off  the  chains  he  wore  as  a  wage-labourer  and 
a  vassal  of  capital,  he  is  least  of  all  disposed  to  indue  new  chains 
which  will  bind  him  as  a  slave  of  the  masses.  Like  all  freed- 
men,  he  has  a  certain  tendency  to  abuse  his  newly  acquired  free- 
dom— a  tendency  to  libertinage.  In  all  countries  we  learn  from 
experience  that  the  working-class  leader  of  proletarian  origin  is 
apt  to  be  capricious  and  despotic.  He  is  extremely  loath  to  tol- 
erate contradiction.  This  trait  is  doubtless  partly  dependent 
upon  his  character  as  parvenu,  for  it  is  in  the  nature  of  the 
parvenu  to  maintain  his  authority  with  extreme  jealousy,  to 
regard  all  criticism  as  an  attempt  to  humiliate  him  and  to 
diminish  his  importance,  as  a  deliberate  and  ill-natured  allusion 
to  his  past.  Just  as  the  converted  Jew  dislikes  references  to  his 
Hebrew  birth,  so  also  the  labour  leader  of  proletarian  origin 

distance  which  has  been  established  between  the  class  of  employees  and  the 
mass.  Colbert  tells  us  that  the  French  bureaucracy  was  born  out  of  the 
mania  for  codification.  "Son  oppression  devint  inquiete,  diffuse,  minu- 
tieuse,  et  se  perdit  dans  une  telle  generation  de  reglements  que,  par  exemple, 
le  seul  code  des  marchands  de  bois  de  Paris  egale  en  volume  tout  le  Corp3 
du  Droit  Eomain"  (Lemontey,  Essai  sur  V Etablissement  monarchique  de 
Louis  XIV,  ed.  cit.,  p.  339). — Enough  has  been  said  to  enable  us  to  judge 
the  value  of  the  opinion  sometimes  expressed  (cf.  Oetors,  Be  CatecMsmus 
van  den  WerTcman,  ed.  cit.,  p.  21)  that  the  problem  of  trade-union  organiza- 
tion is  so  simple  that  any  workman  can  master  it. 
"  C,  Pagliari,  Le  Organizsazioni,  etc.,  ed.  cit.,  p.  7. 


I 


PROLETARIANS  AS  LEADERS       303 

dislikes  any  references  to  his  state  of  dependence  and  his  posi- 
tion as  an  employee. 

Nor  must  it  be  forgotten  that,  like  all  self-made  men^  the 
trade-union  leader  is  intensely  vain.  Although  he  commonly 
possesses  extensive  knowledge  of  material  details,  he  lacks  gen- 
eral culture  and  a  wide  philosophical  view,^^  and  is  devoid  of 
the  secure  self-confidence  of  the  born  leader;  for  these  reasons 
he  is  apt  to  show  himself  less  resistant  than  he  should  be  towards 
the  interested  and  amiable  advances  of  bourgeois  notables.  In 
a  letter  to  Sorge,  Engels  wrote  of  England :  ^*  ' '  The  most  re- 
pulsive thing  in  this  country  is  the  bourgeois  'respectability' 
which  has  invaded  the  very  blood  and  bone  of  the  workers.  The 
organization  of  society  into  firmly  established  hierarchical  grada- 
tions, in  which  each  one  has  his  proper  pride,  but  also  an  inborn 
respect  for  his  'betters'  and  'superiors,'  is  taken  so  much  as  a 
matter  of  course,  is  so  ancient  and  traditional,  that  it  is  com- 
paratively easy  for  the  bourgeois  to  play  the  part  of  seducers. 
For  example,  I  am  by  no  means  sure  that  John  Burns  is  not 
prouder  in  the  depths  of  his  soul  of  his  popularity  with  Car- 
dinal Manning,  the  Lord  Mayor,  and  the  bourgeoisie  in  general, 
than  of  his  popularity  among  his  own  class.  Even  Tom  Mann, 
whom  I  regard  as  the  best  of  these  leaders  of  working-class 
origin,  is  glad  to  talk  of  how  he  went  to  lunch  with  the  Lord 
Mayor." 

In  Germany,  one  of  the  few  "class-conscious"  German 
workers  who  have  come  into  personal  contact  with  William 
II  did  not  venture  in  the  royal  presence  to  give  expression  to 
his  convictions  or  to  manifest  his  fidelity  to  the  principles  of 

^^  The  twilight  of  culture  which  has  been  dispersed  through  the  proletariat 
through  the  participation  of  modern  workers  in  politics  and  in  intellectual 
discussions  bearing  upon  political  life,  often  produces  in  the  minds  of  such 
persons  an  attitude  which  Sombart  rather  unhappily  terms  ' '  dogmatism ' ' 
(Werner  Sombart,  Das  Proletariat,  Eiitten  u.  Loening,  Frankfort-on-the 
Main,  1906,  p.  84),  but  one  which  is  certainly  not  apt  to  contribute  to 
freedom  of  the  spirit.  It  is  very  natural  that  this  should  be  so.  The  share 
of  culture  which  the  modern  working  man  has  won  for  himself  at  an 
incredible  cost  of  physical  and  mental  energy  necessarily  seems  to  him 
(who  lacks  leisure  and  adequate  preliminary  knowledge  to  make  a  good 
use  of  what  he  has  learned,  and  who  lacks  the  ability  to  control  the  ac- 
curacy of  his  own  mental  acquirements)  a  noli  me  tangere,  an  invaluable 
treasure,  which  must  be  relentlessly  and  zealously  guarded  against  all 
criticism  (his  own  or  another's)  precisely  because  it  has  been  won  by  so 
much  labour. 

^*  Brief e  und  Aussiige,  etc.,  ed.  cit.,  pp.  324-5. 


304  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

his  party.^^  There  already  exists  in  the  proletariat  an  extensive 
stratum  consisting  of  the  directors  of  cooperative  societies,  the 
secretaries  of  trade  unions,  the  trusted  leaders  of  various  or- 
ganizations, whose  psychology  is  entirely  modelled  upon  that  of 
the  bourgeois  classes  with  whom  they  associate.^® 

The  new  environment  exercises  a  potent  influence  upon  the 
ex-manual  worker.  His  manners  become  gentler  and  more  re- 
fined.^^  In  his  daily  association  with  persons  of  the  highest 
birth  he  learns  the  usages  of  good  society  and  endeavours  to  as- 
similate them.  Not  infrequently  the  working-class  deputies  en- 
deavour to  mask  the  change  which  has  occurred.  The  socialist 
leaders,  and  the  same  is  true  of  the  democratic-Christians  and 
the  trade-union  leaders,  if  of  working-class  origin,  when  speak- 
ing to  the  masses  like  to  describe  themselves  as  working  men. 
By  laying  stress  upon  their  origin,  upon  the  characteristics 
they  share  with  the  rank  and  file,  they  ensure  a  good  reception 
and  inspire  affection  and  confidence.  During  the  elections  of 
1848  in  France  it  was  the  mode  for  candidates  to  speak  of  them- 
selves as  ouvriers.  This  was  not  simply  a  title  of  honour,  but 
also  a  title  which  helped  to  success.  No  less  than  twenty-one  of 
these  ouvriers  thus  secured  election.     The  real  signification  of 


" " Arbeiterzeitung "  of  Dortmund,  September  16,  1903:  "In  the  year 
1900,  the  representatives  of  the  Imperial  Insurance  Institute  were  com- 
manded to  an  audience  at  the  court,  on  the  occasion  of  the  inauguration  of 
the  new  administrative  building  in  Berlin.  The  stucco-worker  Buchholz, 
well  known  in  trade-union  circles,  was  present  with  his  colleagues.  Buchholz, 
who  was  wearing  the  iron  cross,  attracted  the  personal  attention  of  William 
II.  The  king  was  apparently  aware  of  Buchholz 's  position  as  a  socialist, 
and  said:  'I  believe  the  socialists  are  all  opponents  of  the  monarchy?' 
Buchholz  promptly  answered:  'No,  Your  Majesty,  not  all!  '  " 

"  The  princes  of  the  ancien  regime,  being  profound  psychologists,  knew 
better  than  the  socialists  of  to-day  how  to  value  at  its  worth  the  influence 
of  environment  upon  personality.  In  the  political  testament  of  Augustus 
II  of  Saxony,  King  of  Poland,  we  find  a  remarkable  passage  in  which  he 
recommended  his  successor  to  change  ambassadors  frequently,  for  they  were 
apt  to  accommodate  themselves  to  the  interests  of  the  court  to  which  they 
were  accredited,  and  to  allow  themselves  to  be  overcome  by  the  influences 
of  their  new  environment  (Paul  Haake,  Ein  PoUtisches  Testament  Konig 
Augusts  der  Starken,  "Historische  Zeitschrif t, "  Ixxxvii,  fasc.  1,  p.  7). 

""Among  the  fifty-eight  socialist  deputies,  there  are  at  least  thirty  who 
come  from  the  factory  or  the  workshop  and  whose  natural  temperamental 
energy  has  never  been  chastened  by  the  discipline  of  the  drawing-room;  it 
should  certainly  give  occasion  for  astonishment  to  the  bourgeois  that  they 
are  almost  invariably  well-behaved,  that  they  hardly  ever  break  the  con- 
ventions" (Maximilian  Harden,  "Zukunft,"  anno  x,  No.  2,  December  6, 
1902). 


PROLETARIANS  AS  LEADERS       305 

this  title  may  be  learned  from  a  study  of  the  list  of  candidates 
presented  by  the  modern  socialist  party  in  France,  Italy,  and 
elsewhere;  here  we  find  that  a  master-tinsmith  (a  man  who 
keeps  a  shop  and  is  therefore  a  petty  bourgeois)  describes  him- 
self as  a  "tinker,"  and  so  on.  It  even  happens  that  the  same 
candidate  will  describe  himself  as  a  workman  in  an  electoral  ad- 
dress intended  for  working-class  readers,  and  as  an  employer  in 
an  appeal  to  the  bourgeoisie.  When  they  have  entered  Parlia- 
ment, some  of  the  ex-manual  workers  continue,  more  or  less  os- 
tentatiously, to  differentiate  themselves  by  their  dress  from 
their  bourgeois  colleagues.  But  it  is  not  by  such  external  signs 
of  a  proletarian  origin  that  they  can  hope  to  prevent  the  internal 
change,  which  was  described  by  Jaures  (before  his  own  adhesion 
to  socialism)  in  the  following  terms:  '*Les  deputes  ouvriers  qui 
arrivent  au  Parlement  s 'embourgeoisent  vite,  au  mauvais  sens  du 
mot ;  ils  perdent  leur  seve  et  leur  energie  premiere,  et  il  ne  leur 
reste  plus  qu'une  sorte  de  sentimentalite  de  tribune.  "^^ 

Inspired  with  a  foolish  self-satisfaction,  the  ex-worker  is  apt 
to  take  pleasure  in  his  new  environment,  and  he  tends  to  become 
indifferent  and  even  hostile  to  all  progressive  aspirations  in  the 
democratic  sense.  He  accommodates  himself  to  the  existing 
order,  and  ultimately,  weary  of  the  struggle,  becomes  even  rec- 
onciled to  that  order.^''  What  interest  for  them  has  now  the 
dogma  of  the  social  revolution?  Their  own  social  revolution 
has  already  been  effected.  At  bottom,  all  the  thoughts  of  these 
leaders  are  concentrated  upon  the  single  hope  that  there  shall 
long  continue  to  exist  a  proletariat  to  choose  them  as  its  dele- 
gates and  to  provide  them  with  a  livelihood. ^^     Consequently 

"Jean  Jaures,  "Depeche  de  Toulouse,"  November  12,  1887. 

"  Max  Weber,  a  few  years  ago,  advised  the  German  princes,  if  they 
wished  to  appease  their  terrors  of  socialism,  to  spend  a  day  on  the 
platform  at  a  socialist  congress,  so  that  they  might  convince  them- 
selves that  in  the  whole  crowd  of  assembled  revolutionists  "the 
dominant  type  of  expression  was  that  of  the  petty  bourgeois,  of  the 
self-satisfied  innkeeper,"  and  that  there  was  no  trace  of  genuine  revo- 
lutionary enthusiasm  (Max  Weber's  speech  at  the  Magdeburg  congress 
of  the  Verein  fiir  Sozialpolitik,  stenographic  report  of  the  sitting, 
October  2,  1907). 

=^ Madeleine  Pelletier  (La  Fin  du  Guesdisme,  "Guerre  Sociale,"  iii, 
No.  4),  writing  of  the  evolution  of  the  French  labour  leaders,  says: 
"Mais  I'age,  la  maladie,  etaient  venus  et  I'anenergie  avec  eux.  Autour 
du  Maltre  s 'etaient  formes  des  eentaines  d'eleves  que  la  lutte  deg 
classes  avaient  fait  deputes,  conseillers  generaux  et  municipaux,  maires, 
secretaires   de   mairie   et   qui,    enchantes   de   I'aubaine,    songeaient,   sana 


306  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

they  contend  that  what  is  above  all  necessary  is  to  organize,  to 
organize  unceasingly,  and  that  the  cause  of  the  workers  will' 
not  gain  the  victory  until  the  last  worker  has  been  enrolled  in 
the  organization.  Like  all  the  heati  possidentes,  they  are  poor 
fighters.  They  incline,  as  in  England,  to  a  theory  in  accordance 
with  which  the  workers  and  the  capitalists  are  to  be  united  in  a 
kind  of  league,  and  to  share,  although  still  unequally,  in  the 
profits  of  a  common  enterprise.  Thus  the  wages  of  the  la- 
bourers become  dependent  upon  the  returns  of  the  business.  This 
doctrine,  based  upon  the  principle  of  what  is  known  as  the 
sliding-scale,  throws  a  veil  over  all  existing  class-antagonisms 
and  impresses  upon  labour  organizations  a  purely  mercantile 
and  technical  stamp.  If  a  struggle  becomes  inevitable,  the 
leader  undertakes  prolonged  negotiations  with  the  enemy;  the 
more  protracted  these  negotiations,  the  more  often  is  his  name 
repeated  in  the  newspapers  and  by  the  public.  If  he  con- 
tinues to  express  "reasonable  opinions,"  he  may  be  sure  of 
securing  at  once  the  praise  of  his  opponents  and  (in  most  cases) 
the  admiring  gratitude  of  the  crowd. 

Personal  egoism,  pusillanimity,  and  baseness  are  often  as- 
sociated with  a  fund  of  good  sense  and  wide  knowledge,  and  so 
intimately  associated  that  a  distinction  of  the  good  qualities 
from  the  bad  becomes  a  difficult  matter.  The  hotheads,  who 
are  not  lacking  among  the  labour  leaders  of  proletarian  origin, 
become  cool.  They  have  acquired  a  conscientious  conviction 
that  it  would  be  a  mistake  to  pursue  an  aggressive  policy, 
which  would  in  their  view  not  merely  fail  to  bring  any  profit, 
but  would  endanger  the  results  hitherto  attained.  Thus  in  most 
cases  two  orders  of  motives  are  in  operation,  the  egoistic  and 
the  objective,  working  hand  in  hand.  The  resultant  of  these 
influences  is  that  state  of  comparative  calm  proper  to  the  labour 
leader,  regarding  which  an  employee  of  one  of  the  trade  unions 
has  expressed  himself  with  great  frankness:  "It  is  no  matter 
for  reproach,  but  is  perfectly  comprehensible,  that  when  we 
were  all  still  working  at  the  bench  and  had  to  get  along  as 
best  we  could  with  our  small  wages,  we  had  a  keener  personal 
interest  in  a  speedy  change  of  the  existing  social  order  than 
we  have  in  our  present  conditions."  ^^    Such  a  state  of  mind  will 

oser  1  'avouer,  que  le  besoin  d  'une  revolution  soeiale  ne  se  f aisait  plus  aussi 
vivement  son  tir  qu'au  temps  ou  ils  gagnaient  cent  sous  par  jour." 

^Kloth,  leader  of  the  bookbinders'  union,  speaking  at  the  conference 
of  the  trade-union  executives  in  Berlin,  1906    {Frotoholl,  p.  10).     In  the 


PROLETARIANS  AS  LEADERS       307 

be  yet  further  reinforced  if  the  former  manual  worker  should  be, 
as  he  often  is,  engaged  in  journalistic  work.  Although  in  most 
cases  he  will  with  admirable  diligence  have  amassed  a  con- 
siderable amount  of  knowledge,  he  has  not  had  the  necessary- 
preliminary  training  to  enable  him  to  assemble,  re-elaborate, 
and  assimilate  the  elements  of  his  knowledge  to  constitute  a 
scientific  doctrine,  or  even  to  create  for  himself  a  system  of 
directive  ideas.  Consequently  his  personal  inclinations  towards 
quietism  cannot  be  neutralized,  as  unquestionably  happens  in 
the  case  of  many  Marxists,  by  the  preponderant  energy  of  a 
comprehensive  theory.  Marx  long  ago  recognized  this  defect  in 
proletarian  leaders,  saying:  "When  the  workers  abandon 
manual  labour  to  become  professional  writers,  they  almost  al- 
ways make  a  mess  of  the  theoretical  side. ' '  ^^ 

We  see,  then,  that  the  substitution  of  leaders  of  proletarian 
origin  for  those  of  bourgeois  origin  offers  the  working-class 
movement  no  guarantee,  either  in  theory  or  in  practice,  against 
the  political  or  moral  infidelity  of  the  leaders.  In  1848,  when 
the  elections  ordered  by  the  provisional  government  took  place 
in  France,  eleven  of  the  deputies  who  entered  the  Chamber 
were  members  of  the  working  class.  No  less  than  ten  of  these 
promptly  abandoned  the  labour  programme  on  the  strength  of 
which  they  had  been  elected.-^  A  yet  more  charactertistic  ex- 
ample is  furnished  by  the  history  of  the  leaders  of  the  Italian 
branch  of  the  International  (1868-79).  Here  the  leaders,  who 
were  for  the  most  part  derived  from  the  bourgeoisie  and  the 
nobility,  nearly  all  showed  themselves  to  be  persons  of  dis- 
tinguished worth.  The  only  two  exceptions  were  men  of  work- 
ing-class origin.  Stefano  Caporusso,  who  spoke  of  himself  as 
"the  model  workingman,"  embezzled  the  funds  of  the  socialist 
group  of  Naples,  of  which  he  was  the  president;  while  Carlo 
Terzaghi,  president  of  the  section  of  Turin,  turned  out  to  be 
a  police  spy  and  was  expelled  from  the  party .^*  Speaking  gen- 
erally, we  learn  from  the  history  of  the  labour  movement  that  a 
socialist  party  is  exposed  to  the  influence  of  the  political  en- 

ProtoTcoll  it  is  here  noted  that  there  were  vigorous  cries  of  objection, 
and  also  the  remark,  "What  you  say  applies  still  more  to  the  employees 
of  the  socialist  party."     (Cf.  supra,  p.  146.) 

"Letter  to  Sorge,  October  19,  1877,  Brief e  u.  Ausziige,  etc.,  ed. 
cit.,  p.   159, 

"Arthur  Arnould,  Histoire  populaire  et  parlementaire  de  la  Com- 
mune de  Paris,  Kistemaekers,  Brussels,   1878,  vol.  ii,  p.   43. 

**  Cf .  MichelSj  Proletariato  et  Borghesia,  etc.,  ed.  cit.,  pp.  72  et  seq. 


308  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

vironment  in  proportion  to  the  degree  in  wliich  it  is  genuinely 
proletarian  in  character.  The  first  deputy  of  the  Italian  socialist 
party  (which  at  that  time  consisted  exclusively  of  manual  work- 
ers), Antonio  Maffi,  a  type-founder,  elected  to  parliament  in 
1882,  speedily  joined  one  of  the  bourgeois  sections  of  the  left, 
declaring  that  his  election  as  a  working  man  did  not  make  it 
necessary  for  him  to  set  himself  in  opposition  to  the  other 
classes  of  society.^^  In  France,  the  two  men  who  under  the 
Second  Empire  had  been  the  leaders  of  the  Proudhonists,  Henri 
Louis  Tolain,  the  engraver,  and  Fribourg,  the  compositor,  and 
who  at  the  first  international  congress  in  Geneva  (1866)  had 
urgently  advocated  an  addition  to  the  rules  to  effect  the  ex- 
clusion of  all  intellectuals  and  bourgeois  from  the  organization, 
when  the  Commune  was  declared  in  1871  ranged  themselves  on 
the  side  of  Thiers,  and  were  therefore  expelled  from  the  In- 
ternational as  traitors.  It  may  be  added  that  Tolain  ended  his 
career  as  a  senator  under  the  conservative  republic.  Odger, 
the  English  labour  leader,  a  member  of  the  general  council  of 
the  International,  abandoned  this  body  after  the  insurrection 
in  Paris.  It  is  true  that  he  was  in  part  influenced  in  this 
direction  by  his  objection  to  the  dictatorial  methods  of  Marx. 
But  Marx  could  rejoin,  not  without  reason,  that  Odger  had 
wished  merely  to  make  use  of  the  International  to  acquire  the 
confidence  of  the  masses,  and  that  he  was  ready  to  turn  his 
back  upon  socialism  as  soon  as  it  seemed  to  him  an  obstacle  to 
his  political  career.  A  similar  case  was  that  of  Lucraft,  also 
on  the  general  council  of  the  International,  who  secured  an 
appointment  as  school  inspector  under  the  British  government.^'' 
In  a  word,  it  may  said  that  when  the  forces  of  the  workers  are 
led  against  the  bourgeoisie  by  men  of  working-class  origin, 
the  attack  is  always  less  vigorous  and  conducted  in  a  way  less 
accordant  with  the  alleged  aims  of  the  movement  than  when  the 
leaders  of  the  workers  spring  from  some  other  class.  A  French 
critic,  referring  to  the  political  conduct  of  the  working-class 
leaders  of  the  proletariat,  declares  that  alike  intellectually  and 
morally  they  are  inferior  to  the  leaders  of  bourgeois  origin, 
lacking  the  education  and  the  culture  which  these  possess.  The 
same  writer  declares  that  the  behaviour  of  many  of  the  leaders 
of  working-class  origin  cannot  fail  to  contribute  to  the  intensive 

*°  Alfredo    Angiolini,    Cinquent  'anni    di    Socialismo    in    Italia,    ed.    cit., 
pp.  180-6. 
*G.  Jaeckh,  Die  Internationale,  ed.  cit.,  p.  152. 


PROLETARIANS  AS  LEADERS       309 

culture  of  anti-parliaraentarist  tendencies.  "Apres  le  regne  de 
la  feodalite,  nous  avons  eu  le  regne  de  la  bourgeoisie.  Apres  le 
bourgeois,  aurons-nous  le  contremaitre  ? — Notre  ennemi,  c'est 
notre  maitre,  a  dit  La  Fontaine.  Mais  le  maitre  le  plus  redout- 
able,  c'est  celui  qui  sort  de  nos  rangs  et  qui,  a  force  de  mensonges 
et  de  roublardises,  a  su  s'elever  jusqu'au  pouvoir. "  ^^ 

It  was  hoped  that  the  energetic  entry  of  the  proletariat  upon 
the  world-stage  would  have  an  ethically  regenerative  influence, 
that  the  new  elements  would  exercise  a  continuous  and  un- 
wearied control  over  the  public  authorities,  and  that  (endowed 
with  a  keen  sense  of  responsibility)  they  would  strictly  control 
the  working  of  their  own  organizations.  These  anticipations 
have  been  disappointed  by  the  oligarchical  tendencies  of  the 
workers  themselves.  As  Cesare  Lombroso  pointed  out  without 
contradiction  in  an  article  published  in  the  central  organ  of 
the  Italian  socialist  party,  the  more  the  proletariat  approxi-. 
mates  to  the  possession  of  the  power  and  the  wealth  of  the 
bourgeoisie,  the  more  does  it  adopt  all  the  vices  of  its  opponent 
and  the  more  does  it  become  an  instrument  of  corruption. 
' '  Then  there  arise  all  those  subdivisions  of  our  so-called  popular 
parties,  which  have  all  the  vices  of  the  bourgeois  parties,  which 
claim  and  often  possess  a  prestige  among  the  people,  and  which 
easily  become  the  tools  of  governmental  corruption  sailing  un- 
der liberal  colours  in  their  name. ' '  ^^  We  have  sufficient  ex- 
amples in  European  history,  even  in  that  of  very  recent  date, 
of  the  manner  in  which  the  artificial  attempt  to  retain  the 
party  leadership  in  proletarian  hands  has  led  to  a  political 
misoneism  against  which  the  organized  workers  of  all  countries 
have  every  reason  to  be  on  their  guard.  The  complaint  so 
frequently  voiced  by  the  rank  and  file  of  the  socialists  that 
almost  all  the  defects  of  the  movement  arise  from  the  flooding 
of  the  proletarian  party  with  bourgeois  elements  are  merely 
the  outcome  of  ignorance  of  the  historical  characteristics  of  the 
period  through  which  we  are  now  passing. 

"Flax  (Victor  Meric),  Coutant  (d'lvry),  "Hommes  du  Jour,"  Paris, 
908,  No.  32. 

=*  Cesare  Lombroso,  I  Frutti  di  un  Foto,  "Avanti,"  No.  2987  (April 
27,  1905).  The  criminologist  Eaffaele  Garofalo  prophesies  that  the 
protelariat  will  follow  in  the  footsteps  of  the  bourgeoisie,  "that  tiers  etat 
which  was  to  substitute  its  youthful  energies  for  a  decadent  and  degen- 
erate aristocracy,"  but  which  instead  of  doing  this  "has  displayed  a 
hundred- fold  the  defects  and  the  corruption  of  its  predecessors"  (Garo- 
falo, La  Superstisione  socialista,  Turin,  1894,  p.  178). 


310  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

The  leaders  of  the  democratic  parties  do  not  present  every- 
where the  same  type,  for  the  complex  of  tendencies  by  which 
they  are  influenced  necessarily  varies  in  accordance  with  en- 
vironment, national  character,  climate,  historical  tradition,  etc. 

The  United  States  of  America  is  the  land  of  the  almighty 
dollar.  In  no  other  country  in  the  world  does  public  life  seem 
to  be  dominated  to  the  same  extent  by  the  thirst  for  gold.  The 
unrestricted  power  of  capital  necessarily  involves  corruption. 
In  America,  however,  this  corruption  is  not  merely  exhibited 
upon  a  gigantic  scale,  but,  if  we  are  to  believe  American 
critics,  has  become  a  recognized  institution.^^  Whilst  in  Europe 
such  corruption  gives  rise  to  censure  and  anger,  in  America  it  is 
treated  with  indifference  or  arouses  no  more  than  an  indulgent 
smile.  Lecky  declares  that  if  we  were  to  judge  the  Americans 
solely  by  the  manner  in  which  they  conduct  themselves  in 
public  life,  our  judgments  would  be  extremely  unfavourable — 
and  unjust.^" 

We  cannot  wonder,  then,  that  North  America  should  be  pre- 
eminently the  country  in  which  the  aristocratic  tendencies  of 
the  labour  leaders,  fostered  by  an  environment  often  permeated, 
as  has  just  been  explained,  by  a  gross  and  unrefined  materialism, 

''  The  extent  to  which,  in  the  States,  corruption  has  progressed  among 
the  representatives  of  the  people  would  seem  to  be  displayed  by  a  news- 
item  recently  circulated  in  the  principal  European  papers.  In  this 
we  were  told  that  a  society  had  been  formed  in  Washington,  known  as 
the  "Private  Secretaries'  Union,"  which  was  to  protect  its  members 
against  being  plundered  by  the  American  popular  representatives.  The 
members  of  the  House  of  Eeprescntatives  are  paid,  in  addition  to  their 
salary  of  $7,500  a  year,  a  sum  of  $1,500  for  a  secretary.  The  congress- 
men receive  this  supplement  personally,  but  must  furnish  documentary 
proof  that  the  amount  is  paid  over  to  a  secretary.  Many  of  these  states- 
men, being  of  a  thrifty  disposition,  engage  a  shorthand  writer  for  the 
session  at  a  fee  of  $500,  and  pocket  the  balance.  Others  install  relatives 
of  their  own  as  private  secretaries,  so  that  all  the  money  shall  be  kept  in 
the  family.  Another  arrangement  is  for  five  of  the  congressmen  to  combine 
to  employ  a  common  secretary,  who  receives  $3,000  a  year,  but  each  of 
the  five  employers  clears  $900  by  the  transaction.  Thus  there  are  numerous 
variations,  but  in  any  case  the  private  secretary  fails  to  secure  all  the 
fruits  of  his  labour. 

'"W.  E.  H.  Lecky,  Democracy  and  Liberty,  ed.  cit.,  vol.  i,  pp.  113-14. 
According  to  Robert  Clarkson  Brooks  (^Corruption  in  American  Politics  and 
Life,  Dodd  Mead  &  Co.,  New  York,  1910,  p.  54),  the  corruption  existing 
in  the  States  is  merely  the  expression  of  the  higher  moral  level  of  public 
life:  "If  monarchies  are  less  corrupt  than  democracies,  it  is  also  true 
that  monarchies  do  not  repose  so  much  faith  in  the  fundamental  honesty 
of  their  citizens  as  do  democracies." 


PROLETARIANS  AS  LEADERS       311 

should  have  developed  freely  and  upon  a  gigantic  scale.  The 
leaders  of  the  American  proletariat  have  merely  followed  the 
lead  of  the  capitalism  by  which  the  life  of  their  country  is 
dominated.  The  consequence  is  that  their  party  life  has  also 
become  essentially  plutocratic.^^  When  they  have  secured  an 
improved  rate  of  wages  and  similar  advantages,  the  officials  of 
the  trade  unions,  wearing  evening  dress,  meet  the  employers  in 
sumptuous  banquets.  At  congresses  it  is  the  custom  to  offer 
foreign  delegates,  and  even  their  wives,  valuable  gifts,  jewellery, 
etc.  The  special  services  of  the  leaders  are  rewarded  by  in- 
creases of  salary,  which  sometimes  attain  considerable  figures. 
We  learn  from  indisputable  authority  that  many  of  the  labour 
leaders,  and  especially  of  the  trade-union  leaders,  regard  their 
positions  simply  as  a  means  for  personal  advancement.  Ac- 
cording to  the  testimony  of  the  well-informed,  the  American 
working  class  has  hitherto  produced  few  leaders  of  whom  it 
has  any  reason  to  be  proud.  Many  of  them  shamelessly  and 
unscrupulously  exploit  for  personal  ends  the  posts  which  they 
have  secured  through  the  confidence  of  their  fellow-workmen. 
Taken  as  a  whole,  the  American  labour  leaders  have  been 
described  as  ' '  stupid  and  cupid. ' '  ^^  We  owe  to  Gaylord  Wil- 
shire,  himself  also  an  American  and  a  socialist,  the  following 
unflattering  picture  of  the  socialist  leader:  "He  is  a  man  who 
often  expresses  a  social  dissatisfaction  based  upon  personal 
failure.  He  is  very  apt  to  be  loud  rather  than  profound.  He 
is,  as  a  rule,  not  an  educated  man,  and  his  demands  and  urgings 
are  based  too  often  on  ignorance. ' '  ^^  Intelligent  and  honest 
workmen  are  consequently  repelled  from  the  labour  organiza- 
tions or  induced  to  follow  false  paths.  We  have  even  been  told 
that  not  a  few  labour  leaders  are  altogether  in  the  hands  of 
the  capitalists.  Being  uneducated  parvenus,  they  are  extremely 
sensible  to  flattery,^*  but  this  seems  to  be  among  the  least  of 
their  defects.  In  many  cases  they  are  no  more  than  paid 
servants   of   capital.     The   "Union   Officer"   then   becomes   a 

"  In  1909  the  congress  of  the  American  labour  organizations  made 
a  special  grant  of  $4,000  each  to  Gompers,  Morrison,  and  Mitchell,  who 
had  been  condemned  by  the  Supreme  Court  for  offences  connected  with 
the  labour  movement. 

"Austin  Lewis,  The  Bise  of  the  American  Proletariat,  ed.  cit.,  p. 
200. 

"Gaylord  Wilshire,  Wilshire  Editorials,  Wilshire  Book  Co.,  New  York, 
1906,  p.  140. 

"Austin  Lewis,  op.  cit.,  p.  202. 


312  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

"boss"  in  the  hands  of  the  enemy,  a  "scab"  or,  to  use  a  still 
more  significant  American  expression,  "a  labour  lieutenant  of 
the  capitalist  class.  "^^  It  is  from  the  socialists  themselves  that 
we  learn  almost  incredible  details  regarding  certain  categories 
of  American  workers  who  have  achieved  a  privileged  position, 
but  who  are  utterly  devoid  of  moral  sense.  Among  the  best 
organized  unions  there  are  some  which  enter  into  regular  treaties 
with  the  capitalists  in  their  respective  branches  of  industry 
in  order  to  exploit  the  consumer  and  to  effect  with  the  capitalist 
a  friendly  division  of  the  spoil.^''  In  other  cases,  the  leaders 
of  a  federation  of  trade  unions,  bribed  by  one  group  of  em- 
ployers, will  organize  strikes  among  the  employees  of  another 
group.  On  the  other  hand,  many  strikes  which  are  progressing 
favourably  for  the  workers  come  abruptly  to  an  end  because 
the  employers  have  made  it  worth  the  leaders'  while  to  call 
the  strike  off.  The  absence  of  socialist  tendencies  among  the 
American  workers,  their  lack  of  class  consciousness,  have  been 
noted  with  admiration  by  distinguished  writers  and  leading 
members  of  the  employing  class,  who  praise  these  workers  for 
their  exceptional  intelligence,  and  hold  them  up  as  examples 
to  the  degenerate  and  lazy  European  working  men.^'^  Yet  these 
same  intelligent  American  workers  are  led  by  the  nose  by  such 
men  as  we  have  been  describing,  and  appear  to  be  the  only 
ones  who  fail  to  notice  the  misdeeds  of  the  labour  leaders.  In- 
deed, they  favour  these  misdeeds  by  refusing  to  work  at  the 
same  bench  with  those  of  their  comrades  who,  more  perspicacious 
than  themselves,  have  attracted  the  enmity  of  the  leaders  by 
discovering  and  unmasking  the  frauds  of  the  latter.^^ 

The  history  of  the  organized  working  class  in  North  America 
certainly  rivals,  in  respect  of  the  frequent  occurrence  of  cor- 
ruption, the  history  of  a  part  of  the  capitalist  class  in  the 
same  country.  A  historian  of  the  American  labour  movement 
exclaims:  "It  is  in  both  cases  a  sordid  and  dreary  tale  and, 
in  the  case  of  organized  labour,  is  unrelieved  to  a  disappointing 
degree  by  the  heroism  and  sentiment  which  have  played  such 

^"Daniel  De  Leon,  The  Burning  Question  of  Trades-Unionism,  ed.  cit., 
pp.  10-12,  41-43. 

^  George  D.  Herron,  The  Bay  of  Judgment,  Kerr,  Chicago,  1904,  p.  17. 
— See  also  Werner  Sombart,  Warum  gibt  es  in  den  Vereinigten  Staaten 
Iceinen  Sozialismus?,  ed.  cit.,  p.  33. 

*'  Cf .,  for  example,  E.  Cauderlier,  L  'Evolution  economique  du  XIX 
siecle,  Brussels,  1903,  p.  209. 

"De  Leon,  ed.  cit.,  p.  12. 


PROLETARIANS  AS  LEADERS        313 

a  conspicuous  part  in  the  labour  movements  of  other  countries. 
The  cynicism  of  a  civilization  based  on  cash  seems  to  have 
found  its  way  into  the  bones  of  both  capitalist  and  proletarian.^^ 
The  American  labour  movement  is  the  purest  in  respect  of  its 
proletarian  composition  and  is  at  the  same  time  the  richest  in 
examples  of  social  perversion.  Side  by  side  with  the  vulgar 
and  interested  corruption  to  which  we  have  referred,  there 
exists,  indeed,  a  corruption  which  arises  from  idealism,  and 
the  latter  must  not  be  confused  with  the  former.  It  some- 
times happens  that  the  leader  allows  himself  to  be  induced  by 
pecuniary  considerations  to  attack  a  given  party,  the  money 
being  furnished  by  other  parties  or  by  the  government.  That 
he  should  do  this  presupposes,  indeed,  that  his  point  of  view 
regarding  money  is  non  olet;  but  he  acts  as  he  does  exclusively 
in  the  interest  of  his  party,  and  not  a  penny  of  the  money  he 
receives  goes  into  his  own  pocket.  An  American  political  econ- 
omist has  justly  pointed  out  that  such  corruption  sometimes 
involves  a  heroic  capacity  for  self-sacrifice  on  the  part  of  the 
leader  who,  to  secure  advantages  for  the  party  with  the  foreign 
money,  faces  the  fiercest  attacks  and  the  worst  suspicions,  and 
even,  if  need  be,  accepts  his  own  political-  annihilation.  He 
offers  up  his  honour  to  the  party,  the  greatest  sacrifice  that 
a  man  of  honour  can  make.*°  Of  this  kind,  for  example,  is 
the  corruption  of  which  the  leaders  of  the  political  labour  move- 
ment have  frequently  been  accused  by  the  liberals,  namely, 
when  they  have  accepted  money  from  the  conservatives  or  from 
the  government  in  order  to  fight  liberals  or  radicals.  There 
are  not  a  few  instances  of  this  kind  in  the  history  of  the  inter- 
national labour  movement.  Thus,  in  England,  during  the  gen- 
eral election  of  1885,  the  leaders  of  the  Social  Democratic 
Federation,  in  order  to  run  two  candidates  in  metropolitan 
constituencies,  accepted  money  from  the  tory  party,  whose  aim 
it  was  to  split  the  votes  of  its  opponents,  and  thus  to  secure  the 
defeat  of  the  liberal  candidates ;  *^  the  sum  payable  in  this 
case  was  determined  by  the  number  of  votes  given  to  the 
socialist  candidate,  £8  for  every  vote.*-     Similarly,  Constantino 

^'Austin  Lewis,  op.  cit,  p.   196. 

*°Eobert  Clarkson  Brooks,  op.  cit.,  pp.  65  et  seq. 

"Stegmann  and  Hugo  [Lindemann],  Eandbuch  des  Soz.,  ed.  cit.,  p. 
180. 

"Bernard  Shs^^y,  The  Fahian  Society:  What  it  has  done:  Row  it  has 
done  it,  Fabian  Society,  Lond.,  1892,  p.  6. 


314  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

Lazzari,  leader  of  the  Milanese  labour  party,  accepted  from 
the  government  the  sum  of  500  lire  to  carry  on  an  electoral 
struggle  against  the  bourgeois  radicals.^^  In  Germany,  the 
conduct  of  Schweitzer  during  the  last  years  in  which  he  was 
president  of  the  Allgemeine  Deutsche  Arbeiterverein,  conduct 
which  led  to  accusations  of  corruption  in  which  Bebel  joined, 
appears  to  have  been  dictated  by  similar  considerations.  Such 
at  least  is  the  impression  produced  by  a  perusal  of  the  various 
references  to  the  matter  made  by  Gustav  Mayer.**  In  none  of 
these  cases  is  it  fair  to  accuse  the  party  leaders  of  personal 
corruption,  since  the  money  was  not  accepted  for  personal  ends 
but  for  the  supposed  advantage  of  the  party.  Whether  such 
procedures  are  politically  wise,  whether  they  make  for  the 
general  advance  of  political  morality,  are  different  questions. 
Indubitably  their  influence  on  the  mentality  of  the  masses  is 
not  educational  in  a  good  sense.  They  are,  moreover,  especially 
dangerous  to  the  leaders'  own  morale.  Corruption  for  honour- 
able motives  is  likely  to  be  succeeded  by  corruption  for  dis- 
honourable. If  the  method  were  to  be  accepted  as  a  regular 
and  legitimate  element  of  party  politics,  it  would  be  easy  for 
able  but  unscrupulous  leaders  to  put  a  portion  of  the  price  of 
corruption  into  their  own  pockets,  and  yet  to  remain  more 
"useful"  to  the  party  than  their  disinterested  and  conscien- 
tious colleagues.*^  This  would  be  the  beginning  of  the  end, 
and  would  open  the  door  to  plutocracy  in  the  party. 

It  cannot  be  said  that  the  English  labour  leaders  are  in  these 
respects  greatly  superior  to  the  American,  although  in  England, 
perhaps,  corruption  assumes  a  more  subtle  and  less  obvious  form. 
At  the  Amsterdam  congress  (1906)  Bebel  related  in  a  private 
conversation  what  Marx  and  Engels  had  said  to  him  once  in 
London:  "English  socialism  would  certainly  be  far  more 
advanced  than  it  is  to-day  had  not  the  capitalists  been  clever 
enough  to  check  the  movement  by  corrupting  its  leaders. ' '  *" 
Hyndman,  the  leader  of  the  English  Marxists,  a  man  of  bour- 
geois origin  who  sacrificed  a  diplomatic  career  for  the  sake 

"Alfredo  Angiolini,  Cinquant' anni  di  Socialismo  in  Italia,  Nerbini, 
Florence,  1900,  1st  ed.,  p.  135. 

**  Gustav  Mayer,  /.  B.  Schweitzer,  ed.  cit.,  pp.  129,  161,  181,  195,  321, 
379. 

^  Cf .  also  R.  C.  Brooks,  op.  cit.,  p.  66 :   and  supra,  note  12,  p.  231. 

*'  Daniel  De  Leon,  Flashlights  of  the  Amsterdam  Congress,  Labour 
News  Co.,  New  York,  1906,  p.  41. 


PROLETARIANS  AS  LEADERS         315 

of  socialism,  relates  in  his  memoirs  that  many  of  the  working- 
class  leaders,  and  among  these  the  most  energetic  and  the  most 
gifted,  after  having  acquired  a  genuine  political  culture  with 
the  aid  of  socialists  of  bourgeois  origin,  have  not  hesitated  to 
sell  this  new  acquirement  to  the  bourgeoisie.  Nor  do  the 
workers  themselves  complain  of  this,  for,  full  of  admiration 
for  what  they  call  the  cleverness  of  their  leaders,  they  have 
by  their  votes  rendered  possible  the  gradual  rise  of  these  in 
public  life.*'^  Another  writer  well  acquainted  with  the  Eng- 
lish labour  movement  declares:  ''A  prominent  labour  leader 
remarked  recently  that  the  labour  movement  was  a  charnel- 
house  of  broken  reputations.  That  puts  it  too  strongly,  but, 
in  essence,  how  true  ! "  *® 

Thus  in  the  United  States,  and  also,  though  to  a  less  degree, 
in  England,  there  exists  a  peculiar  category  of  working-class 
leaders  of  proletarian  origin.  Among  these  there  are  unques- 
tionably to  be  found  many  men  of  strong  character,  and  many 
who  are  uninfluenced  by  selfish  considerations,  although  but 
few  who  take  lofty  views,  who  are  endowed  with  a  fine  theo- 
retical insight,  or  capacity  for  coherent  political  work  and  the 
avoidance  of  opportunities  for  error.  Most  of  them  are  excel- 
lent organizers  and  technicians.  But  apart  from  these  some- 
what exceptional  categories,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  many 
of  the  labour  leaders  are  half-educated  and  arrogant  egoists. 
We  might  almost  imagine  that  Diderot  had  a  premonition  of 
such  individuals  when  he  made  his  ambitious  Parisian  beggar, 
Lumpazius,  say:  "Je  serai  comme  tons  les  gueux  revetus.  Je 
serai  le  plus  insolent  maroufle  qu  'on  eut  encore  vu. ' '  *^ 

*^H.    M.    Hyndman,    The  Record   of   an   Adventurous   Life,   Macmillan, 
London,  1911,  p.  433. 

**S.  G.  Hobson,  Boodle  and  Cant,  loc.  cit.,  p.  588. 
"Diderot,  Le  Neveu  de  Bameau,  Delarue,  Paris,  1877,  p.  44, 


CHAPTER  VI 

INTELLECTUALS,  AND  THE  NEED  FOR  THEM  IN 
THE  WORKING-CLASS  PARTIES 

In  the  early  days  of  the  labour  movement  the  bourgeois  intel- 
lectuals who  adhered  to  the  cause  of  the  workers  were  regarded 
by  these  with  profound  esteem;  but  as  the  movement  matured 
the  attitude  of  the  proletariat  became  transformed  into  one  of 
undue  criticism.     This  antipathy  on  the  part  of  the  rank  and 
file  of  the  socialists  is  based  upon  false  presuppositions,  and 
proceeds  from  two  antithetical  points  of  view.     Some,  like  the 
group  of  the  "Neue  Zeit"  and  the  "Leipzige  Volkszeitung "  in 
Germany,  with  the  support  of  the  revolutionary-minded  work- 
ers of  Berlin,  of  the  two  Saxonies,  and  of  Rhenish  Westphalia, 
persisting   in    the    maintenance    of   intransigent   revolutionary 
conceptions,  think  themselves  justified  in   accusing  the   intel- 
lectuals of  a  tendency  to  "take  the  edge  off"  the  labour  move- 
ment, to  "water  it  down,"  to  give  it  "bourgeois"  characteristics, 
to  rob  it  of  proletarian   virility,   and   to  inspire   it  with   an 
opportunist  spirit  of  compromise.     The  others,  the  reformists, 
the  revisionists,  who  find  inconvenient  the  continued  reminder 
principiis  ohsia!  with  which  they  are  assailed  by  the  revolu- 
tionists,   in    their    turn    attack    the    intellectuals,^    regarding 
them    as    meddlesome    intruders,     fossilized     professors,    and 
so    on,    as    persons    who    are    utterly    devoid    of    any    sound 
ideas    of    the    labour    movement    and    of    its    necessities,    dis- 
turbing   its    normal    course    with    their    ideas    of    the    study. 
Thus  whilst  the  first  group  of  critics  regard  the  intellectuals  as 
being  for  the  most  part  reformists,  bourgeois-minded  socialists 
of  the  extreme  right,  the  other  group  of  critics  classes  the  in- 
tellectuals as  ultra-revolutionary,  as  anarchizing  socialists  of 

'  Sometimes,  even,  when  these  belong  to  their  own  tendency.  Thus 
Eduard  Bernstein  was  attacked  by  the  German  trade-union  leaders  at 
the  trade-union  congress  of  Cologne  on  account  of  his  theory  of  the 
general  strike,  being  treated  as  an  incompetent  and  uninvited  intruder. 

316 


INTELLECTUALS  317 

the  extreme  left.  In  Italy,  towards  1902,  the  intellectuals 
found  themselves  placed  between  two  fires.  On  one  side  the 
reformists  claimed  to  represent  the  healthy  proletarian  energy 
of  the  economic  organizations  of  the  peasants  as  against  the 
circolctti  amhiziosetti  ("the  self-seeking  petty  circles" — i.e. 
socialist  groups  in  the  towns),  which  were  composed  for  the 
most  part,  so  they  affirmed,  of  bourgeois  and  petty  bourgeois. 
On  the  other  side,  the  revolutionists  of  the  "Avanguardia 
Socialista"  group  entered  the  lists  against  the  employees  and 
the  bourgeois  leaders,  in  the  name  of  the  class-conscious  prole- 
tariat of  industrial  workers.  Thus  by  both  factions  alike  the 
intellectuals  were  treated  as  scapegoats  and  made  responsible 
for  all  the  mistakes  and  sins  of  the  party. ^  But  both  sides  are 
wrong.  Above  all  it  is  hardly  possible  to  imagine  the  reasons 
which  would  induce  refugees  from  the  bourgeoisie  to  adhere 
to  the  extreme  right  wing  of  the  working-class  party.  It  is 
rather  the  adverse  thesis  which  might  be  sustained  by  psycho- 
logical and  historical  arguments  which  are  good  but  not  de- 
cisive. 

1.  Let  us  first  consider  the  psychological  arguments.  Kaut- 
sky,  referring  to  a  period  when  "even  by  educated  persons 
socialism  was  stigmatized  as  criminal  or  insane"  (a  period 
which  Kautsky  wrongly  imagines  to  have  passed  away),  makes 
the  judicious  observation  that  the  bourgeois  who  adheres  to  the 
socialist  cause  needs  more  firmness  of  character,  stronger  revo- 
lutionary passion,  and  greater  force  of  conviction,  than  the 
proletarian  who  takes  a  similar  step.^  The  violent  internal  and 
external  struggles,  the  days  full  of  bitterness  and  the  nights 
without  sleep  during  which  his  socialist  faith  has  ripened, 
have  combined  to  produce  in  the  socialist  of  bourgeois  origin, 
especially  if  he  be  derived  from  the  higher  circles  of  the 
bourgeoisie,  an  ardour  and  a  tenacity  which  are  rarely  en- 
countered among  proletarian  socialists.  He  has  broken  com- 
pletely with  the  bourgeois  world,  and  henceforward  confronts  it 
as  a  mortal  enemy,  as  one  irreconcilable  a  priori.  The  conse- 
quence is  that,  in  the  struggle  with  the  bourgeoisie,  the  socialist 

'Cf.  Miehels,  II  Froletariato,  etc.,  ed.  cit.,  pp.  357  et  seq.  Cf.  also, 
as  regards  France,  the  articles  of  Charles  Kappoport  in  the  "Neue  Zeit" 
during  the  years   1909-10-11. 

'  Karl  Kautsky,  Die  Soziale  devolution.  1.  Sozialreform  u.  Sosiale 
Bevolution,  "Vorwarts, "  Berlin,  1902,  p.  27;  also  Eepublik  u.  Sozialdemo- 
cratie  in  Franlcreicli,  "Neue  Zeit,"  xxiii,  No.  11,  p.  333, 


318  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

intellectual  will  incline  towards  the  most  revolutionary  ten- 
dencies.* 

There  is,  however,  another  reason  which  leads  the  ex-bourgeois 
to  make  common  cause  with  the  intransigent  socialists,  and 
this  is  his  knowledge  of  history  and  his  intimate  acquaintance 
with  the  nature  of  the  bourgeoisie.  To  the  proletarian  socialist 
it  is  often  difficult  to  form  any  precise  idea  of  the  power  of 
his  adversaries  and  to  learn  the  nature  of  the  means  at  their 
disposal  for  the  struggle.''  Often,  too,  he  is  inspired  with  an 
ingenuous  admiration  for  the  benevolent  attempts  at  social 
reform  patronized  by  certain  strata  of  the  bourgeoisie.  Faced 
by  the  more  or  less  serious  or  more  or  less  deceitful  offer  of 
panaceas,  he  is  often  in  the  position  of  the  peasant  at  the  fair 
who  listens  open-mouthed  while  the  quack  vaunts  the  miraculous 
virtue  of  his  remedies.*'  Conversely  the  socialist  of  bourgeois 
origin  will  interpret  more  precisely  the  efforts  made  by  the 
bourgeoisie  to  put  the  labour  movement  to  sleep.  His  expe- 
rience as  a  bourgeois  will  enable  him  to  penetrate  more  easily  the 
real  motives  of  the  different  proceedings  of  the  enemy.  That 
which  to  his  proletarian  comrade  seems  a  chivalrous  act  and 
proof  of  a  conciliatory  spirit,  he  will  recognize  as  an  act  of  base 
flattery,  performed  for  the  purposes  of  corruption.  That  which 
a  proletarian  socialist  considers  a  great  step  forward  towards 
the  end,  will  appear  to  the  bourgeois  socialist  as  an  infinitesimal 
advance  along  the  infinitely  extended  road  of  the  class  struggle. 

The  difference  of  intellectual  level  between  those  who  ad- 
vocate the  same  idea,  dependent  upon  their  respective  derivation 
from  a  proletarian  or  a  bourgeois  environment,  must  necessarily 
reflect  itself  in  the  manner  in  which  they  represent  this  idea  in 
the  face  of  non-socialists,  and  in  the  tactics  they  employ  towards 

*Cf.  supra,  pp.  251  et  seq. 

■Augusto  Novelli,  the  dramatist,  at  one  time  a  compositor  in  his  na- 
tive city  ef  Florence,  was  for  years  an  active  member  of  the  socialist 
party.  In  one  of  his  comedies,  a  workman  is  asked  what  he  and  his 
comrades  have  done  for  their  defence  in  a  struggle  with  their  employer 
in  which  they  are  engaged.  The  workman  replies  that  a  mixed  committee 
has  been  chosen  to  represent  the  views  of  the  strikers,  a  committee  of 
workers  and  intellectuals.  The  questioner  exclaims:  "But  why  mixed? 
Could  you  not  settle  the  matter  yourselves?"  To  which  the  other  replies: 
"We  need  a  man  with  some  intelligence  or  else  we  are  likely  to  be  hum- 
bugged" (A.  Novelli,  La  Chiocciola,  L 'Elzeviriana,  Florence,  1901,  p. 
117). 

"  Cf .  supra,  pp.  303,  308-9,  312. 


INTELLECTUALS  319 

adversaries  and  sympathizers.  The  psychological  process  which 
goes  on  in  the  socialists  of  these  two  categories  rests  upon  a 
logical  foundation.  The  proletarian  adherent  of  the  party  who 
remains  a  simple  member  of  the  rank  and  file  attentively  follows 
the  progress  made  in  all  fields  by  the  idea  on  behalf  of  which 
he  is  an  enthusiastic  fighter;  he  notes  the  growth  of  the  party, 
and  experiences  in  his  own  person  the  increase  in  wages  se- 
cured in  the  struggle  with  the  employers;  besides  being  a  mem- 
ber of  the  party,  he  belongs  to  his  trade  union,  and  often  to  a 
cooperative  society  as  well.  His  experience  in  these  various 
organizations  induces  a  feeling  of  comparative  content.  He 
regards  social  evolution  in  a  rosy  light,  and  easily  comes  to 
take  an  optimistic  view  of  the  distance  which  his  class  has  to 
traverse  in  order  to  attain  to  the  fulfilment  of  its  historic  mis- 
sion. Ultimately  social  progress  is  regarded  by  him  as  a  con- 
tinuous rectilinear  movement.  It  appears  incredible,  even  im- 
possible, that  the  proletariat  should  suffer  reverses  and  dis- 
asters; when  they  actually  occur,  they  seem  to  him  merely 
transient  phenomena.  This  state  of  mind  renders  him  generous 
and  considerate  even  towards  his  adversaries,  and  he  is  far  from 
disinclined  to  accept  the  idea  of  peace  with  the  enemy  and  of 
class  collaboration.  It  need  hardly  be  said  that  this  disposition 
is  yet  more  accentuated  among  those  proletarians  who  attain 
to  positions  of  eminence  in  the  party. 

2.  These  considerations  do  not  lack  historical  corroboration. 
Their  truth  is  confirmed  by  a  study  of  the  activities  of  those 
socialists  who  were  born  as  members  of  the  aristocracy,  or  in 
the  upper  strata  of  the  bourgeoisie,  such  as  Bakunin  and 
Kropotkin,  both  Kussian  nobles  and  both  anarchists,  Frederick 
Engels,^  Karl  Marx.*    As  a  rule,  in  all  the  great  questions  with 

^  Frederick  Engels  belonged  to  an  old-established  and  rich  family  of 
manufacturers  at  Barmen.  He  performed  his  military  service  (1841)  in 
the  select  corps  of  the  artillery  of  the  guard,  as  Einjdhrig-Freiwilliger 
(soldier  serving  one  year  at  his  own  expense).  We  learn  from  the  de- 
scription given  by  his  old  friend  Lafargue  that  the  life  he  led  was 
that  of  a  well-to-do  man,  fond  of  study,  but  also  not  averse  from  sport 
and  society  life  (Paul  Lafargue,  Personliche  Erinnerungen  an  Friedrich 
Engels,  "Neue  Zeit,"  anno  xiii,  vol.  ii,  No.  44). 

*  As  is  well  known,  Karl  Marx  was  a  Jew,  and  thus  belonged  to  a 
race  which  was  not  then,  nor  is  even  to-day,  admitted  to  the  best  society 
in  Germany.  His  father,  however,  belonged  to  an  aristocratic  Jewish 
family,  and  was  highly  respected  and  well-to-do.  It  should  be  noted, 
also,  that  Marx's  student  life  was  passed  during  the  critical  years  of 
Jewish    emancipation,    at    a    time    when    social    advance    was    especially 


320  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

whicli  the  party  has  to  deal  the  ex-bourgeois  socialist  is  in 
actual  fact  one  who  gives  the  preference  to  the  most  radical 
and  intransigent  solutions,  to  those  which  accord  most  strictly 
with  socialist  principles.  It  is  of  course  true,  on  the  other 
hand,  that  the  history  of  the  working-class  movement  shows  that 
many  "reformist"  currents  have  been  strongly  permeated  by 
intellectual  elements.  It  is  indisputable  that  even  if  German 
reformism  was  not  actually  created  by  the  little  phalanx  grouped 
round  "Der  Sozialistiche  Student"  of  Berlin,  the  reformist 
tendency  was,  from  the  days  of  its  first  inception,  vigorously 
and  ostentatiously  patronized  by  the  members  of  this  group.  A 
closer  examination,  however,  shows  very  clearly  that  the  strong- 
est impulse  to  the  reformist  tendency  in  Germany  was  given 
by  the  trade-union  leaders,  by  persons  therefore  of  proletarian 
origin.  Moreover,  it  is  the  most  exclusivist  working-class  move- 
ments which  have  everywhere  and  always  been  most  definitely 
characterized  by  the  reformist  spirit.  In  illustration  may  be 
mentioned :  the  French  group  of  the  International  Working- 
men 's  Association  which  assembled  round  Fribourg  and  Tolain; 
the  English  trade  unionists ;  the  ' '  integralists ' '  in  France,  whose 
organ  was  the  "Revue  Socialiste,"  edited  by  the  gentle  ex- 
manual  worker,  Benoit  Malon  (the  note  of  alarm  against  this 
form  of  socialism  was  sounded  first  by  the  medical  student 
Paul  Brousse,  next  by  the  intransigent  IMarxists  under  the 
leadership  of  Paul  Lafargue,  who  had  just  secured  his  medical 
diploma  in  England,  and  finally  by  the  man  of  letters  Jules 
Guesde)  ;  the  Independent  Labour  Party  with  the  Labour 
Representation  Committee;  the  socialists  of  Genoa,  led  by  the 
varnisher  Pietro  Chiesa ;  the  peasants  of  Reggio  Emilia.  This 
tendency  has  been  manifest  from  the  very  outset  of  the  modern 
labour  movement.  Bernstein  says  with  good  reason  that,  not- 
withstanding all  assertions  to  the  contrary,  in  the  English 
Chartist  movement  the  intellectuals  were  distinguished  by  their 
marked  revolutionary  inclinations.  "In  the  disputes  among 
the  Chartists,  the  radical  or  revolutionary  tendency  was  by  no 
means  characteristic  of  the  proletarian  elements,  or  the  moderate 
tendency  of  the  bourgeois  elements.  The  most  notable  repre- 
sentatives of  the  revolutionary  spirit  were  members  of  the  bour- 
geoisie, men  of  letters,  etc.,  whereas  it  was  leaders  of  working- 
easy  to  a  Jew.  Moreover,  by  his  love-match  with  Jenny  von  Westphalen 
Marx  became  connected  with  the  Borussian  aristocracy.  His  wife 's  brother 
was  celebrated  as  a  Prussian  reactionary  minister. 


INTELLECTUALS  321 

class  origin  who  advocated  moderate  methods.""  To  sum  up, 
and  putting  aside  the  question  whether  the  reformist  movement 
has  been  a  good  or  an  evil  for  the  working  class,  it  may  he 
affirmed  that  generally  speaking  the  working-class  leaders  of 
proletarian  origin  have  a  special  tendency  to  adopt  the  reformist 
attitude.  In  proof  of  this  assertion  it  suffices  to  mention  the 
names  of  Anseele  in  Belgium,  Legien  in  Germany,  and  Rigola 
in  Italy.  The  term  possibilisTiie  oiivrier  is  far  from  being  a 
malicious  invention. 

It  is  not  easy  to  furnish  statistical  proof  of  the  statement 
that  the  socialists  of  bourgeois  origin  are  more  often  revolu- 
tionaries than  reformists.  On  the  other  hand,  the  history  of 
Italian  socialism  during  recent  years  offers  an  interesting  dem- 
onstration of  the  adverse  thesis  (the  causes  of  this  peculiarity 
will  be  subsequently  discussed).  The  official  socialist  organiza- 
tion of  Milan,  the  Federazione  Milanese,  suffering  from  a 
chronic  impecuniosity  due  to  the  slackness  with  which  the  ma- 
jority of  the  members  paid  their  subscriptions,  proposed  in  the 
year  1903  an  expedient  which  is  frequently  adopted  by  the 
Italian  socialists.  Henceforward  the  monthly  subscriptions  were 
no  longer  to  be  equal  for  all  the  comrades,  but  those  who  were 
better  off  were  invited  to  pay  more  in  proportion  to  their  means. 
This  reform,  which  was  inspired  by  a  thoroughly  socialist  sen- 
timent, led  the  Milanese  reformists  (who  in  consequence  of  their 
differences  with  the  revolutionists  had  for  a  long  time  been  on 
the  look-out  for  an  honourable  excuse  to  leave  the  federation, 
in  which  the  revolutionary  current  was  predominant)  to  resign 
their  membership,  declaring  that  they  regarded  the  new  sys- 
tem of  payment  as  altogether  unjust.  On  this  occasion  it  ap- 
peared that  it  was  the  well-to-do  members  who  resigned,  so 
that  these,  the  bourgeois,  manifested  the  reformist  tendency.^" 
It  is  also  to  be  noted  that  during  recent  years  (since  1901)  the 
great  majority  of  Italian  socialist  intellectuals  have  definitely 
declared  themselves  to  be  reformists  by  a  more  or  less  uncondi- 
tional adhesion  to  the  opportunism  of  Turati.  The  cases  just 
quoted  seem  to  conflict  with  the  rule  previously  enunciated  that 
the  refugees  from  the  bourgeoisie  are  adverse  to  opportunism, 

'  Eduard  Bernstein,  Ziir  Theorie  u.  GeschicMe  des  Sozialismus,  Ferd. 
Diinmiler,  Berlin,  1904,  4th  ed.,  part  ii,  p.  18. 

"7  Casi  di  Milane,  a  memorial  presented  by  the  Milanese  federation 
to  the  party  executive  and  to  the  Italian,  comrades  (Stamp,  editr.  Lom- 
barda  di  Mondaini,  Milan,  1903,  p.  18. 


322  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

But  the  inconsistency  is  no  more  than  apparent.  It  has  several 
times  been  pointed  out  that  the  intransigence  of  the  ex-bourgeois 
socialist  depends  upon  the  circumstance  that  on  his  way  to 
join  the  class-conscious  proletariat  he  has  had  to  make  his  way 
through  a  thorny  thicket,  struggling  violently  and  suffering 
many  injuries,  and  his  courageous  progress  proves  him  to  be 
endowed  with  an  exceptional  capacity  of  sacrifice  for  the  ideal 
and  with  the  energy  of  the  born  fighter.  As  the  years  have 
passed,  however,  this  primal  source  of  revolutionary  energy  has 
to  a  large  extent  dried  up,  because  the  path  of  the  bourgeois 
adherent  to  socialism  has  become  so  much  easier.  It  is  a  gen- 
eral law  that  when  we  change  the  soil  we  change  the  quality  of 
the  fruit.    This  is  what  has  happened  in  Italy.^^ 

The  recent  history  of  socialism  shows  that  the  intellectuals 
are  distributed  in  nearly  equal  proportions  among  the  various 
tendencies.  Confining  ourselves  to  German  examples,  we  find 
that  it  is  a  doctor  of  medicine,  Raphael  Friedeberg,  who  has 
inaugurated  anarchizing  socialism;  a  similar  tendency  is  ex- 
hibited by  the  Tolstoian-Kantian  Otto  Buck,  doctor  of  philos- 
ophy, and  Ernst  Thesing,  doctor  of  medicine  and  at  one  time 
a  cavalry  lieutenant.  If  among  the  reformists  we  find  the 
barrister  Wolfgang  Heine,  the  former  theological  student  Rich- 
ard Calwer,  the  former  student  of  political  science  Max  Schippel, 
the  pastor  Gohre,  the  sometime  gymnasium  teacher  Eduard 
David,  the  doctor  of  philosophy  Heinrich  Braun,  and  many 
other  intellectuals — we  find  in  the  opposite  camp,  that  of  the 
revolutionaries,  the  doctor  of  philosophy  Franz  Mehring,  the 
doctor  of  medicine  Paul  Lensch,  Rosa  Luxemburg,  Israel  Helph- 
ant  (Parvus),  the  former  student  Max  Grunwald,  the  ex-bar- 
rister Arthur  Stadthagen,  the  barrister  Karl  Liebknecht,  and 
Karl  Kautsky,  who  escaped  only  by  chance  the  disgrace  of  the 
doctor's  title.  We  see,  then,  that  in  Germany  the  intellectuals 
cannot  be  classed  exclusively  as  revolutionists  or  as  reform- 
ists. 


The  struggle  against  the  intellectuals  within  the  socialist 
party  is  due  to  various  causes.  It  originated  as  a  struggle  for 
leadership  among  the  intellectuals  themselves.  Then  there  came 
a  struggle  between  the  representatives  of  different  tendencies: 
strict  logical  adhesion  to  theory  versus  criticism,  opportunism 

"  Cf.  supra,  pp.  214,  266-7. 


INTELLECTUALS  323 

versus  impossibilism,  trade  unionism  after  the  English  manner 
versus  doctrinal  Marxism  as  a  philosophy  of  history,  reformism 
versus  syndicalism.  From  time  to  time  these  struggles  assume 
the  form  of  attacks  made  by  the  bulk  of  the  party  upon  some 
small  heterogeneous  element  which  has  invaded  the  labour 
movement.^-  It  is  not  always  the  genuine  manual  workers,  or 
those  who  have  been  such,  that  are  the  first  to  raise  the  cry  of 
alarm  against  the  intellectuals.  But  it  is  true  that  the  working 
class  has  ever  been  suspicious  of  those  elements  in  the  party  who 
were  derived  from  other  social  camps.^^  Clara  Zetkin  writes 
very  justly:  "The  bourgeois  refugee  is  apt  to  find  himself 
lonely  and  misunderstood  among  his  comrades  in  the  struggle. 
He  is  at  once  a  stranger  and  a  citizen  in  the  valley  of  the 
possessing  classes,  with  which  he  is  associated  by  education 
and  habits  of  life ;  at  once,  also,  a  stranger  and  a  citizen  upon 
the  heights  of  the  proletariat,  to  whom  he  is  bound  in  a  firm 
community  by  his  convictions. '  '^*  The  power  of  tradition  presses 
with  peculiar  force  upon  persons  of  culture.^^ 

The  coldness  of  his  reception  in  the  new  environment  seems 
to  him  doubly  hard.  The  intellectuals,  who  have  entered  the 
party  under  the  spur  of  idealism,  soon  feel  humiliated  and 
disillusioned.^^  The  masses,  moreover,  are  little  capable  of 
appreciating  the  gravity  of  the  sacrifices  which  the  intellectual 
often  accepts  when  he  adheres  to  the  party.  When  Paul  Gohre 
related  to  the  Dresden  congress  how  for  love  of  the  cause  he 
had  renounced  his  profession  and  his  income,  his  social  position, 

"  Cf .  supra,  p.  167. 

"What  the  present  author  has  written  elsewhere  concerning  the  Italian 
labour  movement  (Michels,  Proletariato,  etc.,  ed.  cit.,  p.  334)  applies 
perfectly,  mutatis  mutandis,  to  Germany. 

"  Clara  Zetkin,  Geistiges  Proletariat,  Frauenfrage,  u.  Sozialismus,  a 
lecture,  Verlag  "Vorwiirts,"  Berlin,   1902,  p.   32. 

" "  It  is  precisely  those  who  are  inspired  by  the  impulse  to  swim  in 
the  full  stream  of  civilization,  and  not  to  stray  into  the  backwater  of 
any  sect,  that  feel  with  redoubled  force  the  isolation  in  which  they  are 
placed  by  opposition  to  the  system  prevailing  in  Germany  since  1866. 
They  suffer  like  those  who  have  discarded  Christianity  and  transcendental 
religion,  and  who  only  when  they  have  done  so  come  to  recognize  to  what 
an  extent  aU  our  institutions,  habits  of  life,  and  even  the  forms  of  our 
speech,  are  permeated  with  Christian  traditions"  (Max  Maurenbrecher, 
Die  Gehildeten  u.  d.  SozialdemoTcratie,  Leipzig,  1904,  p.  26). 

"Cf.  P.  J.  Troelstra,  Inzake  Partijleiding,  ed.  cit.,  p.  103;  G.  Zepler, 
Sadikali-smu-s  u.  Taktik,  Nachwort  sum  Vorwdrtskonflikt,  Birk,  Munich, 
1905,  p.  6;  Lily  Braun,  Memoiren  einer  Sozialistin,  ed.  cit.,  p.  632. 


324  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

and  even  his  family,  a  number  of  socialist  journals  answered 
that  all  this  was,  to  put  it  politely,  maudlin  sentimentality,  and 
that  the  socialist  intellectuals,  when  they  made  such  ' '  sacrifices, ' ' 
were  not  thinking  of  the  cause  of  the  workers  but  of  them- 
selves. In  a  word,  the  comrades  showed  themselves  utterly  in- 
sensible of  the  greatness  of  the  sacrifice  which  Gohre  had  made 
for  love  of  them.  The  truth  is  that  upon  this  point,  as  upon 
so  many  others,  the  intellectuals  and  the  proletarians  lack  the 
capacity  of  mutual  understanding. 

In  Germany,  as  in  Italy,  France,  and  in  some  of  the  Balkan 
states,  the  gravest  accusations  have  been  launched  against  the 
intellectuals.^^     There  have  been  times  in  the  history  of  Ger- 


17  ■ 


We  are  assured  by  a  Eoumanian  socialist,  B.  Libreseu,  formerly 
editor  of  the  socialist  journal  "L'Unea  Noua"  of  Bukharest,  that  his 
party,  which  from  1880  to  1885  was  strongly  represented  at  the  inter- 
national congresses  and  had  then  already  two  deputies  in  Parliament, 
had  been  so  utterly  ruined  in  consequence  of  the  attacks  made  upon 
the  intellectuals  that  hardly  a  trace  of  it  remained.  He  reports:  "Be- 
cause a  few  intellectuals  had  left  the  party  in  order  to  secure  good 
positions,  the  intellectuals  in  general  were  regarded  with  contempt. 
People  had  no  confidence  in  them,  and  this  sentiment  went  so  far  that 
the  word  'intellectual'  became  equivalent  to  a  term  of  opprobrium.  But 
since  our  cultured  comrades  were  unwilling  to  abandon  the  labouring 
masses,  they  allowed  themselves  to  be  maltreated,  and  did  not  even 
venture  to  reprove  the  workers  for  some  of  their  mistakes.  To  a  working 
man  everything  was  permissible.  Gradually,  however,  these  tendencies  led 
.  .  .  into  the  great  and  gloomy  sea  of  indifference  and  death"  (B.  Libreseu, 
11  Socialismo  in  Bumenia,  sua  Vita  e  sua  Morte,  ' '  II  Socialismo, ' '  anno 
ii,  p.  184).  At  times  the  self-inflicted  humiliations  of  the  bourgeois  social- 
ists assume  comical  forms.  There  have  been  periods  in  the  history  of  the 
socialist  parties  when  the  ex-bourgeois  masqueraded  as  working  men  in 
order  to  escape  the  contempt  of  their  proletarian  comrades.  It  is  really 
laughable  to  see  how  unwilling  socialists  often  are  to  admit  to  bourgeois 
opponents  that  there  are  many  ex-bourgeois  in  their  own  ranks.  A 
typical  example  is  recorded  in  "Het  Volk, "  the  organ  of  the  Dutch 
socialists  (issue  of  August  21,  1904).  In  a  sketch  entitled  Overwegingen 
van  Jan  Balebas  over  het  Internationaal  Kongres,  we  are  told  of  a 
peasant  to  whom  certain  opponents  of  socialism  have  declared  that  the 
leaders  of  international  socialism  are  all  bourgeois.  Thereupon  the 
peasant  has  the  different  notabilities  in  the  hall  pointed  out  to  him  (this 
is  supposed  to  be  at  the  international  socialist  congress  of  Amsterdam 
in  August  1904).  He  then  learns  that  the  accusation  is  quite  untrue. 
For  Molkenbuhr  is  a  cigar-maker,  Paul  Miiller  a  fore-mast  hand,  and  Clara 
Zetkin  a  gewezen  naaister  (ex-tailoress) !  Thus  the  writer,  instead  of 
admitting  frankly  that  the  dominant  personalities  in  the  international 
proletariat  are  derived  from  the  bourgeoisie,  leads  his  imaginary  peasant 
(and  the  reader!)   by  the  nose.     He  does  not  point  out  to  the  peasant 


INTELLECTUALS  325 

man  socialism  in  wliich  the  educated  members  of  the  party  have 
been  exposed  to  universal  contempt.  It  suffices  to  recall  the 
Dresden  congress  (1903),  during  which  the  whole  complicated 
question  of  tactics  seemed  to  be  reduced  to  "the  problem  of  the 
intellectuals."  Even  to-day  they  are  often  treated  as  suspects. 
There  are  still  intellectuals  who  think  it  necessary  to  demon- 
strate to  the  masses  that,  notwithstanding  the  aggravating  cir- 
cumstances of  their  social  origin  and  their  superior  education, 
they  are  nevertheless  good  socialists.  It  is  surely  far  from 
heroic,  this  persistence  with  which  the  intellectuals  are  apt  to 
deny  their  true  social  character  and  to  pretend  that  their  own 
hands  are  horny.  But  we  need  not  be  deceived.  Merlino  hits 
the  bull's-eye  when  he  ironically  warns  us  that  this  state  of 
affairs  lasts  only  until  the  moment  when  the  intellectuals  succeed 
in  getting  control  of  the  working-class  movement. ^^  They  now 
feel  themselves  secure,  and  no  longer  need  wear  the  mask,  at 
least  in  their  relations  with  the  masses.  If  they  continue,  none 
the  less,  to  assume  the  posture  of  the  humble  demagogue,  this 
is  done  from  a  vague  fear  of  being  accused  as  tyrants  by  the 
bourgeois  parties,  but  still  more  in  order  to  ward  off  the  criticism 
of  their  working-class  competitors.^** 

It  is  proper  to  recognize  that  mistrust  of  the  intellectuals, 
although  in  large  part  an  artificial  product,  has  its  good  side. 
For  this  mistrust  leads  no  small  number  of  cranky  and  eccentric 
intellectuals,  who  incline  to  play  a  picturesque  part  in  joining 
the  socialists,  to  turn  towards  other  pastures.^"    Nothing  would 

the  principal  orators  of  the  congress,  the  professors  Vandervelde,  Ferri, 
and  Jaures,  and  the  doctors  Luxemburg  and  Adler,  whilst  with  deliberate 
artifice  the  names  of  a  few  leaders  less  conspicuous  than  these  are 
trumpeted  as  those  of  ' '  guaranteed  proletarians ' ' — and  even  then  the 
teacher,  Clara  Zetkin,  is  presented  to  us  as  a  tailoress. 

'*  F.  S.  Merlino,  Collettivismo,  Lotta  di  Casse  e  .  .  .  Ministero !,  re- 
joinder to  F.  Turati,  Nerbini,  Florence,  1904,  p.  34. 

"  Cf .  supra,  p.  165  et  seq. 

^^ ' '  During  the  second  half  of  the  period  of  anti-socialist  legislation, 
it  was  not  alone  men  of  the  stamp  of  Hochberg  who  abandoned  the 
possessing  classes  for  socialism,  in  order  to  warm  themselves  in  the  raya 
of  this  rising  sun.  Misunderstood  discoverers  and  reformers,  anti-vac- 
cinators,  nature-healers,  and  other  cranky  geniuses  of  all  kinds,  endeavoured 
to  secure  from  the  working  classes,  which  were  displaying  so  vigorous 
an  activity,  the  recognition  elsewhere  denied.  Eager  to  overthrow  an 
outworn  world,  the  class-conscious  proletariat  was  not  fastidious,  and 
looked  more  to  the  goodwill  of  those  who  offered  help  than  to  the  strength 
of  their  loins.  Especially  vigorous  was  the  current  which  set  towards 
socialism  from  academic  circles.     The  traditions  of  bourgeois  radicalism, 


326  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

be  more  disastrous  for  the  workers  than  to  tolerate  the  exclusive 
rule  of  the  intellectuals.  University  study  is  not  possible  to 
those  choice  individuals  alone  who  are  endowed  with  excep- 
tional natural  gifts;  it  is  merely  a  class  privilege  of  persons 
whose  position  is  economically  advantageous.  Consequently  the 
student  has  no  right  to  be  proud  of  his  ability  and  his  knowl- 
edge. He  need  not  glory  in  being  able  to  write  Dr.  before  his 
name  or  M.A.  after  it.  Every  proletarian  of  average  intelli- 
gence, given  the  necessary  means,  could  acquire  a  university 
degree  with  the  same  facility  as  does  the  average  bourgeois. 
Besides,  and  above  all,  it  cannot  be  denied,  that  for  the  healthy 
progress  of  the  proletarian  movement  it  would  be  incomparably 
better  that  the  mistrust  of  the  workers  towards  the  bourgeois 
refugees  should  be  a  hundred  times  greater  than  necessary, 
rather  than  that  the  proletariat  should  be  deceived  even  once 
by  overconfidence  in  its  leaders.  But  unfortunately,  as  we  learn 
from  the  history  of  the  modern  labour  movement,  even  the  total 
exclusion  of  intellectuals  would  not  save  the  working  class 
from  numerous  deceptions. 

From  the  ethical  point  of  view  the  contempt  felt  by  the  non- 
intellectuals  for  the  intellectuals  is  utterly  without  justification. 
It  is  a  positive  fact  that  even  to-day,  in  many  countries,^^  the 
bourgeois  refugee  who  makes  his  adhesion  to  the  party  of  the 
revolutionary  workers,  the  party  of  "social  subversion,"  or,  as 
William  II  expresses  it,  "the  unpatriotic  rout  of  those  who  are 
unworthy  to  bear  the  name  of  Germans,"  suffers  serious  eco- 
nomic and  social  damage.  On  the  other  hand,  the  proletarian 
commonly  derives  advantage  in  these  respects  from  joining  the 
party  of  his  own  class,  and  is  thus  impelled  to  take  this  step 
from  motives  of  class-egoism.  Unquestionably  the  working  class, 
struggling  on  the  political  field,  needs  recruits  from  its  own 
ranks  who  can  rise  to  the  position  of  officers  in  the  proletarian 
army.     It  is  natural,   too,   that  these  leaders  should  be  fur- 

which  had  persisted  among  the  students  since  the  days  of  the  old  BurscJien- 
schaft,  had  become  extinguished  in  the  political  decay  of  the  progressive 
party.  Varying  in  their  inborn  tendencies  and  their  social  origin,  some 
of  the  students  devoted  themselves  to  a  repulsive  place-hunting,  which 
at  best  waved  the  antisemite  flag,  whilst  others  endeavoured  to  make 
friends  vsdth  the  socialists"  (Mehring,  Geschichte  der  deutschen  Sozial- 
demoTcratie,  ed.  cit.,  vol.  iv,  p.  120).     Cf.  also  supra,  pp.  94-5. 

"  For  example,  in  northern  Germany,  Switzerland,  the  department  of 
the  Nerd  in  France,  and,  for  other  reasons,  in  Trieste,  Japan,  and 
so  on. 


INTELLECTUALS  327 

nished  with  adequate  means,  and  that  they  should  be  firmly- 
secured  in  their  positions.  But  it  ill  becomes  the  working  men 
who  have  thus  risen  in  the  social  scale  to  look  down  upon  their 
ex-bourgeois  associates,  who  have  descended  in  the  social  scale, 
and  have  thereby  become  voluntary  declasses  for  love  of  the 
party. 

.  It  results  from  all  that  has  been  said  that  the  campaign 
against  the  intellectuals  in  the  socialist  party,  however  justified 
it  may  be  in  individual  cases,  is  as  a  whole  utterly  unjust,  and 
often  inopportune  and  absurd.  Even  the  German  labour  move- 
ment, despite  the  high  degree  of  technical  organization  to  which 
it  has  attained,  could  not  dispense  with  intellectuals.  Although, 
as  we  have  seen,^^  its  general  character  is  decisively  proletarian, 
and  although  it  has  as  authoritative  leaders  such  men  of  prole- 
tarian origin  as  August  Bebel,  Ignaz  Auer,  Johannes  Timm, 
Martin  Segitz,  Adolph  von  Elm,  Otto  Hue,  etc.,  it  may  be 
affirmed  that  German  socialism  would  lose  much  of  its  prestige 
if  it  were  to  eliminate  the  intellectuals. 

According  to  Mehring,  the  use  of  the  Intellectuals  to  the 
proletariat  is  not  so  much  to  serve  as  fellow-combatants  in  the 
struggle,  as  to  play  the  part  of  theorists  who  illuminate  the 
road.  He  writes:  "If  they  wish  to  be  practical  fighters  and 
not  theorists,  they  become  altogether  insignificant  as  adherents 
to  the  labour  movement;  for  what  could  be  the  import  of  the 
adhesion  of  a  few  hundred  intellectuals  to  the  working-class 
millions,  seeing  that  the  latter  are  already  much  better  equipped 
than  the  former  for  the  rough  and  tumble  of  practical  life?" 
On  the  other  hand,  he  says,  the  intellectuals  are  of  great  value 
to  the  proletariat  in  the  elaboration  of  the  theory  of  the  class- 
struggle;  they  display  the  historical  nexus  between  the  labour 
movement  and  the  world-process  as  a  whole;  they  take  care 
that  the  workers  shall  not  lose  sight  of  the  purposive  relationship 
of  individual  branches  of  their  movement  with  the  process  of 
world-transformation  which  it  must  be  their  aim  to  effect  with 
all  possible  speed.  Thus  the  task  of  the  intellectuals  consists 
in  "maintaining  the  freshness  and  vigour  of  the  workers  in 
their  movement  towards  their  great  goal,  and  in  elucidating  for 
them  the  social  relationships  which  make  the  approaching  vic- 
tory of  the  proletariat  a  certainty. ' '  ^^ 

"''  Cf .  supra,  p.  270. 

"Franz  Mehring,  AkademiJcer  u.  Proletarier,  II,  "Leipziger  Volks- 
zeitung, "  xi,  No.  95. 


328  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

It  is  not  necessary  here  to  undertake  a  defence  of  the  intelli- 
gence of  the  proletariat  against  those  who,  seeing  that  intel- 
lectuals are  historically  necessary  to  the  socialist  party,  wish 
on  this  account  to  impugn  the  political  capacity  of  the  manual 
workers.     Any  one  who  has  attentively  followed  the  history  of 
the  international  working-class  movement  will  know  how  much 
goodwill  and  capacity  are  to  be  found  in  that  proletarian  party 
which,   permeated   with   class-consciousness,   has   conceived   the 
design  of  fighting  for  its  own  emancipation ;  he  knows  how  much 
intelligence,  devotion  to  duty,  calm  and  indefatigable  energy, 
have  been  displayed  in  this  cause  by  the  workers  of  every  coun- 
try.    As  managers  of  cooperative  societies,  employees  of  trade 
unions,  editors  of  socialist  newspapers,   the  proletarians  have 
from  the  technical  point  of  view  displayed  themselves  as  models 
whom  the  bourgeois  who  undertake  similar  activities  would  do 
well  to  imitate.2*     If,  notwithstanding  all  this,  we  commonly 
find  in  the  international  working-class  parties  it  is  to  the  bour- 
geois refugees  that  is  usually  assigned  the  task  of  dealing  with 
theoretical  problems  and  in  many  cases  the  supreme  guidance 
in  matters  of  practical  politics  (although  in  the  latter  sphere 
the  proletarians  always  retain  great  influence),  this  phenome- 
non, far  from  being  a  testimonium  paupertatis  inteUectualis  on 
the  part  of  the  fighting  proletariat,  finds  a  perfectly  natural 
explanation  in  the  economic  organization  of  contemporary  pro- 
duction.   This  organization  (whilst  it  permits  the  wage-earner, 
when  conditions  are  favourable,  to  cultivate  his  intelligence), 
since  it  monopolizes  the  supreme  advantages  of  civilization  ad 
usum   Delphinorum,   makes   it    impossible    for   the   intellige^it 
worker  to  become  an  intellectual.    Unquestionably  modern  pro- 
duction needs  intelligent  workers,  such  as  are  found  among  the 
modern  proletariat.     But  it  has  need  also  of  intellectuals,  that 
is  to  say  of  persons  whose  natural  mental  abilities  have  received 
suitable  training.    Now  a  sufficient  supply  of  these  intellectuals 
is  furnished  by  the  master  class,  from  among  whose  relatives 
they  are  recruited.     Consequently  it  is  not  in  the  interest  of 
private  industry  to  open  for  the  proletariat  all  the  sluices  of 
instruction.    ]\Ioreover,  as  far  as  agriculture  is  concerned,  many 
landowners  cynically  declare  that  the  more  ignorant  the  worker 
the  better  does  he  serve  their  turn.     The  consequence  of  all 
this  is  that  the  socialist  of  bourgeois  origin  has  enjoyed  that 


Cf .  supra,  pp.  299-301. 


INTELLECTUALS  329 

which  the  modern  proletarian  still  necessarily  lacks.  The  former 
has  had  time  and  means  to  complete  his  political  education ;  he 
has  had  the  physical  freedom  of  moving  from  place  to  place, 
and  the  material  independence  without  which  political  activity 
in  the  true  sense  of  the  word  is  inconceivable.  It  is  therefore 
not  astonishing  that  the  proletariat  should  still  be  to  some 
extent  dependent  upon  bourgeois  refugees. 

In  1894,  at  the  Frankfort  congress  of  the  German  socialist 
party,  a  committee  was  appointed  for  the  study  of  the  agrarian 
question,  and  of  the  fifteen  members  of  which  it  was  composed 
no  less  than  nine  were  intellectuals.  This  is  a  manifest  dispro- 
portion, especially  when  we  remember  that  among  the  leaders 
of  the  German  socialist  party  there  is  an  exceptional  numerical 
preponderance  of  working-class  elements.  But  the  committee 
in  question  had  to  deal  with  scientific  problems,  and  these  could 
be  solved  by  those  alone  who  had  received  a  scientific  education. 
The  same  thing  happens  whenever  legal,  economic,  or  philo- 
sophical problems  have  to  be  treated  with  technical  competence 
— ^in  a  word,  whenever  the  questions  under  discussion  are  not 
fully  comprehensible  except  by  those  who  have  made  prolonged 
and  profound  preliminary  studies.  Cases  in  which  the  self- 
taught  man  is  incompetent,  present  themselves  daily.  The  in- 
creasing democratization  of  state  institutions  and  the  progres- 
sive socialization  of  the  collective  life,  together  with  the  secur- 
ing of  better  conditions  of  labour  for  the  workers,  may  per- 
haps gradually  render  the  help  of  the  intellectuals  less  essen- 
tial. But  this  is  a  question  for  the  remote  future.  Meanwhile, 
such  a  movement  as  that  of  the  modern  proletariat  cannot  afford 
to  await  that  degree  of  maturity  which  would  enable  it  to 
replace  the  ex-bourgeois  among  its  leaders  by  men  of  prole- 
tarian origin. 

The  bourgeois  elements  in  the  socialist  working-class  party 
cannot  be  forcibly  eradicated,  nor  excluded  by  any  resolutions 
of  party  congresses ;  they  are  integral  constituents  of  the  move- 
ment for  whose  existence  it  is  needless  to  offer  any  apologies. 
A  political  labour  movement  without  deserters  from  the  bour- 
geoisie is  historically  as  inconceivable  as  would  be  such  a  move- 
ment without  a  class-conscious  proletariat.  This  consideration 
applies,  above  all,  to  the  early  days  of  the  labour  movement; 
but  it  is  still  applicable  to  the  movement  in  the  form  in  which 
we  know  it  to-day.^^ 

"Cf.  supra,  p.  238. 


PART   FIVE 

ATTEMPTS   TO   RESTRICT   THE    INFLUENCE   OF 

THE   LEADERS 


CHAPTER  I 

THE  EEFERENDUM 

In  the  domain  of  public  law,  democracy  attains  its  culminating 
point  in  that  complex  of  institutions  which  exists  in  Switzerland, 
where  the  people  possesses  the  right  of  the  referendum  and  that 
of  the  initiative.  The  use  of  the  referendum  is  compulsory  in 
Switzerland  upon  a  number  of  questions  which  are  statutorily 
determined.  The  legislative  measures  drawn  up  by  the  repre- 
sentative body  must  then  be  submitted  to  a  popular  vote,  for 
acceptance  or  rejection.  In  addition,  the  burghers  exercise 
the  power  of  direct  legislation.  When  a  certain  number  of 
voters  demand  the  repeal  of  an  existing  law  or  the  introduction 
of  a  new  one,  the  matter  must  be  submitted  to  popular  vote. 
These  important  popular  rights  are  supplemented  by  the  direct 
popular  election  of  the  supreme  executive  authorities,  as  in  the 
United  States.^  Although  these  democratic  ordinances  have 
often  in  actual  practice  proved  but  little  democratic  in  their 
results  (the  referendum,  above  all,  having  frequently  shown 
that  the  democratic  masses  possess  less  democratic  understand- 
ing than  the  representative  government),  and  although  leading 
socialists  have  therefore  with  good  reason  sharply  criticized 
these  manifestations  of  democracy,-  other  socialists  look  to 
these  institutions  for  the  definitive  solution  of  all  questions  of 
public  law,  and  for  the  practical  contradiction  of  the  opinion 
that  oligarchy  arises  by  natural  necessity,  contending  that  by 
the  referendum  and  by  the  initiative  the  decisive  influence  in 
legislative  matters  is  transferred  from  the  representative  as- 
sembly to  the  totality  of  the  citizens.^ 

*  Karl  Hilty,  Die  Bundesverfassung  der  scJiweitserischen  Eidgenossen- 
schaft,  Berne,   1891. 

*  Karl  Kautsky,  Der  Parlamentarismus,  die  Koll'sgesetsgehung  u.  d. 
SozialdemoTcratie,  Dietz,  Stuttgart,  1893;  Arturo  Labriola,  Contro  il  Eefer- 
endum,  "Critica  Sociale,"  Milan,  1897;  J.  Ramsay  Macdonald,  Socialism 
and  Government,  Independent  Labour  Party,  London,  1910. 

^Giuseppe  Eenzi,  Gli  " Ancien  Eegime"  e  la  Bemoerazia  diretta,  ed. 
cit.,  p.  231. 

333 


334  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

Now  the  democratic  parties,  as  far  as  their  internal  organiza- 
tion is  concerned,  have  either  failed  to  adopt  the  principles  of 
direct  popular  sovereignty,  or  else  have  accepted  application 
of  these  only  after  prolonged  hesitation  and  in  exceptional 
cases.  From  the  democratic  point  of  view  they  are  therefore 
inferior  to  many  of  the  Swiss  cantons.  For  example,  the  Ger- 
man social  democracy  does  not  submit  the  deliberations  of  its 
congresses  to  ratification  by  the  party  as  a  whole.  Moreover, 
and  here  the  German  arrangements  differ  from  those  which 
obtain  among  the  socialists  of  Italy,  France,  and  England  (where 
the  vote  is  based  upon  the  number  of  the  adherents  in  the  local 
branches  which  the  delegates  respectively  represent),  in  Ger- 
many the  decisions  at  the  congress  are  determined  by  the  simple 
majority  of  the  delegates.  Thus  we  have  parliamentarism  in 
place  of  democracy.  It  is  true  that  every  member  of  the  so- 
cialist party  has  the  right  of  submitting  any  motion  he  pleases 
to  the  annual  congress.  But  the  initiative  thus  secured  is  purely 
nominal.  The  motions  sent  in  by  individuals  are  hardly  ever 
considered,  and  they  are  never  passed,  and  the  consequence  is 
that  none  but  a  few  cranks  avail  themselves  of  this  right.  When 
the  congress  is  actually  sitting,  if  a  new  resolution  is  to  be 
submitted  at  least  ten  delegates  must  demand  it.  The  only 
institution  in  the  modern  socialist  parties  which  corresponds  to 
the  right  of  initiative  is  that  in  virtue  of  which  the  executive  is 
compelled  to  summon  an  extraordinary  congress  upon  the  de- 
mand of  a  certain  number  of  the  members:  in  Germany,  fifteen 
sections ;  in  Italy,  not  less  than  one-tenth  of  all  the  members ;  *  in 
Belgium,  two  provincial  federations  or  twenty  sections.^ 

In  the  Italian  socialist  party  the  referendum  was  practised 
for  a  certain  time,  especially  as  regards  questions  upon  which 
a  preceding  congress  had  not  come  to  a  decision,  or  where  this 
decision  had  been  insufficiently  clear.  From  1904  to  1906  the 
executive  council  had  recourse  to  this  means  on  four  occasions. 
In  one  of  these  the  question  submitted  was  whether  in  the 
local  branches  the  minority  had  the  right  of  secession  to  form 
autonomous  branches.  Of  the  1,458  sections  consulted,  778  re- 
plied (166  for,  612  against).  On  another  occasion  it  was  neces- 
sary to  consult  the  party  upon  the  compatibility  of  freemasonry 

*  Statuto  del  Partito  Socialista  Italiano  (1900),  Gennaro  Messina,  II 
Manuale  del  Socialista,  Nerbini,  Florence,  1901,  p.  164. 

"  Programme  et  Statuts  du  Parti  Ouvrier  Beige,  ' '  Le  Peuple, ' '  Brussels, 
1903,  p.  14. 


THE  REFERENDUM  335 

with  socialism,  and  to  ask  whether  members  of  the  party  could 
continue  to  be  members  of  lodges.  The  participation  of  the 
members  in  this  referendum  was  insignificant,  but  of  the  replies 
received,  the  majority  were  adverse  to  freemasonry.^  In  the 
two  other  cases  in  which  the  referendum  was  employed,  one 
related  to  a  local  Milanese  question  and  the  other  to  the  choice 
of  seat  for  a  congress.  Thus  the  use  made  in  Italy  of  the 
referendum  has  been  extremely  restricted  and  the  results  have 
been  mediocre.  In  England,  many  of  the  trade  unions,  after 
having  for  long  made  use  of  the  referendum,  have  now  discon- 
tinued the  practice,  on  the  ground  that  it  led  to  a  loss  of 
tactical  stability  and  was  prejudicial  to  the  finances  and  to 
the  work  of  administration.'^  In  Germany,  where,  notwith- 
standing the  hesitation  of  the  majority,  the  referendum  was 
introduced  in  certain  districts  for  the  election  of  the  delegates 
to  the  congress,  it  was  soon  perceived  that  those  comrades  alone 
had  sufiicient  knowledge  to  participate  in  the  election  of  dele- 
gates who  had  taken  part  in  the  meetings  upon  party  questions 
and  were  familiar  with  the  attitude  assumed  upon  these  by  the 
various  candidates.  Consequently  the  application  of  the  refer- 
endum to  the  election  of  delegates  came  to  be  regarded  as  a 
dangerous  measure,  tending  to  withdraw  the  electoral  act  from 
the  sovereignty  of  the  assembly.^  In  Holland,  where  the  referen- 
dum is  obligatory  for  the  election  of  the  executive  committee 
of  the  socialist  party,  in  1909  the  participation  of  the  rank  and 
file  in  the  election  was  so  small  that  (notwithstanding  the 
violent  internal  struggles  then  agitating  the  higher  centres  of 
the  party)  not  more  than  one-half  of  the  members  exercised 
their  right  to  vote.^ 

The  history  of  the  referendum  as  a  democratic  expedient 
utilized  by  the  socialist  parties  may  be  summed  up  by  saying 
that  its  application  has  been  rare,  and  that  its  results  have  been 
unfortunate.  The  results  have  been  bad  owing  to  the  confused 
manner  in  which  the  questions  have  been  formulated  and  owing 
to  the  inadequate  participation  of  the  masses.  The  rare  appli- 
cation within  the  socialist  party  of  this  direct  appeal  to  the 

'  Ernesto  Cesare  Longobardi,  Eelatione  morale  e  politica  della  Diresione 
del  Partito,  Stab.  Tip.  Ital.,  Frascati,  1906,  pp.  5  et  seq. 

^  Fausto  Pagliari,  Organissasione  operaia  in  Europa,  Umanitaria,  Milan, 
1909,   2nd   ed.,  p.   54. 

* "  Volksstimme "  of  Frankfort,  1908,  No.  188,  first  supplement. 

»"Het  Volk,"  April  21,  1910. 


336  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

members  is  in  remarkable  contrast  with  the  frequent  use  made 
of  the  referendum  by  the  bourgeois  national  organism  of  Switzer- 
land, and  it  is  in  flagrant  contradiction  with  the  demand  which 
all  socialists  make  of  the  state  for  direct  legislation  by  the 
people  through  the  initiative  and  right  of  popular  veto.  Where 
party  life  is  concerned,  the  socialists  for  the  most  part  reject 
these  practical  applications  of  democracy,  using  against  them 
conservative  arguments  such  as  we  are  otherwise  accustomed 
to  hear  only  from  the  opponents  of  socialism.  In  articles  written 
by  socialist  leaders  it  is  ironically  asked  whether  it  would  be 
a  good  thing  to  hand  over  the  leadership  of  the  party  to  the 
ignorant  masses  simply  for  love  of  an  abstract  democratic  prin- 
ciple." The  conservative  has  views  which  harmonise  perfectly 
with  the  thought  here  expressed,  but  he  will  speak  of  the  "state" 
instead  of  the  "party." 

The  referendum  is  open  to  criticism  to  the  same  extent  and 
for  the  same  reasons  as  is  every  other  form  of  direct  popular 
government.^^  The  two  principal  objections  are  the  incom- 
petence of  the  masses  and  the  lack  of  time.  Bernstein  has  said 
with  good  reason  that  even  if  none  but  the  most  important 
political  and  administrative  questions  are  to  be  submitted  to 
the  popular  vote,  the  happy  citizen  of  the  future  will  find  every 
Sunday  upon  his  desk  such  a  number  of  interrogatories  that 
he  will  soon  lose  all  enthusiasm  for  the  referendum.^-  It  is, 
however,  especially  in  respect  of  questions  demanding  a  prompt 
decision  that  the  referendum  proves  impracticable ;  it  con- 
flicts with  the  militant  character  of  the  party,  interfering  with 
easy  mobilization.  Moreover,  in  all  the  more  important  cases, 
as  when  it  is  necessary  to  determine  the  attitude  of  the  socialist 

^^  Cf.  also  supra,  pp.  151-2.  The  same  train  of  thought  is  developed 
by  an  Italian  revolutionist,  Arturo  Labriola.  In  the  days  before  his 
adhesion  to  syndicalism  he  wrote  a  little  work  against  the  referendum, 
in  which  he  said :  "In  politics,  as  in  everything  else,  it  is  not  truly  demo- 
cratic to  hand  over  power  to  the  many  on  the  plea  that  right  must  be 
on  their  side;  it  should  be  given  to  those  who  can  best  judge  the  interac- 
tion of  cause  and  effect  in  social  life.  It  is  certainly  not  a  revolutionary 
tactic  to  entrust  the  part  of  Brennus  in  political  life  to  those  who  are 
most  attached  (as  are  the  peasants)  to  conservative  traditions.  But  this 
is  what  the  referendum  does"  (Arturo  Labriola,  Contro  il  Referendum, 
ed.  cit.,  p.  24).  In  these  phrases  we  have  the  plainest  denial,  the  most 
deliberate  denunciation,  of  democracy. 

"  Cf .  supra,  pp.  24  et  seq.,  43  et  seq.,  100-1,  151-2. 

"E.  Bernstein,  Zur  Geschichte  u.  Theorie  des  Sozialismus,  Diimmler, 
Berlin,  1901,  p.  204. 


THE  REFERENDUM 


337 


party  towards  an  imminent  war,  the  use  of  a  referendum  would 
be  rendered  impossible  by  the  forcible  opposition  of  the  state. 
It  may  be  added  that  it  is  easy  for  the  chiefs  to  lead  the  masses 
astray  by  clever  phrasing  of  the  questions/^  and  by  reserving 
to  themselves  the  right  of  interpretation  in  the  case  of  replies 
which  are  ambiguous  precisely  because  the  questions  have  been 
ambiguously  posed.  The  referendum,  through  its  absolute  char- 
acter and  its  withdrawal  from  all  criticism,  favours  the  dominion 
of  adroit  adventurers.  George  Sand  describes  the  plebiscite,  if 
not  counterpoised  by  the  intelligence  of  the  masses,  as  an  attack 
upon  the  liberty  of  the  people.^*  The  power  of  Bonapartism 
was,  in  fact,  based  on  the  referendum.^^  The  institution  of  the 
referendum  demands  for  its  just  working  a  perfectly  con- 
scientious bureaucracy,  for  the  history  of  this  electoral  system 
shows  with  what  ease  its  results  are  falsified.^''  Even  if  the 
operation  should  be  effected  strictly  according  to  rule,  the  result 
of  a  referendum  can  never  have  a  truly  demonstrative  value, 

"  In  1860,  when  the  unification  of  Italy  was  effected  by  a  plebiscite, 
the  Italian  petty  states  being  swept  away,  the  alternative  proposed  in 
the  referendum  was  between  the  retention  of  the  ancient  and  detested 
petty  princedoms  and  the  acceptance  of  the  kingship  of  Victor  Emanuel. 
In  this  manner  the  numerous  Italians  who  desired  the  unification  of 
Italy  in  republican  form  were  deprived  of  the  possibility  of  expressing 
their  true  views.     (Cf.  supra,  pp.  91  and  229  note  3.) 

"G.  Sand,  Journal  d'un  Voyageur,  etc.,  ed.  cit.,  p.  306. 

"Eesult  of  the  plebiscitary  elections  of  Napoleon  I  (Idees  Napo- 
leoniennes,  ed.  cit.,  p.   19,  by  Louis  Napoleon  Bonaparte)  :  — 


Votes. 

Favourable. 

Unfavourable. 

Constitution     of     the     year     1791, 

not    submitted    to    popular    vote 

Constitution  of  the  year  1793 

— 

1,801,018 

11,600 

Constitution  of  the  year  III 

— 

1,057,390 

49,977 

Election  as  Consul   (year  VIII) . . . 

3,012,569 

3,011,007 

1,562 

Consul  for  life  (1802)        

3,577,259 

3,568,888 

8,371 

Emperor   (1804)       

3,524,253 

3,521,675 

2,578 

This  table  is  con 

tinned  on  pa 

ge  338. 

"  Celebrated  is  the  reproach  hurled  by  Victor  Hugo  at  Napoleon  III  on 
account  of  the  plebiscite  of  the  year  1851:  ''Qui  a  conte?  Baroche.  Qui 
a  scrute?  Eouher.  Qui  a  controle?  Pietri.  Qui  a  additionne?  Maupas. 
Qui  a  verifie?  Troplong.  Qui  a  proclame?  Vous.  C 'est  a  dire  que  la 
bassesse  a  conte,  la  platitude  a  scrute,  la  rouerie  a  controle,  le  faux  a 
additionne,  la  venalite  a  verifie,  le  mensonge  a  proclame"  (Victor  Hugo, 
Napoleon  le  Petit,  ed.  cit.,  p.  313). 


338 


POLITICAL  PARTIES 


for  it  always  lacks  the  vivifying  influence  of  discussion.  To 
conclude,  it  may  be  said  that  it  can  exercise  no  substantial  in- 
fluence upon  the  executive. 


Plebiscites  of  Napoleon  III 


Election  to   the   presidency    (1848) 


Ke-elected    president    for    10    years 

(J-oOJ.)  •••  •••  •••  ••• 

Emperor   (1852)       


5,500,000 


7,500,000 
7,800,000 


1,590,000 

(for 

Cavaignae) 


CHAPTER  II 

THE   POSTULATE    OF   RENUNCIATION 

The  dissolution  of  the  democratic  consciousness  of  the  leaders 
may  doubtless  be  retarded,  if  not  completely  arrested,  by  the 
influence  of  intellectual  or  purely  ideological  factors.  * '  So  long 
as  the  guidance  and  representation  of  the  party  remains  in  the 
hands  of  persons  who  have  grown  grey  in  the  great  tradition 
of  socialism,"^  so  long,  that  is  to  say,  as  the  party  is  still 
dominated  by  vigorous  socialistic  idealism,  it  is  possible  that 
in  certain  conditions  the  leaders  will  retain  their  ancient  demo- 
cratic sentiments,  and  that  they  will  continue  to  regard  them- 
selves as  the  servitors  of  the  masses  from  whom  their  power  is 
derived.  We  have  already  discussed  the  drastic  measures  that 
have  been  proposed  to  prevent  the  embourgeoisement  of  the 
leaders  of  proletarian  origin.^  But  it  is  not  enough  to  prevent 
the  proletarian  elements  among  the  leaders  from  adopting  a 
bourgeois  mode  of  life ;  it  is  also  essential,  on  this  line  of  thought, 
to  insist  upon  the  proletarianization  of  the  leaders  of  bourgeois 
origin.  In  order  to  render  it  impossible  for  the  socialist  in- 
tellectuals to  return  to  their  former  environment  it  has  been 
proposed  to  insist  that  they  should  assimilate  the  tenour  of 
their  lives  to  that  of  the  proletarian  masses,  and  should  thus 
descend  to  the  level  of  their  followers.  It  is  supposed  that  their 
bourgeois  instincts  would  undergo  atrophy  if  their  habits  were 
to  be  in  external  respects  harmonized  as  closely  as  possible  with 
those  of  the  proletariat. 

This  thesis  is  rooted  in  the  records  and  experiences  of  popular 
history.  A  life  in  common  awakens  sympathy,  attenuates  the 
sentiments  of  class  opposition,  and  may  culminate  in  their  entire 
disappearance.  In  the  equalitarian  state  of  Paraguay,  which 
was  founded  and  administered  by  the  Jesuit  order,  those  who 
were  under  tutelage  felt  themselves  to  be  at  one  with  the  Jesuit 


*Heinrieh  Strobel,  Gewerkschaften  u.  Sosialistische  Geist,  <'Neue  Zeit,'* 
anno  xxiii,  vol.  ii,  No.  44. 
'Cf.  supra,  p.  126. 

339 


340  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

fathers  who  were  exploiting  them,  since  there  was  no  distinction 
between  the  leaders  and  the  led  in  respect  of  clothing  or  general 
manner  of  life.^  During  the  French  Revolution,  the  peasantry- 
took  the  castles  of  the  nobles  by  storm ;  it  was  only  in  La  Vendee 
that  the  two  classes  made  common  cause  in  the  pitiless  struggle 
with  the  centralized  revolutionary  government  in  Paris,  because 
the  patriarchal  life  in  common,  the  common  festivals  and  com- 
mon hunting  parties,  had  there  effected  a  close  psychological 
community  between  the  peasants  and  their  lords.*  Similarly  in 
Italian  villages  we  do  not  usually  find  a  well-marked  hatred  of 
the  clergy,  for  the  local  cures,  good-natured  if  uncultured  indi- 
viduals, are  in  no  way  elevated  above  the  rest  of  the  population, 
whose  habits,  and  even  whose  poverty,  they  usually  share.^ 

Numerous  measures,  both  material  and  ideal,  have  been  pro- 
posed to  prevent  the  formation  of  an  oligarchy  within  the  demo- 
cratic parties.  Speaking  of  the  Italian  students,  Bakunin  de- 
fines in  the  following  terms  the  role  which  in  his  opinion  the 
young  refugees  from  the  bourgeoisie  ought  to  play  in  the  ranks 
of  the  proletariat.  "Ni  guides,  ni  prophetes,  ni  instructeurs, 
ni  docteurs,  ni  createurs,  Aux  jeunes  intellectuels  il  convient 
d'etre  les  accoucheurs  de  la  pensee  enfantee  par  la  vie  meme 
du  peuple,  et  d'elever  les  aspirations  aussi  inconscientes  que 
puissantes  du  proletariat  de  I'etat  de  confusion  a  celui  de 
clarte. ' '  ^  Bakunin  saw  clearly  that  in  certain  countries,  such 
as  Italy  and  Russia,  the  working-class  movement  could  not  pos- 
sibly dispense  with  the  aid  of  bourgeois  intellectuals,  but  he 
desired  that  those  who  by  birth  were  the  natural  adversaries 
of  socialism  should  be  subjected  to  a  very  strict  regime  when 
they  adhered  to  the  socialist  cause.  In  this  respect  he  may  be 
considered  a  precursor  of  Tolstoi,  ''La  vie  domine  la  pensee 
et  determine  la  volonte."  It  is  by  this  aphorism,  essentially 
based  upon  the  materialist  conception  of  history,  that  Bakunin 
defines  his  attitude  to  the  question  under  consideration.  He 
continues:     "Si  un  homme,  ne  et  eleve  dans  un  milieu  bour- 

•J.  Guevara  Historia  de  la  Conquista  de  Paraguay,  Buenos  Ayres,  1885. 

*  Adolphe  Thiers,  Eistoire  de  la  Bevolution  Fran<;aise,  Brockhaus  u. 
Avenarius,  Leipzig,  1846,  vol.  ii,  pp.  395-6;  Karl  Kautsky,  Die  Klas- 
sengegensdtse  von  1789,  Dietz,  Stuttgart,  1889,  p.  17. 

°Cf.  the  admirable  picture  given  by  Bakunin,  II  Sozidlismo  e  Massini, 
ed.  cit.,  p.  49. 

'Bakunin,  Lettre  inedite  a  Celso  Cerretti,  1872,  "La  Societe  Nouvelle, " 
Brussels,  February  1896,  No.  exxiv,  p.  179. 


POSTULATE  OF  RENUNCIATION     341 

geois,  veut  devenir,  sincerement  et  sans  phrases,  I'ami  et  lo 
frere  des  ouvriers,  il  doit  renoneer  a  toutes  les  conditions  de 
son  existence  passee,  a  toutes  ses  habitudes  bourgeoises,  rompre 
tons  ses  rapports  de  sentiment,  de  vanite,  et  d 'esprit  avec  le 
moude  bourgeois,  et,  tournant  le  dos  a  ce  monde,  devenant  son 
ennemi  et  lui  declarant  une  guerre  irreconciliable,  se  jeter  en- 
tierement,  sans  restriction  ni  reserve,  dans  le  monde  ouvrier. 
S'il  ne  trouve  pas  en  lui  une  passion  de  justice  suffisante  pour 
lui  inspirer  cette  resolution  et  ce  courage,  qu  'il  ne  se  trompe  pas 
lui-meme  et  qu'il  ne  trompe  pas  les  ouvriers;  il  ne  deviendra 
jamais  leur  ami."'  Thus  it  was  above  all  for  reasons  of  a 
psychological  order  that  Bakunin  demanded  from  the  "bour- 
geois socialists,"  from  the  "intellectuals,"  a  complete  abandon- 
ment of  their  former  mode  of  life.  He  believed  that  the  outer 
world  exercises  a  decisive  influence  upon  the  world  of  mental 
life.  Self-renunciation,  sacrifice,  repudiation  of  all  the  forms 
of  bourgeois  existence — such  were  the  conditions  essential  to  the 
labour  leader  during  the  long  history  of  the  Russian  revolution. 
In  1871  Netchajeff  wrote  his  famous  revolutionary  catechism, 
enunciating  the  principle  that  the  true  revolutionary  must  be 
a  man  "consecrated  to  the  cause."  In  the  first  paragraph  we 
read:  "II  n'a  n'y  interets  personnels,  ni  affaires,  ni  senti- 
ments, ni  attachements,  ni  propriete,  ni  meme  un  nom. 
Tout  en  lui  est  absorbe  par  un  seul  interet  exclusif, 
une  seule  pensee,  une  seule  passion :  la  Revolution. ' '  ^  Thus 
the  aim  was  to  attain  to  an  absolute  forgetfulness  of  the  former 
bourgeois  existence.  Even  more  important  than  this  elusory 
internal  mortification  was  the  external  or  environmental  mortifi- 
cation which,  among  the  Russian  socialists,  subsequently  came 
to  constitute  the  substratum  of  their  activities,  and  which 
Bakunin  described  as  "complete  immersion  in  the  life  of  the 
people. ' '  ^  The  suppression  of  bourgeois  instincts,  this  was 
the  postulate  which  long  dominated  the  history  of  Russian  social- 
ism. The  apostles  of  the  revolution,  who  were  in  many  cases 
of  the  highest  birth,  must  effect  this  suppression,  in  accordance 

^Bakunin,  L'Enipire  Jcnouto-germanique  et  la  devolution  Sociale,  CEuvres 
de  Michel  Bakounine,  P.  V.  Stock,  Paris,  1897,  vol.  ii,  p.  370. 

*  Le  Catechisme  Bevolutionnaire,  reprinted  by  Marx,  L 'Alliance  de  la 
Democratie  Socialiste  et  I' Association  internationale  des  Travailleurs.  A. 
Darson,  successeur  Foucault,  London  and  Hamburg,  1873,  p.  90. 

*"I1  bagno  nella  vita  del  populo"  (Bakunin,  Jl  Sozialismo  e  Massini, 
ed.  cit.,  p.  24). 


342  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

with  established  custom,  by  living  "among  the  people,"  by- 
harmonizing  their  mode  of  life  with  that  of  the  proletariat,  by 
confounding  themselves  with  the  latter.  Such  was  the  theory 
of  the  "narodniki"  or  "populists,"  and  its  practical  conse- 
quences were  endured  with  the  greatest  heroism.  Abandoning 
their  social  position,  bidding  farewell  to  all  the  intellectual 
comforts  of  the  town,  renouncing  study  and  bourgeois  career, 
men  of  science,  schoolmasters,  nobles,  Jewish  girl-students,  and 
young  women  of  family,  withdrew  to  remote  villages.  Working 
as  agricultural  labourers,  wheelwrights,  locksmiths,  blacksmiths, 
etc.,  they  endeavoured  to  acquire  the  most  intimate  knowledge 
of  the  common  people,  to  gain  their  confidence,  and  whilst  still 
keeping  always  in  view  the  great  revolutionary  aim,  they  became 
the  advisers  of  the  people  in  the  most  varied  conditions  of  their 
lives.^" 

After  1870  an  analogous  movement,  though  a  somewhat  less 
extensive  one,  was  manifest  among  the  socialist  intellectuals  of 
other  countries,  and  more  especially  among  those  of  Italy,  who 
for  this  reason  were  stigmatized  by  Marx,  in  a  spasm  of  un- 
justified anger,  as  declasses.  This  term,  used  in  an  insulting 
sense,  presents  the  Italian  socialists  in  a  false  light.  Bakunin 
spoke  of  such  declassement,  not  as  a  historical  fact,  but  as  a 
psychological  postulate  of  the  effective  socialist  action  of  those 
who  were  not  proletarians  by  birth.  Thus  in  Bakunin 's  view 
the  declasse  was  not  a  social  outcast,  a  bankrupt,  an  ineffectual 
genius,  in  a  word,  an  involuntary  outcast,  but  the  very  opposite, 
a  voluntary  outcast,  one  who  has  deliberately  broken  with  the 
society  in  which  he  was  born,  in  order  to  adapt  himself  to  a 
strange  environment  and  one  hostile  to  that  in  which  he » was 
himself  brought  up.  He  is  an  intentional  declasse,  and  apart 
from  the  end  which  he  pursues  he  must  inspire  us  with  respect 
for  his  spirit  of  self-sacrifice  and  for  the  invincible  firmness 
of  his  convictions.  It  is  a  historical  fact,  though  one  of  which 
the  proof  cannot  be  attempted  here,  that  the  bourgeois  leaders 
of  the  early  Italian  labour  movement  were  declasses,  but  that 
they  were  such  almost  exclusively  in  the  sense  in  which  the 
word  is  used  by  Bakunin  and  not  in  the  sense  in  which  the 
word  is  used  by  Marx.     Carlo  Cafiero,  the  best-known  leader 

"Adolf  Braun,  Bussland  u.  d.  'Revolution,  p.  4. — Among  numerous  docu- 
ments relating  to  this  period  of  the  Eussian  struggle  for  liberty,  cf. 
also  Gehcime  Denl'schrift  iiber  die  Nihilistischen  Umtriebe  im  Jahre  1875. 
'  *  Deutsche  Rundschau. ' ' 


POSTULATE  OF  RENUNCIATION     343 

of  the  Italian  section  of  the  International,  derived  from  an 
aristocratic  and  wealthy  family,  placed  the  whole  of  his  con- 
siderable fortune  at  the  disposal  of  the  party,  whilst  himself 
leading  the  life  of  a  poor  Bohemian.  He  may  be  considered 
the  prototype  of  such  idealists.^^  Similar  political  tactics,  of 
which  perhaps  idealists  alone  are  capable  (and  these  only  in 
periods  dominated  by  strong  collective  emotion),  are  based  upon 
the  psychological  experience  that  the  most  ominously  dictatorial 
tendencies  of  the  leaders  can  be  weakened,  if  not  altogether  sup- 
pressed, by  one  prophylactic  means  alone,  namely,  by  the  arti- 
ficial creation  of  a  social  homogeneity  among  the  various  strata 
and  fragments  of  which  the  revolutionary  socialist  party  is 
composed.  It  thus  becomes  a  moral  postulate  that  all  members 
of  the  party  should  live  more  or  less  in  the  same  manner.  This 
homogeneity  of  life  is  regarded  as  a  safety-valve  against  the 
development  of  oligarchical  forms  within  the  working-class 
parties. 

In  our  own  day  the  principle  that  the  leaders  should  practise 
economic  renunciation  and  should  identify  themselves  with 
the  multitude  is  advocated  only  by  a  few  isolated  romanticists 
who  belong  to  the  anarchist  wing  of  the  socialist  movement,  and 
even  by  them  only  in  timid  periphrases.^^  A  similar  principle, 
however,  continues  to  prevail  in  the  form  of  a  political  postulate, 
for  the  demand  is  made  in  certain  working-class  sections  of  the 
French  and  German  socialist  parties  that  the  leaders  should 
break  off  all  social  relationships  with  the  bourgeois  world,  should 
devote  themselves  entirely  to  the  party,  and  should  have  no  other 
companions  than  ' '  regularly  inscribed  members. "  In  a  Guesdist 
congress  held  in  the  north  of  France  a  resolution  was  passed 
that  it  was  the  duty  of  the  socialist  deputies  to  spend  their 
lives  among  their  comrades.^^  In  Germany  we  find  traces  of 
the  same  order  of  ideas  in  the  absolute  prohibition  that  mem- 
bers of  the  party  shall  write  for  the  bourgeois  press,  or  take 

"  Cf.  Michels,  Borgliesia  e  Proletariato,  etc.,  ed.  cit.,  pp.  68  et  seq. 

"Leda  Eafanelli  Polli,  Italian  authoress  and  anarchist  agitator,  for- 
merly a  compositor,  maintains  in  one  of  her  interesting  novels  that  the 
intellectual  cannot  become  a  complete  socialist  unless  he  abandon  the  life 
of  his  class.  If  he  is  unwilling  to  effect  this  renunciation,  we  can  be  sure 
that  sooner  or  later  he  will  leave  the  proletariat  in  the  lurch  (Polli,  Vn 
Sogno  d'Amore,  Nerbini,  Florence,  1905,  pp.  171  et  seq.). 

"  Compte-rendu  officiel  du  111^  Congrts  departmental  de  la  Federation 
du  Nord  du  Parti  Socialiste,  tenu  a  Loos  1907,  M.  Dhoossche,  LiUe,  1907, 
p.  41. 


344 


POLITICAL  PARTIES 


any  part  whatever  in  bourgeois  society.  It  is  obvious  that  these 
attempts,  which  are  inefficacious  and  impractical,  can  succeed 
at  most  in  creating  party  fanaticism.  They  cannot  establish 
identity  of  thought  and  action  between  the  leaders  and  the 
proletarian  masses. 


CHAPTER  III 

SYNDICALISM    AS    PROPHYLACTIC 

According  to  the  syndicalist  doctrine,  it  is  essential  to  transfer 
the  revolutionary  centre  of  gravity  of  the  proletariat  from  the 
political  party  to  the  trade  union.  The  union  is  conceived  as  a 
politically  neutral  organism,  one  which  does  not  adhere  to  any 
party,  but  which  is  socialist  in  inspiration  and  aim. 

It  is  the  great  merit  of  the  syndicalists  that  they  have  under- 
stood how  disastrous  would  be  isolated  syndicalist  activity, 
devoid  of  any  general  theory,  living  simply  from  day  to  day; 
and  to  have  advocated  with  much  energy  the  indissoluble  union 
of  the  working  class,  organized  in  its  trade  unions,  with  the 
socialist  idea  as  spiritus  rector  and  as  ultimate  aim.  The  syn- 
dicalists desire  (and  here,  for  once,  they  agree  with  the  Marxist 
politicians)  to  diffuse  among  the  organized  workers  the  convic- 
tion that  the  trade  union  cannot  attain  its  aim  except  by  the 
elimination  of  capitalism,  that  is  to  say,  by  the  abolition  of 
the  existing  economic  order.  But  the  syndicalists  also  desire 
(and  here  they  are  in  open  conflict  with  all  the  other  currents 
of  contemporary  socialism)  that  the  trade  union  should  not 
merely  be  an  asylum  for  socialist  ideas,  but  that  it  should  also 
directly  promote  socialist  activity,  pursuing  not  simply  a  trade- 
unionist  policy  in  the  amplest  sense  of  the  term,  but  in  addi- 
tion and  above  all  a  socialist  policy.  Syndicalism  is  to  put  an 
end  to  the  dualism  of  the  labour  movement  by  substituting  for 
the  party,  whose  sole  functions  are  politico-electoral,  and  for 
the  trade  union,  whose  sole  functions  are  economic,  a  completer 
organism  which  shall  represent  a  synthesis  of  the  political  and 
of  the  economic  function.^ 

Hence  it  is  not  the  purpose  of  syndicalism  to  do  away  with 
organization  as  the  basis  of  the  labour  movement.  It  expressly 
recognizes  that  this  basis  is  indispensable.  The  syndicalists 
hold,  and  with  good  reason,  that  the  dangers  of  organization 

^  Enrico   Leone,   Che   cosa   e  il   Sindacdlismo,   Tip.   Industria  e  Lavoro, 
Eome,  1906,  p.  28. 

345 


\ 


\ 


346  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

i  cannot  be  eliminated  simply  by  suppressing  the  organization, 
any  more  than  we  can  prevent  intoxication  of  the  blood  or 
diseases  of  the  circulation  by  withdrawing  the  blood  from  the 
vessels.  These  would  be  quack  cures,  alike  fatal  in  their  result, 
for  the  latter  would  kill  the  human  organism  and  the  former 
would  kill  the  political  and  social  organism.  The  problem  rather 
is  to  discover  an  appropriate  means  for  reducing  to  a  minimum 
the  chief  defect  which  seems  inherent  in  organization,  namely, 
the  rule  exercised  by  the  minority  over  the  majority.  Here  we 
find  a  political  school,  whose  adherents  are  numerous,  able,  well- 
educated,  and  generous-minded,  persuaded  that  in  syndicalism  it 
has  discovered  the  antidote  to  oligarchy.  But  we  have  to  ask 
whether  the  antidote  to  the  oligarchical  tendencies  of  organiza- 
tion can  possibly  be  found  in  a  method  which  is  itself  also  rooted 
in  the  principle  of  representation.  Does  it  not  rather  seem 
I  that  this  very  principle  is  in  insoluble  contradiction  with  the 
anti-democratic  protestations  of  syndicalism  ?  In  other  words,  is 
not  syndicalism  itself  affected  by  a  manifest  antinomy? 

The  great  significance  of  syndicalism  is  found,  above  all,  in 
the  clear  and  penetrating  manner  in  which  it  has  recognized 
the  dangers  of  bourgeois  democracy.  With  a  genuinely  scientific 
scepticism  it  has  stripped  away  the  veils  which  conceal  the  power 
exercised  by  the  democracy  in  the  state,  showing  that  this  power 
is  really  no  more  than  the  hegemony  of  a  minority,  and  demon- 
strating that  it  is  in  acute  opposition  with  the  needs  of  the 
working  class.^  "La  democratic  pretend  continuer  1 'exploitation 
des  masses  productrices  par  une  oligarchic  de  professionnels  de 
I'intelligence. "  ^  All  the  struggles  which  international  syndical- 
ism has  undertaken  against  the  Grerman  social-democracy,  against 
the  Italian  and  French  intellectuals,  and  against  the  trade  unions 
constituted  upon  a  bureaucratic  basis,  may  be  reduced  in  ulti- 
mate analysis  to  a  struggle  against  democratic  demagogy.* 

Syndicalism  is,  however,  mistaken  in  attributing  to  parliamen- 
tary democracy  alone  the  inconveniences  that  arise  from  the 
principle  of  delegation  in  general.  Mantica  is  right  when  he 
says  that  the  syndicalists  themselves  have  not  succeeded  in  get- 

*  Werner  Sombart,  in  his  Sosialismus  u.  Sozialhewegung  (Fischer,  Jena, 
6th  ed.,  1907,  p.  129),  attributes  great  importance  to  this  particular  aspect 
of  syndicalism. 

*  Georges  Sorel,  Les  Illusions  du  Progres,  ed.  cit.,  p.  263. 

*  Georges  Sorel  in  a  letter  to  Enrico  Leone,  "Divenire  Sociale,"  v, 
fasc.  12,  1909. 


SYNDICALISM  AS  PROPHYLACTIC    347 

ting  rid  of  the  mental  impedimenta  with  which  all  those  are 
burdened  who  belong  to  any  party,  whether  it  participates  in 
parliamentary  elections  or  rejects  such  participation  on  prin- 
ciple.^ NoIe7is  volens,  the  syndicalist  party  is  nothing  more 
than  a  socialist  party  inefficiently  revised  and  corrected.  The 
syndicalists  wish  to  stop  where  logically  there  is  no  stopping- 
place.  All  that  the  syndicalists  have  written  upon  political 
parties  in  general,  and  upon  their  big  brother  the  socialist  party 
in  particular,  applies  to  themselves  as  well,  because  it  applies 
to  all  organizations  as  such  without  exception. 

The  more  syndicalism  endeavours  to  displace  the  axis  of 
working-class  policy  towards  syndicalist  action,  the  greater  is 
the  danger  it  runs  of  itself  degenerating  into  an  oligarchy.  Even 
in  the  revolutionary  syndicalist  groups  the  leaders  have  fre- 
quent opportunities  of  deceiving  the  rank  and  file.  The  treas- 
urer of  a  strike,  the  secretary  of  a  trade  union,  even  the  par- 
ticipator in  a  conspiracy  or  the  leader  upon  a  barricade,  can. 
betray  those  from  whom  they  have  received  their  instructions 
far  more  easily  and  with  much  more  serious  consequences  than 
can  a  socialist  member  of  parliament  or  municipal  councillor.*' 
French  syndicalists  have  frequently  insisted  with  a  certain  vio- 
lence upon  what  they  speak  of  as  ''direct  action"  as  the  only 
means  of  bringing  the  working  class  into  effective  operation 
as  an  autonomous  mass  not  represented  by  third  persons,  and 
of  excluding  a  priori  all  representation  "qui  ne  pent  etre  que 
trahison,  deviation,  embourgeoisement. "  ^  But  they  arbitrarily 
restrict  their  one-sided  theory  to  the  political  party  alone,  as 
if  it  were  not  inevitable  that  like  causes  should  produce  like 
effects  when  their  action  is  displayed  upon  the  field  of  the 
syndicalist  movement.  They  reason  as  if  they  were  immunized 
against  the  action  of  sociological  laws  of  universal  validity.^ 

"Paolo  Mantica,  postscript  to  an  article  by  Fiorino  dal  Padulo,  Elezio- 
nismo  o  Anti-Elesionismo ? ,  "Divenire  Soeiale, "  vi,  fasc.  19  and  20, 
p.   272, 

'We  find  that  this  is  admitted  even  by  a  syndicalist.  Cf.  Angelo 
Oliviero  Olivetti,  Problemi  del  Socialismo  Contemporaneo,  Cagnoni,  Lugano, 
1906,  vol.  i,  p.  52. 

^  Cf .,  inter  al.,  Edouard  Berth,  Bourgeoisie  et  Proletariat  dans  le  Mouve- 
ment  socialiste  italien,  *  *  Mouvement  Socialiste, ' '  anno  ix,  series  ii,  p.  16 ; 
and  reply  by  E.  Michels,  Controverse  socialiste,  in  the  same  review,  pp. 
282  et  seq. 

*  Typical  of  the  ingenuous  views  of  the  writer,  an  ingenuousness  which 
is   characteristic    of    most   of    the    syndicalists,    are    the    words   in    which 


348  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

The  organic  structure  of  the  trade  unions  is  based  upon  the 
same  foundation  as  that  of  the  political  party  of  the  workers, 
namely,  the  representation  of  the  interests  of  the  rank  and  file 
by  individuals  specially  elected  for  that  purpose."  In  the 
decisive  moments  of  the  struggle  for  higher  wages,  the  masses 
do  not  represent  themselves  but  are  represented  by  others.  Trade 
unions  without  representatives,  without  some  kind  of  executive, 
do  not  exist  and  are  inconceivable.^" 

The  management  of  a  trade  union  is  sometimes  a  post  of 
transition  extremely  favourable  to  a  political  career.  In  Ger- 
many, 35  trade-union  leaders  sit  in  parliament,  and  in  England 
27.    In  France  the  two  first  permanent  secretaries  of  the  Metal- 

Gustave  Herve  deals  with  the  case  of  Azeff,  the  Eussian  revolutionary 
who  was  unmasked  as  a  spy.  In  an  article  entitled  L' Affaire  Azew  ("La 
Guerre  Sociale, "  iii  annee,  No.  7),  Herve  first  of  all  expresses  the  view 
that  the  Azeff  revelations  are  of  a  nature  "a  decourager  tout  revolution- 
naire  d'entrer  jamais  dans  une  organisation  secrete."  He  then  goes 
on  to  insist  upon  the  need  for  the  existence  of  small  and  secret  groups 
of  leaders,  saying,  among  other  things:  "II  est  indispensable  qu'une  or- 
ganisation de  combat,  quel  qu'elle  soit,  ait  a  sa  tete  un  comite  central 
aussi  peu  nombreux  que  possible,  et  compose  de  militants  aussi  inaccessibles 
a  la  cupidite  et  a  1  'ambition  qu  'a  la  peur  et  a  la  neurasthenie.  ...  II 
f aut  que  ses  noyaux  soient  composes  de  camarades,  ayant  fait  leurs  preuves 
de  courage,  de  discretion,  de  sobriete,  et  de  desinteressement. ' '  Herve 
thus  consoles  himself  with  regard  to  the  dangers  of  leadership,  which  he 
does  not  fail  to  recognize,  through  the  act  of  faith  by  which  he  is  assured 
that  syndicalism  at  any  rate  will  have  leaders  whose  qualities  will  be  proof 
against  all  these  dangers. 

Tor  this  reason,  too,  the  criticism  which  the  syndicalists  direct  against 
the  parliamentary  methods  of  democracy  is  largely  fallacious.  For  ex- 
ample, Emile  Pouget,  in  a  work  upon  La  Confederation  Generate  du 
Travail  (Riviere,  Paris,  1908,  p.  35),  speaks  of  "I'enorme  difference  de 
methode"  between  socialism  and  syndicalism.  Whereas,  he  tells  us,  the 
activity  of  syndicalism  must  be  regarded  as  the  outcome  of  the  work 
of  an  enlightened  minority,  namely  that  composed  of  the  organized 
workers,  political  socialism,  which  avails  itself  of  the  mechanism  of  uni- 
versal suffrage,  puts  power  into  the  hands  of  the  unenlightened  majority, 
or  rather  of  their  spokesmen.  In  reality,  however,  the  activity  of  the 
trade  union  and  the  activity  of  the  electoral  system  are  governed  by  the 
same  principle,  that  is  to  say,  by  an  electoral  right  freely  exercised.  It 
may  be  true  that  the  participation  of  the  people  in  the  elections  to 
representative  bodies  may  be  somewhat  more  extensive  than  is  the  par- 
ticipation of  the  organized  workers  in  the  election  of  their  leaders,  but 
it  would  be  rash  to  deduce  from  this  trifling  difference  the  essential  in- 
feriority of  "political  democracy." 

"  Cf .  supra,  pp.  298-9. 


SYNDICALISM  AS  PROPHYLACTIC    349 

lurgical  Federation  have  become  deputies."  The  strike,  direct 
action  by  the  proletariat,  Avhich  the  syndicalists  regard  as  the 
panacea  for  all  the  ills  affecting  the  labour  movement,  offers 
to  men  with  a  taste  for  political  life,  excellent  opportunities  for 
the  display  of  their  faculty  for  organization  and  their  aptitude 
for  command.  The  same  may  be  said  of  the  political  strike,  the 
general  strike.^^  For  the  professional  leaders  of  the  working- 
class,  the  economic  strike  is  often  precisely  what  war  is  for 
professional  soldiers.^^  Both  present  a  good  opportunity  for 
rapid  and  splendid  promotion.  Many  labour  leaders  have  risen 
to  extremely  exalted  and  lucrative  positions  because  they  have 
directed  a  great  strike,  and  have  thus  attracted  the  attention  of 
the  general  public  and  of  the  government.^*  The  political  posi- 
tion now  [1912]  occupied  in  England  by  John  Bums  is  largely 
due  to  the  celebrity  he  acquired  as  a  strategist  when  he  led  the 
great  dockers'  strike  in  London  during  the  year  1889.  He  then 
created  a  solid  foundation  for  his  subsequent  popularity,  and 
in  particular  he  then  gained  the  confidence  of  the  most  im- 
portant categories  of  organized  workers,  and  thus  paved  the 
way  for  his  elevation  from  the  bench  of  the  working  engineer 
to  the  rank  of  cabinet  minister.^ ^  This  is  one  example  among 
many  which  could  be  adduced  in  support  of  the  assertion  that 
very  frequently  the  strike,  instead  of  being  a  field  of  activity 
for  the  uniform  and  compact  masses,  tends  rather  to  facilitate 
the  process  of  differentiation  and  to  favour  the  formation  of 

^^  Union  Federale  des  Ouvriers  Metallurgistes  de  France,  Bourse  du 
Travail,  Paris,  p.  16. 

"  Even  the  reformist  socialist  Victor  Adler  of  Vienna  accepts  the  general 
strike  as  a  method  of  public  activity  suitable  for  throwing  into  greater 
relief,  by  its  reactions,  by  the  fear  and  respect  it  arouses  in  the  ad- 
versaries of  the  socialist  party,  the  work  of  the  labour  representatives 
in  parliament. 

"  Vilf redo  Pareto,  Systemes  socialistes,  ed.  cit.,  vol.  i,  p.  71. 

"Cf.  supra,  p.  306. 

" "  In  the  great  dockers '  strike  of  1889  Burns  showed  himself  to  be 
a  notable  organizer.  Henceforward  he  was  recognized  by  all  parties  as 
one  of  the  most  important  personalities  in  English  public  life"  (Carl 
Stegmann  and  C.  Hugo  [Lindemann]  Handbuch  des  Sozialismus,  1897, 
ed.  cit.,  p.  101),  "The  whole  labour  movement  received  during  1889 
an  immense  impetus  .  .  .,  above  all,  from  the  remarkable  series  of  strikes 
mostly  led  and  organized  by  Mr.  John  Burns. ' ' — ' '  The  strike  [of  the 
London  dock  labourers]  was  admirably  led  and  managed  by  Burns ' '  (Sid- 
ney Webb,  Socialism  in  England,  Swann  Sonnenschein,  London,  1890, 
pp.  48  and  53).  (Cf.  also  H.  M.  Hyndman,  The  Record  of  an  Adven- 
turous Life,  ed.  cit.,  p.  407.) 


350  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

an  elite  of  leaders.^®  Syndicalism  is  even  more  than  socialism 
a  fighting  party.  It  loves  the  great  battlefield.  Can  we  be  sur- 
prised that  the  syndicalists  need  leaders  yet  more  than  do  the 
socialists  1 

The  syndicalists  reject  the  system  of  democratic  representa- 
tion and  of  bureaucracy.  They  desire  to  substitute  for  it  "the 
more  combative  tactics  of  the  revolutionary  army  of  liberty, 
tactics  founded  upon  the  tried  ability  of  the  leaders. ' '  The  mod- 
ern labour  leader,  they  tell  us,  must  not  be  a  bureaucrat.  Al- 
ready to-day,  they  add,  the  great  strike-leaders  arise  suddenly 
from  obscurity  as  did  formerly  the  great  leaders  of  revolution.^^ 
In  so  far  as  it  corresponds  to  historic  truth,  this  conception  does 
not  at  the  best  afford  more  than  a  general  explanation  of  the 
institution  of  leadership.  Its  adequacy  would  be  far  greater 
were  it  possible  to  prove  that  these  strike-leaders,  whose  necessity 
is  admitted  by  the  syndicalists  themselves,  when  they  have 
emerged  from  obscurity  to  fulfil  a  temporary  need,  were  to  prove 
sufficiently  disinterested  to  undergo  a  spontaneous  eclipse  as 
soon  as  the  strike  was  over.  We  know,  however,  that  in  general 
they  seize  the  opportunity  to  secure  a  position  of  permanent 
influence.  No  form  of  strike,  however  much  it  may  seem  to  be 
inspired  by  the  autonomy  of  the  masses,  will  be  able  to  kill  the 
dragon  of  demagogy,  or  even  to  prevent  the  formation  of  a  class 
of  independent  leaders.^^ 

Under  certain  conditions,  the  mere  theoretical  propaganda 
of  the  idea  of  the  strike  and  of  direct  action  has  sufficed  to 
secure  power  and  influence  for  the  popular  leader,  to  lift  him 
upon  the  shoulders  of  the  multitude  to  a  position  in  which  he 
could  pluck  at  his  ease  the  golden  apples  of  life.  Aristide 
Briand,  born  at  Nantes  of  a  family  of  small  tavern-keepers,  hav- 

"  During  the  great  strike  of  the  agricultural  workers  in  the  Parma 
district,  which  took  place  during  the  summer  of  1908  and  which  had 
been  organized  by  the  syndicalists,  the  whole  Italian  press  resounded 
with  the  name  of  a  man  hitherto  unknown,  Alceste  De  Ambris.  This 
brilliant  strike-leader  succeeded  within  a  few  weeks  in  obtaining  for 
himself  among  the  agricultural  population  of  Emilia  a  position  some- 
what similar  to  that  which  in  the  beginning  of  the  seventeenth  century 
Masaniello  acquired  among  the  lazsaroni  of  Naples.  The  popular  leader- 
ship of  De  Ambris  came,  however,  to  a  speedy  end,  owing  to  his  con- 
demnation for  political  offences  and  his  flight  to  America. 

"Alfonso  de  Pietri-Tonelli,  II  Sindacalismo  come  Froblenia  della 
Liberia  operaia,  "Pagine  Libere, "  anno  iii,  No.  819. 

«  Cf .  supra,  pp.  298-9,  306. 


SYNDICALISM  AS  PROPHYLACTIC    351 

ing  joined  the  socialist  party  in  Paris,  speedily  acquired  fame 
and  power  among  the  workers  by  his  defence  of  the  doctrine  of 
the  general  strike  and  the  military  strike.  He  soon  gained  so 
great  a  prestige  as  to  require  but  a  few  years  to  climb  to  the 
position  of  premier  of  France.^''  The  starting-point  of  his 
triumphal  march  was  the  Nantes  congress  (1894),  where  he 
secured  the  acceptance  of  the  idea  of  the  general  strike  as 
part  of  the  official  programme  of  the  French  trade  unions.^" 

Syndicalism  is  hostile  to  the  ''democratic"  policy  of  the 
socialist  party  and  the  "authoritarian"  syndicates,  for  the 
syndicalists  hold  that ' '  democracy ' '  affords  a  mere  caricature  of 
the  fundamental  principle  of  the  labour  movement,  and  they 
declare  that  from  the  democratic  soil  no  fruit  can  spring  but 
that  of  oligarchy.  No  other  movement  bases  itself  so  ener- 
getically as  does  the  syndicalist  movement  upon  the  right  and 
ability  of  the  masses  for  self-government.  Where,  as  in  France, 
the  leadership  of  the  labour  movement  is  in  their  hands,  they 
lay  great  stress  upon  the  fact  that  their  authority  is  restricted 
to  carrying  into  effect  the  resolutions  passed  at  the  sovereign 
assemblies  of  the  comrades.  They  assure  us  that  the  Confedera- 
tion Generale  du  Travail,  which  sits  in  Paris,  is  not  a  directive 
organ,  but  a  mere  instrument  for  the  coordination  and  the  dif- 
fusion of  the  revolutionary  activity  of  the  working  class.  They 
describe  this  body  as  equally  hostile  to  "centralization"  and 
to  ' '  authoritarianism. ' '  -^  All  impulse  to  action,  we  are  as- 
sured, starts  from  the  masses,  and  the  syndicalist  leaders  are 
merely  the  exponents  of  this  impulse.  In  strikes,  the  activity 
of  the  Comite  Confederal  is  not  directive  in  the  strict  sense  of 
the  term ;  this  body  is  a  mere  intermediary  to  ensure  the  solidar- 
ity of  the  workers,  to  secure  an  element  of  suractivite  and  of 
polarization."^  Such  is  the  theory.  In  practice,  these  same 
French  syndicalists  complain  that  in  all  decisive  questions  the 
masses  wait  until  those  above  take  the  initiative,  and  that  in 
default  of  such   initiative  the   comrades  remain   with   folded 


arms.^^ 


"Flax  (Victor  Meric),  Aristide  Briand,  "Les  Hommes  du  Jour,"  Paris, 
1908,  No.  26. 

^Hubert  Lagardelle,  Les  Origines  du  Syndicalisme  en  France,  "Mouve- 
ment  Socialiste, '  -  anno  xi,  Nos.  215-16,  pp.  245-6. 

^  Emile  Pouget,  La  Confederation  Generale  du  Travail,  ed.  cit.,  pp. 
7,  23,  24. 

"  Emile  Pouget,  La  Confederation  Generale  du  Travail,  ed.  cit.,  p.  30. 

''After    the   sanguinary    conflict   at   Draveil   between    the    strikers   and 


352  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

As  in  all  groups  characterized  by  an  ostensibly  democratic 
ideology,  among  the  syndicalists  the  dominion  of  the  leaders 
often  assumes  veiled  forms.  In  Prance,  the  trade  union  leaders 
are  forbidden  to  seek  election  as  deputies,  for  they  must  be 
preserved  from  all  impure  contacts.  They  must  remain  in  con- 
stant communication  with  the  masses,  and  their  activities  must 
be  carried  on  in  the  full  light  of  day.  It  is  none  the  less  true 
that  the  necessities  of  their  position  often  oblige  them,  in  the 
interest  of  the  trade  unions,  to  enter  into  relationships  with  the 
organs  of  state,  in  such  a  way  that  their  antiparliamentary  atti- 
tude is  apt  to  mean  no  more  than  that,  instead  of  treating  with 
the  government  in  the  open,  from  the  summit  of  the  parliamen- 
tary tribune,  where  their  actions  are,  in  part  at  least,  visible  to 
the  rank  and  file,  they  negotiate  mysteriously  out  of  sight  in  ante- 
chambers and  passages.^* 

The  theory  of  the  masses  professed  by  the  syndicalists  has 
a  reverse  side  to  which  it  is  well  to  pay  attention.  The  trade- 
union  organizations,  taken  as  a  whole,  do  not  include  in  their 
membership  more  than  a  minority  of  the  workers  susceptible 
of  organization :  in  Italy,  11  % ;  in  England,  23  % ;  in  Sweden 
(where  the  proportion  is  highest  of  all),  42.21  %.    Among  the 

the  cuirassiers,  the  expected  general  strike  did  not  take  place.  Regarding 
this  failure,  Emile  Pouget  wrote  as  follows  in  the  "Voix  du  Peuple" 
(June,  1908),  the  chief  mouthpiece  of  the  French  labour  organizations: 
"  Malheureusement,  11  faut  bien  constater  que,  si,  theoriquement,  I'idee 
de  la  greve  generale  a  pris  corps  en  France,  pratiquement,  nous  nous 
sonimes  laisses  devancer  ne  serait  ce  que  par  la  classe  ouvriere  d 'Italic. 
Le  tort,  le  tort  grave,  est  de  trop  regarder  au  centre  et  d'attendre  de  lui 
le  mot  d'ordre.  Cette  mentalite  regrettable  decele  chez  ceux  qui  s'y 
attardent,  une  superstition  etatique  qui,  au  point  de  vue  revolutionnaire, 
est  on  ne  peut  plus  dangereuse.  Au  lieu  d'agir  soi-meme  on  attend  un 
indication  d  'en  baut.  .  .  .  Et  1  'occasion  propice  s  'echappe !  ' ' 

^*  The  Belgian  socialist  De  Brouckere,  writing  against  the  syndicalists, 
says  very  truly:  "Le  systeme  des  Parloirs  est  assurement  tres  inferieur 
a  celui  des  Parlemeuts"  (Louis  De  Brouckere  et  C.  Huysmans,  L' Af- 
filiation des  Syndicats  au  Parti  Ouvrier.  Discours,  Brismee,  Brussels, 
1907,  p.  40).  Moreover,  in  any  case,  syndicalism  is  utterly  inconsistent 
in  its  attitude  towards  political  democracy.  On  principle,  the  syndicalists 
regard  labour-protection  laws  as  either  injurious  to  the  proletariat  or 
utterly  unimportant,  and  they  therefore  refuse  to  raise  a  finger  to  secure 
the  passage  of  such  laws — except  in  the  case  of  the  eight-hours  law, 
which  is  warmly  advocated  by  some,  though  not  by  all  syndicalists.  But 
whenever  labour-protection  laws  have  been  actually  passed,  they  do  all 
they  can  to  maintain  them  and  secure  their  enforcement.  (Gf.  A.  Keufer, 
La  Crise  Syndicaliste,  "Mouvement  Socialiste, "  anno  xii,  No.  220.) 


SYNDICALISM  AS  PROPHYLACTIC    353 

organized  workers,  it  is  once  more  only  a  minority  which  plays 
an  active  part  in  trade-union  life.^^  The  syndicalists  at  once 
lament  this  fact  and  rejoice  at  it,  being  inspired,  in  this  respect, 
by  sentiments  which  are  by  no  means  logically  consistent.  They 
rejoice  to  be  rid  of  the  dead  weight  of  those  who  are  still  in- 
different or  immature.^*'  No  doubt  this  attitude  is  inspired  by 
the  old  Blanquist  idea,  that  masses  too  vast  and  intellectually 
heterogeneous  paralyse  all  activity  by  their  lack  of  mobility, 
and  that  only  alert  minorities  are  enterprising  and  bellicose. 
If  they  were  logical,  the  syndicalists  would  draw  the  conclusion 
that  the  general  movement  of  the  modern  proletariat  must 
necessarily  be  the  work  of  a  minority  of  enlightened  proletarians. 
But  the  democratic  tendencies  of  our  time  prevent  the  formula- 
tion of  such  a  conclusion,  or  at  least  prevent  its  frank  avowal, 
for  this  would  bring  the  syndicalists  into  open  conflict  with 
the  very  basis  of  democracy,  and  would  force  them  to  proclaim 
themselves,  without  circumlocution,  partisans  of  an  oligarchical 
system.  The  syndicalist  oligarchy,  it  is  true,  would  not  consist 
(like  that  of  the  socialist  party)  in  the  dominion  of  the  leaders 
over  the  masses,  but  in  the  dominion  of  a  small  fraction  of  the 
masses  over  the  whole.  There  are  a  few  theorists  of  syndicalism 
who  already  speak  unreservedly  of  socialism  as  an  evolution 
based  upon  the  action  of  working-class  elites.^'' 

The  oligarchical  character  of  the  syndicalist  movement  is  dis- 
played most  conspicuously  in  the  demand  (made  for  reasons 
which  have  nothing  to  do  with  democracy)  for  absolute  obedi- 
ence to  the  orders  of  the  organized  eliie.  ' '  Les  indiff erents,  par 
le  seul  fait  qu'ils  ont  neglige  de  formuler  leur  volonte,  n'ont 
qu  'a  acquiescer  aux  decisions  prises. ' '  -®  Following  the  example 
of  the  reformist  trade  unions  of  Germany  and  England,  those 
French  unions  that  are  inspired  by  the  doctrine  of  revolutionary 
syndicalism  hold  fast  to  the  principle  that  the  organized  workers 
have  the  right  to  issue  orders  to  the  unorganized. 

It  may  be  admitted  that  the  supreme  directive  organs  of  the 
French  labour  movement  do  not  possess  that  plenitude  of  powers 
which  the  corresponding  hierarchical  grades  of  other  countries 

"  Cf .  supra,  p.  47. 

=*Pouget,  La  Confederation  Generale  du  Travail,  ed.  cit.,  pp.  7  and  34. 

"  Cf .  the  essays  of  Angelo  Oliviero  Olivetti  and  Alfredo  Polledro  in 
"Pagine  Libere, "  1909-10;  especially  Polledro 's  article  Dal  Congresso 
di  Bologna  alia  Palingenesi  SindacaUsta    (anno   iv,   1909,   fasc.   14). 

**Einile  Pouget,  La  Confederation  Generale  du  Travail,  ed.  cit.,  p.  7. 


354  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

have  at  their  disposal — above  all  in  Germany.  There  are  various 
reasons  for  this  difference,  such  as  the  national  character  of  the 
French,  the  weakness  of  the  organizations,  etc.  But  even  in 
France  there  is  a  great  difference  between  theory  and  practice. 
In  the  first  place  the  leaders  exercise  a  powerful  influence  upon 
the  organized  comrades  through  the  newspapers,  which,  as  every 
one  knows,  are  not  edited  by  the  masses.  In  addition  there 
exists  a  whole  hierarchy  of  sub-chiefs.  The  number  of  trade 
unionists  enrolled  in  the  Confederation  Generale  du  Travail  is 
about  350,000,  whilst  the  number  of  subscribers  to  the  '*Voix  du 
Peuple,"  the  central  organ  of  the  Confederation,  is  no  more  than 
7,000.  These  subscribers  are  described  as  "les  plus  actifs  mili- 
tants, membres  des  bureaux  et  des  conseils  syndicaux.  .  ,  .  Par 
leur  intermediaire  se  diffuse  la  pensee  conf ederale. ' '  ^^  Here 
we  have  a  frank  confession  that  there  exists  a  graduated  in- 
tellectual subordination  which  conflicts  with  the  syndicalist 
theory.  Even  the  general  strike  was  primarily  conceived  in 
France  as  a  hierarchical  procedure.  A  resolution  voted  at  the 
Nantes  congress  (1894)  specified  that  the  general  strike  must 
be  accurately  prepared  in  advance  by  a  central  committee  of 
eleven  and  by  a  large  number  of  local  sub-committees.  These 
were  to  give  the  signal  and  to  direct  the  movement.  To-day  the 
syndicalists  reject  this  conception  on  account  of  its  jacobin 
character ;  ^°  but  in  practice  they  are  compelled  to  conform  to 
the  idea,  notwithstanding  the  theoretical  contradiction  in  which 
they  are  thus  involved.  In  the  works  of  some  of  the  French 
syndicalist  writers  who  have  a  strong  tendency  towards 
jBstheticism,  such  as  Edouard  Berth,  we  find  that  the  jacobin 
germs  of  the  theory  in  question  have  undergone  a  full  develop- 
ment.^^ 

The  more  syndicalism  gathers  power,  the  more  conspicuous 

^'Ibid.,  ed.  cit.,  pp.  30  and  33. 

*°  Lagardelle,  Les  Origines  du  Syndicalisme,  etc.,  p.  247. 

^  Eead,  for  example,  the  following  typical  phrases,  inspired  by  a 
genuine  enthusiasm  for  the  policy  of  the  strong  hand  and  by  a  profound 
admiration  for  the  grandeur  of  the  creative  will:  "La  bourgeoisie  a 
toujours  vu  dans  I'interet  de  sa  elasse,  I'interet  national  lui-meme;  elle 
a  toujours  identifie  sa  richesse  propre  avec  la  richesse  nationale,  et  avec 
raison,  en  definitif:  toute  volonte  forte  et  creatrice  s'erige  naturellement 
en  volonte  generale,  et  confond  audacieusement,  mais  legitimement,  son 
interet  avec  I'interet  general"  (Edouard  Berth,  Bevue  critique:  un 
Marx  inedit.',  "Mouvement  Socialiste, "  anno  vi,  series  ii,  No,  142,  p. 
100,  November  1,  1904). 


SYNDICALISM  AS  PROPHYLACTIC    355 

among  the  syndicalists  become  the  effects  which  are  everywhere 
characteristic  of  the  representative  system.  From  the  ranks 
of  the  French  syndicalists,  leaders  have  already  sprung  whose 
sensitiveness  towards  the  criticisms  of  their  followers  can  be 
equalled  only  by  that  of  an  English  trade-union  leader.^-  Youth- 
ful syndicalism,  although  born  out  of  opposition  to  the  au- 
thoritarianism of  the  leaders,  is  thus  quite  unable  to  escape  the 
oligarchical  tendencies  which  arise  in  every  organization.  Fori 
the  syndicalist  leaders,  as  for  others,  the  preservation  of  their 
own  power  becomes  the  supreme  law.  So  far  has  the  process! 
already  gone  in  France,  that  they  have  abandoned  the  old  tactics 
of  taking  advantage  of  the  prosecutions  instituted  against  them 
by  the  government  to  make  propagandist  speeches  in  court  and 
to  employ  the  language  of  heroes  and  prophets.  Instead,  on 
these  occasions,  they  act  with  extreme  prudence  and  display 
diplomatic  reserve.^^  Sorel  himself  speaks  of  the  "degeneres- 
cence  progressive  du  syndicalisme. ' '    And  he  has  declared :  "La 

^  One  of  the  best  known  of  the  French  syndicalist  leaders,  Victor 
Griffuelhes,  at  that  time  general  secretary  of  the  Confederation  Geuerale 
du  Travail,  in  an  interview  published  in  "  L 'Humanite, "  described 
bluntly  as  "braillards"  his  own  opponents,  and  especially  those  whose 
views  were  voiced  in  the  "Guerre  Sociale,"  although  they  belonged 
to  his  own  section  of  the  trade-union  movement.  He  used  still  more  dis- 
dainful terms  of  his  opponents,  declaring  that  their  conduct  was  the 
outcome  of  mere  '  *  demagogy. "  "  II  en  est  qui  se  plaisent  a  parler  de 
1 'opportunisme  croissant  de  la  C.G.T.  Peu  m'importe!  J'ai  suffisamment 
du  courage  pour  braver  meme  cette  demagogie-la, "  Here  we  have  the 
very  language  of  every  holder  of  power  when  his  adversaries  appeal  to 
Demos,  for  he  regards  such  an  appeal  as  extremely  inconvenient. 

^^  During  the  war  in  Morocco  the  antimilitarist  propaganda  of  the 
Confederation  Generate  du  Travail  was  answered  by  the  then  premier, 
Georges  Clemenceau,  by  the  institution  of  a  number  of  prosecutions 
against  various  noted  syndicalist  leaders.  In  the  winter  of  1907-8,  when 
Griffuelhes,  among  others,  was  prosecuted  for  antimilitarist  views,  he 
changed  his  tactics.  He  gave  as  a  reason  for  this  change  the  necessity 
that  he  should  retain  the  leadership  in  his  own  hands,  and  that  by  se- 
curing the  possibility  of  an  acquittal  he  should  be  able  to  attend  the 
trade-union  congress  to  be  held  at  Marseilles  in  the  autumn  and  there 
make  headway  against  the  reformist  tendency.  Consequently,  in  the 
proceedings  in  court  the  defence  was  conducted  with  all  that  ingenuity 
which  is  calculated  to  make  a  good  impression  on  the  judge,  but  which 
had  hitherto  been  rigorously  eschewed.  It  was  asserted,  for  example,  that 
the  attacks  upon  the  army  had  been  guided  by  sentiments  similar  to  those 
of  the  old  soldier  who  declared  that  in  taking  part  in  the  war  his  regi- 
ment had  been  sent  not  so  much  to  a  battle  as  to  a  massacre.  (Cf. 
article  in  the  "Guerre  Sociale,"  1908,  ii,  Nos.  11  and  12.) 


356  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

Confederation  Generale  du  Travail  prend  de  plus  en  plus  I'aspect 
d  'un  gouvernement  ouvrier. ' '  ^* 

^SJean  BouTdean,  Entre  deux  Servitudes,  A}can,  Paris,  1910,  p.  94. — 
A  typical  manifestation  of  the  small  respect  the  syndicalist  leaders  dis- 
play for  the  masses,  and  of  the  absolute  freedom  of  action  they  claim 
whenever  their  special  views  do  not  accord  with  those  of  their  troops, 
is  afforded  by  the  attitude  assumed  by  Arturo  Labriola  during  the 
Tripolitan  War,  In  a  letter  to  "  L 'Internazionale "  of  Parma  (anno  v. 
No.  27),  Labriola  affirms  that  the  manner  in  which  the  syndicalist  in- 
tellectuals pursue  their  ideals  concerns  themselves  alone.  He  says  fur- 
ther: "Working-class  syndicalists,  confined  within  their  unions,  must 
understand  once  for  all  the  position  of  syndicalists  who  are  not  manual 
workers,  from  whom  it  would  be  inhuman  to  demand  sacrifices  not  de- 
manded from  others.  We  cannot  fail  to  have  opinions  upon  questions 
of  civilization,  national  interests,  the  moral  or  religious  currents  of  our 
time.  Naturally  these  opinions  are  not  and  cannot  be  (and  perhaps  it 
is  better  that  they  should  not  be)  in  conformity  with  the  ideas  of  an 
organized  manual  worker,  to  whom  class  questions  seem  not  merely  essential, 
but  determinative  of  his  attitude  to  all  others. ' '  With  these  assertions 
Labriola  in  effect  declares  that  the  leaders  are  independent  of  the  masses, 
and  discloses  a  jemenficMsme  which  conflicts  with  all  the  duties  of  political 
consistency  and  of  obedience  to  democratic  principles.  Moreover,  this  open 
confession  displays  the  youth  (or  the  senility)  of  the  syndicalist  move- 
ment. The  leader  of  an  ordinary  political  party  might  think  these  things, 
but  he  would  keep  his  thoughts  to  himself. 


CHAPTER  IV 

ANARCHISM  AS  PROPHYLACTIC 

Anarchists  were  the  first  to  insist  upon  the  hierarchical  and 
oligarchical  consequences  of  party  organization.  Their  view 
of  the  defects  of  organization  is  much  clearer  than  that  of  social- 
ists and  even  than  that  of  syndicalists.  They  resist  authority 
as  the  source  of  servility  and  slavery,  if  not  the  source  of  all 
the  ills  of  the  world.  For  them  constraint  is  "synonymous  with 
prison  and  police. ' '  ^  They  know  how  readily  the  individualism 
of  the  leaders  checks  and  paralyses  the  socialism  of  the  led.  In 
order  to  elude  this  danger,  anarchists,  notwithstanding  the  prac- 
tical inconveniences  entailed,  have  refrained  from  constituting 
a  party,  at  least  in  the  strict  sense  of  the  term.  Their  adherents 
are  not  organized  under  any  stable  form.  They  are  not  united 
by  any  discipline.  They  know  nothing  of  obligations  or  duties, 
such  as  elections,  pecuniary  contributions,  participation  in 
regular  meetings,  and  so  on. 

It  is  a  necessary  consequence  of  these  peculiarities  that  the 
typical  anarchist  leader  differs  considerably  from  the  typical 
socialist  leader,  the  characteristic  product  of  the  last  twenty- 
five  years.  Anarchism  has  no  party  organization  which  can 
offer  lucrative  positions,  nor  does  the  anarchist  pathway  lead  to 
parliamentary  honours.  Consequently  there  are  fewer  oppor- 
tunities for  contagion,  fewer  temptations,  and  much  less  field  for 
personal  ambition.  Thus  it  may  be  expected,  as  a  logical  conse- 
quence of  the  theory  that  environment  makes  character,  that 
in  the  average  anarchist  leader  idealism  should  be  more  con- 
spicuous than  in  the  average  socialist  leader.  The  anarchist 
lives  remote  from  the  practice  of  politics,  with  all  its  passions, 
all  its  appetites,  and  all  its  allurements ;  consequently  he  is  more 
objective  in  his  judgment  of  persons  and  of  things,  more  con- 
templative, more  self-enclosed — but  also  more  of  a  dreamer, 
more  remote  from  reality.     Among  anarchist  leaders  we  find 

^  Ferdinand  Domela  Nieuwenhuis,  Der  staaissozialistische  Charakter  der 
SosialdemoJcratie,  "Archiv  fiir  Sozialw.,"  xxviii,  fasc.  i,  p.  144. 

357 


358  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

many  learned,  cultivated,  and  modest  men  who  have  not  lost 
the  sentiment  of  true  friendship,  and  to  whom  it  is  a  pleasure 
to  cultivate  and  nourish  that  sentiment:  sincere  and  high- 
minded  men,  such  as  Peter  Kropotkin,  Elisee  Eeclus,  Christian 
Cornelissen,  Enrico  Malatesta,  and  many  others  less  famous.^ 
But  though  the  anarchist  leaders  are  as  a  rule  morally  superior 
to  the  leaders  of  the  organized  parties  working  in  the  political 
field,  we  find  in  them  some  of  the  qualities  and  pretensions  char- 
acteristic of  all  leadership.  This  is  proved  by  a  psychological 
analysis  of  the  characteristics  of  the  individual  anarchist  leader. 
The  theoretical  struggle  against  all  authority,  against  all  coer- 
cion, to  which  many  of  the  most  eminent  anarchists  have  sac- 
rificed a  large  portion  of  their  lives,  has  not  stifled  in  them  the 
natural  love  of  power.  All  that  we  can  say  is  that  the  means 
of  dominion  employed  by  the  anarchist  leader  belong  to  an 
epoch  which  political  parties  have  already  outlived.  These 
are  the  means  utilized  by  the  apostle  and  the  orator :  the  flaming 
power  of  thought,  greatness  of  self-sacrifice,  profundity  of  con- 
viction.^ Their  dominion  is  exercised,  not  over  the  organiza- 
tion, but  over  minds;  it  is  the  outcome,  not  of  technical  in- 
dispensability,  but  of  intellectual  ascendancy  and  moral  su- 
periority. 

Whilst  anarchists  repudiate  the  formation  of  political  parties, 
they  adhere  none  the  less  to  the  principle  of  organization  in 
the  economic  field.*  Some  of  them,  even,  explicitly  recognize 
the  need  for  the  technical  guidance  of  the  masses ;  ^  whilst  others 

'  We  find  some  admirably  drawn  character-sketches  of  anarchist  leaders 
in  the  work  of  Peter  Kropotkin,  Memoirs  of  a  Eevolutionist ,  Smith,  Elder, 
London,  1899,  vol.  ii,  p.  196.  See  also  the  psychological  portrait  of  an 
unnamed  anarchist  in  De  Amicis,  Lotte  civili,  Nerbini,  Florence,  1904,  pp. 
128  et  seq. 

'  In  some,  naturally,  we  encounter  sounding  phrases  with  very  little 
content.  *  *  Un  besoin  de  s  'epancher,  de  convaincre,  tombe  souvent  a 
diseutailler  ou  s'ecoule  en  declamations  a  I'honneur  de  societes  futures. 
Ailleurs  c  'est  pire :  une  science  rudimentaire  s  'ebat  dans  des  discours — • 
preches  ou  ronronnent  les  mots  d'harmonie,  d 'amour,  et  de  maehinisme" 
(Zo  d'Axa,  A  Paterson,  "La  Eevue  Blanche,"  Paris,  1902,  No.  222,  p. 
10). — Eegarding  the  wealth  of  empty  phrases  characteristic  of  the  less 
serious  and  less  able  among  the  anarchists,  consult  the  critical  work  of 
a  convinced  Italian  anarchist,  Domenico  Zavattero,  Gli  AnarcMci  nel  Movi- 
mento  sociale  in  Italia,  Iniziativa  Edit.,  Eavenna  1906,  pp.  30,  84  et  seq. 

*  Cf .  Christian  Cornelissen,  Op  Weg  naar  een  nieuwe  Maatscliappij,  Begin- 
selen  en  Talctieh  van  den  Klassentrijd,  Beclit,  Amsterdam,  1902,  p.  242. 

'  S.   Merlino,   Pro  e  contro  il  Socialismo,  Treves,   Milan,   1897,  p.   268. 


ANARCHISM  AS  PROPHYLACTIC    359 

declare  their  conviction  that  it  would  suffice  to  restrict  the 
functions  of  the  leaders  to  purely  administrative  work,  to  elimi- 
nate, once  for  all,  the  differences,  so  dangerous  to  the  organiza- 
tion, which  arise  between  the  leaders  and  the  led.''  As  if  the 
technical  and  administrative  superiority  of  the  leaders  were  not 
alone  sufficient  to  establish  their  supremacy  over  the  masses 
in  all  other  respects!  Not  even  Bakunin  proposed  to  exclude 
the  principles  of  organization  and  discipline,  hut  he  desired  that 
they  should  be  voluntary  instead  of  automatic.''  He  conceived 
the  anarchist  regime  as  a  federation  of  perpetual  barricades, 
and  proposed  to  institute  a  council  of  the  revolutionary  com- 
mune, consisting  of  delegates,  one  or  two  in  number  from  each 
barricade,  or  from  each  street  or  quarter,  these  delegates  hav- 
ing an  imperative  mandate.  The  communal  council  thus  com- 
posed would  nominate  from  among  its  own  members  special 
executive  committees  for  all  the  branches  of  the  revolutionary 
administration  of  the  commune.  The  capital,  having  effected  a 
successful  insurrection  and  constituted  itself  as  a  commune, 
would  then  declare  to  the  other  municipalities  of  the  country 
that  it  put  forward  no  claim  to  exercise  any  supremacy  over 
them.  But  it  would  invite  them  to  provide  themselves  also 
with  a  revolutionary  organization,  and  to  send  delegates  to  a 
meeting-place  to  be  determined  by  agreement,  in  order  to  estab- 
lish a  federation  of  insurgent  associations,  communes,  and 
provinces,  and  thus  to  create  a  revolutionary  power  sufficiently 
strong  to  oppose  any  possible  reaction.  As  Marx  justly  pointed 
out,  these  executive  committees,  if  they  were  to  do  anything  at 
all,  must  be  furnished  with  powers,  and  must  be  sustained  by 
public  force.  The  federal  parliament  would  have  no  reason  for 
existence  unless  it  were  to  organize  this  public  force.  Besides, 
this  parliament  could,  just  like  the  communal  council,  delegate 
its  executive  power  to  one  or  more  committees,  and  each  of  these 
would  in  fact  be  invested  with  an  authoritative  character  which 
the  needs  of  the  struggle  would  not  fail  continually  to  accentu- 
ate. In  a  word,  according  to  Marx,  the  whole  Bakuninian 
scheme  would  be  characterized  by  an  ultra-authoritative  stamp.^ 

®Luigi  Fabbri,  Sindicalismo  y  Anarquismo,  Traduccion  de  Jose  Prat, 
F.  Sempre,  Valencia,  1907,  p.  169. 

*  Bakunin,  CEuvres,  ed.  cit.,  vol.  ii,  p.  297. 

*  Karl  Marx,  L' Alliance  de  la  Democratie  socialiste  et  I' Association 
Internationale  des  Travailleurs,  ed.  cit.,  p.  14. — Eegarding  the  autocratic 
tendencies  of  Bakunin  see  pp.  3,  9,  10-11,  18,  24-5. 


360  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

Like  the  sjoidiealists,  the  anarchists  have  extolled  "direct 
action,"  which,  they  consider,  possesses  the  value  of  an  ethical 
principle.  Direct  action,  "in  contradistinction  to  the  tactics 
of  negotiation,  of  mutual  compromise,  of  hierarchical  organiza- 
tion, and  of  the  representative  system,  tends  to  secure  a  higher 
standard  of  life  for  the  workers,  and  the  emancipation  of  the 
proletariat  from  capitalism  and  political  centralization — to  se- 
cure these  advantages  by  the  immediate  self-help  of  the 
workers. '  '^ 

Notwithstanding  this,  anarchism,  a  movement  on  behalf  of 
liberty,  founded  on  the  inalienable  right  of  the  human  being 
over  his  own  person,  succumbs,  no  less  than  the  socialist  party, 
to  the  law  of  authoritarianism  as  soon  as  it  abandons  the  region 
of  pure  thought  and  as  soon  as  its  adherents  unite  to  form 
associations  aiming  at  any  sort  of  political  activity.^"  Nieuwen- 
huis,  the  veteran  champion  of  anarchizing  socialism  with  a 
frankly  individualist  tendency,  showed  on  one  occasion  that 
he  had  a  keen  perception  of  the  dangers  which  anarchism  runs 
from  all  contact  with  practical  life.  At  the  Amsterdam  con- 
gress of  1907,  after  the  foundation  of  the  new  anarchist  inter- 
national, he  raised  a  warning  voice  against  the  arguments  of  the 
Italian  Enrico  Malatesta,  an  anarchist  attached  to  the  school 
of  Bakunin.  Malatesta,  having  dilated  upon  the  strength  of 
bourgeois  society,  declared  that  nothing  would  suit  this  society 
better  than  to  be  faced  by  unorganized  masses  of  workers,  and 
that  for  this  reason  it  was  essential  to  counter  the  powerful  or- 
ganization of  the  rich  by  a  still  more  powerful  organization  of 
the  poor.  "Si  tel  est  ta  pensee,  cher  ami,"  said  Nieuwenhuis 
to  Malatesta,  "tu  peux  t'en  aller  tranquillement  chez  les  so- 
cialistes.  lis  ne  disent  pas  autre  chose."  In  the  course  of  this 
first  anarchist  congress  there  were  manifest,  according  to  Nieu- 

'  Erich  Miihsam,  Die  direTcte  AMion  im  Befreiungsl^am'pfe  der  Arheiter- 
scJiaft,  " Generalstreik, •' '  monthly  supplement  of  "Der  Freie  Arbeiter, " 
anno  i,  October  1905. 

'°  A  striking  instance  of  the  way  in  which  an  anarchist  may  suffer 
from  the  same  lust  for  power  and  the  use  of  force  which  he  condemns 
in  the  working-class  leaders  of  other  parties  is  afforded  by  the  following 
passage  relating  to  the  future  socialist  state,  in  which  Siegfried  Nacht 
is  referring  to  Bebel,  Legien,  and  others :  "  If  we  are  to  escape  the 
danger  that  the  greatest  of  all  men's  struggles  for  freedom  may  lead 
to  a  new  despotism,  the  first  duty  of  the  genuine  revolutionist  will  be  to 
hang  to  the  street-lamps  all  aspirants  to  dictatorship"  (S.  Nacht,  Tod 
den  Schurken!,  "Weckruf,"  Swiss  bi-monthly,  June  1905). 


ANARCHISM  AS  PROPHYLACTIC    361 

wenliuis,  the  symptoms  of  that  diplomatic  mentality  which  char- 
acterizes all  the  leaders  of  authoritarian  parties." 

Ostrogorski  has  proposed  to  substitute  for  party  organiza- 
tion, which  invariably  leads  to  the  institution  of  anti-demo- 
cratic forms,  a  system  of  temporary  associations,  which  should 
come  into  existence  only  for  the  attainment  of  definite  ends,  and 
should  be  dissolved  as  soon  as  these  ends  have  been  secured 
{league  system)}'^  He  considers  that  the  adoption  of  this  sys- 
tem would  tend  to  restore  to  political  struggles  the  sincerity, 
honesty,  and  clarity  which  they  lack  to-day.  Now,  the  analysis 
of  political  parties  which  has  been  effected  authorizes  us  to  doubt 
the  efficiency  of  the  proposed  method.  Its  adoption  would  not 
secure  any  real  progress,  even  were  it  possible  to  suppress  by  a 
simple  decree  the  organizations  which  have  been  brought  into 
existence  by  the  necessary  determinants  of  historical  evolution. 
Whilst  anarchism,  which  presents  to  us  the  most  abstract  and 
most  idealistic  vision  of  the  future,  has  promised  to  the  world 
an  order  from  which  all  concentration  of  power  shall  be  ex- 
cluded, it  has  not  known  how  to  establish,  as  a  part  of  anarchist 
theory,  the  logical  elements  of  such  an  order.^^ 

"Ferdinand  Domela  Nieuwenhuis,  Die  Nieuive  Internationale,  "De  Vrije 
Socialist,"    Hilversum,    September    1907,    vol.    x,    No.    71. 

"M.  Ostrogorski,  La  Democratic  et  V Organisation  des  Partis  politiques, 
ed.  cit.,  vol.  ii,  pp.  618  et  seq. 

^^"Most  once  said  that  only  the  dictatorial  and  the  servile  could  be 
sincere  opponents  of  anarchism.  Even  if  the  use  of  the  'only'  be  left 
uncriticized,  these  words  seem  to  me  to  display  a  fatal  defect  in  the 
psychological  foundations  of  anarchism.  For,  in  view  of  the  natural 
endowments  of  human  beings,  it  seems  probable  that  the  majority  will 
always  continue  to  belong  to  one  or  other  of  the  two  types  here  char- 
acterized by  Most"  (Walter  Borgius,  Die  Ideenwelt  des  AnarchismurS, 
Dietrich,  Leipzig,  1904,  p.  58). 


PART   SIX 

SYNTHESIS:     THE   OLIGARCHICAL   TENDENCIES  OF 

ORGANIZATION 


CHAPTER   I 

THE   CONSERVATIVE   BASIS   OF   ORGANIZATION 

At  this  point  in  our  inquiry  two  decisive  questions  present 
themselves.    One  of  these  is  whether  the  oligarchical  disease  of  I 
the  democratic  parties  is  incurable.     This  vnW  be  considered  in(    „  a 
the  next  chapter.    The  other  question  may  be  formulated  in  the 
following  terms.     Is  it  impossible  for  a  democratic  party  to 
practise  a  democratic  policy,  for  a  revolutionary  party  to  pursue] 
a  revolutionary  policy?     Must  we  say  that  not  socialism  alone,' 
but  even  a  socialistic  policy,  is  Utopian?    The  present  chapter 
will  attempt  a  brief  answer  to  this  inquiry. 

Within   certain  narrow  limits,   the   democratic   party,    even 
when  subjected  to  oligarchical  control,  can  doubtless  act  upon 
the  state  in  the  democratic  sense.^     The  old  political  caste  of 
society,  and  above  all  the  ' '  state ' '  itself,  are  forced  to  undertake ' 
the  revaluation  of  a  considerable  number  of  values — a  revalua- 
tion both  ideal  and  practical.     The  importance  attributed  tol 
the  masses  increases,  even  when  the  leaders  are  demagogues.' 
The  legislature  and  the  executive  become  accustomed  to  yield,  not 
only  to  claims  proceeding  from  above,  but  also  to  those  proceed- 
ing from  below.     This  may  give  rise,  in  practice,  to  great  in- 
conveniences, such  as  we  recognize  in  the  recent  history  of  all 
the  states  under  a  parliamentary  regime ;  ^  in  theory,  however, 

^  Especially  where  there  exists  universal,  equal,  and  direct  suffrage,  and 
where  the  working-class  is  strongly  organized  and  is  awake  to  its  own 
interests.  (Cf.  Franco  Savorgnan,  Sosiologische  Fragmente,  Wagner,  Inns- 
bruck, 1909,  p.  105).  In  this  case  the  leaders  have  every  interest  in 
exercising  upon  the  state  all  the  pressure  they  can  to  render  it  more 
democratic. 

'  Cf .,  as  far  as  Italy  is  concerned,  the  classic  work  of  Marco  Minghetti, 
I  Partiti  politici  e  la  Ingerenza  loro  nella  Justicia  e  nelV  Amminis- 
trazione,  N.  Zanichelli,  Bologna,  1881,  2nd  ed.,  pp.  17  et  seq.  In  conse- 
quence of  the  intimate  relationships  between  the  popular  oligarchy 
(deputies)  and  the  highest  levels  of  the  bureaucratic  oligarchy  (govern- 
ment), the  state  officials  of  the  second  degree  of  importance,  and  espe- 
cially the  prefects,  are  apt  to  become  entirely  dependent  upon  the  popular 
oligarchy.     The   deputy  threatens,   overtly   or   tacitly,   to   go   over  to   the 

365 


366  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

this  new  order  of  things  signifies  an  incalculable  progress  in 
i  respect  of  public  rights,  which  thus  come  to  conform  better  with 
jthe  principles  of  social  justice.     This  evolution  will,  however, 
be  arrested  from  the  moment  when  the  governing  classes  suc- 
ceed in  attracting  within  the  governmental  orbit  their  enemies 
of  the  extreme  left,  in  order  to  convert  them  into  collaborators. 
Political  organization  leads  to  power.     ButpowerJ^salwa^s 
/jgonggrvative.     In  any  case,  the  influence  exerciseTupon  the 
I  governmental  machine  by  an  energetic  opposition  party  is  neces- 
I  sarily  slow,  is  subject  to  frequent  interruptions,  and  is  always 
restricted  by  the  nature  of  oligarchy. 

The  recognition  of  this  consideration  does  not  exhaust  our 
problem,  for  we  have  further  to  examine  whether  the  oligarchical 
nature  of  organization  be  not  responsible  for  the  creation  of 
the  external  manifestations  of  oligarchical  activity,  whether  it 
be  not  responsible  for  the  production  of  an  oligarchical  policy. 
The  analysis  here  made  shows  clearly  that  the  internal  policy 
of  the  party  organizations  is  to-day  absolutely  conservative,  or 
is  on  the  way  to  become  such.  Yet  it  might  happen  that  the 
external  policy  of  these  conservative  organisms  would  be  bold 
and  revolutionary;  that  the  anti-democratic  centralization  of 
power  in  the  hands  of  a  few  leaders  is  no  more  than  a  tactical 
method  adopted  to  effect  the  speedier  overthrow  of  the  ad- 
versary; that  the  oligarchs  fulfil  the  purely  provisional  func- 
tion of  educating  the  masses  for  the  revolution,  and  that  organi- 
zation is  after  all  no  more  than  a  means  employed  in  the  service 
of  an  amplified  Blanquist  conception. 

This  development  would  conflict  with  the  nature  of  party, 
with  the  endeavour  to  organize  the  masses  upon  the  vastest 
scale  imaginable.  As  the  organization  increases  in  size,  the 
struggle  for  great  principles  becomes  impossible.  It  may  be 
noticed  that  in  the  democratic  parties  of  to-day  the  great  con- 
flicts of  view  are  fought  out  to  an  ever-diminishing  extent  in 
the  field  of  ideas  and  with  the  weapons  of  pure  theory,  that 
they  therefore  degenerate  more  and  more  into  personal  struggles 
and  invectives,  to  be  settled  finally  upon  considerations  of  a 
purely  superficial  character.    The  efforts  made  to  cover  internal 

opposition  if  the  minister  will  not  speedily  remove  from  his  constituency 
a  prefect  to  whom  he  (the  deputy)  has  taken  a  dislike,  and  the  minister, 
who  has  to  think  of  maintaining  his  majority  in  the  chamber,  is  apt  to 
give  way.  (Cf.  also  Annibale  Marazio,  Del  Governo  parlementare  Italiano, 
Unione  Tip.  Ed.  Torinese,  Turin,  1904,  p.  168.) 


BASIS  OF  ORGANIZATION  367 

dissensions  with  a  pious  veil  are  the  inevitable  outcome  of  or- 
ganization based  upon  bureaucratic  principles,  for,  since  the 
chief  aim  of  such  an  organization  is  to  enrol  the  greatest  pos- 
sible number  of  members,  every  struggle  on  behalf  of  ideas  with- 
in the  limits  of  the  organization  is  necessarily  regarded  as  an 
obstacle  to  the  realization  of  its  ends,  an  obstacle,  therefore,^ 
which  must  be  avoided  in  every  possible  way.  This  tendency 
is  reinforced  by  the  parliamentary  character  of  the  political 
party.  "Party  organization"  signifies  the  aspiration  for  the  / 
greatest  number  of  members.  "Parliamentarism"  signifies  the  ; 
aspiration  for  the  greatest  number  of  votes.  The  principal  fields 
of  party  activity  are  electoral  agitation  and  direct  agitation  to 
secure  new  members.  What,  in  fact,  is  the  modern  politicalAi 
party?  It  is  the  methodical  organization  of  the  electoral  masseslll 
The  socialist  party,  as  a  political  aggregate  endeavouring 
simultaneously  to  recruit  members  and  to  recruit  votes,  finds 
here  its  vital  interests,  for  every  decline  in  membership  and 
every  loss  in  voting  strength  diminishes  its  political  prestige. 
Consequently  great  respect  must  be  paid,  not  only  to  new  mem- 
bers, but  also  to  possible  adherents,  to  those  who  in  Germany 
are  termed  mitldufer,  in  Italy  simpatizzanti,  in  Holland  geestver- 
wanten,  and  in  England  sympathizers.  To  avoid  alarming  these 
individuals,  who  are  still  outside  the  ideal  worlds  of  socialism 
or  democracy,  the  pursuit  of  a  policy  based  on  strict  principle 
is  shunned,  while  the  consideration  is  ignored  whether  the  nu- 
merical increase  of  the  organization  thus  effected  is  not  likely  to 
be  gained  at  the  expense  of  its  quality. 

The  last  link  in  the  long  chain  of  phenomena  which  confer 
a  profoundly  conservative  character  upon  the  intimate  essence 
of  the  political  party  (even  upon  that  party  which  boasts  itself 
revolutionary)  is  found  in  the  relationships  between  party  and 
state.  Generated  to  overthrow  the  centralized  power  of  the 
state,  starting  from  the  idea  that  the  working  class  need  merely 
secure  a  sufficiently  vast  and  solid  organization  in  order  to 
triumph  over  the  organization  of  the  state,  the  party  of  the 
workers  has  ended  by  acquiring  a  vigorous  centralization  of  I 
its  own,  based  upon  the  same  cardinal  principles  of  authority  I 
and  discipline  which  characterize  the  organization  of  the  state.^  I 

'Albert  Schaffle  believes  that  socialism  needs  merely  to  produce  a  great 
general  at  the  right  moment  in  order  to  inherit  the  power  of  the  centralized 
military  organization  (Schaffle,  Quintessens  des  Sosialismus,  Perthes,  Gotha, 
1879,  7th  ed.,  p.  68). 


368  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

It  thus  becomes  a  governmental  party,  that  is  to  say,  a  party 
which,  organized  itself  like  a  government  on  the  small  scale, 
hopes  some  day  to  assume  the  reins  of  government  upon  the 

I  large  scale.  The  revolutionary  political  party  is  a  state  within 
the  state,*  pursuing  the  avowed  aim  of  destroying  the  existing 
state  in  order  to  substitute  for  it  a  social  order  of  a  funda- 
mentally different  character.^  To  attain  this  essentially  po- 
litical end,  the  party  avails  itself  of  the  socialist  organization, 
whose  sole  justification  is  found  precisely  in  its  patient  but 
systematic  preparation  for  the  destruction  of  the  organization 
of  the  state  in  its  existing  form.  The  subversive  party  or- 
ganizes the  framework  of  the  social  revolution.  For  this  reason 
it  continually  endeavours  to  strengthen  its  positions,  to  extend 
'its  bureaucratic  mechanism,  to  store  up  its  energies  and  its 
funds. 

*  The  same  is  true  of  the  revolutionary  trade  unions  (French  style). 
"Tin  Stat  dans  I'etat!  C'etait  bien  la,  en  effet,  le  but  poursuivi.  On 
voulait  que,  dans  tons  les  evenements,  1 'organisation  ouvriere  put,  a  un 
signal,  adopter  une  attitude  identique  et,  au  besoin,  prendre  I'offensif" 
(Eugene  Guerard,  La  Confederation  du  Travail,  "Mouvement  Socialiste, " 
May  15,  1899,  p.  555). 

^  Devoting  all  its  energies  to  the  imitation  of  the  outward  apparatus  of 
power  characteristic  of  the  "class-state,"  the  socialist  party  allots  no 
more  than  a  secondary  importance  to  psychological  enfranchisement  from 
the  mentality  which  dominates  this  same  class-state.  This  neglect  of 
the  psychical  factor  is  disastrous  to  the  democratic  principle,  especially 
in  so  far  as  it  springs  from  psychological  sources.  Raphael  Friedeberg, 
who  finds  fault  with  historical  materialism  because  it  * '  starts  from  the 
monstrous  error  that  the  mode  of  production  of  material  life  is  the  sole 
cause  of  all  sociological  happenings,"  because  it  leads  to  the  atrophy  of 
all  spiritual  faculties,  and  consequently  to  the  decay  of  socialist  thought, 
has  opposed  this  doctrine  by  that  which  he  calls  the  doctrine  of  his- 
torical psychism,  namely,  "the  psychical  enfranchisement  of  the  proletariat 
from  all  the  intrinsic  conditions  of  class  dominion"  (see  his  preface  to  the 
German  edition  of  Gustave  Herve's  work,  Lenr  Patrie  [Das  Vaterland 
der  Beichen],  Zurich,  1907,  p.  vii).  But  Friedeberg 's  charge  against 
historical  materialism  is  unsound,  for  the  following  reason.  This  doctrine, 
based  upon  the  idea  of  class,  teaches  the  masses  of  the  workers  that  just 
as  they  exist  in  a  state  of  economic  antagonism  to  the  dominant  class, 
so  also  their  spiritual  and  psychical  life  (the  "superstructure")  is  (or 
at  least  ought  to  be)  in  irreconcilable  conflict  with  the  spiritual  and 
psychic  life  of  the  bourgeoisie.  Another  argument  against  historical 
materialism  is  adduced  elsewhere  by  Friedeberg.  It  conflicts,  he  says, 
with  the  class  struggle,  which  depends  upon  the  fact  that  those  who 
are  removed  from  the  mental  environment  of  their  material  sphere  of 
production  become  psychical  declasses.  He  goes  so  far  as  to  maintain 
that  the  more  independent  the  human  brain  becomes,  the  more  manifest 


BASIS  OF  ORGANIZATION  3G9 

Every  new  official,  every  new  secretary,  engaged  by  the  party 
is  in  theory  a  new  agent  of  the  revolution;  in  the  same  way 
every  new  section  is  a  new  battalion;  and  every  additional 
thousand  francs  furnished  by  the  members'  subscriptions,  by 
the  profits  of  the  socialist  press,  or  by  the  generous  donations  of 
sympathetic  benefactors,  constitute  fresh  additions  to  the  war- 
chest  for  the  struggle  against  the  enemy.  In  the  long  run,  how- 
ever, the  directors  of  this  revolutionary  body  existing  within 
the  authoritarian  state,  sustained  by  the  same  means  as  that 
state  and  inspired  by  the  like  spirit  of  discipline,  cannot  fail 
to  perceive  that  the  party  organization,  whatever  advances  it 
may  make  in  the  future,  will  never  succeed  in  becoming  more 
than  an  ineffective  and  miniature  copy  of  the  state  organiza- 
tion. For  this  reason,  in  all  ordinary  circumstances,  and  as  far 
as  prevision  is  humanly  possible,  every  attempt  of  the  party 
to  measure  its  forces  with  those  of  its  antagonists  is  foredoomed 
to  disastrous  failure.  The  logical  consequence  of  these  con- 
siderations is  in  direct  conflict  with  the  hopes  entertained  by  the 
founders  of  the  party.  Instead  of  gaining  revolutionary  energy 
as  the  force  and  solidity  of  its  structure  has  increased,  the 
precise  opposite  has  occurred;  there  has  resulted,  pari  passu 
with  its  growth,  a  continued  increase  in  the  prudence,  the  timid- 
ity even,  which  inspires  its  policy.  The  party,  continually 
threatened  by  the  state  upon  which  its  existence  depends,  care- 
fully avoids  (once  it  has  attained  to  maturity)  everything  which 

is  the  fallacy  of  Marxism  (E.  Friedeberg,  Historische  Materialismus  und 
KlassenJcampf,  "Polis, "  a  review  published  at  Zurich,  1907,  i,  No.  5). 
But  this  reasoning  is  erroneous,  for  in  the  class  situation  of  the  proletariat, 
a  situation  clearly  recognized  by  Marxism,  there  exist  all  the  elements 
which  combine  to  make  the  proletariat  the  natural  enemy  (in  the  in- 
tellectual sphere)  of  the  bourgeoisie,  and  thus  lead  to  the  "class  strug- 
gle." Ideologically  to  remove  the  members  of  the  working  class  from 
the  world  of  their  material  sphere  of  production  could  not  mean  any- 
thing else  than  to  impose  upon  them  an  essentially  strange  mentality,  to 
embourgeoiser  them.  In  actual  fact  this  process  occurs  to-day  upon  a 
large  scale,  not  in  consequence,  however,  of  historical  materialism,  but 
in  opposition  to  it,  being  due  above  all  to  the  suggestive  influence  exer- 
cised upon  the  masses  by  leaders  who  have  themselves  become  em- 
hourgeoises.  It  is  true  that  the  process  of  embourgeoisement  can  itself 
be  explained  in  conformity  with  the  doctrine  of  historical  materialism, 
on  the  ground  that  it  depends  upon  the  changed  mode  of  life  and 
changed  position  in  life  of  the  leaders,  upon  the  organization  that  ia 
necessary  for  the  conduct  of  the  class  struggle,  and  upon  the  consequences 
inherent  in  this  organization  which  have  been  studied  in  the  text. 


370  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

might  irritate  the  state  to  excess.     The   party  doctrines  are, 

whenever  requisite,  attenuated  and  deformed  in  accordance  with 

the  external  needs  of  the  organization."     Organization  becomes 

the  vital  essence  of  the^  party.     During  tlie  fiFsF~years"'orTts 

j  existen^gj~tbe  party  di3.  not^ail  to  make  a  parade  of  its  revolu- 

I  tionary  character,  not  only  in  respect  of  its  ultimate  ends,  but 

j  also  in  respect  of  the  means  employed  for  their  attainment — 

\  although  not  always  in  love  with  these  means.    But  as  soon  as 

jit  attained  to  political  maturity,  the  party  did  not  hesitate  to 

Imodify  its  original  profession  of  faith  and  to  affirm  itself  revolu- 

kionary  only  ' '  in  the  best  sense  of  the  word, ' '  that  is  to  say,  no 

longer  on  lines  which  interest  the  police,  but  only  in  theory 

ind  on  paper.'^     This  same  party,  which  at  one  time  did  not 

^  A  classical  example  of  the  extent  to  which  the  fear  of  injuring  the 
socialist  organization  will  lead  even  the  finest  intelligences  of  the  party 
to  play  tricks  with  socialist  theory  is  afforded  by  the  history  of  that 
celebrated  preface  which  in  1895  Frederick  Engels  wrote  for  a  posthumous 
edition  of  Marx's  book.  Die  Klassenkdmpf e  in  Frankreich,  1848-9.  This 
preface  became  the  subject  of  great  international  discussions,  and  has 
been  justly  considered  as  the  first  vigorous  manifestation  of  reformism 
in  German  socialism.  For  Engels  here  declares  that  socialist  tactics  will 
have  more  success  through  the  use  of  legal  than  of  illegal  and  revolutionary 
means,  and  thus  expressly  repudiates  the  Marxist  conception  of  the  socialist 
revolution.  It  was  not  till  some  years  later  that  Kautsky  published  a 
letter  from  Engels  in  which  the  latter  disavowed  his  preface,  saying: 
"My  text  had  to  suffer  from  the  timid  legalism  of  our  friends  in  Berlin, 
who  dreaded  a  second  edition  of  the  anti-socialist  laws — a  dread  to  which 
I  was  forced  to  pay  attention  at  the  existing  political  juncture"  (Karl 
Kautsky,  Der  Weg  zur  Macht,  Buchhandlung  "Vorwarts, "  1909,  p.  42). 
From  this  it  would  appear  that  the  theory  (at  that  time  brand-new)  that 
socialism  could  attain  to  its  ends  by  parliamentary  methods — and  this 
was  the  quintessence  of  Engels'  preface — came  into  existence  from  a  fear 
lest  the  socialist  party  organization  (which  should  be  a  means,  and  not 
an  end  in  itself)  might  suffer  at  the  hands  of  the  state.  Thus  Engels  was 
feted,  on  the  one  hand,  as  a  man  of  sound  judgment  and  one  willing  to 
look  facts  in  the  face  (cf.  W.  Sombart,  Friedrich  Engels,  Bin  Blatt  zur 
EntwicMungsgeschichte  des  Sosialismus,  Separat-Abdruck  der  "Zukunft, " 
Berlin,  1895,  p.  32),  and  was  attacked,  on  the  other  hand,  as  a  pacifist 
utopist  (cf.  Arturo  Labriola,  Biforme  e  Bivolusione  sociale,  ed.  eit.,  pp.  181 
and  224)  ;  whereas  in  reality  Engels  would  seem  to  have  been  the  victim 
of  an  opportunist  sacrifice  of  principles  to  the  needs  of  organization,  a  sac- 
rifice made  for  love  of  the  party  and  in  opposition  to  his  own  theoretical 
convictions. 

'  Maximilian  Harden  is  not  far  wrong  when  he  compares  the  revolutionary 
parties  in  their  attitude  towards  the  state  authorities  to  a  cock  which  is  as 
it  were  glued  to  its  place  because  a  chalk-line  has  been  drawn  in  front  of 
its  beak,  a  line  which  to  the  bird  represents  an  insuperable  obstacle. 


BASIS  OF  ORGANIZATION;  371 

hesitate,  when  the  triumphant  guns  of  the  bourgeois  governors 
of  Paris  were  still  smoking,  to  proclaim  with  enthusiasm  its 
solidarity  with  the  communards,^  now  announces  to  the  whole 
world  that  it  repudiates  anti-militarist  propaganda  in  any  form 
which  may  bring  its  adherents  into  conflict  with  the  penal  code, 
and  that  it  will  not  assume  any  responsibility  for  the  conse- 
quences that  may  result  from  such  a  conflict.  A  sense  of  re- 
sponsibility is  suddenly  becoming  active  in  the  socialist  party. 
Consequently  it  reacts  with  all  the  authority  at  its  disposal 
against  the  revolutionary  currents  which  exist  within  its  own 
organization,  and  which  it  has  hitherto  regarded  with  an  in- 
dulgent eye.  In  the  name  of  the  grave  responsibilities  attach- 
ing to  its  position  it  now  disavows  anti-militarism,  repudiates  the 
general  strike,  and  denies  all  the  logical  audacities  of  its  past. 

The  history  of  the  international  labour  movement  furnishes  i 
innumerable  examples  of  the  manner  in  which  the  party  be-  ' 
comes  increasingly  inert  as  the  strength  of  its  organization 
grows;  it  loses  its  revolutionary  impetus,  becomes  sluggish,  not 
in  respect  of  action  alone,  but  also  in  the  sphere  of  thought.^ 
More  and  more  tenaciously  does  the  party  cling  to  what  it  calls 
the  "ancient  and  glorious  tactics,"  the  tactics  which  have  led 

*As  is  well-known,  in  1871  Bebel,  in  open  Eeichstag,  declared  himself 
opposed  to  the  annexation  of  Alsace-Lorraine,  an  annexation  which  had 
already  been  completed,  and,  with  the  sole  support  of  Liebknecht,  pushed 
his  theoretical  opposition  to  war  to  the  point  of  voting,  in  war-time,  against 
the  military  credits.  Bakunin  cherished  no  affection  either  for  the  Marx- 
ists or  for  the  Germans,  but  he  was  unable  to  refuse  his  admiration  to 
the  youthful  Marxist  party  in  Germany,  which  had  had  the  sublime  courage 
to  proclaim  "in  Germany,  in  the  country  where  freedom  is  least  known, 
under  the  triumphant  military  regime  of  Bismarck,  its  ardent  sympathies 
for  the  principles  and  heroes  of  the  Commune"  (M.  Bakunin,  II  Socialismo 
e  Massini,  ed.  eit.,  p.  9). 

"  In  this  connection  it  may  be  observed  that  the  intellectual  decadence 
of  the  socialist  party,  and  its  incapacity  for  producing  men  of  talent,  or  at 
least  for  attracting  such  men  to  its  ranks,  are  often  demonstrated  by  critics 
who  dwell  upon  the  contrast  between  the  present  and  the  past.  Ludwig 
Stein  writes  {Die  soziale  Frjige,  im  Lichte  der  Philosophie,  Encke,  Stutt- 
gart, 1897,  p.  438)  :  "The  intellectual  growth  of  the  socialist  party  is  in 
inverse  ratio  to  its  geographical  extension.  What  an  intellectual  vacuum 
has  existed  since  the  death  of  Engels.  Millions  of  votes,  but  not  a  single 
man.  A  vast  number  of  respectabilities,  but  not  one  leading  intelligence. 
The  columns  of  the  'Neue  Zeit'  are  largely  filled  with  matter  which  is 
nothing  better  than  an  insipid  Alexandrianism. ' '  A  similar  opinion  by 
Sombart  has  been  previously  quoted  (cf.  p.  63,  note  2). — There  is  at  least 
this  amount  of  truth  in  such  accusations,  that  everywhere  in  the  socialist 
parties  the  new  generation  is  weakly  and  intellectually  insignificant. 


372  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

to  a  continued  increase  in  membership.    More  and  more  invin- 
cible becomes  its  aversion  to  all  aggressive  action. 

The  dread  of  the  reaction  by  which  the  socialist  party  is 
haunted  paralyses  all  its  activities,  renders  impossible  all  mani- 
festation of  force,  and  deprives  it  of  all  energy  for  the  daily 
struggle.  It  attempts  to  justify  its  misoneism  by  the  false  pre- 
tence that  it  must  reserve  its  strength  for  the  final  struggle. 
Thus  we  find  that  the  conservative  tendencies  inherent  in  all 
forms  of  possession  manifest  themselves  also  in  the  socialist 
party.  For  half  a  century  the  socialists  have  been  working  in 
the  sweat  of  their  brow  to  create  a  model  organization.  Now, 
when  three  million  workers  have  been  organized — a  greater  num- 
ber than  was  supposed  necessary  to  secure  complete  victory 
over  the  enemy  ^^  — the  party  is  endowed  with  a  bureaucracy 
which,  in  respect  of  its  consciousness  of  its  duties,  its  zeal,  and 
its  submission  to  the  hierarchy,  rivals  that  of  the  state  itself; 
the  treasuries  are  full ;  ^^  a  complex  ramification  of  financial  and 

"In  1893,  in  a  speech  at  Bielefeld,  Liebknecht,  referring  to  the  Cologne 
congress,  made  a  comparison  between  the  political-socialist  and  trade-union 
movements,  saying:  "I  do  not  believe  that  the  trade-union  organizations 
in  Germany  will  ever  attain  a  degree  of  development  comparable  with  that 
of  the  kindred  organizations  in  England;  for  I  am  of  opinion  that  before 
such  a  development  can  be  reached  the  red  flag  of  victorious  socialism  will 
be  waving  over  the  Bastille  of  capitalism  and  the  entrenchments  of  the 
German  bourgeoisie"  (Wilhelm  Liebknecht,  Ueber  den  Kolner  Parteitag, 
etc.,  ed.  cit.,  p.  18).  To-day,  the  German  trade  unionists  are  as  numerous 
as  the  English,  while  in  the  intervening  years  the  numerical  strength  of  the 
socialist  movement  has  more  than  doubled,  but  the  conquest  of  power  seems 
more  remote  than  ever. 

"  In  the  year  1906  the  total  funds  of  the  German  trade  unions  amounted 
to  about  16,000,000  marks.  The  richest  union,  that  of  the  compositors, 
had  accumulated  funds  amounting  to  4,374,013  marks.  Next  came  the 
bricklayers'  union,  with  2,091,681  marks;  the  metalworkers'  union,  with 
1,543,353  marks;  and  the  woodworkers'  union,  with  1,452,215  marks  (Karl 
Kautsky,  Ber  neue  Tarif  der  BuchdrucTcer,  ' '  Neue  Zeit, ' '  anno  xxv,  vol.  1, 
No.  4,  p.  129).  Since  then,  notwithstanding  the  intervening  years  of  crisis 
involving  exceptionally  high  claims  for  out-of-work  pay,  the  financial  posi- 
tion of  the  unions  has  become  yet  stronger.  In  1909  the  compositors  owned 
7,929,257  marks;  the  bricklayers,  6,364,647  marks;  the  metalworkers,  6,248,- 
251  marks;  the  woodworkers,  3,434,314  marks  (Statistisches  Jahrbuch  fiir 
das  deutscJie  Beich,  1910,  anno  xxxi,  pp.  376-7).  These  ample  funds  are 
of  great  importance  for  defensive  purposes,  but  their  value  for  offensive 
purposes  is  extremely  restricted.  It  would  be  utterly  absurd  for  the  union 
to  pursue  the  policy  of  heaping  up  funds  in  the  hope  of  thus  overthrowing 
capitalism.  In  Germany  there  are  hundreds  of  capitalists  in  whose  private 
treasuries  are  available  means  exceeding  those  of  all  the  unions  put  to- 


BASIS  OF  ORGANIZATION  373 

moral  interests  extends  all  over  the  country.  A  bold  and  enter- 
prising tactic  would  endanger  all  this:  the  work  of  many  dec- 
ades, the  social  existence  of  thousands  of  leaders  and  sub-leaders, 
the  entire  party,  would  be  compromised.  For  these  reasons  the 
idea  of  such  a  tactic  becomes  more  and  more  distasteful.  It 
conflicts  equally  with  an  unjustified  sentimentalism  and  a  justi- 
fied egoism.  It  is  opposed  by  the  artist's  love  of  the  work  he 
has  created  with  so  much  labour,  and  also  by  the  personal  in- 
terest of  thousands  of  honest  bread-winners  whose  economic  life 
is  so  intimately  associated  with  the  life  of  the  party  and  who 
tremble  at  the  thought  of  losing  their  employment  and  the  conse- 
quences they  would  have  to  endure  if  the  government  should 
proceed  to  dissolve  the  party,  as  might  readily  happen  in  case 
of  war. 

Thus,  from  a  means,  organization  becomes  an  en^  To  the 
institutions  and  qualities  which  at  the  outset  were  destined 
simply  to  ensure  the  good  working  of  the  party  machine  (sub- 
ordination, the  harmonious  cooperation  of  individual  members, 
hierarchical  relationships,  discretion,  propriety  of  conduct),  a 
greater  importance  comes  ultimately  to  be  attached  than  to  the 
productivity  of  the  machine.  Henceforward  the  sole  preoccu- 
pation is  to  avoid  anything  which  may  clog  the  machinery. 
Should  the  party  be  attacked,  it  will  abandon  valuable  positions 
previously  conquered,  and  will  renounce  ancient  rights  rather 
than  reply  to  the  enemy's  offensive  by  methods  which  might 
''compromise"  its  position.  Naumann  writes  sarcastically: 
' '  The  war-cry  '  Proletarians  of  all  countries  unite ! '  has  had  its 
due  effect.  The  forces  of  the  organized  proletariat  have  gained 
a  strength  which  no  one  believed  possible  when  that  war-cry 
was  first  sounded.  There  is  money  in  the  treasuries.  Is  the 
signal  for  the  final  assault  never  to  be  given?  ...  Is  the  work 
of  preliminary  organization  to  go  on  for  ever  ? "  ^^     As  the 

gether.  Moreover,  on  the  present  system  of  depositing  savings  with  private 
banks,  the  earnings  of  this  accumulated  capital  yield  profit,  not  to  the  trade 
unionist,  but  to  the  enemies  of  the  working  class  who  are  shareholders  in 
these  banks,  so  that  the  trade-union  funds  are  ' '  ultimately  employed  against 
the  labour  movement"  (Bruno  Buchwald,  Die  GewerTcschaftsbank,  "Die 
neue  Gesellschaf t, "  anno  iii,  fasc.  x).  Hence  the  trade-union  funds  help 
to  strengthen  the  opponents  of  the  trade  unions.  For  this  reason  a  scheme 
has  long  been  on  foot  among  trade  unionists  to  institute  a  bank  of  their 
own. 

"  Friedrich  Naumann,  Das  Schicksal  des  Marxismus,  ' '  Hilf e, ' '  October 
11,  1908,  p.  657. 


374  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

party's  need  for  tranquillity  increases,  its  revolutionary  talons 
atrophy.  We  have  now  a  finely  conservative  party  which  (since 
the  effect  survives  the  cause)  continues  to  employ  revolutionary 
terminology,  but  which  in  actual  practice  fulfils  no  other  func- 
tion than  that  of  a  constitutional  opposition. 

All  this  has  deviated  far  from  the  ideas  of  Karl  Marx,  who, 
were  he  still  alive,  ought  to  be  the  first  to  revolt  against  such 
a  degeneration  of  Marxism.  Yet  it  is  quite  possible  that,  car- 
ried away  by  the  spectacle  of  an  army  of  three  million  men 
acting  in  his  name,  swearing  on  solemn  occasions  in  verba 
magistri,  he  also  would  find  nothing  to  say  in  reprobation  of  so 
grave  a  betrayal  of  his  own  principles.  There  were  incidents 
in  Marx's  life  which  render  such  a  view  possible.  He  cer- 
tainly knew  how  to  close  his  eyes,  in  public  at  any  rate,  to  the 
serious  faults  committed  by  the  German  social  democracy  in 
1876.1^ 

In  our  own  day,  which  may  be  termed  the  age  of  the  epigones 
of  Marx,  the  character  of  the  party  as  an  organization  ever 
greedy  for  new  members,  ever  seeking  to  obtain  an  absolute 
majority,  cooperates  with  the  condition  of  weakness  in  which 
it  finds  itself  vis-a-vis  the  state,  to  effect  a  gradual  replace- 
ment of  the  old  aim,  to  demolish  the  existing  state  by  the  new 
aim,  to  permeate  the  state  with  the  men  and  the  ideas  of  the 
party.  The  struggle  carried  on  by  the  socialists  against  the 
parties  of  the  dominant  classes  is  no  longer  one  of  principle, 
but  simply  one  of  competition.  The  revolutionary  party  has  be- 
come a  rival  of  the  bourgeois  parties  for  the  conquest  of  power. 
It  therefore  opens  its  doors  to  all  those  persons  who  may  assist 
in  the  attainment  of  this  end,  or  who  may  simply  swell  its 
battalions  for  the  struggle  in  which  it  is  engaged.  With  the 
necessary  modifications,  we  may  well  apply  to  the  international 
socialist  party  the  words  which  de  Maupassant  puts  into  the 
mouth  of  the  Neveu  de  VOncle  Sosthene  in  order  to  describe  the 
essence  of  French  freemasonry:  "Au  lieu  de  detruire,  vous 
organisez  la  concurrence:  ca  fait  baisser  les  prix,  voila  tout. 
Et  puis  encore,  si  vous  n'admettiez  parmi  vous  que  des  libres 
penseurs,  je  comprendrais ;  mais  vous  recevez  tout  le  monde. 
Vous  avez  des  catholiques  en  masse,  meme  des  chefs  du  parti. 
Pie  IX  fut  des  votres  avant  d'etre  pape.    Si  vous  appelez  une 

"  Karl  Kautsky,  Preface  to  Karl  Marx,  Eandglossen  sum  Programm  der 
deutschen  Arbeiterpartei  (1875),  "Neue  Zeit,"  anno  ix,  vol.  1,  pp.  508 
et  seq. 


BASIS  OF  ORGANIZATION  375 

societe  ainsi  composee  une  citadelle  contre  le  clericalisme,  je 
la  trouve  faible,  votre  citadelle.  .  .  .  Ah!  oui,  vous  etes  des 
malins !  Si  vous  me  dites  que  la  Franc-Maconnerie  est  une  usine 
a  elections,  je  vous  I'accorde;  qu'elle  sert  de  machine  a  faire 
voter  les  candidats  de  toutes  nuances,  je  ne  le  nierai  jamais; 
qu'elle  n'a  d 'autre  fonction  que  de  berner  le  bon  peuple,  de 
I'enregimenter  pour  le  faire  aller  a  I'urne  comme  on  envoie  au 
feu  les  soldats,  je  serai  de  votre  avis;  qu'elle  est  utile,  indis- 
pensable meme  a  toutes  les  ambitions  politiques  parcequ'elle 
change  chacun  de  ses  membres  en  agent  electoral,  je  vous  crierai : 
*  C  'est  clair  comme  le  soleil ! '  Mais  si  vous  me  pretendez  qu  'elle 
sert  a  saper  1 'esprit  monarchique,  je  vous  ris  au  nez."  " 

Thus  the  hatred  of  the  party  is  directed,  not  in  the  first  place 
against  the  opponents  of  its  own  view  of  the  world  order,  but 
against  the  dreaded  rivals  in  the  political  field,  against  those 
who  are  competing  for  the  same  end — power.  It  is  above  all 
in  the  electoral  agitation  carried  on  by  the  socialist  parties  when 
they  have  attained  what  is  termed  ' '  political  maturity ' '  that  this  / 
characteristic  is  most  plainly  manifest.  The  party  no  longer 
seeks  to  fight  its  opponents,  but  simply  to  outbid  them.  For 
this  reason  we  observe  a  continual  recurrence  in  socialist 
speeches  of  a  claim  which  harmonizes  ill  with  socialist  prin- 
ciples, and  which  is  often  untrue  in  fact.  Not  the  nationalists, 
they  say,  but  we,  are  the  best  patriots ;  not  the  men  of  the  gov 
emment,  but  we,  are  the  best  friends  of  the  minor  civil  servants  I 
[in  Italy]  or  of  the  peasants  [in  Germany]  ;  and  so  on.  Evi- 
dently among  the  trade  unions  of  diverse  political  colouring,  , 
whose  primary  aim  it  is  to  gain  the  greatest  possible  number  of 
new  members,  the  note  of  competition  will  be  emphasized  yet 
more.  This  applies  especially  to  the  so-called  "free  unions"  of 
Germany,  neutrally  tinted  bodies  which  on  principle  hold  in 
horror  all  definiteness  in  respect  of  political  views  or  conceptions 
of  the  world  order,  and  which  are  therefore  distinguishable  in 
name  only  (a  few  trifling  terminological  differences  apart)  from 
the  Christian  unions.  If  we  study  the  speeches  and  polemic 
writings  directed  by  the  leaders  of  the  free  unions  against  the 
leaders  of  the  Christian  unions,  we  find  that  these  speeches 
and  writings  contain  no  declarations  of  principle  and  no  theo- 
retical expositions,  but  merely  personal  criticisms  and  accusa- 

"  Guy  de  Maupassant,  Mademoiselle  Fifi,  Libr.  Ollendorff,  Paris,  1907, 
p.  69. 


376 


POLITICAL  PARTIES 


tions,  and  above  all  accusations  of  treachery  to  the  cause  of 
labour.  Now  it  is  obvious  that  these  are  no  more  than  the  means 
vulgarly  employed  by  competitors  who  wish  to  steal  one  an- 
other's customers.^  ^ 

By  such  methods,  not  merely  does  the  party  sacrifice  its 
political  virginity,  by  entering  into  promiscuous  relationships 
with  the  most  heterogeneous  political  elements,  relationships 
which  in  many  cases  have  disastrous  and  enduring  consequences, 
but  it  exposes  itself  in  addition  to  the  risk  of  losing  its  essential 
character  as  a  party.  The  term  "party"  presupposes  that 
among  the  individual  components  of  the  party  there  should 
exist  a  harmonious  direction  of  wills  towards  identical  objective 
and  practical  aims.^®  Where  this  is  lacking,  the  party  becomes 
a  mere  '  *  organization. ' ' 


"An  article  was  published  not  long  ago  in  the  "Neue  Zeit"  (anno  rxv, 
No.  5)  entitled  Zur  Taktik  gegenuher  den  gewerkschaftlichen  Konkurrens- 
Organisationen  [Tactics  to  be  employed  against  the  competi7ig  Trade-Union 
Organizations]. 

"Antonio  Labriola,  Scritti  van  di  filosofia  e  Folitica  (collected  by  B. 
Croce),  Laterza,  Bari,  1906,  p.  321. 


CHAPTER  II 

DEMOCRACY  AND  THE  IRON  LAW  OF  OLIGARCHY 

Whilst  the  majority  of  the  socialist  schools  believe  that  in  a 
future  more  or  less  remote  it  will  be  possible  to  attain  to  a 
genuinely  democratic  order,  and  whilst  the  greater  number  of 
those  who  adhere  to  aristocratic  political  views  consider  that 
democracy,  however  dangerous  to  society,  is  at  least  realizable, 
we  find  in  the  scientific  world  a  conservative  tendency  voiced 
by  those  who  deny  resolutely  and  once  for  all  that  there  is  any 
such  possibility.  As  was  shown  in  an  earlier  chapter,^  this 
tendency  is  particularly  strong  in  Italy,  where  it  is  led  by  a 
man  of  weight,  Gaetano  Mosca,  who  declares  that  no  highly 
developed  social  order  is  possible  without  a  "political  class, 
that  is  to  say,  a  politically  dominant  class,  the  class  of  a  mi-, 
nority.  Those  who  do  not  believe  in  the  god  of  democracy  are\ 
never  weary  of  affirming  that  this  god  is  the  creation  of  a 
childlike  mythopoeic  faculty,  and  they  contend  that  all  phrases 
representing  the  ide^  of  the  rule  of  the  masses,  such  terms  as 
state,  civic  rights,  popular  representation,  nation,  are  descrip- 
tive merely  of  a  legal  principle,  and  do  not  correspond  to  any 
actually  existing  facts.  They  contend  that  the  eternal  strug- 
gles between  aristocracy  and  democracy  of  which  we  read  in 
history  have  never  been  anything  more  than  struggles  between 
an  old  minority,  defending  its  actual  predominance,  and  a  new 
and  ambitious  minority,  intent  upon  the  conquest  of  power,  de- 
siring either  to  fuse  with  the  former  or  to  dethrone  and  replace 
it.  On  this  theory,  these  class  struggles  consist  merely  of  strug- 
gles between  successively  dominant  minorities.  The  social 
classes  which  under  our  eyes  engage  in  gigantic  battles  upon 
the  scene  of  history,  battles  whose  ultimate  causes  are  to  be  found 
in  economic  antagonism,  may  thus  be  compared  to  two  groups 
of  dancers  executing  a  chasse  croise  in  a  quadrille. 

*  Cf.  supra,  p.  41. 
377 


378  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

I  The  democracy  has  an  inherent  preference  for  the  authori- 
(tarian  solution  of  important  questions.^  It  thirsts  simultane- 
ously for  splendour  and  for  power.  When  the  English  burghers 
had  conquered  their  liberties,  they  made  it  their  highest  ambi- 
tion to  possess  an  aristocracy.  Gladstone  declared  that  the  love 
of  the  English  people  for  their  liberties  was  equalled  only  by 
their  love  for  the  nobility.^  Similarly  it  may  be  said  that  it  is 
a  matter  of  pride  with  the  socialists  to  show  themselves  capable 
of  maintaining  a  discipline  which,  although  it  is  to  a  certain 
extent  voluntary,  none  the  less  signifies  the  submission  of  the 
majority  to  the  orders  issued  by  the  minority,  or  at  least  to 
the  rules  issued  by  the  minority  in  obedience  to  the  majority's 
instructions.  Vilfredo  Pareto  has  even  recommended  socialism 
as  a  means  favourable  for  the  creation  of  a  new  working-class 
elite,  and  he  regards  the  courage  with  which  the  socialist  lead- 
ers face  attack  and  persecution  as  a  sign  of  their  vigour,  and 
as  the  first  condition  requisite  to  the  formation  of  a  new  "po- 
V  litical  class. ' '  *  Pareto 's  theorie  de  la  circulation  des  elites 
must,  however,  be  accepted  with  considerable  reserve,  for  in 
most  cases  there  is  not  a  simple  replacement  of  one  group  of 
elites  by  another,  but  a  continuous  process  of  intermixture,  the 
old  elements  incessantly  attracting,  absorbing,  and  assimilating 
the  new. 

This  phenomenon  was  perhaps  recognized  at  an  earlier  date, 
I  in  so  far  as  the  circulation  des  elites  was  effected  within  the 
limits  of  a  single  great  social  class  and  took  place  on  the  political 
plane.  In  states  where  a  purely  representative  government  pre- 
vails, the  constitutional  opposition  aims  simply  at  such  a  circula- 
tion. In  England,  for  instance,  the  opposition  possesses  the  same 
simple  and  resistant  structure  as  the  party  which  holds  the  reins 
of  government;  its  programme  is  clearly  formulated,  directed 
to  purely  practical  and  proximate  ends;  it  is  thoroughly  dis- 
ciplined, and  is  led  by  one  lacking  theoretical  profundity  but 
endowed  with  strategic  talent;  all  its  energies  are  devoted  to 
overthrowing  the  government,  to  taking  the  reins  of  power  into 
its  own  hands,  while  in  other  respects  leaving  matters  exactly  as 
they  were ;  it  aims,  in  a  word,  at  the  substitution  of  one  clique 
of  the  dominant  classes  for  another.  Sooner  or  later  the  com- 
petition between  the  various  cliques  of  the  dominant  classes 

*  W.  E.  H.  Lecky,  Democracy  and  Liberty,  ed.  cit.,  vol.  i,  p.  267. 

'  Quoted  by  J.  Novicow,  Conscience  ei  Volonte  sociales,  ed.  cit.,  p.  42. 

*  V.  Pareto,  Les  Systemes  socialistes,  ed.  cit.,  vol.  i,  pp.  62  et  seq. 


THE  IRON  LAW  OF  OLIGARCHY    379 

ends  in  a  reconciliation,  which  is  effected  with  the  instinctive  i 
aim  of  retaining  dominion  over  the  masses  by  sharing  it  among  I 
themselves.  The  opinion  is  very  generally  held  that  as  a  result 
of  the  French  Revolution,  or  that  in  any  case  in  the  Third 
Republic,  the  old  order  had  socially  speaking  been  completely 
suppressed  in  France.  This  view  is  utterly  erroneous.  In  the 
present  year  of  grace  we  find  that  the  French  nobility  is  repre- 
sented in  the  cavalry  regiments  and  in  the  republican  diplo- 
matic service  to  an  extent  altogether  disproportionate  to  its 
numerical  strength;  and  although  in  the  French  Chamber 
there  does  not  exist,  as  in  Germany,  a  declared  conservative 
party  of  the  nobility,  we  find  that  of  584  deputies  no  less  than 
61  belong  to  the  old  aristocracy  (noblesse  d'epee  and  noblesse 
de  robe). 

As  we  have  said,  the  theory  that  a  directive  social  group  is 
absolutely  essential  is  by  no  means  a  new  one.  Gaetano  Mosca, 
the  most  distinguished  living  advocate  of  this  sociological  con- 
ception, and,  with  Vilfredo  Pareto,  its  ablest  and  most  authorita- 
tive exponent,  while  disputing  priority  with  Pareto,  recognizes 
as  precursors  Hippolyte  Taine  and  Ludwig  Gumplowicz.^  It  is\ 
a  less  familiar  fact,  but  one  no  less  interesting,  that  the  leading 
intellectual  progenitors  of  the  theory  of  Mosca  and  Pareto  are 
to  be  found  among  the  members  of  the  school  against  which  these 
writers  more  especially  direct  their  attacks,  namely  among  so- 
cialist thinkers,  and  especially  among  the  earlier  French  so- 
cialists. In  their  work  we  discover  the  germs  of  the  doctrine 
which  at  a  later  date  was  elaborated  by  Mosca  and  Pareto  into 
a  sociological  system. 

The  school  of  Saint-Simon,  while  holding  that  the  concept 
of  class  would  some  day  cease  to  be  characterized  by  any  eco- 
nomic attribute,  did  not  look  for  a  future  without  class  dis- 
tinctions. The  Saint-Simonians  dreamed  of  the  creation  of 
a  new  hierarchy  which  was  to  be  founded,  not  upon  the  privileges 
of  birth,  but  upon  acquired  privileges.  This  class  was  to  con- 
sist of  "les  plus  aimants,  les  plus  intelligents,  et  les  plus  forts, 

•Gaetano  Mosca,  Piccola  Polemica,  "Eiforma  Sociale, "  anno  xiv,  vol. 
xvii,  fasc.  4. — Among  the  followers  of  Mosca  may  be  mentioned  Carmelo 
Caristia,  who  in  his  book  Analisi  odierna  del  Costitutionalismo  (Bocca, 
Turin,  1908),  whilst  he  does  not  deny  that  an  absolutist  regime  of  the  old 
style  cannot  pass  into  a  modern  republican  regime  by  a  simple  process  of 
gradual  differentiation  (p.  107),  nevertheless  concludes  that  every  demo- 
cratic principle  ends  by  generating  an  aristocratic  principle  (p.  229). 


380  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

personnifieation  vivante  du  triple  progres  de  la  societe,"  and 
' '  capables  de  la  diriger  dans  une  plus  vaste  carriere. "  ®  At 
the  head  of  their  socialist  state  the  Saint-Simonians  desired  to 
place  those  whom  they  termed  * '  hommes  generaux, ' '  who  would 
be  able  to  prescribe  for  each  individual  his  quantum  of  social 
labour,  the  individual's  special  aptitudes  being  taken  into  ac- 
count in  this  connection;  here  it  is  obvious  that  dependence 
must  be  placed  upon  the  discretion  of  these  supermen/  One 
of  the  most  ardent  followers  of  Saint-Simon,  an  enthusiastic  ad- 
vocate of  the  "nouvelle  dynastic,"  when  forced  to  defend  him- 
self against  the  accusation  that  his  doctrine  paved  the  way  for 
despotism,  did  not  hesitate  to  declare  that  the  majority  of  human 
beings  ought  to  obey  the  orders  of  the  most  capable ;  they  should 
do  this,  he  contended,  not  only  for  the  love  of  God,  but  also  on 
grounds  of  personal  egoism,  and  finally  because  man,  even  if  he 
could  live  in  isolation,  would  always  need  some  external  sup- 
port. The  necessity  for  issuing  orders  on  one  side  and  the 
necessity  for  complying  with  them  on  the  other  are  furnished 
with  metaphysical  justification.  Such  authority  would  only 
be  "une  transformation  politique  de  I'amour  qui  unit  tons  les 
hommes  en  Dieu.  Et  pouvez-vous  lui  preferer  cette  triste  in- 
dependance  qui  aujourd'hui  isole  les  sentiments,  les  opinions, 
les  efforts,  et  qui,  sous  un  nom  pompeux,  n'est  rien  autre  chose 
que  I'egoisme  accompagnee  de  tous  les  maux  qu'il  enfante?"" 
The  Saint-Simonian  system  is  authoritarian  and  hierarchical 
through  and  through.  The  disciples  of  Saint-Simon  were  so 
little  shocked  by  the  Caesarism  of  Napoleon  III  that  most  of 
them  joyfully  accepted  it,  imagining  that  they  would  find  in 
it  the  principles  of  economic  socialization. 

The  school  of  Fourier  went  further  still.  With  a  wealth 
of  detail  bordering  on  pedantry  and  exhibiting  more  than  one 
grotesque  feature,  Fourier  thought  out  a  vast  and  complex 
system.  To-day  we  can  hardly  restrain  a  smile  when  we  study 
the  tables  he  drew  up  describing  his  ''spherical  hierarchy," 
consisting  of  a  thousand  grades  and  embracing  all  possible  forms 
of  dominion  from  "anarchic"  to  " omniarchie, "  each  of  them 
having    its    special    "hautes    dignites,"    and    its    appropriate 

"E.  Barrault,  La  HierarcMe,  in  Beligion  Saint-Simonienne,  Receuil  et 
Predications,  Aux  bureaux  du  "Globe,"  Paris,  1832,  vol.  i,  p.  196. 

'  CEuvres  de  Saint-Simon  et  Enfantin,  vol.  xli,  Doctrines  Saint-Simonien- 
ties.     Exposition  par  Bozard,  Leroux,  Paris,  1877,  p.  275. 

'E.  Barrault,  La  HierarcMe,  etc.,  ed.  cit.,  p.  196. 


THE  IRON  LAW  OF  OLIGARCHY    381 

"hautes  f onctions. "  **  Sorel  has  well  shown  that  the  socialism 
of  the  days  prior  to  Louis  Blanc  was  intimately  connected  with 
the  Napoleonic  era,  so  that  the  Saint-Simonian  and  Fourierist 
Utopias  could  not  live  and  prosper  elsewhere  than  in  the  soil  of 
the  idea  of  authority  to  which  the  great  Corsican  had  furnished 
a  new  splendour.^*'  According  to  Berth,  Fourier 's  whole  system 
presupposes  for  its  working  the  invisible  but  real  and  indis- 
pensable ubiquity  of  Fourier  himself,  for  he  alone,  the  Napoleon, 
as  it  were,  of  socialism,  would  be  capable  of  activating  and  har- 
monizing the  diverse  passions  of  humanity. ^^ 

Socialists  of  the  subsequent  epoch,  and  above  all  revolutionary 
socialists,  while  not  denying  the  possibility,  in  the  remote  future, 
of  a  democratic  government  by  majority,  absolutely  denied  that 
such  a  government  could  exist  in  the  concrete  present.  Bakunin 
opposed  any  participation  of  the  working  class  in  elections.  He 
was  convinced  that  in  a  society  where  the  people,  the  mass 
of  the  wage-earners,  is  under  the  economic  dominion  of  a 
minority  consisting  of  possessors,  the  freest  of  electoral  systems 
could  be  nothing  more  than  an  illusion.  ' '  Qui  dit  pouvoir,  dit 
domination,  et  toute  domination  presume  1 'existence  d'une  masse 
dommee. ' '  ^^  Democracy  is  even  regarded  as  the  worst  of  all 
the  bourgeois  regimes.  The  republic,  which  is  presented  to  us 
as  the  most  elevated  form  of  bourgeois  democracy,  was  said  by 
Proudhon  to  possess  to  an  extreme  degree  that  fanatical  and 
petty  authoritative  spirit  {zele  gouvernemental)  which  believes 
that  it  can  dare  everything  with  impunity,  being  always  ready 
to  justify  its  despotic  acts  under  the  convenient  pretext  that 
they  are  done  for  the  good  of  the  republic  and  in  the  general 
interest."  Even  the  political  revolution  signifies  merely  "un 
deplacement  de  1 'autorite.  "^* 

The   only  scientific  doctrine  which  can  boast  of  ability  to  I 
make  an  effective  reply  to  all  the  theories,  old  or  new,  affirming  | 

•Ferdinand  Guillon,  Accord  des  Principes.  Travail  des  Ecoles  socie- 
taires.     Charles  Fourier,  Libr.  Phalanst.,  Paris,  1850,  p.  97. 

^'Preface  by  Georges  Sorel  to  the  work  of  Fernand  Pelloutier,  Eistoire 
des  Bourses  du  Travail,  ed.  cit.,  pp.  7  et  seq. 

"  Edouard  Berth,  Marcliands,  intellectuels  et  politiques,  ' '  Mouvement 
Socialiste, "  anno  ix,  No.  192,  p.  385. 

"Bakunin,  L' Empire  Knouto-Germanique  et  la  Bevolution  sociale,  ed. 
cit.,  vol.  ii,  p.  126. 

"Proudhon,  Idee  generale  de  la  Bevolution  aux  XIX  siecle,  vol.  x  of 
CEuvres  completes  de  Proudhon,  Paris,  1868,  p.  65. 

"Proudhon,  Les  Confessions  d'un  Bevolutionnaire,  ed.  cit.,  p.  24. 


382  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

I  the  immanent  necessity  for  the  perennial  existence  of  the  "po- 
litical class"  is  the  Marxist  doctrine.  In  this  doctrine  the  state 
is  identified  with  the  ruling  class — an  identification  from  which 
Bakunin,  Marx's  pupil,  drew  the  extreme  consequences.  The 
state  is  merely  the  executive  committee  of  the  ruling  class;  or, 
to  quote  the  expression  of  a  recent  neo-Marxist,  the  state  is 
merely  a  "trade-union  formed  to  defend  the  interest  of  the 
powers-that-be, "  ^^  It  is  obvious  that  this  theory  greatly  re- 
sembles the  conservative  theory  of  Gaetano  Mosca.  Mosca,  in 
fact,  from  a  study  of  the  same  diagnostic  signs,  deduces  a  similar 
prognosis,  but  abstains  from  lamentations  and  recriminations 
on  account  of  a  phenomenon  which,  in  the  light  of  his  general 
political  views,  he  regards  not  merely  as  inevitable,  but  as 
actually  advantageous  to  society.  Aristide  Briand,  in  the  days 
when  he  was  an  active  member  of  the  socialist  party,  and  be- 
fore he  had  become  prime  minister  of  the  "class-state,"  pushed 
the  Marxist  notion  of  the  state  to  its  utmost  limits  by  recom- 
mending the  workers  to  abandon  isolated  and  local  economic 
struggles,  to  refrain  from  dissipating  their  energies  in 
partial  strikes,  and  to  deliver  a  united  assault  upon  the  state  in 
the  form  of  the  general  strike,  for,  he  said,  you  can  reach  the 
bourgeoisie  with  your  weapons  in  no  other  way  than  by  at- 
tacking the  state.^*^ 

The  Marxist  theory  of  the  state,  when  conjoined  with  a  faith 
in  the  revolutionary  energy  of  the  working  class  and  in  the 
democratic  effects  of  the  socialization  of  the  means  of  produc- 
tion, leads  logically  to  the  idea  of  a  new  social  order  which  to 
the  school  of  Mosca  appears  Utopian.  According  to  the  Marxists 
the  capitalist  mode  of  production  transforms  the  great  ma- 
jority of  the  population  into  proletarians,  and  thus  digs  its 
own  grave.  As  soon  as  it  has  attained  maturity,  the  proletariat 
will  seize  political  power,  and  will  immediately  transform 
private  property  into  state  property.  ' '  In  this  way  it  will  elimi- 
nate itself,  for  it  will  thus  put  an  end  to  all  social  differences, 
and  consequently  to  all  class  antagonisms.  In  other  words,  the 
proletariat  will  annul  the  state,  qua  state.  Capitalist  society, 
divided  into  classes,  has  need  of  the  state  as  an  organization 
of  the  ruling  class,  whose  purpose  it  is  to  maintain  the  capitalist 

"Angelo  Oliviero  Olivetti,  Problemn  del  Socialismo  Contemporaneo,  ed. 
cit.,  p.  41. 

"  Aristide  Briand,  La  Greve  Generale  et  la  Bevolution.  Speech  published 
in  1907.     Girard,  Paris,  p.  7. 


THE  IRON  LAW  OF  OLIGARCHY    383 


system  of  production  in  its  own  interest  and  in  order  to  effect 
the  continued  exploitation  of  the  proletariat.  Thus  to  put  an 
end  to  the  state  is  synonymous  with  putting  an  end  to  the  exist- 
ence of  the  dominant  class. ' '  ^'^  But  the  new  collectivist  society, 
the  society  without  classes,  which  is  to  be  established  upon  the 
ruins  of  the  ancient  state,  will  also  need  elective  elements.  It 
may  be  said  that  by  the  adoption  of  the  preventive  rules  formu- 
lated by  Kousseau  in  the  Contrat  Sociale,  and  subsequently 
reproduced  by  the  French  revolutionists  in  the  Declaration  des 
Droits  de  I' Homme,  above  all  by  the  strict  application  of 
the  principle  that  all  offices  are  to  be  held  on  a  revocable 
tenure,  the  activity  of  these  representatives  may  be  confined 
within  rigid  limits.^®  It  is  none  the  less  true  that  social  wealth 
cannot  be  satisfactorily  administered  in  any  other  manner  than 
by  the  creation  of  an  extensive  bureaucracy.  In  this  way  we 
are  led  by  an  inevitable  logic  to  the  flat  denial  of  the  possibility 
of  a  state  without  classes.  The  administration  of  an  immeas- 
urably large  capital,  above  all  when  this  capital  is  collective 
property,  confers  upon  the  administrator  influence  at  least  equal 
to  that  possessed  by  the  private  owner  of  capital.  Consequently 
the  critics  in  advance  of  the  Marxist  social  order  ask  whether 
the  instinct  which  to-day  leads  the  members  of  the  possessing 
classes  to  transmit  to  their  children  the  wealth  which  they  (the 
parents)  have  amassed,  will  not  exist  also  in  the  administrators 
of  the  public  wealth  of  the  socialist  state,  and  whether  these 
administrators  will  not  utilize  their  immense  influence  in  order 
to  secure  for  their  children  the  succession  to  the  offices  which 
they  themselves  hold.^® 

"  Friedrich  Engels,  Die  EntwicMung  des  Sozialismus  von  der  Utopie  sur 
Wissenschaft,  Buchhandlung  "Vorwarts, "  Berlin,  1891,  4th  ed.,  p.  40. 

"Many  believe  with  Hobson  (Boodle  and  Cant,  ed.  cit.,  pp.  587  and  590) 
that  the  socialist  state  will  require  a  larger  number  of  leaders,  including 
political  leaders,  than  any  other  state  that  has  hitherto  existed.  Bernstein 
declares  that  the  administrative  body  of  socialist  society  will  for  a  long 
time  differ  very  little  from  that  of  the  existing  state  (Eduard  Bernstein, 
Zur  Geschichte,  etc.,  ed.  cit.,  p.  212). 

"  Gaetano  Mosca,  Eisposta  ad  un '  IncMesta  sul  Socialismo,  published  in 
the  annual  '  *  Bios, ' '  Marescotti,  Milan,  1904. — This  is  a  point  to  which  the 
critics  of  collectivism  have  drawn  attention  with  much  emphasis  (cf.  Paul 
Leroy-Beaulieu,  Le  Collectivisme,  Paris,  1884,  vol.  i,  pp.  350  et  seq. ;  F.  S. 
Merlino,  Pro  e  contro  il  Socialismo,  ed.  cit.,  p.  194). — Jean  Jaures  proposed 
a  national  council  of  labour  which,  with  many  safeguards,  was  to  direct 
production  in  the  socialist  state  (Jaures,  Organisation  Socialiste,  "Eevue 
Socialiste,"  August  1895);  such  a  body,  however,  would  have  a  fatal  ten- 


»•• 


384  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

The  constitution  of  a,  new^dmainant  minority  would,  in  addi- 
ction, be  especially  facilitated  by  the  manner  in  which,  according 
I  to  the  Marxist  conception  of  the  revolution,  the  social  trans- 
I  formation  is  to  be  effected.    Marx  held  that  the  period  between 
the  destruction  of  capitalist  society  and  the  establishment  of 
communist  society  would  be  bridged  by  a  period  of  revolu- 
tionary transition  in  the  economic  field,  to  which  would  cor- 
respond a  period  of  political  transition,  "when  the  state  could 
not  be  anything  other  than  the  revolutionary  dictatorship  of 
the  proletariat. "  ^^     To  put  the  matter  less  euphemistically, 
there   will   then   exist   a   dictatorship    in   the   hands   of   those 
leaders  who  have  been  sufficiently  astute  and  sufficiently  power- 
ful to  grasp  the  sceptre  of  dominion  in  the  name  of  social- 
ism, and  to  wrest  it  from  the  hands  of  the  expiring  bourgeois 
society. 

A  revolutionary  dictatorship  was  also  foreshadowed  in  the 
minimum  programme  of  Mazzini's  republican  party,  and  this 
led  to  a  rupture  between  Young  Italy  and  the  socialist  ele- 
ments of  the  carbonari.  Filippo  Buonarroti,  the  Florentine, 
friend  and  biographer  of  Gracchus  Babeuf,  a  man  who  at  one 
time  played  a  heroic  part  in  the  French  Revolution,^^  and  who 
had  had  opportunities  for  direct  observation  of  the  way  in 
which  the  victorious  revolutionists  maintained  inequality  and 
endeavoured  to  found  a  new  aristocracy,  resisted  with  all  his 
might  the  plan  of  concentrating  the  power  of  the  carbonari 
in  the  hands  of  a  single  individual.  Among  the  theoretical 
reasons  he  alleged  against  this  concentration,  the  principal  was 
that  individual  dictatorship  was  merely  a  stage  on  the  way 
to  monarchy.  To  Mazzini  and  his  friends,  Buonarroti  objected 
that  all  the  political  changes  they  had  in  view  were  purely 
formal   in    character,    aiming   simply    at   the    gratification    of 

dency  to  concentrate  power  in  the  hands  of  a  few. — Joseph  Sarratne,  the 
reformist  socialist,  describes  the  eollectivist  form  of  socialist  society  as 
"une  tache  audacieuse  dont  on  voudrait  investir  non  pas  un  Dieu,  mais 
un  tyran  ou  un  eomite  de  salut  publique  entre  les  mains  de  qui  devrait 
necessairement  abdiquer  la  nation  souveraine"  (Sarratne,  Socialisme  d'Op- 
fosition,  Socialisme  de  Gouvernement  et  Lutte  de  Classe,  Jacques,  Paris, 
1901,  p.  46). 

""Karl  Marx,  "Randglossen  sum  Frogramm  der  deutschen  Arbeiterpartei, 
"  Waff enkammer  des  Sozialismus, "  10th  semi-annual  vol.,  Frankfort-on- 
the-Main,  1908,  p.  18. 

"^Filippo  Buonarroti,  Conspiration  pour  I'Egalite,  dites  de  Babeuf,  Brus- 
sels, 1828.     Cf.  especially  p.  48. 


THE  IRON  LAW  OF  OLIGARCHY    385 

personal  needs,  and  above  all  at  the  acquirement  and  exercise 
of  unrestricted  authority.  For  this  reason  Buonarroti  opposed 
the  armed  rising  organized  by  Mazzini  in  1833,  issuing  a  secret 
decree  in  which  he  forbade  his  comrades  of  the  carbonari  to 
give  any  assistance  to  the  insurgents,  whose  triumph,  he  said, 
could  not  fail  to  give  rise  to  the  creation  of  a  new  ambitious 
aristocracy.  "The  ideal  republic  of  Mazzini,"  he  wrote,  "dif- 
fers from  monarchy  in  this  respect  alone,  that  it  possesses  a 
dignity  the  less  and  an  elective  post  the  more."  -- 

There   is   little   difference,   as   far   as   practical   results   arei 
concerned,  between  individual  dictatorship  and  the  dictatorship! 
of  a  group  of  oligarchs.    Now  it  is  manifest  that  the  concept! 
dictatorship  is  the  direct  antithesis  of  the  concept  democracy.  \ 
The  attempt  to  make  dictatorship  serve  the  ends  of  democracy 
is   tantamount  to  the   endeavour  to  utilize  war  as   the   most 
efficient  means  for  the  defence  of  peace,  or  to  employ  alcohol 
in  the  struggle  against  alcoholism.^^     It  is  extremely  probable 
that  a  social  group  which  had  secured  control  of  the  instruments 
of  collective  power  would  do  all  that  was  possible  to  retain 
that  control.^*    Theophrastus  noted  long  ago  that  the  strongest 
desire  of  men  who  have  attained  to  leadership  in  a  popularly 
governed  state  is  not  so  much  the   acquirement   of  personal 
wealth  as  the  gradual  establishment  of  their  own  sovereignty 
at  the  expense  of  popular  sovereignty.^^     The  danger  is  immi- 
nent lest  the  social  revolution  should  replace  the  visible  and 
tangible  dominant  classes  which  now  exist  and  act  openly,  by 
a  clandestine  demagogic  oligarchy,  pursuing  its  ends  under  the 
cloak  of  equality. 

The  Marxist  economic  doctrine  and  the  Marxist  philosophy 
of  history  cannot  fail  to  exercise  a  great  attraction  upon  think- 
ers. But  the  defects  of  Marxism  are  patent  directly  we  enter 
the  practical  domains  of  administration  and  public  law,  with- 
out speaking  of  errors  in  the  psychological  field  and  even  in 

*^  Giuseppe  Romano-Catania,  Filippo  Buonarroti,  Sandron,  Palermo,  1902, 
2nd  ed.,  pp.  211-12,  213,  218,  and  228. 

^" There  continually  recurs  the  dream  of  Schiller's  Marquis  Posa  (in 
Don  Carlos),  who  endeavours  to  make  absolutism  the  instrument  of  libera- 
tion; or  the  dream  of  the  gentle  Abbe  Pierre  (in  Zola's  Rome),  who  wishes 
to  use  the  church  as  a  lever  to  secure  socialism"  (Kropotkin,  Die  histo- 
rische  Bolle  des  Staates,  Grunau,  Berlin,  1898,  p.  52). 

**  Those  among  the  reformists  who  have  been  scientifically  trained  begin 
to  recognize  this  (cf.  Fourniere,  La  Sociocratie,  ed.  cit.,  p.  10). 

*  LabruyerC;  Characteres,  ed.  cit.,  p.  38. 


386  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

more  elementary  spheres.^®  Wherever  socialist  theory  has  en- 
deavoured to  furnish  guarantees  for  personal  liberty,  it  has  in 
the  end  either  lapsed  into  the  eloudland  of  individualist  an- 
archism, or  else  has  made  proposals  which  (doubtless  in  op- 
position to  the  excellent  intentions  of  their  authors)  could  not 
fail  to  enslave  the  individual  to  the  mass.  Here  is  an  example : 
to  ensure  that  the  literature  of  socialist  society  shall  be  ele- 
vated and  moral,  and  to  exclude  a  priori  all  licentious  books, 
August  Bebel  proposed  the  nomination  of  a  committee  of  ex- 
perts to  decide  what  might  and  what  might  not  be  printed.  To 
obviate  all  danger  of  injustice  and  to  secure  freedom  of  thought 
and  expression,  Bebel  added  that  every  author  must  have  the 
right  of  appeal  to  the  collectivity.^'^  It  is  hardly  necessary  to 
\  \  I  point  out  the  impracticability  of  this  proposal,  which  is  in 
\  I  effect  that  the  books,  however  large,  regarding  which  an  appeal 
J  is  made,  must  be  printed  by  the  million  and  distributed  to  the 
I  public  in  order  that  the  public  may  decide  whether  they  are 
or  are  not  fit  for  publication! 

»The  problem  of  socialism  is  not  merely  a  problem  in  eco- 
nomics. In  other  words,  socialism  does  not  seek  merely  to 
determine  to  what  extent  it  is  possible  to  realize  a  distribution 
of  wealth  which  shall  be  at  once  just  and  economically  produc- 
tive. Socialism  is  also  an  administrative  problem,  a  problem 
\  of  democracy,  and  this  not  in  the  technical  and  administrative 
sphere  alone,  but  also  in  the  sphere  of  psychology.  In  the 
individualist  problem  is  found  the  most  difficult  of  all  that 
complex  of  questions  which  socialism  seeks  to  answer.  Rudolf 
Goldscheid,  who  aims  at  a  renascence  of  the  socialist  move- 
ment by  the  strengthening  of  the  more  energetic  elements  in 
that  movement,  rightly  draws  attention  to  a  danger  which 
socialism  incurs,  however  brilliantly  it  may  handle  the  prob- 
lems of  economic  organization.  If  socialism,  he  says,  fails  to 
study  the  problem  of  individual  rights,  individual  knowledge, 
and  individual  will,  it  will  suffer  shipwreck  from  a  defective 
understanding  of  the  significance  of  the  problem  of  freedom 
for  the  higher  evolution  of  our  species — will  suffer  shipwreck 
lino  less  disastrous  than  that  of  earlier  conceptions  of  world 
||  reform  which,  blinded  by  the  general  splendour  of  their  vision, 

^George  Sorel,  Dove  va  il  Marxismo?,  ed.  eit.,  p.  17. 
^  A.  Bebel,  Die  Frau  und  der  Sozialismus,  J.  H.  W.  Dietz  Nachf .,  Stutt- 
gart, 34th  ed.,  1903,  p.  423. 


THE  IRON  LAW  OF  OLIGARCHY    387 

have   ignored  the   individual  light-sources  which   combine   to// 
produce  that  splendour.^^ 

The  youthful  German  labour  party  had  hardly  succeeded  in 
detaching  itself,  at  the  cost  of  severe  struggles,  from  the  bour- 
geois democracy,  when  one  of  its  sincerest  friends  drew  at- 
tention to  certain  urgent  dangers.  In  an  open  letter  to  the  Leip- 
zig committee  of  the  Allgemeine  Deutsche  Arbeiterverein,  Rod- 
bertus  wrote:  "You  are  separating  yourselves  from  a  po- 
litical party  because,  as  you  rightly  believe,  this  political  party 
does  not  adequately  represent  your  social  interests.  But  you 
are  doing  this  in  order  to  found  a  new  political  party.  Who 
will  furnish  you  with  guarantees  against  the  danger  that  in  this 
new  party  the  adversaries  of  your  class  {die  antisozialen  Ele- 
ment e)  may  some  day  gain  the  upper  hand?"^^  In  this  ob- 
servation Rodbertus  touches  the  very  essence  of  the  political 
party.  An  analysis  of  the  elements  which  enter  into  the  com- 
position of  a  party  will  show  the  perfect  justice  of  his  criticism. 
A  party  is  neither  a  social  unity  nor  an  economic  unity.  It| 
is  based  upon  its  programme.  In  theory  this  programme  may 
be  the  expression  of  the  interests  of  a  particular  class.  In 
practice,  however,  anyone  may  join  a  party,  whether  his  in- 
terests coincide  or  not  with  the  principles  enunciated  in  the 
party  programme.  The  socialist  party,  for  example,  is  the 
ideological  representative  of  the  proletariat.  This,  however, 
does  not  make  it  a  class  organism.  From  the  social  point  of 
view  it  is  a  mixture  of  classes,  being  composed  of  elements 
fulfilling  diverse  functions  in  the  economic  process.  But  since 
the  programme  has  a  class  origin,  an  ostensible  social  unity  Is 
thereby  conferred  upon  the  party.  All  socialists  as  such,  what- 
ever their  economic  position  in  private  life,  admit  in  theory 
the  absolute  pre-eminence  of  one  great  class,  the  proletariat. 
Those  non-proletarians  affiliated  to  the  party,  and  those  who 
are  but  partial  proletarians,  "adopt  the  outlook  of  the  work- 
ing class,  and  recognize  this  class  as  predominant."^'^  It  is 
tacitly  presupposed  that  those  members  of  a  party  who  do  not 
belong  to  the  class  which  that  party  represents  will  renounce 

"^Eudolf  Goldscheid,  Grundlinien  su  einer  KritiJc  der  Willenskraft,  W. 
Braumiiller,  Vienna  and  Leipzig,  1905,  p.  143. 

^*Eodbertus,  Offener  Brief,  etc.,  in  F.  Lassalle's  Politische  Beden  u. 
Schriften,  ed.  cit.,  vol.  ii,  p.  15. 

^"Eduard  Bernstein,  Wird  die  SosialdemoTcratie  VolJcspartei?  "Sozial. 
Monatsliefte,"  August  1905,  p.  670. 


388  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

their  personal  interests  whenever  these  conflict  with  the  in- 
terests of  the  proletarian  class.  On  principle,  the  heterogeneous 
elements  will  subordinate  themselves  to  the  "idea"  of  a  class 
to  which  they  themselves  do  not  belong.  So  much  for  theory, 
I  In  practice,  the  acceptance  of  the  programme  does  not  suffice 
/to  abolish  the  conflict  of  interests  between  capital  and  labour. 
Among  the  members  belonging  to  higher  social  strata  who  have 
made  their  adhesion  to  the  political  organization  of  the  working 
class,  there  will  be  some  who  will,  when  the  occasion  demands 
it,  know  how  to  sacrifice  themselves,  who  will  be  able  to  unclass 
will  continue  to  pursue  economic  interests  opposed  to  those  of 
themselves.  The  majority  of  such  persons,  however,  notwith- 
standing their  outward  community  of  ideas  with  the  proletariat, 
the  proletariat.  There  is,  in  fact,  a__conflict  of_  interests,  and 
the  decision  in  this  conflict  will  be  determined  by  the  relation- 
ship which  the  respective  interests  bear  towards  the  principal 
I  necessities  of  life.  Consequently  it  is  by  no  means  impossible 
I  that  an  economic  conflict  may  arise  between  the  bourgeois  mem- 
j  bers  and  the  proletarian  members  of  the  party,  and  that  as  this 
'  conflict  extends  it  will  culminate  in  political  dissensions.  Eco- 
nomic antagonism  stifles  the  ideological  superstructure.  The 
programme  then  becomes  a  dead  letter,  and  beneath  the  banner 
of  "socialism"  and  within  the  bosom  of  the  party,  a  veritable 
class  struggle  goes  on.  We  learn  from  actual  experience  that 
in  their  conduct  towards  persons  in  their  employ  the  bourgeois 
socialists  do  not  always  subordinate  personal  interests  to  those 
of  their  adoptive  class.  When  the  party  includes  among  its 
members  the  owners  of  factories  and  workshops,  it  may  be 
noticed  that  these,  notwithstanding  personal  goodwill  and  not- 
withstanding the  pressure  which  is  exercised  on  them  by  the 
party,  have  the  same  economic  conflict  with  their  employees 
as  have  those  employers  whose  convictions  harmonize  with  their 
economic  status,  and  who  think  not  as  socialists  but  as  bourgeois. 
But  there  exists  yet  another  danger.  The  leadership  of  the 
socialist  party  may  fall  into  the  hands  of  persons  whose  prac- 
tical tendencies  are  in  opposition  with  the  programme  of  the 
working  class,  so  that  the  labour  movement  will  be  utilized  for 
the  service  of  interests  diametrically  opposed  to  those  of  the 
proletariat.^^    This  danger  is  especially  great  in  countries  where 

"Cf.  Arturo  Labriola,  Biforme  e  Eivoluzione  Sociale,  ed.  cit.,  pp.  22")-6. 
— Labriola  applies  his  hypothesis  to  the  socialist  leaders  of  bourgeois  ori- 


It 


THE  IRON  LAW  OF  OLIGARCHY    389 

the  working-class  party  cannot  dispense  with  the  aid  and  guid-      % 
ance  of  capitalists  who  are  not  economically  dependent  upon  the 
party;  it  is  least  conspicuous  where  the  party  has  no  need  of 
such  elements,  or  can  at  any  rate  avoid  admitting  them  to 
leadership. 

When  the  leaders,  whether  derived  from  the  bourgeoisie  or 
from  the  working  class,  are  attached  to  the  party  organism  as 
employees,  their  economic  interest  coincides  as  a  rule  with 
the  interest  of  the  party.  This,  however,  serves  to  eliminate 
only  one  aspect  of  the  danger.  Another  aspect,  graver  because 
more  general,  depends  upon  the  opposition  which  inevitably 
arises  between  the  leaders  and  the  rank  and  file  as  the  party 
grows  in  strength. 

The  party,  regarded  as  an  entity,  as  a  piece  of  mechanism, 
is  not  necessarily  identifiable  with  the  totality  of  its  members, 
and  still  less  so  with  the  class  to  which  these  belong.  The 
party  is  created  as  a  means  to  secure  an  end.  Having, 
however,  become  an  end  in  itself,  endowed  with  aims  and  in- 
terests of  its  own,  it  undergoes  detachment,  from  the  teleologieal 
point  of  view,  from  the  class  which  it  represents.  In  a  party, 
it  is  far  from  obvious  that  the  interests  of  the  masses  which 
have  combined  to  form  the  party  will  coincide  with  the  inter- 
ests of  the  bureaucracy  in  which  the  party  becomes  personified. 
The  interests  of  the  body  of  employees  are  always  conservative, 
and  in  a  given  political  situation  these  interests  may  dictate  a 
defensive  and  even  a  reactionary  policy  when  the  interests  of 
the  working  class  demand  a  bold  and  aggressive  policy;  in 
other  cases,  although  these  are  very  rare,  the  roles  may  be 
reversed.  By  a  universally  applicable  social  law,  every  organ 
of  the  collectivity,  brought  into  existence  through  the  need  for  ^^ 
the  division  of  labour,  creates  for  itself,  as  soon  as  it  becomes  ""^ 
consolidated,  interests  peculiar  to  itself.  The  existence  of  these 
special  interests  involves  a  necessary  conflict  with  the  interests 
of  the  collectivity.  Nay,  more,  social  strata  fulfilling  peculiar 
functions  tend  to  become  isolated,  to  produce  organs  fitted  for 
the  defence  of  their  own  peculiar  interests.  In  the  long  run  they 
tend  to  undergo  transformation  into  distinct  classes. 

The    sociological    phenomena    whose    general    characteristics 
have  been  discussed     in  this  chapter  and  in  preceding  ones 

gin,  whereas,  for  the  reasons  previously  discussed,  it  should  be  made  gen- 
erally applicable,  disregarding  the  social  origin  of  the  labour  leaders. 


390 


POLITICAL  PARTIES 


f  offer  numerous   vulnerable   points  to  the  scientific   opponents 
of  democracy.     These  phenomena  would  seem  to  prove  beyond 
dispute  that  society  cannot  exist   without   a   ''dominant"   or 
"political"  class,  and  that  the  ruling  class,  whilst  its  elements 
are  subject  to  a  frequent  partial  renewal,  nevertheless  consti- 
tutes the  only  factor  of  sufficiently  durable  efficacy  in  the  his- 
I  tory  of  human  development.    According  to  this  view,  the  gov- 
/  ernment,  or,  if  the  phrase  be  preferred,  the  state,  cannot  be 
anything  other  than  the  organization  of  a  minority.     It  is  the 
aim  of  this  minority  to  impose  upon  the  rest  of  society  a  ' '  legal 
order,"  which  is  the  outcome  of  the  exigencies  of  dominion  and 
of  the  exploitation  of  the  mass  of  helots  effected  by  the  ruling 
minority,    and    can    never    be    truly    representative    of    the 
majority.^^     The  majority  is  thus   permanently   incapable  of 
self-government.     Even  when  the  discontent  of  the  masses  cul- 
minates in  a  successful  attempt  to  deprive  the  bourgeoisie  of 
power,  this  is  after  all,  so  Mosca   contends,   effected  only  in 
appearance ;    always   and   necessarily   there   springs   from   the 
masses  a   new  organized  minority   which  raises   itself  to  the 
rank  of  a  governing  class.^^     Thus  the  majority  of  human  be- 
ings,  in  a  condition  of  eternal  tutelage,   are   predestined   by 
tragic  necessity  to  submit  to  the  dominion  of  a  small  minor- 
'ity,  and  must  be  content  to  constitute  the  pedestal  of  an  oli- 
garchy. 

The  principle  that  one  dominant  class  inevitably  succeeds  to 
another,  and  the  law  deduced  from  that  principle  that  oligarchy 
is,  as  it  were,  a  preordained  form  of  the  common  life  of  great 
,1  social  aggregates,  far  from  conflicting  with  or  replacing  the 
j  I  materialist  conception  of  history,  completes  that  conception  and 
1 1  reinforces  it.     There  is  no  essential  contradiction  between  the 

(doctrine  that  history  is  the  record  of  a  continued  series  of  class 
struggles  and  the  doctrine  that  class  struggles  invariably  cul- 
minate in  the  creation  of  new  oligarchies  which  undergo  fusion 
with  the  old.     The  existence  of  a  political  class  does  not  con- 

'"  This  train  of  reasoning  approximates  to  Mommsen  's  theory  that 
democracy  continually  destroys  itself. 

^  Gaetano  Mosca,  Elemente  de  Scienza  poUtica,  ed.  cit.,  p.  62. — Among 
the  socialists  there  are  a  few  rare  spirits  who  do  not  deny  the  truth  of  this 
axiom.  One  of  these  is  the  professor  of  philosophy,  and  socialist  deputy 
of  the  Swedish  Upper  House,  Gustaf  F.  Steffen,  who  declares:  "Even 
after  the  victory,  there  will  always  remain  in  political  life  the  leaders  and 
the  led"  (Steffen,  Die  Demokratie  in  England,  Diederichs,  Jena,  1911, 
p.  59). 


THE  IRON  LAW  OF  OLIGARCHY    391 

flict  with  the  essential  content  of  Marxism,  considered  not  as 
an  economic  dogma  but  as  a  philosophy  of  history ;  for  in  each 
particular  instance  the  dominance  of  a  political  class  arises  as 
the  resultant  of  the  relationships  between  the  different  social 
forces  competing  for  supremacy,  these  forces  being  of  course 
considered  dynamically  and  not  quantitatively. 

The  Russian  socialist  Alexandre  Herzen,  whose  chief  perma- 
nent claim  to  significance  is  found  in  the  psychological  interest 
of  his  writings,  declared  that  from  the  day  in  which  man  be- 
came accessory  to  property  and  his  life  a  continued  struggle 
for  money,  the  political  groups  of  the  bourgeois  world  under- 
went division  into  two  camps:  the  owners,  tenaciously  keeping 
hold  of  their  millions;  and  the  dispossessed,  who  would  gladly 
expropriate  the  owners,  but  lack  the  power  to  do  so.  Thus 
historical  evolution  merely  represents  an  uninterrupted  series 
of  oppositions  (in  the  parliamentary  sense  of  this  term),  "at- 
taining one  after  another  to  power,  and  passing  from  the 
sphere  of  envy  to  the  sphere  of  avarice. ' '  ^* 

Thus  the  social  revolution  would  not  effect  any  real  modifi- 
cation of  the  internal  structure  of  the  mass.     The  socialists!     i^^ 
might  conquer,  but  not  socialism,  which  would  perish  in  thel 
moment  of  its  adherents'  triumph.     We  are  tempted  to  speak/ 
of  this  process  as  a  tragicomedy  in  which  the  masses  are  content 
to  devote  all  their  energies  to  effecting  a  change  of  masters.    All'p 
that  is  left  for  the  workers  is  the  honour  "de  participer  au 
recrutemeut  gouvernemental. ' '  ^^    The  result  seems  a  poor  one, 
especially  if  we  take  into  account  the  psychological  fact  that 
even  the  purest  of  idealists  who  attains  to  power  for  a  few  years 
is  unable  to  escape  the  corruption  which  the  exercise  of  power 
carries  in  its  train.     In  France,  in  working-class  circles,  the  ^^ 
phrase  is  current,  Jiomme  elu,  hqmme  jQiitu.     The  social  revo- 
lution, like  the  political  revolution,  is  equivalent  to  an  operation 
by  which,  as  the  Italian  proverb  expresses  it:     "Si  cambia  il 
maestro  di  cappella,  ma  la  musica  e  sempre  quella. ' '  ^'^ 

Fourier  defined  modern  society  as  a  mechanism  in  which  the 
extremest  individual  licence  prevailed,  without  affording  any 
guarantee  to  the  individual  against  the  usurpations  of  the  mass, 

^*  Alexandre  Herzen,  JErinnerungen,  German  translation  by  Otto  Buek, 
Wiegandt  u.  Grieben,  Berlin,  1907,  vol.  ii,  p.  150. 

*  Felicien  Challaye,  Syndicalisme  revolutionnaire  et  Syndicalisme  reform- 
iste,  Alcan,  Paris,  1909,  p.  16. 

**  There  is  a  new  conductor,  but  the  music  is  just  the  same. 


^' 


)d 


392  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

or  to  the  mass  against  the  usurpations  of  the  individual.^^ 
History  seems  to  teach  us  that  no  popular  movement,  however 
energetic  and  vigorous,  is  capable  of  producing  profound  and 
permanent  changes  in  the  social  organism  of  the  civilized  world. 
The  preponderant  elements  of  the  movement,  the  men  who 
lead  and  nourish  it,  end  by  undergoing  a  gradual  detachment 
.  from  the  masses,   and  are  attracted  within  the   orbit  of  the 

i^Ar  "political  class."     They  perhaps  contribute  to  this  class  a  cer- 

[     tain  number  of  "new  ideas,"  but  they  also  endow  it  with  more 

^  iv,  o  '^  creative  energy  and  enhanced  practical  intelligence,  thus  pro- 
viding for  the  ruling  class  an  ever-renewed  youth.  The  "po- 
A.%  litical  class"  (continuing  to  employ  Mosca's  convenient  phrase) 
has  unquestionably  an  extreme  fine  sense  of  its  possibilities  and 
its  means  of  defence.  It  displays  a  remarkable  force  of  at- 
traction and  a  vigorous  capacity  for  absorption  which  rarely 
fail  to  exercise  an  influence  even  upon  the  most  embittered  and 
uncompromising  of  its  adversaries.  From  the  historical  point 
of  view,  the  anti-romanticists  are  perfectly  right  when  they 
sum  up  their  scepticism  in  such  caustic  phraseology  as  this: 
* '  Qu  'est  ce  qu  'une  revolution  ?  Des  gens  qui  se  tirent  des  coups 
de  fusil  dans  une  rue:  cela  casse  beaucoup  de  carreaux;  il  n'y 
a  guere  que  les  vitriers  qui  y  trouvent  du  profit.  Le  vent  emporte 
la  fumee.  Ceux  qui  reste  dessus  mettent  les  autres  dessous.  .  .  . 
C'est  bien  la  peine  de  remuer  tant  d'honnetes  paves  qui  n'en 
pouvaient  mais ! "  ^^  Or  we  may  say,  as  the  song  runs  in 
Madame  Angot:  "Ce  n'est  pas  la  peine  de  changer  de 
ij  gouvernement ! "  In  France,  the  classic  land  of  social  theories 
\\    and  experiments,  such  pessimism  has  struck  the  deepest  roots.^* 

*' Charles  Fourier,  Be  V Anarchic  industrielle  et  scientifique,  Libr.  Pha- 
lanst.,  Paris,  1847,  p.  40. 

^  Theophile  Gautier,  Les  Jeunes-France,  Charpentier,  Paris,  1878,  p.  rv. 

^  The  disillusionment  of  the  French  regarding  democracy  goes  back  to 
the  Eevolution.  Guizot  declared  that  this  terrible  experiment  sufficed  ' '  a 
degouter  h  jamais  le  monde  de  la  recherche  de  la  liberte,  et  sScher,  jusque 
dans  leur  source,  les  plus  nobles  esperances  du  genre  humain"  (F.  Guizot, 
Du  Gouvernement  de  la  France,  ed.  cit.,  p.  165). 


CHAPTER  III 

PARTY-LIFE  IN  WAR-TIME 

Never  is  the  power  of  the  state  greater,  and  never  are  the 
forces  of  political  parties  of  opposition  less  effective,  than  at 
the  outbreak  of  war.  This  deplorable  war,  come  like  a  storm 
in  the  night,  when  everyone,  wearied  with  the  labours  of  the 
day,  was  plunged  in  well-deserved  slumber,  rages  all  over  the 
world  with  unprecedented  violence,  and  with  such  a  lack  of 
respect  for  human  life  and  of  regard  for  the  eternal  creations 
of  art  as  to  endanger  the  very  corner-stones  of  a  civilization 
dating  from  more  than  a  thousand  years.  One  of  the  corner- 
stones of  historical  materialism  is  that  the  working  classes  all 
over  the  world  are  united  as  if  by  links  of  iron  through  the 
perfect  community  of  economico-social  interests  which  they 
possess  in  face  of  the  bourgeoisie,  this  community  of  interests 
effecting  a  horizontal  stratification  of  classes  which  runs  athwart 
and  supersedes  the  vertical  stratification  of  nations  and  of  races. 
The  greatest  difference,  in  fact,  in  the  views  taken  of  economico- 
social  classes  and  of  linguistico-ethical  nationalities,  as  between 
the  respective  adherents  of  nationalistic  theories  and  of  the 
theories  of  historical  materialism,  consists  in  this,  that  the 
former  propound  the  hypothesis  that  the  concept  "nation"  is 
morally  and  positively  predominant  over  the  concept  "class," 
whilst  the  latter  consider  the  concept  and  reality  "nation" 
altogether  subordinate  to  the  concept  "class."  The  Marxists, 
in  fact,  believed  that  the  consciousness  of  class  had  become  im- 
pressed upon  the  entire  mentality  of  the  proletariat  imbued 
with  socialist  theories. 

The  war  has  shattered  this  theory  at  one  terrible  blow.  The 
German  socialist  party,  the  strongest,  wealthiest,  and  best  or- 
ganized section  of  the  working-class  international,  for  thirty  | 
years  past  the  leading  spirit  in  that  international,  suddenly  andj 
emphatically  declared  its  entire  solidarity  with  the  German! 
Emperor.  Throughout  the  proletarian  mass  there  has  not  been' 
reported  a  single  instance  of  moral  rebellion  against  the  struggle 

393 


394  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

which  enlists  socialists  to  fight  on  behalf  of  German  imperialism 
and  to  contend  with  the  comrades  of  other  lands.  Unquestion- 
ably, the  tactics  of  the  German  socialists  were  largely  due  to 
the  oligarchical  tendencies  which  manifest  themselves  in  mod- 
ern political  parties,  because  these  parties,  even  if  they  pursue  a 
revolutionary  aim,  and  indeed  precisely  because  they  do  so, 
that  is  to  say  because  they  make  war  against  the  existing  state- 
system  and  desire  to  replace  it  by  another,  have  need  of  a  vast 
organization  whose  central  strength  is  found  in  a  trusted  and 
stable  bureaucracy,  the  members  of  which  are  well  paid,  and 
which  has  at  its  disposal  the  powers  of  a  journalistic  system 
and  of  a  well-filled  treasury.^  This  organization  constitutes  a 
state  within  the  state.  Now  the  forces  of  party,  however  well- 
developed,  are  altogether  inferior  and  subordinate  to  the  forces 
of  the  government,  and  this  is  especially  true  in  such  a  country 
as  Germany.  Consequently  one  of  the  cardinal  rules  governing 
the  policy  of  the  socialist  party  is  never  to  push  its  attacks  upon 
the  government  beyond  the  limits  imposed  by  the  inequality 
between  the  respective  forces  of  the  combatants.  In  other  words, 
the  life  of  the  party,  whose  preservation  has  gradually  become 
the  supreme  objective  of  the  parties  of  political  action,  must 
not  be  endangered.  The  result  is  that  the  external  form  of  the 
party,  its  bureaucratic  organization,  definitely  gains  the  upper 
hand  over  its  soul,  its  doctrinal  and  theoretic  content,  and  the 
latter  is  sacrificed  whenever  it  tends  to  involve  an  inopportune 
conflict  with  the  enemy.  The  outcome  of  this  regressive  evolu- 
tion is  that  the  party  is  no  longer  regarded  as  a  means  for  the 
attainment  of  an  end,  but  gradually  becomes  an  end-in-itself, 
and  is  therefore  incapable  of  resisting  the  arbitrary  exercise 
of  power  by  the  state  when  this  power  is  inspired  by  a  vigorous 
will. 

Inevitably  such  a  party  is  unable  to  sustain  so  terrible  a  test 
as  that  of  upholding  its  faith  in  principles  when  the  state,  de- 
termined upon  war,  and  resolved  to  crush  anyone  who  gets  in 
the  way,  threatens  the  party  in  case  of  disobedience  with  the 
dissolution  of  its  branches,  the  sequestration  of  its  funds,  and 
the  slaughter  of  its  best  men.     The  party  gives  way,  hastily 

^At  the  end  of  1913  the  central  treasury  of  the  German  socialist  trade 
unions  owned  property  amounting  to  88,069,295  marks  (£4,400,000),  whilst 
the  local  and  independent  unions  owned  3,152,636  marks  (£150,000).  Now 
a  rebellion  against  the  government  and  its  foreign  policy  would  have  en- 
dangered all  these  funds. 


PARTY-LIFE  IN  WAR-TIME  395 

sells  its  internationalist  soul,  and,  impelled  by  the  instinct  of 
self-preservation,  undergoes  transformation  into  a  patriotic 
party.  The  world-war  of  1914  has  afforded  the  most  effective 
confirmation  of  what  the  author  wrote  in  the  first  edition  of 
this  book  concerning  the  future  of  socialist  parties. 

This  natural  tendency  of  the  modern  political  party  is  rein- 
forced, in  the  particular  case  under  consideration,  by  the  de- 
cision of  the  German  socialists  to  support  their  government  in 
all  respects,  owing  to  their  fear  and  hatred  of  Czarism.  This 
invincible  aversion,  upon  which  is  dependent  the  general  agree- 
ment with  which  the  entire  Germanic  democracy  has  accepted 
the  war,  arises  not  solely  from  the  foolish  prejudice  that  the 
Slavs  belong  to  an  inferior  race,  but  is  also  the  outcome  of  a 
special  historical  theory  held  by  Marx.  Marx,  in  fact,  regarded 
Eussia  as  responsible  for  ''the  reaction"  wherever  this  became 
manifest.  More  particularly,  he  considered  that  the  militarist 
regime  of  the  Prussian  nobles,  which  he  ardently  abhorred,  was 
merely  the  vanguard  of  the  Russian  autocracy.  He  added  that 
the  most  infallible  means  for  destroying  the  predominance  of 
the  German  junkers  would  be  to  crush  Russia,  without  whose 
aid  the  rule  of  the  Prussian  reaction  would  be  impossible.  This 
Marxist  conviction  had  become  a  party  dogma,  deep-rooted  in 
the  mind  of  every  individual  member  and  diffused  in  a  hundred 
writings.  The  German  socialists  who  enthusiastically  obeyed 
the  mobilization  order  issued  by  the  Emperor  believed  them- 
selves to  be  fulfilling  a  sacred  duty,  not  only  from  the  patriotic 
point  of  view,  but  also  from  the  democratic,  considering  that 
they  were  thus  hastening  the  day  of  their  own  final  deliver- 
ance. It  was  by  such  a  state  of  mind  that  were  inspired  the 
principal  speeches  delivered  and  the  most  authoritative  articles 
written  by  the  German  socialists  when  William  II  declared 
war  against  the  Czar. 

Moreover,  an  attitude  which  harmonized  ill .  with  the  theo- 
retical principle  of  historical  materialism  was  defended  by  the 
socialists  themselves  as  absolutely  essential  for  the  German 
proletariat.  Substantially  what  the  German  socialists  said 
was  that,  in  the  event  of  a  defeat  of  the  state  to  which  they 
belonged,  the  proletarians  would  necessarily  suffer  greatly  from 
unemployment  and  poverty;  consequently  it  was  their  supreme 
interest,  and  must  be  the  supreme  aim  of  their  representatives, 
to  avoid  this  eventuality;  hence  it  was  their  first  and  greatest 
duty  to  aid  the  German  army  by  all  the  means  at  their  disposal 


396  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

in  its  arduous  task  of  defeating  the  enemy.    Now,  there  is  no 
lack  of  positive  clearness  about  the  view  which  underlies  this 
reasoning.    Since  the  proletariat  is  an  integral  part  of  the  state, 
it  cannot  but  suffer  when  the  state  falls  upon  evil  days.    Above 
all,  the  lot  of  the  workers  is  dependent  upon  the  degree  to 
which  manufacture  and  commerce  flourish.    No  doubt  the  most 
prosperous  condition  of  manufacturing  industry  does  not  af- 
ford the  workers  an  absolute  guarantee  that  they  will  receive 
good  wages  and  be  able  to  enjoy  a  high  standard  of  life,  since 
there  is  no  proof  that  the  curve  of  wages  will  always  follow 
that  of  industrial  profits;  indeed,  it  is  notorious  that  whilst 
after  1870  the  development  of  German  manufacture  was  rapid 
and  extensive,  the  condition  of  the  German  workers  remained 
stationary  for  nearly  two  decades.    But  if  the  lot  of  the  workers 
and  that  of  the  manufacturers  are  not  always  on  the  same 
footing  in  the  matter  of  good  fortune,  it  cannot  be  doubted 
that  when  bad  times  come  they  have  to  share  the  same  dis- 
tresses;  if  manufacturing  industry   is   stagnant,   any   rise   of 
wages  is  excluded  a  'priori.     While,  however,  this  view  of  a 
community  of   interests   in   the   national   sphere   between   the 
bourgeoisie  and  the  proletariat  has  a  basis  of  reality,  there  can 
be  no  doubt  that  not  only  is  it  absolutely  antagonistic  to  the 
idealism  of  class,  that  is  to  say,  to  the  fraternal  affection  which 
denies  national  solidarity  in  order  to  affirm  with  enthusiasm 
the  international  solidarity  of  the  proletariat,  tending  and  aim- 
ing at  speedy  class-emancipation;  but  further  that  it  under- 
mines the  very  concept  of  class.     In  fact,  the  theoretical  posi- 
tion assumed  by  the  German  socialists,  and  imitated  more  or 
less  faithfully  by  their  comrades  in  other  lands,  is  dictated  by 
a  criterion  altogether  different  from  that  which  forms  the  basis 
of  historical  materialism.    This  latter  doctrine  presupposes  the 
existence  of  a  working  class  by  nature   one   and   indivisible, 
whereas  in  the  nationalist  view  there  exists  only  a  national  prole- 
tariat, included  within  a  given  state,  living  within  definite  geo- 
graphical boundaries,  and  subject  to  all  the  influences  of  force 
or  of  destiny.     Indeed,  the  social  democratic  concept  of  class 
(as  manifested  under  stress  of  war  by  the  majority  of  the  Ger- 
man socialists)  constitutes  the  negation  of  the  IMarxist  concept, 
in  so  far  as  the  foimier  degrades  the  latter,  and,  instead  of  be- 
coming the  instrument  of  world  liberation  as  it  was  conceived 
by  the   internationalist  theorists,   is  made   the   instrument   of 
patriotic,  social,  and  military  cooperation.    Historical  material- 


PARTY-LIFE  IN  WAR-TIME  397 

ism  aimed  at  securing  the  solidarity  of  the  human  race  under 
the  guidance  of  the  revolutionary  proletariat  and  through  the 
overthrow  of  the  bourgeoisie  and  of  national  governments.  The 
social  democratic  concept  of  class  aims  at  the  aggrandizement  of 
the  fatherland  and  at  the  prosperity  of  the  proletariat  and  of 
the  bourgeoisie  therein,  through  the  ruin  of  the  proletariat  and 
of  the  bourgeoisie  of  other  lands.  Between  these  two  concep- 
tions there  is,  in  fact,  so  great  a  gulf  fixed,  that  the  most  learned 
attempts  to  bridge  it  over  will  inevitably  prove  futile.  If  the  war 
has  not  demonstrated  the  fallacy  of  the  theory  that  the  working 
classes  of  various  countries,  considered  as  a  whole,  possess  com- 
mon interests  in  opposition  to  the  interests  of  the  various  na- 
tional bourgeoisies  also  considered  as  a  whole,  it  has  at  least 
demonstrated  the  non-existence  of  the  reaction  which  this  sup- 
posed phenomenon  ought  to  have  exercised  upon  the  mentality 
and  consequently  upon  the  activity  of  the  proletariat  which 
prolonged  socialist  propaganda  had  endeavoured  to  indoctrinate 
with  ]\Iarxist  principles. 

But  while  the  German  socialists  appealed  to  their  right  to 
be  guided  by  strictly  economic  interests  and  to  make  common 
cause  with  those  who  had  hitherto  been  their  worst  enemies, 
they  had  the  bad  taste  to  deny  this  right  to  their  foreign  com- 
rades. Paul  Lensch,  socialist  member  of  the  Reichstag,  editor 
of  the  ultra-Marxist  ''Leipziger  Volkszeitung, "  has,  with  a 
seriousness  worthy  of  a  better  cause,  sustained  the  following  re- 
markable assertions:  that  the  victory  of  Germany  is  necessary 
for  the  destruction  of  militarism,  which  will  become  superfluous 
as  soon  as  the  enemies  of  Germany  have  been  definitely  defeated, 
whilst  the  defeat  of  Germany  will  necessarily  provide  militar- 
ism with  new  aliment  (since  Germany  will  have  to  take  her  re- 
venge) ;  for  the  German  proletariat,  the  defeat  of  Germany 
would  be  equivalent  to  an  economic  catastrophe,  to  the  loss  of 
the  most  essential  means  of  subsistence,  and  to  the  ruin  of  the 
fruits  of  many  years  of  labour;  whereas  for  the  English  prole- 
tariat, the  consequences  of  the  defeat  of  England  would  un- 
questionably be  extremely  beneficial,  by  leading  to  the  rapid 
diffusion  of  socialist  ideas,  to  the  distribution  of  monopolies,  and 
to  "the  disappearance  of  the  stupid  pride  which  characterizes 
the  English  race,"^     According  to  this  profound  thinker,  the 

^Paul  Lensch,  Die  deutsclie    Sozialdemokraiie    u.  der  Weltkrieg,  Buch- 
handlung  "Vorwarts,"  BerUn,  1915,  pp.  26,  42,  58. 


398  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

same  causes  would  produce  different  effects  in  England  and 
France,  on  the  one  hand,  and  in  Germany  on  the  other.  For 
Germany  a  defeat  must  be  avoided  at  all  costs,  for  its  results 
would  be  disastrous,  whilst  in  the  case  of  England  and  France 
they  could  not  fail  to  be  salutary ! 
j  ■  Speaking  generally,  it  may  be  said  that  the  war  has  further 
l(  accentuated  the  oligarchical  character  of  party  leadership.  In 
no  country  (Italy,  of  course,  excepted,  for  Italy  has  had  ten 
months  for  mature  deliberation)  were  the  rank  and  file  of  the 
party  active  factors  in  the  adoption  of  a  policy  for  which  every 
single  member  was  accountable ;  in  no  country,  except  Italy,  was 
the  great  question  of  the  attitude  of  parties  in  relation  to  the 
problem  of  peace  or  war  laid  before  the  ordinary  members; 
everywhere  the  supreme  decision  was  in  the  hands  of  the  lead- 
ers, and  the  masses  had  merely  to  accept  an  accomplished  fact. 
In  most  cases  the  majority  of  the  leaders  established  their  abso- 
lute supremacy  over  the  minority  by  means  of  the  so-called 
party  discipline  which  obliges  the  minority  to  accept  the  will 
of  the  majority.  This  explains  the  almost  incredible  unanimity 
with  which,  in  the  Eeichstag,  in  the  memorable  August  sitting, 
the  German  socialist  parliamentary  group  voted  the  war  credits. 
In  the  secret  session  of  the  group  on  the  eve  of  the  official  session 
the  opponents  of  the  war  were  in  the  minority,  and  were  there- 
fore compelled  on  the  following  day,  by  the  obligations  of  party 
discipline,  to  confound  themselves  publicly  with  the  majority, 
and  to  give  a  vote  which  ran  counter  to  their  most  sincere  con- 
victions. This  amounts  to  saying  that  party  life  involves  strange 
moral  and  intellectual  sacrifices. 

Moreover,  by  not  a  few  party  leaders  the  war  was  looked 
upon  as  a  useful  means  of  propaganda  for  the  attraction  of  new 
recruits.  This  applies  above  all  to  the  socialist  party,  eager  to 
overthrow  the  barriers  which  separate  from  the  party  many 
sympathizers  among  the  manual,  operative,  and  shopkeeping 
classes,  who  are  loth  to  join  a  party  professing  internationalist 
views.  In  a  great  public  meeting  held  at  Stuttgart  on  February 
22,  1915,  Heymann,  a  deputy  to  the  diet  of  Wiirtemberg  and  one 
of  the  best-known  leaders  of  the  socialist  party  in  that  state, 
triumphantly  declared:  "Many  have  ardently  desired  to  join 
our  party.  But  there  was  an  obstacle.  Well,  that  obstacle  no 
longer  exists ! "  ^     Unquestionably  principles  are  often  a  stum- 

'  Zwei  Beden,  by  Hildebrand  and  W.  Heine,  Dietz,  Stuttgart,  1915,  p.  44, 


PARTY-LIFE  IN  WAR-TIME  399 

bling-block  to  a  party  whose  main  desire  is  to  increase  its  mem- 
bership; and  to  disregard  inconvenient  principles  may  bring 
electoral  advantage,  if  at  the  cost  of  honour.  The  leaders  are 
the  first  to  favour  such  a  tendency,  for  the  more  widely  extended 
the  foundations  of  their  party,  the  greater  grows  their  own  indi- 
vidual power.  In  fact,  the  individual  power  of  the  leaders  un- 
dergoes an  immeasurable  increase  at  a  time  when  the  majority 
of  the  members  of  all  parties  are  under  arms,  and  for  this 
reason  may  be  considered  as  politically  non-existent  because  they 
are  unable  to  exercise  any  influence  upon  the  executive  of  the 
party  to  which  they  belong.  On  the  Continent,  even  those  mem- 
bers who  have  not  been  summoned  to  the  colours  no  longer 
possess  any  power  of  controlling  their  leaders,  owing  to  the 
suppression  of  the  freedom  of  the  press  and  of  the  rights  of 
public  meeting  and  of  combination.  Wherever  martial  law  pre- 
vails, the  leader  is  omnipotent. 


CHAPTER  IVi 
FINAL   CONSIDERATIONS 

"A  prendre  le  terme  dans  la  rigueur  de  I'aeception  il  n'a  jamais  existe 
de  veritable  democratic,  et  il  n'cn  existera  jamais.  II  est  contre  I'ordre 
naturel  que  le  grand  nombre  gouverne,  et  que  le  petit  soit  gouverne. " — 
J.  J.  EoussEAU,  Contrat  Social. 

Leadership  is  a  necessary  phenomenon  in  every  form  of  social 
life.  Consequently  it  is  not  the  task  of  science  to  inquire  whether 
this  phenomenon  is  good  or  evil,  or  predominantly  one  or  the 
other.  But  there  is  great  scientific  value  in  the  demonstration 
that  every  system  of  leadership  is  incompatible  with  the  most 
essential  postulates  of  democracy.  We  are  now  aware  that  the 
law  of  the  historic  necessity  of  oligarchy  is  primarily  based  upon 
a  series  of  facts  of  experience.  Like  all  other  scientific  laws, 
sociological  laws  are  derived  from  empirical  observation.  In 
order,  however,  to  deprive  our  axiom  of  its  purely  descriptive 
character,  and  to  confer  upon  it  that  status  of  analytical  ex- 
planation which  can  alone  transform  a  formula  into  a  law,  it 
does  not  suffice  to  contemplate  from  a  unitary  outlook  those 
phenomena  which  may  be  empirically  established;  we  must 
also  study  the  determining  causes  of  these  phenomena.  Such 
has  been  our  task. 

Now,  if  we  leave  out  of  consideration  the  tendency  of  the 
leaders  to  organize  themselves  and  to  consolidate  their  interests, 
and  if  we  leave  also  out  of  consideration  the  gratitude  of  the 
led  towards  the  leaders,  and  the  general  immobility  and  passivity 

(of  the  masses,  we  are  led  to  conclude  that  the  principal  cause  of 
oligarchy  in  the  democratic  parties  is  to  be  found  in  the  technical 
indispensability  of  leadership. 

The  process  which  has  begun  in  consequence  of  the  differentia- 
tion of  functions  in  the  party  is  completed  by  a  complex  of 
qualities  which  the  leaders  acquire  through  their  detachment 

{from  the  mass.  At  the  outset,  leaders  arise  spontaneously; 
their  functions  are  accessory  and  gratuitous.    Soon,  however, 

400 


FINAL  CONSIDERATIONS  401 

they  become  professional  leaders,  and  in  this  second  stage  of 
development  they  are  stable  and  irremovable. 

It  follows  that  the  explanation  of  the  oligarchical  phenome- 
non which  thus  results  is  partly  psychological;  oligarchy  de- 
rives, that  is  to  say,  from  the  psychical  transformations  which 
the  leading  personalities  in  the  parties  undergo  in  the  course 
of  their  lives.  But  also,  and  still  more,  oligarchy  depends  upon 
what  we  may  term  the  psychology  of  organization  itself,  that 
is  to  say,  upon  the  tactical  and  technical  necessities  which  re- 
sult from  the  consolidation  of  every  disciplined  political  aggre- 
gate. Reduced  to  its  most  concise  expression,  the  fundamental 
sociological  law  of  political  parties  (the  term  "political"  being 
here  used  in  its  most  comprehensive  significance)  may  be  formu- 
lated in  the  following  terms :  "  It  is  organization  w^iich  gives 
birth  to  the  dominion  of  the  elected  over  the  electors,  of  the 
mandataries  over  the  mandators,  of  the  delegates  over  the 
delegators.     Who  says  organization,  says  oligarchy." 

Every  party  orgamzaTioiT  Tellrysc'irLy  HU"^garchical  power 
grounded  upon  a  democratic  basis.  We  find  everywhere  electors 
and  elected.  Also  we  find  everywhere  that  the  power  of  the 
elected  leaders  over  the  electing  masses  is  almost  unlimited. 
The  oligarchical  structure  of  the  building  suffocates  the  basic 
democratic  principle.  That  which  is  oppresses  that  which 
ought  to  be.  For  the  masses,  this  essential  difference  between 
the  reality  and  the  ideal  remains  a  mystery.  Socialists  often 
cherish  a  sincere  belief  that  a  new  elite  of  politicians  will  keep 
faith  better  than  did  the  old.  The  notion  of  the  repre- 
sentation of  popular  interests,  a  notion  to  which  the  great 
majority  of  democrats,  and  in  especial  the  working-class  masses 
of  the  German-speaking  lands,  cleave  with  so  much  tenacity 
and  confidence,  is  an  illusion  engendered  by  a  false  illumina- 
tion, is  an  effect  of  mirage.  In  one  of  the  most  delightful 
pages  of  his  analysis  of  modern  Don  Quixotism,  Alphonse 
Daudet  shows  us  how  the  "brav'  commandant"  Bravida, 
who  has  never  quitted  Taraseon,  gradually  comes  to  persuade 
himself,  influenced  by  the  burning  southern  sun,  that  he  has 
been  to  Shanghai  and  has  had  all  kinds  of  heroic  adventures.^ 
Similarly  the  modern  proletariat,  enduringly  influenced  by 
glib-tongued  persons  intellectually  superior  to  the  mass,  ends 

^  Alphonse  Daudet,  Tartarin  de  Taraseon,  Marpon  et  Flanunarion,  Paris, 
1887,  p.  40. 


402  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

by  believing  that  by  flocking  to  the  poll  and  entrusting  its 
social  and  economic  cause  to  a  delegate,  its  direct  participation 
in  power  will  be  assured.^ 

(The  formation  of  oligarchies  within  the  various  forms  of 
democracy  is  the  outcome  of  organic  necessity,  and  consequently 
affects  every  organization,  be  it  socialist  or  even  anarchist. 
Haller  long  ago  noted  that  in  every  form  of  social  life  rela- 
tionships of  dominion  and  of  dependence  are  created  by  Nature 
herself.^  The  supremacy  of  the  leaders  in  the  democratic  and 
revolutionary  parties  has  to  be  taken  into  account  in  every 
historic  situation  present  and  to  come,  even  though  only  a  few 
and  exceptional  minds  will  be  fully  conscious  of  its  existence. 
The  mass  will  never  rule  except  in  abstracto.  Consequently  the 
question  we  have  to  discuss  is  not  whether  ideal  democracy  is 
realizable,  but  rather  to  what  point  and  in  what  degree  democ- 
racy is  desirable,  possible,  and  realizable  at  a  given  moment.  In 
the  problem  as  thus  stated  we  recognize  the  fundamental  prob- 
lem of  politics  as  a  science.  Whoever  fails  to  perceive  this 
must,  as  Sombart  says,  either  be  so  blind  and  fanatical  as  not 
to  see  that  the  democratic  current  daily  makes  undeniable  ad- 
vance, or  else  must  be  so  inexperienced  and  devoid  of  critical 
faculty  as  to  be  unable  to  understand  that  all  order  and  all 
civilization  must  exhibit  aristocratic  features.*  The  great  error 
of  socialists,  an  error  committed  in  consequence  of  their  lack 
of  adequate  psychological  knowledge,  is  to  be  found  in  their 
combination  of  pessimism  regarding  the  present,  with  rosy  op- 
timism and  immeasurable  confidence  regarding  the  future.  A 
realistic  view  of  the  mental  condition  of  the  masses  shows  be- 
yond question  that  even  if  we  admit  the  possibility  of  moral 

*  Militant  democrats  will  not  admit  this  publicly.  According  to  them 
the  power  of  the  masses  is  unlimited.  This  unrealistic  view,  in  its  applica- 
tion to  political  elections,  will  be  found  in  a  number  of  socialist  writings, 
although  its  expression  is  apt  to  be  somewhat  veiled.  It  is  only  in  the 
work  of  Dr.  P.  Coullery,  of  La  Chaux-de-Fonds,  a  somewhat  eccentric  Swiss 
internationalist,  that  we  find  a  categorical  expression  of  the  thought:  "Par 
le  suffrage  universel  le  peuple  des  travailleurs  devient  tout-puissant" 
(Coullery,  Jesus  le  Christ  et  sa  Vie,  sa  Doctrine  morale,  politique,  econo- 
mique  et  sociale.  Les  Lois  naturelles  et  le  Socialisme,  Schweizer,  Bienne, 
1891,  p.  303).  In  its  application  to  party  organization  this  same  notion, 
makes  no  closer  approximation  to  the  real  facts  of  the  case. 

*Ludwig  von  Haller,  Restauration  der  Staatswissenschaften,  Winterthur, 
1816,  vol.  i,  pp.  304  et  seq. 

*  Werner  Sombart,  Bennoch!,  ed.  eit.,  p.  90.  Cf.  also  F.  S.  Merlino,  Pro 
e  contro  il  Socialismo,  ed.  cit.,  pp.  262  et  seq. 


.  FINAL  CONSIDERATIONS  403 

improvement  in  mankind,  the  human  materials  with  whose  use 
politicians  and  philosophers  cannot  dispense  in  their  plans  of 
social  reconstruction  are  not  of  a  character  to  justify  exces- 
sive optimism.     Within  the  limits  of  time  for  which  human! 
provision    is    possible,    optimism    will    remain    the    exclusive  j 
privilege  of  Utopian  thinkers.  * 

The  socialist  parties,  like  the  trade  unions,  are  living  forms 
of  social  life.  As  such  they  react  with  the  utmost  energy 
against  any  attempt  to  analyse  their  structure  or  their  nature, 
as  if  it  were  a  method  of  vivisection.  "When  science  attains  to 
results  which  conflict  with  their  apriorist  ideology,  they  revolt 
with  all  their  power.  Yet  their  defence  is  extremely  feeble. 
Those  among  the  representatives  of  such  organizations  whose 
scientific  earnestness  and  personal  good  faith  make  it  impos- 
sible for  them  to  deny  outright  the  existence  of  oligarchical 
tendencies  in  every  form  of  democracy,  endeavour  to  explain 
these  tendencies  as  the  outcome  of  a  kind  of  atavism  in  the 
mentality  of  the  masses,  characteristic  of  the  youth  of  the 
movement.  The  masses,  they  assure  us,  are  still  infected  by  I 
the  oligarchic  virus  simply  because  they  have  been  oppressed  I 
during  long  centuries  of  slavery,  and  have  never  yet  enjoyed  I 
an  autonomous  existence.^     The  socialist  regime,  however,  will  ) 

^Such  an  opinion  has  been  expressed  by  the  syndicalist  theorists  in  espe- 
cial, as,  for  instance,  by  Enrico  Leone   ("Divenire  Sociale, "  vol.  v,  Nos. 
18,  19)  in  a  criticism  of  my  own  preliminary  studies  on  this  theme,  and  by 
Adolpho  Momigliano  ("Propaganda,"  Naples,  December  2,  1910).     Many 
of  the  reformists  give  utterance  to  a  similar  opinion.     In  a  lengthy  critical 
examination  of  my  views  (whose  justice  he  by  no  means  denies)   Fausto 
Pagliari  comes  to  the  conclusion  that  the  oligarchical  tendencies  of  the  so- 
cialist movement  are  not  indications  of  what  is  going  to  continue  in  the 
future,  but  merely  transitional  forms  of  a  movement  which  is  still  walking 
in  darkness;  signs  of  youth,  not  of  age  (OligarcMa  e  Bemocrasia  neW  Or- 
ganizsazione  opcraia,  "Critica  Sociale,"  February  1,  1909).     Others,  like 
the  syndicalist  Sergio  Panunzio,  accept  my  proposition  without  reserve  but 
fail  to  apply  its  consequences  to  their  own  theory  (Syndicalisme  et  Bepre- 
sentation  Ouvriere,  "Mouvement  Socialiste, "  anno  xii,  No.  221).     Eduard 
Bernstein,  who  also  fails  to  rebut  my  demonstrations   (cf.  Bie  Bemokratie 
in  der  SozialdemoTiratie,  "Sozial.  Monatshef te, "  1908,  fasc.  18  and  19), 
reproaches  me  with  overstressing  the  psychological  note,  but  does  not  him- 
self fall  into  the  error  of  the  Marxists  and  syndicalists.     He  continues  to 
hold  to-day  the  realistic  conception  of  the  future  which  he  expressed  in 
1897,  when  he  compared  the  process  of  internal  democratic  administration 
with  that  of  industrial  production,  writing:     "At  the  door  of  the  worksliop 
we  may  be  equal,  but  are  equal  no  longer  when  we  have  gone  inside.    Here 
the  engineer  must  issue  his  orders,  and  the  various  subordinate  workmen 


404  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

soon  restore  them  to  health,  and  will  furnish  them  with  all  the 
capacity  necessary  for  self-government.  Nothing  could  be  more 
anti-scientific  than  the  supposition  that  as  soon  as  socialists 
have  gained  possession  of  governmental  power  it  will  suffice  for 
the  masses  to  exercise  a  little  control  over  their  leaders  to 
secure  that  the  interests  of  these  leaders  shall  coincide  perfectly 
with  the  interests  of  the  led.*'  This  idea  may  be  compared 
<^    with  the  view  of  Jules  Guesde,  no  less  anti;S£ientific  than  anti- 

V  Marxist    (though   Guesde   proclaims  himself  a   Marxist),   that 

II  whereas  Christianity  has  made  God  into  a  man,  socialism  will 

"make  man  into  a  god.'' 

The  objective  immaturity  of  the  mass  is  not  a  mere  transitory 
phenomenon  which  will  disappear  with  the  progress  of  de- 
mocratization au  lendemam  du  socialisme.    On  the  contrary,  it 

\derives  from  the  very  nature  of  the  mass  as  mass,  for  this,  even 
jwhen  organized,  suffers  from  an  incurable  incompetence  for 
/the  solution  of  the  diverse  problems  which  present  themselves 

'for  solution — because  the  mass  per  se  is  amorphous,  and  there- 
fore needs  division  of  labour,  specialization,  and  guidance. 
"L'espece  humaine  veut  etre  gouvernee;  elle  le  sera.  J'ai 
honte  de  mon  espece,"  wrote  Proudhon  from  his  prison  in 
1850.^  Man  as  individual  is  by  nature  predestined  to  be  guided, 
and  to  be  guided  all  the  more  in  proportion  as  the  functions  of 
life  undergo  division  and  subdivision.  To  an  enormously  greater 
degree  is  guidance  necessary  for  the  social  group. 

From  this  chain  of  reasoning  and  from  these  scientific  convic- 
tions it  would  be  erroneous  to  conclude  that  we  should  renounce 
all  endeavours  to  ascertain  the  limits  which  may  be  imposed 
upon  the  powers  exercised  over  the  individual  by  oligarchies 

must  carry  them  out.  The  stoker  cannot  act  according  to  his  own  fancy 
and  draw  the  fires  whenever  it  pleases  him"  (Das  demolratiscJie  Prlnzip 
und  seine  Anwendimg,  "Neue  Zeit, "  anno  xix,  p.  25  [1897]  ).  Bernstein, 
however,  has  not  attained  to  clearness  of  vision  regarding  the  results  of  the 
division  of  labour  and  of  the  differences  in  technical  competence  among  the 
democratic  masses.  Consequently  he  remains  faithful  to  a  concept  of 
democracy  which  has  little  more  than  the  name  in  common  with  the  democ- 
racy advocated  by  the  great  democratic  thinkers  of  the  eighteenth  century 
and  the  socialists  of  the  nineteenth. 

® Cf .  Leon  Trochet  (deputy  of  Liege),  Socialdemocratie  et  AnarcMsme, 
Discours,  Brussels-Ghent-Liege,  1902,  p.  42. 

'  Julea  Guesde,  La  Probleme  et  la  Solution,  Libr.  du  Parti  Socialiste, 
Paris,  p.  17. 

'  Charles  Gide  et  Charles  Eist,  Uistoire  des  Doctrines  economiques  depuis 
les  Fhysiocrates  jusqu'a  nos  jours,  Larose  et  Tenia,  Paris,  1909,  p.  709. 


FINAL  CONSIDERATIONS  405 

(state,  dominant  class,  party,  etc.).  It  would  be  an  error  to  V. 
abandon  the  desperate  enterprise  of  endeavouring  to  discover  V 
a  social  order  which  will  render  possible  the  complete  realiza- 
tion of  the  idea  of  popular  sovereignty.  In  the  present  work, 
as  the  writer  said  at  the  outset,  it  has  not  been  his  aim  to 
indicate  new  paths.  But  it  seemed  necessary  to  lay  consider- 
able stress  upon  the  pessimist  aspect  of  democracy  which  is 
forced  on  us  by  historical  study.  We  had  to  inquire  whether, 
and  within  what  limits,  democracy  must  remain  purely  ideal, 
possessing  no  other  value  than  that  of  a  moral  criterion  which 
renders  it  possible  to  appreciate  the  varying  degrees  of  that 
oligarchy  which  is  immanent  in  every  social  regime.  In  other 
words,  we  have  had  to  inquire  if,  and  in  what  degree,  democ- 
racy is  an  ideal  which  we  can  never  hope  to  realize  in  practice. 
A  further  aim  of  this  work  was  the  demolition  of  some  of  the 
facile  and  superficial  democratic  illusions  which  trouble  science 
and  lead  the  masses  astray.  Finally,  the  author  desired  to 
throw  light  upon  certain  sociological  tendencies  which  oppose 
the  reign  of  democracy,  and  to  a  still  greater  extent  oppose  the 
reign  of  socialism. 

The  writer  does  not  wish  to  deny  that  every  revolutionary  i  ^ 
working-class  movement,  and  every  movement  sincerely  in-  I 
spired  by  the  democratic  spirit,  may  have  a  certain  value  as 
contributing  to  the  enfeeblement  of  oligarchic  tendencies.  The 
peasant  in  the  fable,  when  on  his  death-bed,  tells  his  sons  that 
a  treasure  is  buried  in  the  field.  After  the  old  man's  death 
the  sons  dig  everywhere  in  order  to  discover  the  treasure.  They 
do  not  find  it.  But  their  indefatigable  labour  improves  the  soil 
and  secures  for  them  a  comparative  well-being.  The  treasure 
in  the  fable  may  well  symbolize  democracy.  Democracy  is  a 
treasure  which  no  one  will  ever  discover  by  deliberate  search. 
But  in  continuing  our  search,  in  labouring  indefatigably  to 
discover  the  indiscoverable,  we  shall  perform  a  work  which  will 
have  fertile  results  in  the  democratic  sense.  We  have  seen, 
indeed,  that  within  the  bosom  of  the  democratic  workmg-class 
party  are  born  the  very  tendencies  to  counteract  which  that 
party  came  into  existence.  Thanks  to  the  diversity  and  to  the 
unequal  worth  of  the  elements  of  the  party,  these  tendencies 
often  give  rise  to  manifestations  which  border  on  tyranny. 
We  have  seen  that  the  replacement  of  the  traditional  legitimism 
of  the  powers-that-be  by  the  brutal  plebiscitary  rule  of  Bona- 
partist  parvenus  does  not  furnish  these  tendencies  with  any 


406  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

moral  or  aesthetic  superiority.  Historical  evolution  mocks  all 
the  prophylactic  measures  that  have  been  adopted  for  the  pre- 
vention of  oligarchy.  If  laws  are  passed  to  control  the  dominion 
of  the  leaders,  it  is  the  laws  which  gradually  weaken,  and  not 
the  leaders.  Sometimes,  however,  the  democratic  principle  car- 
ries with  it,  if  not  a  cure,  at  least  a  palliative,  for  the  disease 
of  oligarchy.  When  Victor  Considerant  formulated  his  "demo- 
cratico-pacificist "  socialism,  he  declared  that  socialism  signified, 
not  the  rule  of  society  by  the  lower  classes  of  the  population,  but 
the  government  and  organization  of  society  in  the  interest  of  all, 
through  the  intermediation  of  a  group  of  citizens ;  and  he  added 
that  the  numerical  importance  of  this  group  must  increase  pari 
passu  with  social  development.^  This  last  observation  draws 
attention  to  a  point  of  capital  importance.  It  is,  in  fact,  a 
general  characteristic  of  democracy,  and  hence  also  of  the 
labour  movement,  to  stimulate  and  to  strengthen  in  the  indi- 
vidual the  intellectual  aptitudes  for  criticism  and  control.  We 
have  seen  how  the  progressive  bureaucratization  of  the  demo- 
cratic organism  tends  to  neutralize  the  beneficial  effects  of  such 
criticism  and  such  control.  None  the  less  it  is  true  that  the 
labour  movement,  in  virtue  of  the  theoretical  postulates  it  pro- 
claims, is  apt  to  bring  into  existence  (in  opposition  to  the  will 
of  the  leaders)  a  certain  number  of  free  spirits  who,  moved  by 
principle,  by  instinct,  or  by  both,  desire  to  revise  the  base  upon 
which  authority  is  established.  Urged  on  by  conviction  or  by 
temperament,  they  are  never  weary  of  asking  an  eternal ' '  Why  ? ' ' 
about  every  human  institution.  Now  this  predisposition  towards 
free  inquiry,  in  which  we  cannot  fail  to  recognize  one  of  the 
most  precious  factors  of  civilization,  will  gradually  increase  in 
proportion  as  the  economic  status  of  the  masses  undergoes  im- 
provement and  becomes  more  stable,  and  in  proportion  as  they 
are  admitted  more  effectively  to  the  advantages  of  civilization, 
A  wider  education  involves  an  increasing  capacity  for  exercis- 
ing control.  Can  we  not  observe  every  day  that  among  the 
well-to-do  the  authority  of  the  leaders  over  the  led,  extensive 
though  it  be,  is  never  so  unrestricted  as  in  the  case  of  the  lead- 
ers of  the  poor?  Taking  in  the  mass,  the  poor  are  powerless 
and  disarmed  vis-a-vis  their  leaders.  Their  intellectual  and 
cultural  inferiority  makes  it  impossible  for  them  to  see  whither 


•Victor  Considerant,  Prineipes  du  Socialisme.     Manifeste  de   la  Demo- 
cratie  au  xix  Siecle,  Librairie  Phalansterienne,  Paris,  1847,  p.  53. 


FINAL  CONSIDERATIONS  407 

the  leader  is  going,  or  to  estimate  in  advance  the  significance 
of  his  actions.  It  is,  consequently,  the  great  task  of  social 
education  to  raise  the  intellectual  level  of  the  masses,  so  that 
they  may  be  enabled,  within  the  limits  of  what  is  possible,  to 
counteract  the  oligarchical  tendencies  of  the  working-class 
movement. 

In  view  of  the  perennial  incompetence  of  the  masses,  we  have 
to  recognize  the  existence  of  two  regulative  principles: — 

1.  The  ideological  tendency  of  democracy  towards  criticism 
and  control ; 

2.  The  effective  counter-tendency  of  democracy  towards  the 
creation  of  parties  ever  more  complex  and  ever  more  differen- 
tiated— parties,  that  is  to  say,  which  are  increasingly  based  upon 
the  competence  of  the  few. 

To  the  idealist,  the  analysis  of  the  forms  of  contemporary 
democracy  cannot  fail  to  be  a  source  of  bitter  deceptions  and 
profound  discouragement.  Those  alone,  perhaps,  are  in  a  posi- 
tion to  pass  a  fair  judgment  upon  democracy  who,  without 
lapsing  into  dilettantist  sentimentalism,  recognize  that  all  sci- 
entific and  human  ideals  have  relative  values.  If  we  wish  to 
estimate  the  value  of  democracy,  we  must  do  so  in  comparison 
with  its  converse,  pure  aristocracy.  The  defects  inherent  in 
democracy  are  obvious.  It  is  none  the  less  true  that  as  a  form 
of  social  life  we  must  choose  democracy  as  the  least  of  evils. 
,The  ideal  government  would  doubtless  be  that  of  an  aristocracy 
of  persons  at  once  morally  good  and  technically  efficient.  But 
where  shall  we  discover  such  an  aristocracy?  We  may  find  it 
sometimes,  though  very  rarely,  as  the  outcome  of  deliberate  se- 
lection ;  but  we  shall  never  find  it  where  the  hereditary  principle 
remains  in  operation.  Thus  monarchy  in  its  pristine  purity 
must  be  considered  as  imperfection  incarnate,  as  the  most 
incurable  of  ills;  from  the  moral  point  of  view  it  is  inferior 
even  to  the  most  revolting  of  demagogic  dictatorships,  for  the 
corrupt  organism  of  the  latter  at  least  contains  a  healthy  prin- 
ciple upon  whose  working  we  may  continue  to  base  hopes  of 
social  resanation.  It  may  be  said,  therefore,  that  the  more 
humanity  comes  to  recognize  the  advantages  which  democracy, 
however  imperfect,  presents  over  aristocracy,  even  at  its  best, 
the  less  likely  is  it  that  a  recognition  of  the  defects  of  democ- 
racy will  provoke  a  return  to  aristocracy.  Apart  from  certain 
formal  differences  and  from  the  qualities  which  can  be  acquired 
only  by  good  education  and  inheritance  (qualities  in  which  aris- 


408  POLITICAL  PARTIES 

tocraey  will  always  have  the  advantage  over  democracy — quali- 
ties which  democracy  either  neglects  altogether,  or,  attempting 
to  imitate  them,  falsifies  them  to  the  point  of  caricature),  the 
defects  of  democracy  will  be  found  to  inhere  in  its  inability  to 
get  rid  of  its  aristocratic  scoria.  On  the  other  hand,  nothing 
but  a  serene  and  frank  examination  of  the  oligarchical  dangers 
of  democracy  will  enable  us  to  minimize  these  dangers,  even 
though  they  can  never  be  entirely  avoided. 

The  democratic  currents  of  history  resemble  successive  waves. 
They  break  ever  on  the  same  shoal.  They  are  ever  renewed. 
This  enduring  spectacle  is  simultaneously  encouraging  and  de- 
pressing. "When  democracies  have  gained  a  certain  stage  of 
development,  they  undergo  a  gradual  transformation,  adopting 
the  artistocratic  spirit,  and  in  many  cases  also  the  aristocratic 
forms,  against  which  at  the  outset  they  struggled  so  fiercely. 
Now  new  accusers  arise  to  denounce  the  traitors;  after  an  era 
of  glorious  combats  and  of  inglorious  power,  they  end  by 
fusing  with  the  old  dominant  class ;  whereupon  once  more  they 
are  in  their  turn  attacked  by  fresh  opponents  who  appeal  to 
the  name  of  democracy.  It  is  probable  that  this  cruel  game 
will  continue  without  end. 


INDEX 


Abel,  272 

About,  Edmond,  222,  230,  290 

Adler,  Max,  260 

Adler,  Victor,  70,  136,  173,  178,  260, 

325  349 
Alfonso  XIII,  108 
Aliprandi,  Carlo,  254 
Allemane,  Jean,  211 
Allmann,  Otto,  51 
Ambris,  see  De  Ambria 
Amicis,  see  De  Amicis 
Angiolini,  Alfredo,  160,  308,  314 
Anseele,  Eduard,  61,  147,  195,  196,  240, 

321 
Arcoleo.  Giorgio,  265,  266,  267 
Arnould,  Arthur,  308 
Arons,  Leo,  260 

Auer,  Ignaz,  62,  93,  100,  140,  327 
Augagneur,  V.,  110 
Augustus  II  of  Saxony,  King  of  Poland, 

304 
Augustine,  St.,  63 
Austerlitz,  Fritz,  260 
Axa,  see  Zo 
Azeff,  348 

Babeuf,  Gracchus,  384 

Bader,  Paul,  108 

Bakunin,  Michael,  193,  194,  207,  228, 
229,  257,  319,  340,  341,  342,  343, 
359,  360,  361,  371,  381,  382 

Balabanoff,  Angelica,  261 

Bamberger,  L.,  259 

Bang,  G.,  56 

Baroche,  P.  I.,  338 

Barrault,  E.,  380 

Barrison,  James,  162 

Bauer,  O.,  31 

Bayard,  221 

Bax,  see  Belfort  Bax 

Beaulieu,  see  Leroy 

Bebel,  August,  45,  61,  68,  70,  76,  93,  94, 
96,  108,  112,  136,  137,  140,  141,  142, 
143,  153,  159,  196,  213,  214,  226, 
227,  228,  240,  263,  264,  266,  278, 
279,  314,  327,  360,  371,  385 

Beer,  M.,  150,  261 


Belfort  Bax,  Ernest,  89 

Benedict,  St.,  63 

Bernaroli,  E.,  28,  127 

Bernstein,  Eduard,  26,  27,  36,  54,  60, 

71,  73,  88,  96,  100,  113,  124,  126, 

127,   128,   152,   153,   195,  240,  254, 

260,  263,  300,  316,  320,  321,  337, 

383,  387,  403,  404 
Berth,  Edouard,  70,  298,  347,  355,  381 
Berthod,  A.,  2 
Bettolo,  Admiral  G.,  132 
Bianchi,  G.  B.,  252 
Bignami,  Enrico,  83 
Bismarck,  Prince,  46,  60,  66,  119,  227, 

274,  371 
Bissolati,  Leonida,  51 
Blanc,  Louis,  20,  27,  109,  212,  239,  244, 

264,  381 
Blank,  R.,  270 

Blanqui,  Auguste,  108,  129,  239 
Block,  Joseph,  260 
Block,  Hans,  35,  152 
Bios,  W.,  93,  138 
Blum,  Erich,  64 
Bock,  F.  W.,  93 
Bomelburg,  T.,  212 
Bon,  see  Le  Bon 
Bonaparte,  207 

Bonaparte,  Louis  Napoleon,  215 
Borgius,  Walter,  362 
Borne,  Ludwig,  174,  175 
Bosco,  Garibaldi,  66 
Bossuet,  J.  B.,  214 
Boulanger,  General,  107 
Bourdeau,  Jean,  356 
Bozard,  380 
Bracke,  Wilhehn,  281 
Brandenburg,  Erich,  46 
Braun,  Adolf,  78,  198,  260,  276,  342 
Braun,  Heinrich,  260,  322 
Braun,  Lily,  30,  121,  177,  250,  324 
Briand,    Aristide,    56,    109,    180,    35i; 

382 
Brocchi,  Renato,  125 
Brocchi,  Virgilio.  253 
Broda,  Rudolf,  290 
Brooks,  R.  C.,  311,  313,  314,  320 


409 


410 


INDEX 


BrouckSre,  L.  de,  352 
Brousse,  Paul,  84,  108,  320 
Brust  (miner),  123 
Bryce,  J.,  179 

Buchholz  (stucco-worker),  304 
Buchwald,  Bruno,  373 
Buck,  Otto,  322,  391 
Bueb,  Fernand,  109 
Buisson,  Ferdinand,  107 
Biilow,  Prince,  138 
Buonarroti,  Filippo,  384 
Burns,  John,  109,  179,  304,  349 

Cabiati,  Attilio,  21 

Cabrini,  Angelo,  253 

Cafiero,  Carlo,  59,  343 

Calwer,  Richard,   123,   124,   182,  263, 

282,  284,  322 
Caporusso,  Stefano,  308 
Caristia,  Carmelo,  379 
Carlyle,  Thomas,  70,  89 
Casalini,  G.,  52 
Cases,  see  Las  Cases 
Casti,  Giambattista,  184 
Catania,  see  Romano 
Cauderlier,  E.,  312 
Cena,  Giovanni,  255 
Challaye,  Felicien,  391 
Chamarz,  Richard,  70 
Charlemagne,  174 
Charles,  see  Ernest-Charles 
Cherbuliez,  Antoine  Elisfie,  157 
Chiesa,  P.,  320 
Choisy,  Abb6  de,  14 
Ciccotti,  Ettore,  72,  84,  128,  206,  215, 

253,  256,  257 
Ciccotti,  Francesco,  200 
Clemczynski,  E.,  125,  128 
C16menceau,  Georges,  69,  356 
Cldment,  J.  B.,  253 
Clement  IX.,  244 
Clynes,  149 

Colajanni,  Napoleone,  37 
Colbert,  301 
Condorcet,  M.  J.,  87 
Conrad,  Johannes,  236 
Consid6rant,Victor,  23, 37, 38, 39, 88, 406 
Constant,  Benjamin,  26 
Cornelissen,  Christian,  358,  359 
Costa,  A.,  58 
Coullery,  P.,  402 
Cramer,  B.,  141 
Crdmieux,  Isaac  Adolphe,  261 
Crispi,  69 

Croce,  Benedetto,  254,  376 
Curtius,  F.,  7,  8,  46 
Cut6,  A.,  Tasco  di,  178,  201 
Cyrus,  2 


Da  Fonseca,  see  Fonseca 

D'Alembert,  244 

Dalpadulo,  Fiorino,  347 

Danton,  G.  J.,  165 

D'Asson,  see  Baudry 

Daszynski,  I.,  70 

Daudet,  Alphonse,  15,  208,  401,  402 

Daudet,  L6on,  15,  208 

David,  Eduard,  131,  142,  322 

Davidsohn,  Georg,  285 

De  Ambris,  A.,  350 

De  Amicis,  Edmondo,  74,  210,  242,  243, 

252,  253,  358 
D'Axa,  see  Zo 

De  Beaiu-egard,  see  Beauregard 
De  Brouck^re,  see  Brouckfere 
De  Cassagnac,  see  Cassagnac 
De  Castellane,  see  Castellane 
De  Chambrun,  see  Chambrun 
De  Choisy,  see  Choisy 
De  Felice  Giuffrida,  Giuseppe,  65 
Defnet,  G.,  61 

De  Fuisseaux,  Alfred,  see  Fuisseaux 
De  Fuisseaux,  L6on,  see  Fuisseaux 
Deinhardt,  Ernst,  276 
De  la  Grasserie,  Raoul,  295 
De  Lanessan,  see  Lanessan 
De  Leon,  Daniel,  294,  311,  312,  314 
De  Maupassant,  see  Maupassant 
De  Mun,  see  Mun 
De  Paepe,  Charles,  61 
De  Pietri-ToneUi,  A.,  350 
De  Pressens6,  Francis,  see  Pressensfi 
De  Roland,  see  Roland 
De  Rousiers,  see  Rousiers 
Destr6e,  Jules,  253,  265 
De  Tocqueville,  see  Tocqueville 
Deutsch,  J.,  290 
Deville,  Gabriel,  110 
Diamand,  Dr.,  260 
Di  Cut6,  see  Cutd 
Diderot,  D.,  244,  315 
Diehl,  Karl,  54 
Diest-Daber,  Otto  von,  9 
Di  Lando,  see  Lando 
Disraeli  (Lord  Beaconsfield) ,  259 
Domela  Nieuwenhuis,  see  Nieuwenhuis 
Dominic,  St.,  63 
Donniges,  Helene  von,  69 
Doria,  T.  Rossi,  289,  295 
Dreesbach,  W.,  93 
Dreyfus,  107 
Dreyss,  41,  86 
Dilhring,  Eugen,  263 
Dumas  fils,  Alexandre,  60 

Eccarius,  G.,  194 
Eckatein,  Gustav,  241 


i 


INDEX 


411 


Eckstein,  see  Schlesinger 

Eeden,  Friedrich  van,  148 

Ehrhart,  F.  J.,  198 

Eisner,  Kurt,  113,  131,  140,  227,  260 

EUenbogen,  Dr.,  55,  260 

Elm.  A.  von,  79,  129, 327 

Engels,  Friedrich,  44,  192,  193,  221,  228, 

240,  263,  303,  314,  319,  370,  372, 

383 
Ernest-Charles,  J.,  70 
Ernst,  Paul,  94,  228 

Fabbri,  Luigi,  359 

Fehndrich,  E.,  120 

Felice,  see  De  Felice 

Ferdinand  VII  of  Spain,  27 

Ferrero,  Guglielmo,  262,  273,  274,  299 

Ferri,  Enrico,  66,  68,  70,  73,  76,  132, 

159,  167,  178,  180,  197,  228,  255, 

325 
Fischer  (basket-maker),  109 
Fischer,  Edmimd,  55 
Fischer,  Richard,  124,  128 
Flax,  see  Meric 
Fo^,  R.  L.,  260 
Fonseca,  da,  46 
Foscolo,  Ugo,  207 
Fouillee,  A.,  40 

Fourier,  Charles,  239,  381,  391 
Fourni^re,  E.,  36,  72,  119,  151,  212,  385 
France,  Anatole,  74,  253 
Francis,  St.,  63 
Frank,  Ludwig,  160,  260 
Frezer,  J.  G.,  63,  64 
Frederick  William  IV  of  Prussia,  45,  46 
Fribourg  (compositor),  308,  320 
Friedeberg,  Raphael,  322,  369,  370 
Fritzche,  F.  W.,  96 
Fuisseaux,  Alfred  de,  61 
Fuisseaux,  L6on  de,  61 

Gabelli,  Aristide,  245 
Gaevemitz,  see  Schuize 
Gambarotta,  Gughelmo,  90 
Gambetta,  L.,  69,  259,  261 
Garcia,  Nicolas  Salmorony,  175 
Garibaldi,  G.,  67 
Gamier  Pag^s,  see  Pag&g 
Garofala,  Raffaele,  309 
Garoglio,  Diego,  253,  255 
Gatti,  180 

Gautier,  Theophile,  392 
Geib,  W.,  93 
Geier,  Florian,  239 
Geijerstam,  Gustaf  af,  252,  253 
Geithner,  Otto,  144,  149,  154 
GelefF,  56 
George,  Lloyd,  69 


Gerisch,  Otto,  117,  118 

Gerlach,  Helmuth  von,  9,  227,  228 

Germain,  106 

Gewehr,  Wilhelm,  213 

Gide,  Charles,  405 

Giolitti,  G.,  119,  201 

Gladstone,  73,  378 

Godin,  G.  B.  A.,  217 

Goes,  see  van  der  Goes 

Goethe,  154 

Gohier,  Urbain,  70 

Gohre,  Otto,  180 

Gohre,  Paul,  108,  322,  324 

Goldscheid,  Rudolf,  386 

Gompers,  S.,  310 

Gorki,  Maxim,  253 

Gorter,  Herman,  74,  76,  246,  253 

Gradnauer,  G.,  260 

Graf,  Arturo,  255 

Grasserie,  see  De  la  Grasserie 

Graziadei,  Antonio,  178 

Griffuelhes,  V.,  21,  355,  356 

Grillenberger,  K.,  93 

Grumbach,  C,  122 

Grunwald,  Max,  322 

Gudrard,  Eugene,  368 

Guesde,  Jules,  43,  66,  70,  71,  132,  136; 

142,  320,  404 
Guevara,  J.,  340 
Guiffrida,  see  De  Felice 
Guillaume,  James,  192,  229,  257 
GuUlon,  Ferdinand,  381 
Guizot,  F.,  12,  392 
Gumplowicz,  L.,  7,  16,  25,  379 
Gunther,  Ernst,  115,  116 
Guyot,  Yves,  63 
Gystrow,  Ernst,  94 

Haake,  Paul,  304 

Haase,  H.,  260 

Haenisch,  Conrad,  158 

Halen,  Don  Juan  van,  27 

Haller,  L.  von,  402 

Hammerstein,  W.  von,  6 

Harden,  Maximilian,  305,  371 

Hardie,  see  Keir  Hardie 

Hartleben,  Otto  Erich,  94,  228,  262 

Hartmann,  Eduard  von,  207 

Hasenclever,  W.,  138 

Hasselmann,  Wilhelm,  109 

Hatzfeld,  Countess,  66 

Hauptmann,  Gerhard,  74 

Heimann,  Hugo,  260 

Heine,  Heinrich,  242,  243 

Heine,  Wolfgang,  33,  105,  129,  229,  230, 

264,  322,  398 
Heldt,  224 
Hellpach,  see  Gystrow 


412 


INDEX 


Helphant,  see  Parvus 

Henderson,  149 

Henkell,  Karl,  253 

Heraclitus,  3 

Herkner,  Heinrich,  29,  123,  273,  300,  301 

Herkner,  Hermann,  290 

Hermes  da  Fonseca,  46 

Herron,  George  D.,  253,  312 

Hertz,  F.,  260 

Herve,  Gustave,  45,  70,  167,  188,  348, 

368 
Herwegh,  Georg,  253 
Herzen,  Alexandre,  207,  221,  390,  391 
Hess,  Moses,  260 
Heymann,  398 
Hildebrand,  398 
Hillquit,  Morris,  260 
Hilty,  Karl,  333 
Hirschfeld,  P.,  55 
Hobson,  S.  G.,  123,  206,  315,  383 
Hochberg,  K.,  260,  327 
Hoffmann,  A.,  93 
Hohenlohe,  217 
Hohenzollerns,  10 
Hoj,  see  Senna 
Holbach,  Baron  d',  207,  244 
Hoist,  see  Roland-Hoist 
Holzamer,  Wilhelm,  253 
Holzmann,  Johannes,  see  Senna  Hoj 
Hovelacque,  A.  Abel,  107 
Hue,  Otto,  137,  327 
Hugo,  C,  192,  199,  313,  349 
Hugo,  Victor,  216,  219,  338 
Hugues,  Clovis,  253 
Humbert,  Alphonse,  107 
Hume,  David,  77,  299 
Huygens,  Cornelie,  252,  253 
Huysmans,  C,  352 
Hyndman,  H.  M.,  66,  136,  314,  315,  350 

Inglesias,  Pablo,  136 

Jacoby,  Johann,  260 

Jaeckh,  Georg,  59,  193,  309 

Januarius,  St.,  68 

Jaur^s,  Jean,  70,  74,  136,  167.  196,  213, 

281,  305,  325,  383 
Jobert,  A.,  120 
Jochade,  H.,  228 
Jung,  193 
Jurieu,  217,  218 

Kaeser,  Engelbert,  57 

Kampffmeyer,  Paul,  105,  171,  228 

Kant,  J.,  50 

Kappel,  A.,  93 

Kaspar  Schmidt,  see  Stirner 

Katzenstein,  Simon,  260 


Kautsky,  Karl,  17,  35,  43.  88,  114,  145, 
146,  147,  149,  154,  172,  173,  269, 
276,  317,  322,  333,  340,  370,  373, 
374 

Keir  Hardie,  136,  149 

Kette,  Max,  174 

Keufer,  A.,  290,  353 

Kloth  (bookbinder),  307 

Kochanowski,  J.  K.,  72,  164 

Kol,  see  Rienzi 

Koster,  Adolf,  69 

Kropotkin,  319,  358,  384 

Kretschmann,  von,  250 

Kricewski,  Boris,  240 

Krupp,  Friedrich,  18,  132,  274 

KulishofT,  Anna,  261 

Laboulaye,  Edouard,  217 

Labriola,  Antonio,  376 

Labriola,  Arturo,  24,  70,  111,  112,  211, 

333,  336,  356,  370,  388 
Labruy^re,  205,  206,  385 
Lafargue,  Paul,  71,  107,  319,  320 
Lafayette,  239 
Lagardelle,   Hubert,  43,   70,   181,   253, 

351,  355 
La  Grasserie,  see  De  la 
Landauer,  Gustav,  261 
Landgraf,  224 

Lando,  Michele  di,  164,  165 
Las  Cases,  E.  A.  D.,  215 
Lask,  187 
Lasker,  259 
Lassalle,  Ferdinand,  41,  47,  57,  59,  63, 

64,  65,  66,  67,  73,  76,  96,  109,  148, 

159,  189.  190,  191,  227,  238,  240, 

259.  260.  387 
Lazzari,  Constantino,  313 
Le  Bon,  Gustave,  159,  206,  265 
Lecky.  W.  E.  H.,  240,  310,  378 
Ledru-Rollin,  A.  A.,  34 
Legien,  Karl,  212,  222,  321,  360 
Leixner,  Otto  von,  238,  283 
Lemontey,  P.  E.,  301 
Lensch,  Paul,  155,  322,  396,  397 
Leon,  see  De  Leon 
Leone,  Enrico,  345,  346,  403 
Lerda.  G.,  214.  255 
Lerda.  Olberg,  see  Olberg 
Le  Roi  Soleil.  see  Louis  XIV 
Leroux,  Pierre.  240 
Leroy-Beaulieu.  Paul,  383 
Leuss,  Hans,  6 
Lewis,  Austin.  175.  311.  312 
Librescu.  B..  324 
Liebknecht,  Karl,  141,  322 
Liebknecht,  WilheLm.  61,  76.  83.  93,  94, 

193,227,249,262,  264,  277,  371,  372 


INDEX 


413 


Lima,  Magalhaes,  54 

Lindemann,  see  C.  Hugo  and  Stegmann 

Linder,  Theodor,  239 

Lindner,  see  Michels-Lindner 

Littre,  Emil,  217 

Lloyd  George,  see  George 

Lobe,  Paul,  241 

Loewenstein,  G.,  93 

Lombroso,  Cesare,  74,  260,  309 

Lombroso,  Gina,  295 

London,  Jack,  253 

Longobardi,  E.  C.,  197,  299,  335 

Longuet,  Edgar  and  Jean,  250 

Lorenz,  Max,  108 

Loria,  Achille,  34 

Lothar,  Rudolf,  60 

Louis  XIV,  41,  85,  205,  217,  227 

Louis  XVL  8 

Louis  Napoleon,  219,  337 

Louis,  Paul,  125,  260 

Louis  Philippe,  216,  292 

Lucraft,  193,  308 

Liitgenan,  Franz,  109 

Luther,  68 

Luxemburg,  Rosa,  23,  39,  140,  143,  145, 

225,  261,  264,  322,  325 
Luzzatti,  L.,  69 

Macaulay,  227 

Macchi,  Gustavo,  255,  256 

Macdonald,  see  Ramsay 

Maffi,  Antonio,  308 

Malagodi,  Olindo,  255 

Malatesta,  Enrico,  39,  358,  361 

Malon,  Benolt,  240,  320 

Manin,  Daniel,  259 

Mann,  Tom,  162,  304 

Manning,  Cardinal,  304 

Mantica,  Paolo,  347 

Marazio,  Annibale,  366 

Marx,  Karl,  9.  39,  54,  63,  65,  66,  67,  71, 
96,  107,  110,  154,  159,  191, 192, 193, 
223,  227,  228,  236,  237,  240,  246, 
250,  259,  260,  263,  278,  296,  307, 
308,  314,  319,  320,  341,  342,  343, 
360,  361,  370.  374,  382,  383,  395 

Ma^aniello,  164,  350 

Maupas,  338 

Maupassant,  Guy  de,  374 

Maurenbrecher,  Max,  108,  324 

Max  Stimer,  see  Stirner 

Mayer,  Gustav,  48,  54,  190,  314 

Mazzini,  G.,  383,  384 

Meda,  Filippo,  212 

Mehring,  Franz,  44,  109,  112,  139,  155, 
279,  322,  326,  327,  328 

Mendels,  M.,  260 

M6ric,  Victor,  309,  351 


Merlino,  F.  S.,  325,  359,  383,  402 

Mermeix,  151,  240,  261 

M6ry,  Paulin,  107 

Messina,  Gennaro,  332 

Meyer,  R.,  56 

Michels-Lindner,  Gisela,  65 

Michels,  Robert,  17,  18,  21,  57,  67,  74. 

79,   194,   195,  205,  213,  214,  227, 

228,  240,  241,  246,  258,  270,  294, 

298,  308,  317,  343,  347 
MUhaud,  Edgar,  260,  283 
Millerand,  Alexandre,  107,  109,  180 
Minghetti,  Marco,  365 
Mirabeau,  239 
Mitchell,  311 
Modigliani,  G.  E.,  260 
Mol6,  Count,  218 
Moli^re,  14 

Molkenbuhr,  H.,  93,  250,  325 
MomigHano,  Adolfo,  260,  403,  420 
Momigliano,  Felice,  263 
Momigliano,  Ricardo,  260 
Mommsen,  T.,  389 
Monicelli,  Tomaso,  253 
Montalto,  Giacomo,  168 
Morgari,  Oddino,  166 
Morris,  William,  74,  76,  253 
Morrison,  311 
Mosca,  Gaetano,  13,  16,  18,  39,  377, 

379,  380,  382,  383,  390,  391 
Mosso,  Angelo,  273,  292,  295 
Most,  Johann,  109,  362 
Motteler,  J.,  93 
Miihsam,  Erich,  360 
MuUer,  Adolf,  114 
MiiUer,  Hans,  129,  228 
Miiller,  Paul,  224,  325 
Mumford,  Eben,  35 
Miinzer,  Thomas,  239 
Murialdi,  Gino,  231 
Musatti,  Elia,  260,  291 

Nacht,  Seigfried,  261,  360 

Napoleon  I,  97,  104,  207,  215,  218,  219, 

337 
Napoleon  III,  215-219,  221,  338,  380 
Napoleon,  see  Louis  Napoleon 
Naumann,  Friedrich,  7,  9,  100,  101,  218, 

266,  296.  374 
Netchajeff,  229,  257,  341 
Niceforo,  Alfredo,  17,  22 
Nietsche.  156 
Nieuwenhuis,   F.   Domela,  39,  66,  71i 

157,  210,  264,  357,  361 
Nordau,  Max,  60 
Noske.  G.,  224 
Novelli,  Augusto,  318 
Novicow,  J.,  113,  378 


414 


INDEX 


Obcrwinder,  Heinrich,  109 

Octors,  Alphonse,  60,  301 

Odger,  193,  309 

Oehme,  59 

Olberg,  Oda,  118 

Oldenberg,  Karl,  238 

OUvetti,  A.  O.,  347,  353,  382 

Ollivier.  EmUe,  216,  220 

Oncken,  Hermann,  191 

Oppel,  Karl  von,  96 

Ostrogorsky,  M.,  100, 157, 169, 176, 187, 

208,  361 
Owen,  Robert,  239 

Paepe,  see  de  Paepe 
Pagfes,  Garnier,  216 
Pagliari,  Fausto,  90,  105,  123,  145,  276, 

300,  301,  335.  403 
Pahlen,  Count  von  der,  240 
Pannekoek,  Anton,  145 
Panunzio,  Sergio,  403 
Paoletti,  Lamberto,  123,  148 
Pareto.  Vilfredo.  16,  161,  205,  243,  349, 

378,  379,  380 
Parvus,  145,  261,  264,  271,  322 
Pecchio,  Giuseppe,  70 
Pelletier,  Madeleine,  306 
Pelloutier,  Ferdinand,  105, 125,  298,  381 
Penzig,  Rudolf,  241 
Pfund,  Max,  109 
Philippe-Egalit6,  239 
Pieraccini,  Gaetano,  48 
Pidtri,  J.,  338 

Pietri  Tonelli,  see  De  Pietri 
Pio,  L.,  56 
Pisacane,  C,  37 
Pius  IX,  374 
Pius  X,  278 
Podrecca,  Guida,  165 
Polak,  Henri,  260 
PoUedro,  A..  353 
PoUi,  L.  Rafanelli,  343 
Pouget,  Emile,  298,  348,  351,  352,  353, 

354 
Prampolini,  Camillo,  68,  253 
Prat,  Jos6,  359 
Prato,  Guiseppe,  294 
Pressens6,  Francis  de,  110,  142 
Prezzolini,  Giuseppe,  211,  266 
Proudhon,  P.  J.,  26,  38,  240,  382,  405 
Puviani,  Amilcare,  186 

Quarck,  Max,  108,  114 
Quiroga,  Antonio,  27 

Rade,  M.,  8 
Rafanelli,  see  Poll! 

Ramsay  Macdonald,  J  ,  70,  89, 136, 149, 
333 


Ramus,  Pierre,  261 

Rapisardi,  Mario,  253 

Rappoport,  Charles,  265,  261 

Raumer,  Friedrich  von,  4,  8 

Reclus,  Elis6e,  358 

Reichesberg,  N.,  261 

Rensi,  Giuseppe,  218,  334 

Reventlow,  Ludwig,  109 

Rexhauser,  225,  290 

Richard,  Pierre,  107 

Richthofen,  Elisabeth  von,  246 

Riemann,  224 

Rienzi  [van  Kol],  42,  72,  90,  164,  221 

Rigola,  Rinaldo,  30,  126,  143,  150,  ISlj 

321 
Rist,  Charles,  405 
Rittinghausen,  M.,  23,  24 
Robespierre,  37,  165 
Roche,  Ernest,  107,  108 
Rochefort,  Henri,  108 
Rodbertus,  Karl,  148,  149,  240,  385 
Roland,  Baron  de,  239 
Roland-Hoist,  Henriette,  21,  70,  74,  76, 

253 
RoUin,  see  Ledru 
Romano-Catania,  G.,  386 
Romualdi,  G.,  253 
RoBcher,  W.,  4,  9,  25,  27,  61,  86,  104, 

169,  257 
Rosenow,  Emil,  253 
Rossi,  Adolfo,  66 
Rossi,  see  Doria 
Rothstein,  T.,  261 
Rotteck,  C.  von,  8,  235 
Rouher,  338 
Rousiers,  P.  de,  300 
Rousseau,  J.  J.,  2,  36,  37,  244,  383,  399 

Sacchi,  Ettore,  218 
Sachse,  H.,  158 
Saint-Simon,  239,  380 
Salignac-F6n61on,  Marquis  de 
Salmeron,  see  Garcia 
Salucci,  Arturo,  299,  300 
Salvemini,  Gaetano,  200 
Sand,  George,  74,  337 
Sarratne,  Joseph,  110,  384 
Saturne,  37 

Savorgnan,  Franco,  365 
Schaffle,  Albert,  368 
Schaper,  F.  H.,  241 
Schiavi,  Alessandro,  125 
Schildbach,  B.,  52 
Schiller,  384 

Schippel,  Max,  62,  180,  322 
Schlesinger-Eckstein,  Therese,  260 
Schmidt,  Kaspar,  see  Stimer 
SchmoUer,  G.,  36,  97,  98 


INDEX 


415 


Schonlank,  Bruno,  59,  260 

Schulz,  Arthur,  198,  200 

Schulz,  H.,  29 

Schulze-Gaevernitz,  Georg  von,  187 

Schwann,  Mathieu,  95 

Schweichel,  Robert,  95 

Schweitzer,  J.  B.  von,  48,  55,  66,  112, 

189,  191,  314 
Segitz,  Martin,  327 
Senna  Hoj,  261 
Shaw,  G.  B.,  67,  253,  313 
Siey^s,  Abb6,  141,  239 
Sighele,  Scipio,  25,  186 
Simons,  A.  M.,  260 
Simson,  Eduard,  259 
Sinclair,  Upton,  253 
Singer.  Paul,  55,  131,  260 
Soldi,  Romeo,  214 
Soleil,  Le  Roi,  see  Louis  XIV 
Sombart,  Werner,  14,  63,  74,  98,  168, 

205,  208,  292,  300,  303,  312,  346, 

370,  372,  402 
Sorel,  Georges,  142,  222,  264,  346,  356, 

381,  385 
Sorge,  F.  A.,  96,  192,  303,  307 
Sorgue,  Madame,  293 
Spartacus,  239 

Stadthagen,  Arthur,  260,  322 
Stahl,  Julius,  259 
Steffen,  Gustav  F.,  390 
Stegmann.  Karl,  192,  313,  349 
Stein,  Ludwig,  370 
Stein,  Philippe,  65 
Stern,  Jakob,  260 
Stillich,  Oscar,  3,  17 
Stimer,  Max,  49,  50 
Stocker,  A.,  6 
StoUe,  W.,  93 
Strindberg,  A.,  252 
Strobel,  Heinrich,  135,  143,  146,  339 
Bybel,  H.  von,  9,  239 

Taine,  Hippolyte,  379 

Tarde,  G.,  25,  72,  73 

Tasco  di  Cutd,  see  Cutd 

Tenot,  Eugfene,  216,  219,  220 

T6ry,  Gustave,  70 

Terzaghi,  Carlo,  308 

Theophrastus,  385 

Thesing,  Ernst,  322 

Thiers,  Adolphe,  88,  308,  340,  356 

Timm,  Johannes,  212,  327,  343 

Tischendorfer,  K.,  154 

Tobler,  Max,  256 

Tocqueville,  A.  de,  13,  49 

Tolain,  Henri  Louis,  308,  309,  320 

Tolstoi,  Leo,  341 

Tonnies,  F.,  29 


Treves,  Claudio,  260 

Trochet,  L6on,  404 

Troelstra,  P.  J.,  47,  66,  70,  136,  222,  324 

Troeltsch,  W.,  54 

Troplong,  338 

Turati,  Filippo,  52,  70,  136,  153,  167, 

171,  197,  210,  214,  255,  372 
Turiello,  Pasquale,  60 

Ulrich,  Karl,  131,  159,  281 
Untennann,  M.,  257 
Upton  Sinclair,  see  Sinclair 

Vacirca,  Vincenzio,  252 

Vahlteich,  Julius,  47,  65,  76,  96,  227 

Vaillant,  Edouard,  108,  166 

Valois,  Georges,  4 

Vanderburgh,  E.,  221 

Van  der  Goes,  Frank,  81 

Vandervelde,  Emile,  61,  136,  325 

Van  Eeden,  see  Eeden 

Van  Halen,  see  Halen 

Van  Kol,  see  Rienzi 

Varazzani,  Savino,  58,  67 

Veuillot,  L.,  39 

Viazzi,  Pio,  165,  206 

Victor  Emanuel  II,  337 

Viereck,  Louis,  109 

Visser,  S.  J.,  188 

Viviani,  Ren6,  110,  180 

Vliegen,  W.  H.,  68 

Volders,  Jean,  59,  61 

Volmar,  Georg  von,  139,  141,  167,  195, 

196,  228 
Voltaire,  244 

Von  Diest-Daber,  see  Diest-Daber 
Von  Donniges,  see  Donniges 
Von  Elm,  see  Elm 
Von  Gerlach,  see  Gerlach 
Von  Haller,  see  Haller 
Von  Hammerstein,  see  Hammerst«in 
Von  Hartmann,  see  Hartmann 
Von  Kretschmann,  see  Kretschmann 
Von  Leixner,  see  Leixner 
Von  Oppel,  see  Oppel 
Von  Pahlen,  see  Pahlen 
Von  Raumer,  see  Raumer 
Von  Richthofen,  see  Richthofen 
Von  Rotteck,  see  Rotteck 
Von   Schulze-Gaevernitz,   see   Schulae- 

Gaevernitz 
Von  Schweitzer,  see  Schweitzer 
Von  Sybel,  see  Sybel 
Von  Vollmar,  see  Vollmar 
Von  Westphalen,  see  Westphalen 
Vorlander,  Karl,  258 

Webb,  Beatrice,  28,  101,  102,  105,  300 


416 


INDEX 


Webb,  Sidney,  28, 101, 102, 105, 300, 349 

Weber,  Adolf,  145,  158,  164,  277 

Weber,  Alfred,  188 

Weber,  Max,  230,  306 

Weidner,  Albert,  150 

Weitling,  Wilhelm,  240 

Welker,  Georg,  95 

Wells,  H.  G.,  40,  253 

Westphalen,  J.  von,  320 

Wieland,  C.  M.,  2 

Wijnkoop,  D.  J.,  260 

Wille.  Bruno,  94,  129,  228 

William  I,  46 

William  II,  226,  274,  304,  327,  395 

William,  Prince  of  Prussia,  46 

Wilshire,  Gaylord,  311 


Wilson,  Woodrowi  245 
Woltmann,  Ludwig,  16,  94 
Woodrow  Wilson,  see  Wilson 
Wurm,  260 

Yvetot,  Georges,  125 

Zavattero,  Domenico,  358 
Zeisig,  224 
Zepler,  G.,  324 
Zerboglio,  64 
Zetkin,  Clara,  323,  325 
Z6vafes,  Alexandre,  110 
Zibordi,  Giovanni,  180,  228 
Zo  d'Axa,  358 
Zola,  Emile,  385 


ilNOINOLIST    MAR  15 


O 

to 


■3 

an 


Ph 

u 


0) 


,§'3 

o 

•^•H 

CO  -P 

H'H 

(DM 

^  o 

OX, 

•H 

s: 

•H 

C4 

O 

m 

CO      • 

u. 

H^ 

PhO 

! 

6niversify  of  Toronto 
Library 


DO  NOT 
REMOVE 
THE 
CARD 
FROM 
THIS 
POCKET 


Acme  Library  Card  Pocket 
LOWE-MARTIN  CO.  limited 


