History of the French Revolution (Jules Michelet (C. Cocks, trans.), 1847)
==========================================================
The romantic history of the Revolution: the people as hero; France's national epic. Public domain. Internet Archive full text (historyfrenchre00michgoog).

Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http: //books .google .com/I 



f*n 



** 



/^y ./ziT^ 



HISTORY 



OF THE 



FRENCH REVOLUTION. 



BY 



J. MICHELET. 



TRANSLATXD BT 



C. COCKS, B.L., 

PROFBSSOn (BRKYBtA) op THK BNOUSH I^^NOUAOB Iir THB COLLBOB ROYAL. 



INTRODUCTION, AND BOOKS FIRST AND SBCOND. 



LONDON: 
H. O. BOHN, YORK STREET, COVENT GARDEN. 



XDCOCXLYII. 




LONOOIVt 
BKAOBURY AND KVAK8, PRINTXRS, WBTtEWKULlUi, 



CONTENTS. 

—4 

PREFACK 

FAOB 

The Revoltition explams anteriortimeB 1 

The Resolution has no montunents 2 

Her principle was eminently pacific : Bight 3 

Fraternity . • 6 

The Revolution by no means egotistical 7 

Popular instinct • • . 10 

Inspiration of the author 11 



INTRODUCTION. 

FIBiST VASX. 
The Reuoion of thb SlfnoLs Aohb. 

SECTION* I.' 

Is the Revolution Christian or Anti-christian ! • • . .13 
Politicians and devotees 15 

SECTION IL. 

Is the Revolution tile fbUIUIng of Chrifltiiuiit^*? . . . .17 

Christianity and the Revolution' .18' 

Bmbarrassment of Christianity • « < » . .20 

Christianity and Justice .21 

SECTION. IIL. 

Sufferings and Legends of {he* Middlb Ages' . . • • . 28 

They have the Legends for- consolation'* 24 

The chril' world was imitated from the theological dopav • • • 25 



• 



IV CONTENTS. 



SECTION IV. 

PAOS 

The Church in the Middle Ages 26 

Her pride ib. 

Her straggles with Justice 27 

The Terror of the Middle Ages more cruel than that of the Revolution 

— ^Inquisition 28 

Rome makes use indifferently of two opposite principles — Regal 
Tyranny, and Popular Anarchy— Demagogical preparation 

for the Saint-Bartholomew Massacre 2d 

Clergy in the present day 30 

Fanatical acts of violence against Pumoulin, Ramus, Jean Goujon, &c. 31 



SECTION V. 

Freethinkers persecuted hy the Church, intrust to the protection of 

Kinss, the guardianship of human thought . . . .32 
How they have exalted and strengthened the kingly power . • 34 



SECOND PART. 
The Ancient Monarchy. 

SECTION I. 

1300. Theory of Dante 35 

The royal incarnation, Louis XIV 36 

The Kmg as God of Justice 37 

Royal comedy of the States-General and the Parliament (note) ib. 

This gody like the other^ has his elect, and governs for them 38 

« 

SECTION II. 

Famine in the eighteenth centu^ 88 

Fastinff of the armies of Louis XIY . ; their resignation • . 39 

Difficiuty of writing the history of those miseries . . • 40 

1681. Complaint of Colbert • ib. 

1698. Of the Intendants ib, 

1707. Of Boiflgnillebert ib. 

1709. OfFenelon 41 

Misery, and the augmentation of the debt under the regent . ib, 

1739. Was tnere any in^^irovement under Fleury ! • . . • t&. 

1742. Madame de Ch&teauroux foresees the crisis . . ib. 
The land becoming more sterile, the situation will grow worse 

ai^d worse • • 42 



CONTENTS. 



SECTION III. 

FAOB 

Ancient patronage of the lay and ecclesiastical lord / ' . 43 
Does it subsist in the eighteenth century ! . • , « f(. 
Clevemess of the clergy in giving nothmg • . • .44 



SECTION IV. 

The people are obstinately bent on hoping in the King • • 45 
1744. Louis XV., sumamed tiie Well-Beloved . . . .46 

1754. Louis XV. detested^ dares no more enter Paris . . • ib. 

The dogma of the royal incarnation has perished . . . ib. 

The royalty of the mind succeeds ib. 

The Philosophers had hoped to make the Revolution through 

theKing 47 

Voltiure, d'Argenson^ and Machault are driven from Court . ib, 

1746—1755. Death of the King and the death of the people • • 48 



SECTION V. 

The world could only recommence through justice . . 48 

Obstacles ; weak state of moral life 49 

Nature and art : Buffon, Diderot 50 

The three figures of Right : Montesquieu, Voltaire, and 

Rousseau ib. 

Montesquieu believes Justice relative ib, 

Voltaire, the martyr and aposUe of Justice • . . . 51 



SECTION VI. 

Rousseau recommences Right by the idea of Providence • 51 

Where he took his ground in order to arrest the course of ruin 52 

Even God subjected to Justice ib. 

That without believing oneself a god no one does anything • 53 

Rousseau acts by sentiment and melody as much as by idea . tb. 
After him, Voltaire resumes victoriously the fight of justice, 

and commences the Revolution 54 



SECTION VII. 

Everybody wishes for the Revolution, but only as far as such 
and such limits 55 

The question about the privileged classes was settled before- 
hand ; that about royalty remained to be solved . . 57 

Louis XVL — Intrinsic difficulty of the government of grace 58 



yi OONTBNTS. 

SECTION YllT. 
TuK Bjo) Book. 

PAOI 

BuinouQ good-naiore of' the Kings 60 

The poor privileged clcua ib, 

PhihuiihTOpy of the Fanners of the revenue ; Sensibility of 

the Fmanciers 61 

Injurious good-nature ib 

SECTION IX. 

The BAsnuui. 

To be forgotten in the Bastflle 62 

The Jesuits directing the Bastille 63 

Clerics directing the Bastille 64 

The Bastille the prison of the mind 65 

Its regulations become more and more severe . . . ib. 

Case of Latude -. . 66 

The Philanthropists weep, but do nothing . . . .67 

Madame Legros undertakes to save Latude . . . . 68 

Her courage and perseverance t^. 

The Kmg refuses 69 

Madame Legros persists ib, 

1784. The King grants pardon 70 

Long expectation of the Revolution 71 

At last people can hope no longer - ib. 

Its spirit extends to all, to the people, to women . . , ib. 
Justice is at length found to be identical with Grace . .71 

Triumph of Justice 72 



BOOK I. 

APRIL TO JULY, 1789. 

CHAPTER I. 

ELBcnoNft OF 1789. 

The whole peofde called upon to elect theelectors ;'-*to write 

. down their complaints and requests 73 

^nreness of the popular instinct . 76 

Firmness of the people ; .their unanimity ... .77 
The Gonvoeation of the States delayed 78 



CONTENTS. Til 

PAoa 
April 178d. The elections of PariB delayed . . .78 

First act of the national sovereignty . . . . 79 
April 27, 28. The electors troubled by the Rereillon'riot . . . 80 

Who was interested in it 82 

April 29 to May 20. The^lections are finiidied .... 83 



CHAPTER IL 

Opening of the SriTEEhGENE&AL. 

May 4. Procession of the Statee-Geneml 84 

5. Opening 88 

Necker*s speech 90 

Question on the Separation of the Orders . . .91 

The Third Estate invites the others to unite . . . 92 

Inaction of the Assembly ...... 93 

June. Snares laid for it 94 



CHAPTER III. 

National Abbbhblt. 

June 10. Last Summons of the Third 95 

It takes the name of Communes 97 

17. The Commons take the name of National Assembly . 98 
They seize on the right of taxation . . . . 103 

Projects for a amp d'^at . . . . . .104 

The King circumvented ' . . 105 

The King orders the hall to be shut . . . .106 
The Assembly at the Tennis-Conrt {Jmhde^Pmme) . 107 



CHAPTER IV. 

Oath at the Tennis-Coubt, June 20th. 

The Assembly wandering about 110 

Acoupd^AcU; Necker*s project . . . .111 

23. And the King's declaration 112 

The Assembly refuses to separate . . . .117 
The King entreats Neoker to remain, but does not re- 
Toke hu declaiation 118 

CHAPTER V. 

Movement of Paris. 

25. Assembly of the electors 118 

Insurrection of the French GuardB . . 120 



vm 



CONTENTS. 



PAOB 

Agitation in the Palais-Royal 121 

Intrigues of the Orleans partv 122 

June 30. The people deliver the French Guards . . .126 

Paris desires to arm 129 

July 11. Necker dismissed ....... 130 

The Court prepares for resistance 131 



CHAPTER VI. 
^ Imsubrection of Pa&is. 

Danger of Paris 132 

July 12. Outbreak of Paris .133 

Inaction of VersiuUes 134 

Provocation of the troops 135 

Paris takes up armjs ib. 

13. The Assembly applies to the King in vam . . .136 

The electors authorize the arming 137 

Organization of the citizen guard • . . . 1 38 

Hesitation of the electors 139 

The people seize some gunpowder • . . . 140 

The people seek for guns 141 

Security of the Court 142 



CHAPTER VII. : 
Taking of thb Bastille^ July 14th^ 1789. 



Difficulty of taking the Bastille 
The idea of the attack belongs to the people 
Hatred of the people for the Bastille 
Joy of the world at its capture • 
14. The people carry off the guns 

The Bastille was in a state of defence . 
Thuriot summons the Bastille to surrender 
The electors send uselessly several deputations 
Last attack, Elie, Hullin 

Danger of delay 

The people beueve themselves betrayed 
The people menace the provost and the electors 
The conquerors at the H6tel-de-Ville 
How the Bastille surrendered 
The Bastille invaded by the people 
Death of the governor .... 

Prisoners put to death .... 
. Prisoners pardoned by the people 
Clemency of the people . 



143 
144 
145 
146 
147 
148 
149 
152 
153 
154 
155 

ih. 

ib. 
156 
157 
158 

ib. 



159 
160 



CONTENTS. is 



BOOK II. 

JULY 14 TO OCTOBER 6, 1789. 

CHAPTER I. 
The Hollow Truce. 

Yersaillesy on the 14t)h and 15th of July . . . 162 

July 15. The King at the Assembly 165 

Paris in mourning and misery 166 

Deputation of the Assembly to the city of Paris • 167 

17. The hollow peace 169 

The King goes to Paris 172 

First emigration : Artois, Conde, PoUgnae^ &e. . • 175 

Isolated position of the King ib. 



CHAPTER II. 

POPULAK JUDOMENTS. 

No power inspires any confidence 176 

The judiciary power has lost confidence . . . f5, 
l^reton club— Advocates ; the Basoche • . 177y 178^ 179 
Danton and Camille Desmoulins . . .179 

Barbarity of the laws and punishments . . . 180 
Judgments pronounced at the Palais-Royal . .181 

. La Gr^ve and famine i6. 

Foulon and Berthier 183 

Famine 185 

July 2*2. Death of Fonbn, and of Berthier . . ' . .186 



'<■ 



CHAPTER ni. 

' F&ANCE IN AbHS. 

Embarrassment of the Assembly 190 

23. They engage the people to put confidence in them • 192 

Distrust of the people 193 

Fears of Paris .194 

Alarms of the provinces 195 

Conspiracy of Brest 196 

27. The court compromised by the English Ambassador . 197 

Fury of the old nobles and new nobles . . . 1 98 

Threats and plottings ib. 

Terror of the rural districts 199 

The peasants take up arms against the brigands . . 200 

They bum the feudal charters, and fire several casties 201 



GONISNTS. 



. CHAPTER IV. 
Thb RtGHiff OF Man. 

PAOS 

DedaEfttion of the rights of man and dtfasan ' . . 204 

Disturfoances ; danger of France . . . . 207 

July 27. The Aaaembly creates the Committee of Inquiry . 209 

Attempts of ike Court ib. 

They vdsh to prevent the trial of Besenval . . t6. 
The royalist, party wish to maketasweapon.of public 

charity 211 

The revolutionary pavfrof the noUflSoffBir^to abandon 

the feudal rights. . .212 

: Night of the 4Si of August 213 

Qaias privileges abandouad 214 

BABiBtaBoe of the clergy 216 

PriTileges of provinoea abandoaedii 217 



CHAPTHR V. 
Thb Gubbov and thB' Bbdplb. 

Prophetic speeohea of' Fauohet 218 

Impotenifr«fftetB fou'reoonciliation . . • . . .219 

Imminent mki of theaooientChurdic . . 220 

The Church had' abandoned' the people^ . 221 

August 6. Buzot chumathe ettatea of the clergy for tiia<nation . ib, 

SuppreBSH>n:of Tithes 222 

Ruigious liberty acknowledged 224 

- League of the clergy, the nobility) a]id<.thie.Court . 225 

Paris abandoned to itself 226 

No public .authority : few aota^of 'vixdenoe- . . • 227 

Patriotic donations 229 

Devotion and sacrifice 230 



CHAPTER VI. 
Thb Vbio. 

Difficulty of procuring provisions* . ... 231 

The urgent state of things 232 

Can the King arrest everytilingi ib. 

Long discussion on the Veto 233 

Secret projects of the Court • . ... ib* 
Is there to be one Chamber or- two! The' English 

school 234 

The Assembly required to bedfiasolved'knd'renewed . 235 

It was heteroffeneouB, discordant' and powerlesB . 236 

IKscordantprmciples of Mtrabeau*; hls'fear* . . ib. 



ooftfraxpBh' 



XI 



CHAPTER VIL 
Tbs P&ess. 

August 30. Agitation of Paris on thequestbn'of fiiB- Veto- . 

State of thePress. Miiitiplicatton of the newspapers 
Tendenej of the Press ..... 

The Press is still royaHst 

Loustalot, the editor of the BivohtUofa chParh . 
31. His proposition rejected at the Hotelnle-'VIIIe . 



PAOB 

237 
239 

ib. 

Of. 
240 
242 



Conspiracy of the Courts known to La&yette and every- 
body ,,•....,.» 243 
Growing opposition between the National Guards and 

the people 244 

Uncertain conduct of the Assembly . . . . 245 
Sept. 18. Volney proposes to it to dissolve .... 246 
Impotency of Necker and the Assembly . . . 247 
Impotency of the Court and the Duke of Orleans . 248 
Even the Press powerless ib. 



CHAPTER VIII. 

The People go to fetch the Kino^ Ociobeb 5th, 1789. 

The people alone find a remedy .... 249 

Egotistical position of the Kings at Versailles . . . 250 
Louis XVI. unable to act in any way . . . .251 

The Que«i solicited to act 252 

October 1. Orgy of the body guards 253 

Insults offered to the national cockade . . . 254 

Irritation of Paris 255 

Misery and sufferings of the women . . . . 256 

Their courageous compassion 257 

5. They invade the Hotel-de-Ville 259 

They march upon Versailles 260 

The Assembly receives warning 261 

Maillard and the women before the Assembly . . 262 

Robespierre supports Maillard 264 

The women before the King 265 

Indecision of the Court 266 



CHAPTER IX. 

The People bring the Kino back to Paris, October 6th, 1789. 

5th of October continued. First blood shed . . . . 267 

The women gain over the regiment of Flanders . . 268 
A fight between the body guard and the National 
Guard of Versailles .... . 269 



Xll CONTENTS. 

PAOB 

The King no longer able to escape . . • . 269 

The affiight of the Court 270 

The women pass the night in the hall of the Assembly. 271 

Lafayette forced to march against Versailles . • • 272 

October 6. The chAteaa assailed . . ... . . .. 275 

The danger of the Queen . . ... . . 276 

The body guard saved by the French ex-goards . .277 

The Queen before the people 278 

Hesitation of the Assembly 27d 

Movement unforeseen . .. .. ,. ,. • . 280 
Conduct of the Duke of Orleans . ... .281 
The King conducted to Paris . . . . .282 



PREFACE. 



Etert year, when I descend from my chair, at the close of 
my academic labours, when I see the crowd disperse, — another 
generation that I shall behold no more, — my mind is lost in 
inward contemplation. 

Summer comes on ; the town is less peopled, the streets 
are less noisy, the pavement grows more sonorous around my 
Pantheon. Its large black and white slabs resound beneath 
my feet. 

I commune with my own mind. I interrogate myself as to 
my teaching, my history, and its all-powerftd interpreter, — 
the spirit of the Revolution. 

It possesses a knowledge of which others are ignorant. It 
contains the secret of all bygone times. In it sJone France 
was conscious of herself. When, in a moment of weakness, 
we may appear forgetful of our own worth, it is to this point 
we should recur in order to seek and recover ourselves again. 
Here, the inextinguishable spark, the profound mystery of life, 
is ever glowing within us. 

The Revolution lives in ourselves, — in our souls ; it has no 
outward monument. Living spirit of France, where shall 
I seize thee, but within myself? — The governments that 
have succeeded each other, hostile in all other respects, appear 
at least agreed in this, to resuscitate, to awaken remote and 
departed ages. But thee they would have wished to bury. 
Yet why ? Thou, thou alone dost Kve. 

Thou livest ! I feel this truth perpetually impressed upon 
me at the present period of the year, when my teaching is 
suspended, — when labour grows fatiguing, and the season 

B 



2 THE BEYOLUnON HAS NO MONUMENTS. 

becomes oppressiye, Then I wander to the Champ de Mars, 
I sit me down on the parched grass, and inhale the strong 
breeze that is wafted across the arid plain. 

The Champ de Mars ! This is the only monument that 
the Revolution has left. The Empire has its Column, and 
engrosses almost exclusivelj the arch of Triumph ; royalty has 
its Louvre, its Hospital of Invalids ; the feuded church of the 
twelfth century is still enthroned at Notre Dame : nay, the 
very Romans have their Imperial Ruins, the Therm® of the 
CsBsars ! 

And the Revolution has for her monument — empty space. 

Her monument is this sandy plain, flat as Arabia. A 
tumulus on either hand, resembling those which Gaul was 
accustomed to erect, — obscure and equivocal testimonial to 
her heroes' fame. 

The Herol do you mean him who founded the bridge *of 
Jena? No, there is one here greater even than he, more 
powerful and more immortal, who fills this immennty. 

" What God ? We know not. But here a God doth dwell. '• 

Yes, though a forgetful generation dares to select this spot 
for the theatre of its vain amusements, borrowed from a 
foreign land, — ^though the English race-horse may gallop 
insolently over the plain, a mighty breath yet traverses it, such 
as you nowhere else perceive ; a soul, and a spirit omnipotent. 

And though that plain be arid, and the grass be withered. 
It will, one day, renew its verdure. 

For in that soil is profoimdly mingled the fruitfal sweat 
of their brows who, on a sacred day, piled up those hills, — 
that day when, aroused by the cannon of tho IBastiUe, France 
from the North and France from the South came forward and 
embraced ; that day when three millions of heroes in arms rose 
with the unanimity of one man, and decreed eternal peace. 

Alas ! poor Revolution. How confidingly on thy first day 
didst thou invite the world to love and peace. " my enemies, 
didst thou exclaim, " there are no longer any enemies ! *' 
Thou didst stretch forth thy hand to all, and offer them thy 
cup to drink to the peace of nations — But they would not. 

And even when they advanced to inflict a treacherous 
wound, the sword drawn by France was the sword of peace. 
It was to deliver the nations, and give them true peace — liberty. 



THE PRINCIPLE EMINENTLY PACIFIC ! BIGHT. 3 

that she Btratk the tyrants. Dante asserts Eternal Loye to 
be the founder of the gates of hell. And thus the Revolution 
wrote Peace upon her flag of war. 

Her heroes, her invincible warriors, were the most pacific 
of human beings. Hoche, Marceau, Desaix, and Kleber, are 
deplored by friends and foes, as the champions of peace ; they 
are mourned by the Nile, and by the Rhine, nay, by war itself, 
—by the inflexible Vendue. 

France had so completely identified herself with this 
thought, that she did her utmost to restrain herself from 
achieving conquests. Every nation needing the same bless- 
ing — ^liberty, — ^and pursuing the same right, whence could war 
possibly arise ? Could the Revolution, which, in its principle, 
was but the triumph of right, the resurrection of justice, the 
tardy reaction of thought against brute foree^^^-^ould it, 
without provocation, have recourse to violence ? 

This utteriy pacific, benevolent, loving character of the 
Revolution seems to-day a paradox : — so unknown is its origin, 
so misunderstood its nature, and so obscured its tradition, in 
so short a time I 

The violent, terrible efibrts which it was obliged to make, 
in order not to perish in a struggle with the conspiring world, 
has been mistaken for the Revolution itself by a blind, for- 
getful generation. 

And from this confusion has resulted a serious, deeply- 
rooted evil, very difficult to be cured among this people ; the 
adoration of force. 

The force of resistance, the desperate effort to defend 
unity, *93. They shudder, and fall on their knees. 

The force of invasion and conquest, 1800 ; the Alps 
brought low, and the thunder of Austerlitz. They fall 
prostrate, and adore. 

Shall I add, that, in 1815, with too much tendency to over- 
value force, and to mistake success for a judgment of Gk)d, 
they found at the bottom of their hearts, in their grief and 
their anger, a miserable argument for justifying their enemy. 
Many whispered to themselves, " they are strong, therefore 
they are just." 

Thus, two evils, the greatest that can afflict a people, fell 
upon France at once. Her own tradition slipped away from 

b2 



4 COVENANT WITH RELIGIOUS TYRANNY. 

her, she forgot herself. And, every day more uncertaiD, 
paler, and more fleeting, the doubtful image of Right flitted 
before her eyes. 

Let us not take the trouble to inquire why this nation conti- 
nues to sink gradually lower, and becomes more weak. Attri- 
bute not its decline to outward causes ; let it not accuse either 
heaven or earth ; the evil is in itself. 

The reason why an insidious tyranny was able to render it a 
prey to corruption is, that it was itself corruptible. Weak and 
unarmed, and ready for temptation, it had lost sight of the 
idea by which alone it had been sustained ; like a wretched man 
deprived of sight, it groped its way in a miry road ; it no 
longer saw its star. What ! the star of victory ? No, the 
sun of Justice and of the Revolution. 

That the powers of darkness should have laboured through- 
out the earth to extinguish the light of France, and to 
smother Right, was natural enough. But, in spite of all 
their endeavours, success was impossible. The wonder is, 
that the friends of light should help its enemies to veil and 
extinguish it. 

The party who advocate liberty have evinced, of late, two 
sad and serious symptoms of an inward evil. Let them 
permit a friend, a solitary writer, to tell them his entire 
mind. 

A perfidious, an odious hand, — ^the hand of death, — has 
been offered and stretched out to them, and they have not 
withdrawn their own. They believed the foes of religious 
liberty might become the friends of political freedom. 
Vain scholastic distinctions, which obscured their view ! 
Liberty is liberty. 

And to please their enemy, they have proved false to their 
friend — nay, to their own father, the grand eighteenth century. 
They have forgotten that that century had founded liberty on 
the enfranchisement of the mind — till then bound down by the 
flesh, bound by the material principle of the double incarnation, 
theological and political, kingly and sacerdotal. That century, 
that of the spirit, abolished the gods of flesh in the state 
and in religion, so that there was no longer any idol, and 
there was no god but God. 

Yet why have sincere friends of liberty formed a league 



SPIRIT OF EXCLUSION 5 

mth the party of religious tyranny? Because they had 
reduced themselves to a feeble minority. They were as- 
tonished at their own insignificance, and durst not refuse the 
advances of a great party which seemed to make overtures 
to them. 

Our fathers did not act thus. They never counted their 
number. When Voltaire, a child, in the reign of Louis XIV. 
entered upon the perilous career of religious contention, he 
appeared to be alone. Rousseau stood alone, in the middle of 
the century, when, in the dispute between the Christians and 
the philosophers, he ventured to lay down the new dogma. 
He stood alone. On the morrow the whole world was with him. 

If the friends of liberty see their numbers decreasing, they 
are themselves to blame. Not a few have invented a system 
of progressive refinement, of minute orthodoxy, which aims at 
making a party a sect, — a petty church. They reject first 
this, and then that ; they abound in restrictions, distinctions, 
exclusions. Some new heresy is discovered every day. 

For heaven's sake, let us dispute less about the light of 
Tabor, like besieged Byzantium — Mahomet II. is at our gates. 

When the Christian sects became multiplied, we could find 
Jansenists, Molinists, &c., in abundance, but no longer any 
Christians ; and so, the sects which are the offspring of the 
Revolution annul the Revolution itself ; people became Con- 
Btituants, Girondists^ Montagnards ; but the Revolutionists 
ceased to exist. 

Voltaire is but little valued, Mirabeau is laid aside, Madame 
Roland is excluded, even Danton is not orthodox. What ! 
must none remain but Robespierre and Saint-Just ? 

Without disowning what was in these men, without wishing 
to anticipate their sentence, let one word be sufficient here : 
If the Revolution rejects, condemns their predecessors, it 
rejects the very persons who gave it a hold upon mankind, — 
the very men who for a time imbued the whole world with a 
revolutionary spirit. If, on the other hand, it declares to the 
world its sympathy with their characters, and shews no more 
than the image of these two Apostles upon its altar, the 
conversion to its tenets will be slow, the French Propaganda 
will not have much to fear, and absolute governments may 
repose in peace. 



b EaAX£BNITY. 

Eratemity ! fraternity ! It is not enough to re-eclio tlie 
worcU-to attract the world to our cause, as was the case at 
first. It must acknowledge in us a fraternal heart. It must 
be gained over by the fraternity of love, and not by the 
guillotine. 

Fraternity ! Why who, since the creation, has not pro- 
nounced that word ? Do you imagine it ' was fij*st coined by 
Robespierre or Mably ? 

E?ery state of antiquity talked of fraternity ; but the 
WQsd was addressed only to citizens, — to men ; the slave was 
but a thing. And in this case fraternity was exclusiye and 
inhuman. 

When slaves or freed-men govern the Empire, — when they 
are named Terence, Horace, Phedrus^ Epietelus, it is difficult 
not to extend fraternity to the slave. ** Let us be brethren," 
ones Christianity. But, to be a brother, one must first exist ; 
man had no being ; right and liberty alone .constitute 
life. A theory from which these are excluded^ is but a specu- 
lative fiAtemity between nought and nought. 

" Eratenuty, or deathy'' as the leign of Terror subsequently 
exclaimed. Once more a brotherhood of slaves; Why, by 
atrocious derisiouj impart to such an union the holy name of 
liberty? 

Brethren who mutually fly from one another, who shudder 
when they mteet, who extend, who withdraw a dead and icy 
hand. odious and disgusting sight ! Surely, if anything 
ought to be free, it is the fraternal sentiment. 

Liberty alone^ as founded in the last century, has rendered 
fraternity possible. Philosophy found man without right, 
or rather a nonentity, entangled in a religious and political 
system, of which despotism was the base. And she said, 
*' Let i|s create man, let him he, by liberty." No sooner was 
he created than he loved. 

It is by liberty moreover, that our age, awakened and recalled 
to ita true tradition, may likewise commence its work. It will 
no longer inseribQ amongst its laws, '* Be my brother, or die ! *' 
But by a skilful culture of the best sentiments of the human 
aouly it will attain its ends in such a manner that all, without 
compulsion, shall wish to be brothers indeed. The state will 
realise its destiny, and be a fraternal initiation, an education. 



TOS KBYOLimOtf KOT SeOTI9TI<IAL. 7 

a coBstMDit ench^ge of the spontaneoos ideas of inspiratkm 
and faith, which are common to ns all, and of the reflected 
ideas of seienee and meditation, whioh are found among 
thinkers** 

Such is the task for our age to aecompUeh. Hay it at last 
set about the work in earnest ! 

It would indeed be a melancholy reflection, if, instead of 
aehie^ng something great for itself, its time were wasted in 
oensnnng that age-^so renowned for its labours, and to which 
it is so immensely indebted. Our fathers, we must repeat, did 
all that it was necessary then to do, — ^began precisely as it was 
ineumhent on them to begin. 

They found despotism in heaven and on earth, and they 
instituted law. They found individual man disarmed* bare, 
unprotected, confounded, lost in a system of ajqparent unity, 
which was no better than oiHnmon death. And in order that 
jhe might have no appeal, even to the supreme tribunal, the 
religious dogma of the day held him bound for the penalty of 
a transgression which he had not conmiitted ; this eminently 
cacnal dogma supposed that injustice is transmitted with our 
blood from father to son. 

It waa necessary, above all tihings, to vindicate the rights of 



* ItahiatioD, «dacatioii, g^vcmmeat, axe three vyuaBjmauM Troids. 
had some notion of this, when, speaking of the stittes of antiqiiity, and of the 
crowd of -great men poroduced by that little city of Athens, he says, '< They 
were less governments than the moat fruitful systems of education that have 
ever been.** Unfortunately, the age of Rousseau invoking only deliherate 
rtaton, and but little analysing the faculties of instinct, of inapinUion, could 
not weU discern the mutual connexion which constitutes all the mystery of 
"education, initiation, and government. The masters of the Revolution^ the 
philosophers, &mouB antagonists, and very subtle, excellent logicians, were 
endowed wi^ every gift, except that profound simplicity which tJoae enables 
one to comjffehend the child and the people. Therefore, the Revolution 
«oiild sot orgviise the grand revolutionary nachine : I mean that which, 
beMer than laws, ought to found fiatemity — eduecbtion. That will be the work 
of the nineteenth century ; it has already entered upon it, in feeble attempts. 
In my little book The People,^ 1 have, as far as in me lay, vindicated the 
rights of instinct — of inspiration— ^against her aristocratic sister, reflection, the 
reasoning science^ that pretends to be the queen of the woxld. 



.■l n W^^^^y 



> Sea my tnnslation of Ze Pw^ (London : LeBgrnsn & Co.,: 1846), 
Part IL, ch. r. 



8 RETOLUTION NOT EGOTISHOAL. 

mau, which were thus so cruelly outraged, and to reestablish this 
truth, which, though obscured, was jet undeniable : ** Man has 
rights, he is something ; he cannot be disowned or annulled, 
even in the name of God ; he is a responsible creature but for 
his own actions alone, for whatever good or evil he himself 
commits." 

Thus does this false liability for the actions of others dis- 
appear from the world. The unjust transmission of good, 
perpetuated by the rights of the nobility ; the unjust trans- 
mission of evil, by original sin, or the civil brand of being 
descended, from sinners, are effaced by the Bevolution. 

men of the present age, is this the creed you tax with 
individualism — ^is this what you term an egotistical law ? But, 
remember, that without these rights of the individual, by which 
alone man was constituted, he really had no existence, was 
incapable of action, and man, therefore, could not fraternize. It 
was actually necessary to abolish the fraternity of death to found 
that of life. 

Speak not of egotism. History will answer here, quite as 
strongly as logic. It was at the first moment of the Revolution, 
at the moment she was proclaiming the rights of the individual, 
it was then that the soul of France, far from shrinking, ex- 
tended, embraced the whole world in sympathetic thought : 
then did she offer peace to all, and wish to participate with all 
her treasure,— liberty. 

The moment of birth, the entrance upon a still dubious life, 
seems to justify a feeling of egotism in every being. We may 
observe that the newly-born infant, above all things, wishes to 
live, to prolong its existence. Yet, in the case before us, it 
was far otherwise. When young French Liberty first opened 
her eyes to the light, and uttered that earliest cry which trans- 
ports every new creature, — "I am!" even in that moment 
her thoughts were not confined to self; she did not indulge in a 
selfish joy, she extended to mankind her life and her hope ; her 
first impulse, in her cradle, was to open her affectionate arms. 
'< I am ! " she exclaimed to all nations ; '' my brethren, you 
shall be also ! " 

In this lay her glorious error, her touching and sublime weak- 
ness : the Revolution, it must be confessed, commenced by 
loving everything. 



THE PEOPLE BETTER THAN TH£IR LEADERS. 9 

She loved even her enemy, — ^England. 

She loved, and long she strove to save, royalty — ^the key-stone 
of the ahuses which she had just demolished. She wanted to 
save the Church ; she endeavoured to remain Christian, heing 
wilfully hlind to the contradiction of the old principle, — ^Arbi- 
trary Grace, and of the new one, — Justice. 

This universal sympathy which, at first, made her adopt, and 
indiscreetly mingle so many contradictory elements, led her to > 
inconsistency, — to wish and not to wish, to do and undo, at the 
same time. Such is the strange result of our early assemblies. 

The world has smiled at that work of hers : but let it not 
forget, that whatever was discordant in it, was partly owing to 
the too easy sympathy, to the indiscriminate benevolence which 
was the first feature in our Revolution. 

Genius utterly humane ! I love to follow and watch its pro- 
gress, in those admirable flutes wherein a whole people, at once 
the actors and spectators, gave and received the impulse of 
moral enthusiasm ; wherein every heart expanded with all the 
sublimity of France, — of a country which, for its law, pro- 
claimed the rights of humanity. 

At the festival of the 14th of July, 1792, among the sacred 
images of Liberty and the Law, — in the civic procession, — ^in 
which figured, together with the magistrates, the representa- 
tives, the widows and orphans of those killed at the Bastille, — 
were seen divers emblems, — ^those of trades useful to men, 
instruments of agriculture, ploughs, sheaves, branches loaded 
with fruits ; and the bearers were crowned with ears of com 
and green vine-leaves. But others also were seen in mourning, 
crowned with cypress ; they were carrying a table covered with 
crape, and, under the crape, a veiled sword, — that of the law ! 
A touching image ! Justice, showing her sword in mourning, 
was no longer distinguished from Humanity herself. 

A year after, the 10th of August, 1793, a very different 
festival was celebrated. This one was heroic and gloomy. But 
the law had been mutilated ; the legislative power had been 
violated ; the judiciary power, unguaranteed and annulled, was 
the slave of violence. They durst no longer show the sword ; 
it was no longer that of Justice ; the eye could have borne it 
no longer. 



10 POPULiB INSTINCT. 

A thing to be told to eTerjbodj, and which it is but too easy 
to prove, is, that the humane and beneyolent period of our 
Reyolution bad for its aotoxB the very people, the whole people, 
-^OYorybody. And tibe period of violence, the period of san- 
guiQary deeds, into which danger afterwards thrust it, had 
for actors but an inponsiderable,. an extremely small number 
of men. 

That is what I have found established and verified, either by 
written testimony, or by suchi as I have gathered from the lips 
of old men. 

The remarkable exclamation of a man who belonged to 
die Faubourg Saint- Antoine will never die: *<We were all 
of m at the 10th of August, and not one at the 2nd of 
September." 

Another thing which this history will render most oonspi- 
euous, and which is true of every party, is, that the people were 
generally much better than their leaders. The further I have 
searched, the more generally have I found that the more 
deserving olass was ever underneath, buried among the utterly 
obscure. I have also found that those briUiant, powerful 
speakers, who expressed the thoughts of the masses, are usually 
but wrongfully considered as the sole actors. The fact is, that 
they rather received than communicated the impulse. The 
chief aotor is the people. In order to find and restore the latter 
to its proper position, I have been obliged to i*eduoe to 
their proportions those ambitious puppets whom they had set in 
motion, and in whom, till now, people fancied they saw, and 
have sought for, the secret transactions of history. 

This sight, I must confess, struck me with astomshment. 
Xn proportion as I entered more deeply into this study, I 
observed that the mere party leaders, ^ose heroes of the pre- 
pared scene, neither foresaw nor prepared anything, that 
(hoy were never the first proposers of any grand measure, — 
more partieularly of those which were the unanimous work of 
ihe. people in the outset of the Revolution. 

. Left to themselves, at those decisive moments, by their pre- 
tended leaders, they found out what was neeessary to be done» 
and did it. 

Great, astonishing results ! But how much greater was the 



INSPUUTION OF THE AUTHOB. 11 

heart which conceived them ! The deeds themselves are as 
nothing in comparison. So astonishing, indeed, was that great- 
ness of heart, that the future may draw upon it for ever, with- 
out fearing to exhaust its resources. No one can approach its 
eontemplation, without retiring a better man. Every soul 
dejected^ or crushed with grief, every human or national heart 
has but to look there in order to find comfort : it is a mirror 
wherein humanity, in beholding itself, becomes once more 
heroic, magnanimous, disinterested ; a singular purity, shrink- 
ing from the contamination of lucre as from filth, appears 
to be the characteristic glory of all. 

I am endeavouring to describe to-day that epoch of unani- 
mity, that holy period, when a whole nation, free from all party 
distinction, as yet a comparative stranger to the opposition of 
classes, marched together under a flag of brotherly love. No- 
body can behold that marvellous unanimity, in which the self- 
same heart beat together in the breasts of twenty millions of 
men, without returning thanks to God. These are the sacred 
days of the world — thrice happy days for history. For my part, 
I have had my reward, in the mere narration of them. Never, 
since the composition of my Maid of Orleans, have I received 
such a ray from above, such a vivid inspiration from Heaven. 

But as " our thread of life is of a mingled yam,'* whilst I 
enjoyed so much happiness in reviving the annals of France, my 
own peace has been disturbed for ever. I have lost him who 
BO often narrated the scenes of the Revolution to me, him whom 
I revered as the image and venerable witness of the Grand Age, 
that is, of the eighteenth century. I have lost my father, with 
whom I had lived all my life, — ^forty-eight years. 

When that blow fell upon me, I was lost in contemplation, I 
was elsewhere, hastily realizing this work, so long the object of 
my meditation. I was at the foot of the Bastille, taking that 
fortress, and planting our immortal banner upon its towers. 
That blow came upon me, unforeseen, like a shot from the 
Bastille. 

Many of these important questions, which have obliged me 
to fathom deeply the foundations of my faith, have been inves- 
tigated by me during the most awful circumstances that can 
attend human life, between death and the grave, — when the 



12 INSPIBATION OP THE AUTHOR. 

Burviyor, himself partly dead, has been sitting in judgment 
between two worlds. Then I resumed my course, even to the 
conclusion of this work, whilst death and life had equal claims 
upon my mind. I struggled to keep my heart in the closest com- 
munion with justice, strengthening myself in my faith by my 
very bereavements and my hopes ; and, in proportion as my 
own household gods were shattered, I clung to the home of 
my native land. 



INTRODUCTION. 



FIRST PART. 

ON THE BELIGION OF THE MIDDLE AGES. 



SECTION I. 
IS THE REYOLUnOK CHRISTIAN OR ANTI-CHRISTIAN? 

I DEFINE the Reyolution, — The advent of the Law, the resur- 
rection of Right, and the reaction of Justice. 

Is the Law, such as it appeared in the Revolution, conform- 
able, or contrary, to the religious law which preceded it ? In 
other words, is the Revolution Christian or Anti-Christian ? 

This question, historicallj, logically, precedes every other. 
It reaches and penetrates even tibose which might be believed 
to be exclusively political. All the institutions of the civil 
order which the Revolution met with, had either emanated 
from Christianity, or were traced upon its forms, and authorised 
by it. Religious or political, the two questions are deeply, 
inextricably intermingled. Confounded in the past, they will 
reappear to-morrow as they really are, one and identical. 

Socialists* disputes, ideas which seem to-day new and para- 
doxical, were discussed in the bosom of Christianity and of the 
Revolution. There are few of those ideas into which the two 
systems have not deeply entered. The Revolution especially, 
in her rapid apparition, wherein she realised so litde, saw, by 
the flashes of the lightning, unknown depths, abysses of the 
future. 



14 CHARACTER OP THE REVOLUTION. 

Therefore, in spite of the developments which theories have 
been able to take, notwithstanding new forms and new words, 
I see upon the stage but two grand facts, two principles, two 
actors and two persons, Christianity and the Revolution. 

He who would describe the crisis whence the new principle 
emerged and made room for itself, cannot dispense with inquir- 
ing what relation- it bears to its predecessar, in whcU respects 
it continues or outsteps, sways or abolishes it: — a serious 
problem, which nobody has yet encountered face to face. 

It is curious to see so many persons approaching, and yet 
nobody willing to look at this question seriously. Even those 
who believe, or pretend to believe, the- question obsolete, show 
plainly enough, by their avoiding it, that it is extant, present, 
perilous, and formidable. If you are not afraid of the pit, 
why do you shrink back ? Why do you turn aside your head ? 
There is here, apparently, a power of dangerous attraction, at 
which the brain grows giddy. 

Our great politicians have also, we must say, a mysterious 
reason &r avoidiBg these questions. They believe that Christi- 
anity is still a great party, that it is better to treat it cautiously. 
Why fall out with it ? They prefer to smile at it, keeping 
themselves at a distance, and to act politely towards it, without 
compromising themselves. They believe, moreover, that the 
religious ^orid is generally very simple, and that to keep it in 
play, it is merely sufficient to praise the G-ospel a little. That 
does not engage them very deeply. The Gospel) in its gentle 
morality, contains hardly any of the dogmas which makd 
Christianity a religion so positive^ so assuming, and so ab- 
sorbing, so strong in its grasp upon man. All tho philosophers, 
of every religion, of every philosophy, would subscribe, without 
difficulty, to the precepts of the Gospel. To say, with the 
Mahometans, that Jesus is a great prophet, is not being a 
Christian. 

Does the other party expostulate ? Does the xettl of God 
which devours them, fiU their hearts with serious indignation 
against this trifling of politicians ? Not so ; they declaim 
much, but only about minor matters, being but too happy 
so long as they are not molested in what is fundamental. The 
conduct of politicians, often trifling and occasionally savouring 
of irony, does not grieve them much. They pretend not to 



POLITICIANS AKD DKTOtBBS. 15 

nndeniattd the question. Ancient as that party is, it has still 
a strong hold upon the woiid. Whilst their opponents are 
occupied in their parliamentary displays, ever rolling their useless 
wheel and exhausting themselves without advancing, that old 
party still holds possession of all that constitutes &e hasis of 
life — the family and the domestic hearth, woman, and, through 
her instrumentality, the child. They who are the most hostile 
to this party, nevertheless abandon to Hs influence all ^ey love, 
and all that makes them happy. They surrender to it every 
day the inftint, man unarmed and feeble, whose mind, stiU 
dreaming, is incapable of defending itself. This gives die party 
many chances. Let it but keep and fortify this vast, mute, un- 
disputed empire, its case is all the better ; it may grumble and 
complain, but it will take good care never to drive politicians to 
a statement of their belief. 

Politicians on either side ! connivance against connivance! 
Where shall I turn to find the friends of truth? 

The friends of the holy and the just? Does the world then 
contain no one who cares for Gt>d ? 

Children of Christianity, you who claim to be faithful, we 
here adjure you. Thus to pass by God in silence, to omit in 
every disputation what is truly the faith, as something too 
dangerous, offensive to the ear— is this religion? 

One day, when I was oonversing with one of our best bishops 
on the contradictions between Grace and Justice, which is the 
veiy basis of the Christian fietith, he stopped me and said: 
*< This question luckily no longer engages the attention of men. 
On that subject we enjoy repose and silence. Let us maintain 
it, and never go beyond. It is superfluous to return to that 
discussion." 

Tet that discussion, my lord, is no less than the question^ 
whether Grace and Salvation through Christ, the only basis of 
Christianity, is reconcileable with justice ; it is to examine 
whether such a dogma is founded on justice, whether it can 
subsist. Nothing lasts against justice. Does, then, the duration 
of Christianity appear to you an accessory question ? 

I well know, that after a debate of several centuries, after 
heaps of distinctions and scholastic subtleties had been piled 
together, without throwing light on the question, the pope 
silenced all parties, judging, l^e my bishop, that the question 



16 POLITICIANS AND DEVOTEES. 

might be laid aside with no hope of settling the matter, and 
leaving justice and injustice in the arena to make up matters as 
they could. 

This is much more than has ever heen done by the greatest 
enemies of^Christianity. To say the least, they have always 
been respectful enough to examine the question, and not put it 
out of court without deigning to grant it a hearing. 

For how could we, who have no inimical feelings, reject 
examination and debate ? Ecclesiastical prudence, the trifling 
of politicians, and their avoiding the question, do not suit us in 
the least. We owe it to Christianity to see how far it may be 
reconcileable with the Revolution, to know what regeneration 
the old principle may find in the bosom of the new one. We 
have desired fervently and heartily that it would transform 
itself and live again 1 In what sense can this transformation 
be achieved? What hope ought we to entertain that it is 
possible ? 

As the historian of the Revolution, I cannot, without this 
inquiry, advance one step. But even though I were not in- 
vincibly impelled towards it by the very nature of my subject, 
I should be urged to the investigation by my own heart. The 
miserable reluctance to grapple with the difficulty which either 
party evinces, is one of the overwhelming causes of our moral 
debasement, — a combat of condottieri, in which nobody fights ; 
they advance, retire, menace, without touching one another, — 
contemptible sight ! As long as fundamental questions remain 
thus eluded, there can be no progress, either religious or social. 
The world is waiting for a faith, to march forward again, to 
breathe and to live. But, never can faith have a beginning in 
deceit, cunning, or treaties of falsehood. 

Single-handed and free from prejudices, I will attempt, in 
my weakness, what the strong do not venture to perform. I 
will fathom the question from which they recoil, and I shall 
attain, perhaps, before I die, the prize of life ; namely, to dis- 
cover the truth, and to tell it according to one's 'heart. 

Engaged as I am in the task of describing the heroic days 
of Liberty, I may venture to entertain a hope that she herself 
may deign to support me, — accomplish her own work through 
the medium of this my book, and lay the deep foundation upon 
which a better age may build the faith of the future. 



17 



SECTION II. 

IS THE REVOLUTION THE FULFILLINQ OF CHRISTIANITT ? 

Several eminent writers, with a laudable wish for peace 
and reconciliation, have lately affirmed that the Revolution was 
but the accomplishment of Christianity, — that it came to con- 
tinue and to realize the latter, and to make good all it had 
promised.* 

If this assertion be well founded, the eighteenth century, the 
philosophers, the precm*sors, the masters of the Revolution, 
have grievously erred, and have acted very differently from their 
real intentions. Generally, they aimed at anything rather 
than the accomplishment of Christianity. 

If the Revolution consisted in that, and nothing more, it 
would then not be distinct from Christianity, but the actual 
time of its existence, its virile age — its age of reason. It 
would be nothing in itself. In this case, there would not be 
two actors, but one, — Christianity. If there be but one actor, 
then no drama, no crisis ; the struggle we believe we see, is a 
mere illusion ; the world seems to be agitated, but, in reality, 
is motionless. 

But no, it is not so. The struggle is but too real. There 
is no sham fight here between one and the same person. There 
are two distinct combatants. 

Neither must it be said that the new principle is but a 
criticism on the old one, — a doubt, a mere negation. Who 
ever saw a negation ? What is a living, an acting negation, 
one that vivifies like this? A world sprang forth from it 
yesterday. No : in order to produce, there must be existence. 

Therefore, there are two things here, and not one, — it is 
impossible to deny it. There are two principles, two spirits — 
the old and the new. 

In vain the former, confident of Hfe, and for this reaaon so 
much the more pacific, would whisper to the latter: '' I come 
to fulfil, and not to abolish." The old principle has no manner 
of wish to heJulfiUed. The very word sounds ominous and 

* See, among other works, Quinet's " Christia/nity and the Prtnch JUwh 
hUion'* (London, Jjongman & Co., 1846.) — C. C. 

C 



18 CHRISTIANITY ANJ) THE REVOLUTION. 

Bepalchral ; it rejects that filial benediction, and desires neither 
tears nor prayers; it flings aside the branch that is shaken 
oyer it. 

We must keep clear of nusundierBtandings^ if we would know 
whither we are going. 

The RoTolution continues Christianity, and it contradicts it. 
It is, at the same time, its heir and its adversary. 

In sentiment, and in all that is general and hitman between 
them, the two principles agree, but in all that constitutes very 
and special life, — in the operations of the mind, from which 
both derive their l»rth, — they are adverse and thwart each 
other. 

They agree in the sentiment of human fraternity. This 
sentiment, bom with man, — ^with the world, common to every 
society, has nevertheless been made more extensive and pro- 
found by Christianity. This is its glory, its eternal palm. It 
found fraternity confined to the banquets of ancient states ; 
it extended its influence, and spread it throughout the vast 
Christian world. In her- turn, the Revolution, the daughter 
of Christianity, has taught its lessons to the whole world, to 
every race, and to every religion imder the sun. 

This is ^e whole of die resemblance. Now for the difference. 

The Revolution founds fraternity on the love of man for man, 
on mutual duty, — on Right and Justice. This base is frmda- 
mental, and no other is necessary. 

It did not seek to add to this certain principle one derived 
from dubious history. It did not ground fraternity on a common 
relationship, — a flliation which transmits, with our blood, the 
participation of crime from father to son. 

This carnal, material principle, which introduces justice and 
injustice into the blood, and transmits them, with the tide of life, 
from one generation to another, violently contradicts the spiritual 
notion of Justice which is implanted in the depths of the human 
soul. No ; Justice is not a fluid, to be transmitted with gene- 
ratiotu Will alone is just or unjust ; the heart alone feels 
itself responsible. Justice is entirely in the soul ; the body has 
nothing to do with it. 

This barbarous material starting-point is astounding in a 
religion that has carried the subtlety of the dogma farther than 
any other. It impresses upon the whole system a profound 



OBOfE AND BALYATIOK. 19 

character of arbitrarinesB, from wkich mo subtlet j mil be able 
to extricate it. Arbitrariness reaches, pcBetrates the deve^^ 
ments of the dogma, all the religioas iostitutions which are 
dertved from it; and, lastly, the ciyil order, which, in the 
nuddle ages, is itself derived from those iosftitutiooffy imtates 
its forms and is swayed by its spirit. 
Let UB consider this gtand sight : 

I. The starting-point is this : Crime coBoes frei» ene, aahtt- 
tion from one ; Adam has lost, Christ has saved. 

He has saved ! Why ? Beoaase he would save. No oiher 
motive. No virtue, no work of man, no human merit oan 
deserve this prodigious sacrifice of God sacrificing himself. 
He givea himself, but for nothing : that is the miracle of leve ; 
he asks of man no work, — no anterior merit* 

II. What does he reqidre in return for this immeaae sawi- 
fice ? One single thing : people to believe in him, to believe 
themaelveB indeed saved by the blood of Jesus Christ. Faith is 
the condition of salvation, and not the works of BighteoHsness* 

No Righteonsnesa without faith. Whoever does net believe is 
vnrighteotts. Is righteooaness without faith of any use ? No. 

Saint Paul, in laying down this pnnciple of salvation by faith 
alene, has nonsuited Righteousness. Henceforth she is, at 
moot, only an accessory, a sequel, one of the effects of faith. 

III. Having once qmtted Righteoueness, we must eiw go 
on descending into Necessity. 

Believe, or perish ! The questioin being thus laid down, 
people discover with terror that they will perish, that salvation 
ia attached to a condition independent of the will. We da not 
believe as we will. 

Saint Paul had laid down that man can do nought by good 
works, but only by faith. Sunt Augustine d^nonstrates his 
insufilciency in faith itself. God alone gives it ; he gives it even 
gratuitously, without requiring anything, neither fiaith nor 
justice. This gratniiotia gift, this ^fraee, is the only eauee of 
salvation. God gives grace to whom he {leases. Saint 
Augustine has said : *' I believe, because it is absurd." He 
might also say in this syat^n : *' I believe, because it is 
imjitst." 

Neoesaty goes no further. The system is coo3as«aated. 
God loves ; no other explanation ; he. loves whom he pleai»es« 

c2 



20 EMBARRASSMENT OF CHRISTIANITY. 

the least of all, the sinner, the least deserving. Lore is its 
own reason ; it requires no merit. 

What then would be merit, if we may still employ this 
word ? To be loved, the elect of God, predestined^to salvation. 

And demerit, damnation ! To be hated by God, condemned 
beforehand, created for damnation. 

Alas I we believed just now that humanity was saved. The 
sacrifice of a God seemed to have blotted out the sins of the 
world. No more Judgment, no more justice. Blind that we 
were! we were rejoicing, believing justice drowned in the 
blood of Jesus Christ. And lo ! judgment re-appears more 
harsh, — a judgment without justice, or at least the justice of 
which will be hidden from us for ever. The elect of God, the 
favourite, receives from him, with the gift of faith, the gift of 
doing good works, — ^the gift of salvation. That justice should 
be a ^t ! For our part, we had thought it was active, the 
very act of the will. Yet here we have it passive, transmitted 
as a present, from God to the elect of his heart. 

This doctrine, made into a formula more severely by the 
Protestants, is no less that of the Catholic world, such as it is 
acknowledged by the Council of Trent. 

If grace (it says with the apostle) were not gratuitous, as its 
very name implies, if it ought to be merited by works of 
righteousness, it would be righteousness, and no longer grace. 
{Cone. Trid., sess. vi. cap. viii.) 

Such, says that council, has been the permanent belief of 
the church. And it could not be otherwise ; it is the ground- 
work of Christianity ; beyond that, there is philosophy, but no 
longer religion. The latter is the religion of grace, — of gra- 
tuitous, arbitrary salvation, and of the good pleasure of God. 

Great was the embarrassment when Christianity, with this 
doctrine opposed to justice, was called to govern, to judge the 
world, — when Jurisprudence descended from her prsetorium, 
and said to the new faith : " Judge in my place." 

Then were people able to see at the bottom of this doctrine, 
which seemed to be sufficient for the world, an abyss of 
insufficiency, uncertainty, and discouragement. 

If he remained faithful to the principle that salvation is a 
gift, and not the reward of Justice, man would have folded his 
arms, sat down, and waited ; for well he knew that his works 



CHRISTUNITT AND JUSTICE. 21 

could have no influence on his lot. All moral activity ceased in 
this world. And how could civil life, order, human justice, he 
maintained ? Ood loves, and no longer judges. How shall 
man judge? Every judgment, religious or political, is a 
flagrant contradiction in a religion founded solely on a dogma 
foreign to justice. 

Without justice one cannot live. Therefore, the Christian 
world must put up with the contradiction. This introduces 
into many things something false and wrong ; and this 
douhle position is only surmounted hy means of hypocritical 
formulae. The church judges, yet judges not ; kills, yet kills 
not. She has a horror of shedding hlood ; therefore she hums 
— What do I say ? She does not hum. She hands over the 
culprit to another to hum, and adds moreover a little prayer, as 
if to intercede — a terrible comedy, wherein Justice, false and 
cmel justice, assumes the mask of grace ! 

A strange punishment of the excessive ambition which de- 
sired more than justice, and yet despised it ! This church has 
remained without justice. When, in the middle ages, she 
sees the latter reviving again, she wants to draw nearer to her. 
She tries to speak like her, to assume her language ; she 
avows that man can do something towards his salvation hy 
works of righteousness. Vain efforts! Christianity can he 
reconciled with Papinian only by withdrawing from Saint Paul- 
quitting its proper base, and leaning aside at the risk of losing 
its equilibrium and being dashed to atoms. 

Having Necessity for a starting-point, this system must 
remain in Necessity ; it cannot step beyond it.* All the 

* At the present day, people despair of reconcib'ng these different views. 
They no longer attempt to make peace between the dogma and justice. They 
manage matters better. Now they show it, now they conceal it. To simple 
confiding persons, to women, to children, whom they keep docile and obedient, 
they teach the old doctrine which places a terrible arbitrariness in God and in 
the man of God, and gives up the trembling creature defenceless to the priest. 
This terror is ever the faith and the law of the latter ; the sword ever remains 
keen-edged for those poor hearts. 

If, on the contrary, they speak to the strong, to thinkers and politicians, 
they suddenly become indulgent : " Is Christianity, after all, anywhere but in 
the Gospel? Are faith and philosophy so at variance? The old dispute 
between Grace and Justice (that is, the question to know whether Christianity 
be just) is quite obsolete." 

This double policy has two effects, and both fatal. It weighs heavily upon 



22 CSltlSTIAKITY AND J0«TtCE. 

spumufi attoiHpts by which schoolmeti, and others also-siiK^ 
l^eir time, have vaiidiy a^eacnpted to instittite a dogma founded 
upon r&siBGn, that is to my, a philosophix^al and jurist Ohristi- 
anity^ vm&i he dlsoairded. They are devoid i^ke of virtue and 
strength. We can tafee no notice of ihem ; they have passed 
into silence and oblivion. We must examine the system in 
itself; in its terrible purity, which •eon^^tirted all its strength ; 
vre mast follow it through its reign in the middle ages, and, 
above aM thii^, mark its progress at the period when at length 
fixed, amied, and inflexible, it exercised a sway over the whole 
world* 

A sombre doctrine this, which, at the destruction of the 
Roman ^npire, when civil order perished and human justice 
was, as it were, effaced, shut out all appeal to the supreme 
tribunal, and for a thousand years veiled the face of eternal 
justice. 

The iniquity of conquest confirmed by decrees from God, 
becomes authorised and believes itself just. The conquerors 
are the elect, the conquered are the damned. Damnation 
without appeal. Ages may pass away and conquest be for- 
gotten ; but Heaven, devoid of justice, will not the less oppress 
the earth, though formed in its own image. Necessity, 
which constitutes the basis of this theology, will everywhere re- 
appear with desperate fidelity in the political institutions, even in 
those wherein man had thought to build an asylum for justice. 
All monarchies, divine and human, govern for their elect. 

Where then shall man take refuge ? Grace reigns alone in 
heaven, and fevour here below. That Justice, twice proscribed 
and banished, should venture to raise her head, requires indeed 
a difficult eibrt (so completely is the common sense of man 
extinguished beneath the weight of woes and the oppression of 
ages) ; it is necessary, in fact, that Justice should once more 
believe herself just, that she should arouse, remember herself, 

woman, npon thb child, upon the family, in which it creates discord, maintain- 
ing in opposition two contrary authorities, — two fathers. 

It weighs heavily upon the world by a negative power, which does little, but 
which impedes, especially by the facility of presenting either of two aspects,— 
to some the elastic morality of the Gospel, to others immutable fatality, adorned 
with the name of grace. Hence, many a misunderstanding. Hence, many are 
tempted to connect mode^^ feith, — that of Justice and the Revolution^ — ^witb 
the dogmti of ancient injustice. 



andresumeihe coneoioiteneSB of rigbt. This consciotOHiefls, sloidj 
endeoyouring to awake tluroughout a period of six cetitiiries of 
religious effortS) burst forth in the year '89 in the pofitical 
and social worid^ 

The Revolution is nothing but the tardy reaolaon of jostiee 
against the goTemment of favour and tbe religion of grace* 



SECTION III. 

LEGENDS OF THE MIDDLE ACTEB. 

If you hare sometimes travelled among mountams, you mi^ 
perhaps have observed the same speetaole which I onoe met with» 

From among a confused heap of reeks piled together, amid 
a landscape diversified with trees and verdure, towered a 
gigantic peak. That object, black, bare, and solitary, was but 
too evidently thrown up from the deep bowels of the earth. 
Enlivened by no verdure, no season changed its aspect; the 
very birds woidd hardly venture to alight on it, as if they feared 
to singe their wings on touching the mass whroh was projected 
from earth's central fire. That ^oomy evidence of the throes 
of the interior world seemed stiU to muse over the scene, re- 
gardless of surrounding objects, wiliiout ever rousing from its 
savage melancholy. 

What were then the subterraneous revdutions of the einih, 
what incalculable powers combated in its bosom, for that ^ mass, 
disturbing mountains, piercing tlxrongh rocks, shtfttlering beds 
of marble, to burst forth to the surface! What convulsions, 
what agony forced from the entrails of the globe tint pro^ 
digious groan! 

I sat down, and from my eyes tears of angaish, slow and 
painful, began to fiow. Nature had but too weU reminded me 
of history. That chaos of mountain heaps expressed me with 
the same weight which had crushed the heart of nun' tiB-ough- 
out the middle ages ; and in thaA desolate peak, which from 
her inmost bowels the earth had hui^led towards heaven, I saw 
pictured the despair and the cry of the human race. 

That Justice should have borne for a thousand years that 
mountain of dogma upon her heart, and, crashed beneath 
its weight, have counted the hours, the days, the yearn, so 



24 BESIOKATIOK OF THE MIDDLE AGES. 

m^ny long years — is, for him who knows it, a source of eternal 
tears. Be who through the medium of history has partici- 
pated in that long torture, will never entirely recover from it ; 
whatever may happen he will be sad ; the sun, the joy of the 
world, will never more afford him comfort ; he has lived too 
long in sorrow and in darkness ; and my very heart bled in 
contemplating the long resignation, the meekness, the patience, 
and the efforts of humanity to love that world of hate and 
malediction imder which it was crushed. 

When man, resigning liberty and justice as something 
useless, entrusted himself blindly to the hands of Grace, and 
saw it becoming concentrated on an imperceptible point, — that 
is to say the privileged, the elect, — and saw all other beings, 
whether on earth or under the earth, lost for eternity, you would 
suppose there arose everywhere a howl of blasphemy! — l^o, 
only a groan. 

And these affecting words : " If thou wilt ihat I be damned, 
thy will be done, Lord!" 

Then peaceful, submissive, and resigned, they folded them- 
selves in the shroud of damnation ! 

This is, indeed, serious, worthy of remembrance ; a thing 
which theology had never foreseen. It had taught that the 
damned could do nothing but hate. But these still loved. 
These damned souls trained themselves to love theelect, their 
masters. The priest, the lord, those chosen children of heaven, 
found, for ages, only meekness, docility, love, and confidence 
in that humble people. They served, they suffered, in silence ; 
trod upon, they returned thanks ; they did not sin even with 
their lips, as did the saintly Job. 

What preserved them from death ? One thing, we must 
say, which reanimated, refreshed the sufferer in his long 
torment. That astonishing meekness of soul which he pre- 
served, gave him bliss ; from that heart, so wounded, yet so 
good, sprung a living source of lovely and tender fancy, a flood 
of popular religion to counteract the dryness of the ot^er. 
Watered by those fruitful streams, the legend flourished and 
grew ; it shaded the imfortunate T^th its compassionate 
flowers — ^flowers of the native soil, blossoms of the father- 
land, which somewhat refreshed and occasionally buried in 
oblivion Byzantine metaphysics and the theology of death. 



THE CIVIL WORLD. 25 

Yet death was beneath those flowers. The patron, the 
good samt of the place, was not potent enough to defend his 
proUgi against a dogma of dread. The Devil hardly waited 
till man expired in order to seize him. He beset him living. 
He was the lord of this world ; man was his property, his fief. 
It appeared so but too plainly in the social order of the time. 

What a constant temptation to despair and doubt ! How 
bondage here below was, with all its miseries, the beginning, — 
the foretaste of eternal damnation ! First, a life of suffering ; 
next, for consolation, hell ! — Damned beforehand ! — Then, 
wherefore those comedies of Judgment represented in the 
church-porches ! Is it not barbarous to keep in uncertainty, in 
dreadful anxiety, ever suspended over the abyss, him who, 
before his birth, is adjudged to the bottomless pit, is due to it, 
and belongs to it ? 

Before his birth! — The infant, the innocent, created ex- 
pressly for hell ! Nay, did I say the innocent ? This is the 
horror of the system ; innocence is no more. I know not, but I 
boldly and unhesitatingly affirm this to be the insoluble knot at 
which the human soul stopped short, and patience was staggered. 

The infant damned ! I have elsewhere pointed out that 
deep, frightful wound of the maternal heart. I pointed it 
out, and again drew the veil over it. In exploring its depths 
we should find there much more than the terrors of death. 

Thence it was, believe me, that the first sigh arose. Of 
protestation ? No ! And yet, unknown to the heart whence 
it escaped, there was a terrible remonstrance in that humble, 
low, agonising groan. 

So low, but so heart-rending ! The man who heard it at 
night, slept no more — not for many a night after : and in 
the morning, before day-light, he went to his furrow ; and 
there found many things were changed. He found the valley 
and the field of labour lower — much lower, — deep, like a sepul- 
chre ; and the two towers in the horizon more lofty — more 
gloomy and heavy ; gloomy the church-steeple, and dismal 
the feudal castle. Then he began to comprehend the sounds 
of the two bells. The church-bell murmured, Ever ; that of 
the donjon, Never, But, at the same time, a mighty voice spoke 
louder in his heart. That voice cried, One day ! And that 
was the voice of God ! One day justice shall return ! Leave 



26 OHTIBCHIN THE MIDDLE AGES. 

those idle bells ; let them prate to the wind. Be not al&rmed 
with thy doubt. That doubt is already faith. Beliere, hope ! 
Hight, though postponed, shall hare its adrent ; it will come to 
sit in judgment, on the dogma and on the world. And that 
day of Judgment will be called the Revolution. 



SECTION IV. 

THE CLERGY AND THE PEOPLE* 

I HATE ofben asked myself, whilst pursuing the dismal 
study of the middle ages, through paths fiill of thorns ** tristis 
usque ad mortem," how a religion, which is the mildest in its 
principle, and has its starting-point in love itself, could ever 
haye covered the world with that vast sea of blood ? 

Pagan antiquity, entirely warlike, murderous, and destructive, 
had been lavish of human life, unconscious of its value. Youth- 
ful and merciless, beautiful and cold, like the virgin of Tauris, 
she killed and remained unmoved. You do not find in her 
grand immolations so much passion, inveteracy, or fury of 
hate, as characterise, in the middle ages, the combats and the 
vengeances of the religion of love. 

The first reason which I have assigned for this, in my book 
Du Pritre, is the prodigious intoxication of pride* which this 
belief gives to its elect. What maddening dizziness ! Every 
day, to make God descend upon the altar, to be obeyed by 
God ! — Shall I say it? (I hesitated for fear of blaspheming) 
to make Ghd ! How shall he be called who does this miracle 
of miracles every day ? A God ? That would not be enough. 

The more strange, unnatural, and monstrous this greatness, the 
more uneasy and full of misgiving is he who pretends to it : 
he seems to me as though he were sitting on the steeple of 
Strasburg, upon the point of the cross. Imagine his hatred 
and violence towards any man who dares to touch him, shake 
him, or try and make him descend! — Descend? There is 
no descending. He must fall from such a place, — ^he must 
fall ; but so heavy is the fall, that it would bury him into 
the earth. 

Be well convinced that if, in order to maintain himself, he 



THE CHT7B0H AND JUSTICE. 27 

can suppress the world with a nod ; if what God created with 
oii« word, he can exterminate with one word, the woiid is 
annihilated. 

This state of uneaBiness, anger, and tremhiiiig h«te explains 
alone the incredible fury of the chureh in the middle ages, in 
propoition as she beheld her rival, Justiee, arise against her. 

The latter was scarcely perceptible at first. Nothing was 
80 low, so minute, so humble. A paltry blade of grass, fO]> 
gotten in the furrow ; eren stooping, you would hardly have 
percehred it. 

Justice, thou who wast lately so feeble, how canst thou grow 
so fast ! If I but turn aside a moment, I know thee no longer. 
I find thee erery hour grown ten cubits higher. Theology 
quakes, reddens with anger, and turns pale. 

Then begins a terrible, frightful struggle, beyond the power 
of language to express. Theology flinging aside the demtu^e 
mask of grace, abdicating, denying herself, in order to annihi- 
late Justice, striving to absorb— to destroy her within herself, 
to swallow her up. Behold them standing fistce to face ; which 
of them, at the end of this mortal combat, is found to have 
absorbed, incorporated, assimilated the other ? 

Let the revdutionary reign of Terror beware of comparing 
herself with the Inquisition. Let her never boast of having, in 
her two or three years, paid back to the old system what it did 
to us for six himdred years ! The Inquisition would have good 
cause to laugh ! What are the twelve thousand men guillotined 
of the one, to the millions of men butchered, hung, broken on the 
wheel, — to that pyramid of burning stakes, — to those masses of 
burnt -flesh, which the other piled up to heaven. The single 
Inquisition of one of the provinces of Spain stated, in an authentic 
monument, that in sixteen years it burned twenty thousand 
men ! But why speak of Spain, rather than of the Albigenses, 
of the Vaudois of the Alps, of the Beggars of Flanders, of the 
Protestants of France, or of the horrible crusade against the 
Hussites, and so many nations whom the pope abandoned to 
the sword ? 

History will inform us that in her most ferociouB and impla^ 
cable moments the Revolution trembled at the thought of 
aggravating death, that she shortened the sufferings ef victims, 
removed the hand of man, and invented a machine to abridge 
the pangs of death. 



28 THE INQUISITION, 

And it will also inform us that the church of the middle ages 
exhausted herself in inventions to augment suffering, to render 
it poignant, intense ; that she found out exquisite arts of tor- 
ture, ingenious means to contrive that, without dying, one might 
long taste of death — and that, heing stopped in that path hy 
inflexihle nature, who, at a certain degree of pain, mercifully 
grants death, she wept at not heing ahle to make man suffer 
longer. • 

I cannot, I will not agitate that sea of hlood. If God allow 
me one day to touch it, that hlood shall hoil again with life, 
flow in torrents to drown false history and the hired flatterers 
of murder, to fill their lying mouths. 

Well do I know that the greater part of those grand 
hutcheries can no longer he related. They have humt the hooks, 
burnt the men, burnt ihe calcined bones over again, and flung 
away the ashes. When, for instance, shall I recover the history 
of the Yaudois, or of the Albigenses ? The day when I shall 
have the history of the star that I saw falling to-night. A 
world, a whole world has simk, perished, both men and things. 
A poem has been recovered, and bones have been found at the 
bottom of caverns ; but no names, no signs. Is it with these 
sad remnants that I can form that history again ? Let oiur 
enemies triumph that they have rendered us powerless, and 
at having been so barbarous that one cannot, with certainty, 
recount their barbarities! At least the desert speaks, — ^the 
desert of Languedoc, the solitudes of the Alps, the unpeopled 
mountains of Bohemia, and so many other places, where man 
has disappeared, where the earth has become sterile for ever, 
and where Nature, after man, seems itself exterminated. 

But one thing cries louder than all their destructions (and 
this one thing is authentic), which is, that the system which 
killed in the name of a principle, in the name of a faith, made 
use indifferently of two opposite principles, — the tyranny of 
kings, and the blind anarchy of nations. In one single century, 
the sixteenth, Rome changed three times, throwing herself now 
to the right, now to the left, without either prudence or decency. 
First, she gives herself up to the kings ; next, she throws her- 
self into the arms of the people ; then again, she returns to the 
kings. Three lines of policy, but one aim. How attained ? No 
matter. What aim ? To destroy the power of thought. 



MASSACRE OF ST. BARTHOLOMEW. 29 

A writer has discovered that the pope's nuncio had no fore- 
knowledge of the Saint Bartholomew (massacre). And I hare 
discovered that the pope had prepared it, — ^worked at it, for 
ten years. 

** A trifle," says another, "a mere local affair, a vengeance 
of Paris." 

In spite of the titter disgast, the contempt, the sickness, 
which &ese theories occasion me, I have confronted them with 
the records of history, with nnexceptionahle documents. And 
I have found far and near, the hlood-red traces of the mas- 
sacre. I can prove that, from the day when Paris proposed 
(1561) the general sale of the goods of the clergy, from the 
day when the church heheld the king wavering, and tempted 
by the hopes of that booty, she turned hastily, violently towards 
the people, and employed every means in her power, by preach- 
ing, by alms, by different influences, and by her immense con- 
nection, her converts, trades-people, and mendicants, to organize 
the massacre. 

** A popular affair," say you. True. But tell us also by 
what diabolical scheme, by what infernal perseverance, you 
worked during the space of ten years to pervert the under- 
standing of the people, to excite and drive them mad. 

spirit of cunning and murder ! I have lived too many cen- 
turies in face of thee, throughout the middle ages, for thee 
ever to deceive me. After having so long denied justice and 
liberty, thou didst assume their name for thy shout of war. In 
their name thou didst work a rich mine of hate, — that eternal 
repining which inequality implants in the heart of man, the 
envy of the poor for the rich. Thou tyrant, thou proprietor, 
and the most ravenous in the world, didst unhesitatingly em- 
brace on a sudden, and exceed, with one bound, the most 
impracticable theories of the Levellers. 

Before the Saint Bartholomew massacre, the clergy used to 
say to the people, in order to excite them, " The Protestants 
are nobles , provincial gentlemen." That was true ; the clergy 
having already exterminated, stifled Protestantism in the towns. 
The castles alone being shut, were stiU able to remain Pro- 
testant. But read of their earlier martyrs ; they were the inha- 
bitants of towns, petty tradesmen, and workmen. Those creeds 
which were pointed out to ihe hatred of people as those of the 



30 CLEBGT IN THE FBESEKT DAT. 

aristoeraej, liad spmng from the Teiy people. Who dees not 
know that Calyin was the son of a cooper? 

It would be too easy for me to show how all Uiis has been 
misrepresented in our time by writers subservient to the elergy, 
and then c(^ied without consideration. I wanted only to show, 
by one example, the ferocious address with which the clergyurged 
the people, and made for themselves a deadly weapon of social 
jealousy. The detail would be curious ; I regret to postpone 
it. I could tell you the plans resorted to, in order to work the 
ruin of an individual — or a set of men; calumny, skilfully 
directed by a special press, slowly manipulated in the schools 
and seminaries, especially in the pariours of oonTonts, direetfy 
intrusted (in order to be more quickly diffused) to patents, 
to the suborned trades*people of the curates and canons, was 
put in motion among the people. How it worked itself into 
fury in those establishments of gluttony, termed Brotherhoods, 
to which, among other things, they abandcmed the inuttense 
wealth of the hospitals. Low, paltry, miserable details, but 
without which the wholesale murders perpetrated by a Catholic 
rabble would remain incomprehensible. 

Occasionally, if it was sought to destroy a man of ri^ute, 
superior art was added to these manoeuvres. By means of 
money or intimidation, some tainted writw was found and 
let loose upon him. Thus, the king's ccmfessor, to succeed in 
getting Valine burnt, made Ronsard write against him. And 
so to ruin Th^ophile, the confessor instigated Balzac, who could 
not forgive Th6ophile for having drawn his aword for him, and 
saved him from personal chastisement. 

In our own times, I have had an opportunity of noticing how 
the same set, in the name c^ the Church, arouse and foster 
hatred and disturbance in the breasts of the obscure and lower 
orders, — ^the very dregs of society. I once saw, in a city of 
the west, a young professor of philosophy, whom the eccle- 
siastics wanted to expel from his chair, followed, and pointed 
at in the street by a mob of women. What did they know 
about philosophical questions ? Nothing, save what they were 
taught in the oonfossional. They were not less furiona on that 
account, standing before their doors, pointing, and shouting : 
«* There he is!" 

In a large city in the eastern d^artment, I was witness 



VIOLENCE AGAINST DUHOULIN. 31 

to another, and, perhaps, still more odious spectacle. An old 
Protestant pastor, almost blind, who, every day, and often 
several times in the day, was followed and insulted by the 
children of a school, who pulled him behind, and strove to 
throw him down. 

That is their usual way of beginning their game ; by innocent 
agents, agaiast whom you cannot defend yourself, — ^little child- 
ren, women. On more favourable occasions, in unenlightened 
provinces, 0asy to be excited, men take a share in the game. 
The master, who holds to the church, as a member of some 
con/rkie, as a tradesman or a lodger, grumbles, shouts, cabals, 
and collects a mob. The journeyman and the valet get drunk 
to do mischief; the apprentice follows — surpasses them — 
Btrikee, without knowing why, — the very children sometimes 
aAsassinaie. 

Next ccone false reasoners, foolish theorists, to baptize this 
po!U» assassination with the name of justice of the people, to 
canonize the crime perpetrated by tyrants in the name of 
liberty. 

Thus it wasi, that, in the selfsame day, they found means to 
slsrugkter, with one blow, aU that formed the honour of France, 
the first philosopher of the age, the first sculptor, and the first 
]BUBi€ian,-*--Ramus, Jean Goujon, and Goudimel. How much 
rather would they have butchered our great jurisconsult, the 
enemy of Jtome and the Jesuits, the genius of right, — 
Duiiio«mn! 

Ha}^y, he was safe. He had spared them a crime ; his 
noble life had taken refuge in God. But, before that time, 
he had seen riots organised four times by the clergy against 
him and his home. That holy temple of study fom* times 
violated sad. pillaged, his books profaned and c&spersed, his 
manu3cripts, irreparable patrimony of mankind, flung into the 
gutter and destroyed. They have not destroyed Justice ; the 
living spirit contained in those books was emancipated by the 
flames; it expanded and pervaded everything, impregnating the 
very atmosphere, so that, thanks to the murderous fury of 
fanaticism, they could breathe no air but that of equity. 



33 



SECTION V. • 

HOW FREE-THINKERS ESCAPED. 

After a grand festival, a great carnage in the Coliseum of 
Rome, when the sand had heen moistened with hlood, and the 
lions were lying down, cloyed, surfeited with human flesh, then, 
in order to divert the people, to distract their attention a little, 
a farce was enacted. An egg was put into the hand of a 
miserahle slave condemned to the wild heasts ; and then he was 
cast into the arena. If he managed to reach the end, if, hj 
good fortune, he succeeded in carrying his egg and laying it 
upon the altar, he was saved. The distance was not great, 
hut how far it seemed to him ! Those hrutes, glutted, asleep, 
or just going to sleep, would, nevertheless, at the sound of 
the light footstep, raise their heavy eyelids, and yawn fearfully, 
in douht apparently whether they ought to interrupt their re- 
pose for such ridicidous prey. He, half dead with fear, stooping, 
shrinking, cringing, as if to sink into the earth, would have 
exclaimed, doubtless, could he have given utterance to his 
thought : '' Alas ! alas ! noble lions, I am so meagre ! Pray 
allow this living skeleton to pass; it is a meal miworthy of 
you." Never did any buffoon, any mimic, produce such an 
effect upon the people ; the extraordinary comical contortions 
and agonies of fear convulsed all the spectators with laughter; 
they rolled on their benches in the excess of their mirth ; it was 
a fearful tempest of merriment — a roar of joy. 

I am obliged to say, in spite of every consideration, that 
this spectacle was revived towards the close of the middle 
ages, when the old principle, furious at the thought of dying, 
imagined it would still have time to annihilate human thought. 
Once more, as in the Coliseum, miserable slaves were seen 
carrying among wild beasts, undoyed, unglutted, furious, 
atrocious and ravenous, the poor little deposit of proscribed 
truth, — ^the fragile egg which might save the world, if it reached 
the altar. 

Others will laugh — and woe to them! But I can never 
laugh on beholding that spectacle — ^that farce, those contortions, 
those efforts to deceive, to dupe, the growling monsters, to 



THE HUM^N HIND INTRUSTED TO ROTALTT. 33 

amuse that unworthj multitude, wound me to the heart. Those 
slaves whom I see passing yonder across the bloody arena, are 
the sovereigns of the mind, the benefactors of the human race. 
my fathers, my brethren, Voltaire, Moliere, Rabelais, 
beloved of my thoughts, it is you whom I behold trembling, 
suffering and ridiculous, under that sad disguise! Sublime 
geniuses, privileged to bear the sacred gift of God, have you 
then accepted, on our account, that degraded martyrdom to be 
the buffoons of fear ? 

Degraded ! — Oh! no, never! From the centre of the 
amphitheatre they addressed me in a kind voice : *' Friend, 
what matters if they laugh at us ? What do we care at being 
devoured by wild beasts, at suffering the outrage of cruel men, 
if we but reach the goal, provided this dear treasure, laid 
safely upon the altar, be recovered by mankind, whom it will 
save sooner or later. Do you know what this treasure is ? 
— ^Liberty, Justice, Truth, Reason.*' 

When we reflect by what imperceptible degrees, through 
what difficulties and obstacles, every grand design is accom- 
plished, we are less surprised on beholding the humiliation, the 
degradation, to which its originator is often subjected. Who 
would undertake the task of following, from unknown depths to 
the surface, the progress of a thought ? Who can tell the 
eonfiised forms, the modifications, the fatal delays it has to 
undergo for ages ? With what slow steps does it emerge from 
instinct to musing, to revene, and thence to the poetical chiaro- 
oscuro ! How long is its progress confined to children and 
fools, to poets and madmen ? And yet one day that madness 
proves to be the common sense of all ! But this is not enough. 
All men think, but nobody dares speak. — Why? Is courage 
wanting ? — Yes ; and why is it wanting ? — Because the dis- 
covered truth is not yet clear enough ; it must first shine out 
in all its splendour for people to become its martyrs. At length 
it bursts forth luminous in some genius, and it renders him 
heroic ; it inflames him with devotion, love, and sacrifice. He 
lays it to his heart and goes among the lions. 

Hence' that strange spectacle which I beheld just now, that 
sublime yet terrible farce. Look, see how he quakes as he 
passes, humble and trembling ; how he clasps, conceals, presses 
something to his heart. Oh ! he trembles not for himself.—- 

D 



GloKiou3.tr«l»id«Moui! heisai^^ £9ar. ! 9ee you not that he is 
CMFyiog.theTi^i^ouof ioaaki»d? 
. Qjoij <me iimg gtYesim^^uobeAsiaesst-^Wb^re is the place of 
refuge, iix whi-^b. thfit deport' is to bOx concealed ? What altar 
is'aaared- enough to guard; tiiat holy l^eaaui:e ? And what god 
is.^fluffifiiently divine to pi?otect what is no less thaBt the conc^- 
tiea of Gjad: himself ? Great men, ye who, are carrying that 
deposit of salviution with the tender caTiO of a. mother. nursing 
her child, take heed, I beseech you ; be wery in choosing, the 
asylum to whioh you intrust it4 Beware of human idols» slum 
the godfl of flesh or of wood, who» far &om protecting others, 
cftnnot protect themselves. 

I behold you all, towards the close< of .the middle ages,, from 
the thirteenth' to the sixteenth century, emuipusly building up 
and aggrandieing that saaotuary of refuge, the Altar of Royalty. 
In order to dethrone idols,; you- erect .an idol= — ^and you offer to 
her everything, — ^gold, incense, and myrrh. To her, .heavenly 
wisdom ; to. her^ tolerance, liberty^ philosophy ; to her, the 
ultio^a ratio of society-^Rig^t. 

How should, this divinity not become colossal ? The most 
powierful minds in the world, pursued and hunted to death by 
the old iftjplacable priaciple, work hard to build up their, asylum 
ever higher and higher.; they would like to raise it to heaven. 
Heuce, a. series of legends, fables, adorned and amplified by 
every effort of genius : in the thirteenth century^ it is the saint- 
king, more priest than the priest himself ; the cA^tja/ter-king in 
the sixteenth; the ^ocflf-kjng in Henri.IV., and the God-king in 
Low XIV.. 



35 



SECOND PART. 

ON IBS' ANCIENT MONARCIIT. 



SECTION I. 

Asearlj as tlie-ycfti' 1300, 1 behold the great Ghibelm poet, 
who, in oppOBition to the pope, strengthens and exalts to 
heaven the Colossus of Csesar. Unity is salvation ; one 
HHmareh; one for the whole earth. Theuy blindly following up 
his austere, inflexible lope, he lays it down, that the greater 
this mooareh, tiie more he becomes omnipotent,-— the more he 
beeomes a God, and the less mankind should apprehend that 
he will ever abuse his power. If he has all, he desires* nought ; 
Btfll less ean he envy or hate. He is perfect, and perfectly, 
sovereignly just'; he governs infallibly, like the justice of God. 

Such is* the grotmd-werk of all the theories which have since 
been heaped up in support of this principle : Unity^ and the 
Bcipposed result of unity, peace. And since then' we have 
baldly ever had -atiything bbt'wars. 

We must dig lower tl5tn Dante, and discover^ and look into- 
tlieeanrth for the deep popular fbundatkm whereon the Colossus- 
nva bniH. 

Maa needs justice. A captive within the' straight limits of 
fi.'d»gma reposing entirely on* the arMtmty grace of God, he 
tKou^t to save justice in- a political religion, and made unto 
binselft' of a' man, a' Oed of Justicei hoping that this visible 
Ged would preserve for 'him- the* light of equity whfch had been 
darkAaed in the other. 

I hear thiseseianrntionr eseafie> from the bosom ef ancient 
Franee,-— a tcnderexpression of intense love : " my king !*' 

This is no flattery. Louis • XIV.. when young, was truly 
loved by two perseas,-^— by the people and La-'YaWerc. 

d2 



36 THE KINGLY INCARNATION, LOUIS XIV. 

At that time, it was the faith of all. Even the priest seems 
to remove his God from the altar, to make room for the new 
God. The Jesuits banish Jesus from the door of their esta- 
blishment to substitute Louis-le-Grand ; I read on the vaults 
of the chapel at Versailles : '' Intrabit templum suum domi- 
nator." The words had not two meanings : the court knew 
but one God. 

The Bishop of Meaux, is afraid lest Louis XIY. should not 
have enough faith in himself ; he encourages him : ** kings, 
exercise your power boldly, for it is divine — Ye are gods ! '* 

An astounding dogma, and yet the people were most willing 
to believe it. They suffered so many local tyrannies, that, 
from the most remote quarters, they invoked the distant God, 
the God of the monarchy. No evil is imputed to him : if his 
people suffer any, it is because he is too high or too distant. — 
" If the king did but know ! *' 

We have here a singular feature of France ; this nation for 
a long time comprehended politics only as devotion and love. 
A vigorous, obstinate, blind love, which attributes as a merit 
to their God all his imperfections ; whatever human weakness 
they perceive in him is a cause of thanksgiving rather than of 
disgust. They believe he will be but so much the nearer to 
them, less haughty, less hardhearted, and more compassionate 
on that account. They feel obliged to Henri lY. for his love 
of Gabrielle. 

This love for royalty during the earlier days of Louis XIV. 
and Colbert, was idolatry ; the king's endeavours to do equal 
justice to all, to lessen the odious inequality of taxation, gained 
him the heart of the people. Colbert reduced forty thousand 
pretended nobles, and subjected them to taxation ; he forced 
the leading burgesses to give an account at length of the 
finances of the towns, which they used to turn to their own 
advantage. The nobles of the provinces who, under favour of 
the confusion, made themselves feudal barons, received the 
formidable visits of the envoys of the parliament ; royal 
justice was blessed for its severity. The king appeared 
as terrible, in his Grands jours,* as the Day of Judgment, 
between the people and the nobility, the people being on his 

* High days, on whicli vma held a high Court of Justice. — C. C. 



TIIE KING AS GOD OF JUSTICE. 37 

right, and huddling together by the side of their judge, full of 
love and confidence. 

** Tremble, tyrants ! Do you not see that we hare God on 
our side ? " This is exactly the language of a poor simple 
people, who believe they have the king in their favour. They 
imagine they already behold in him the Angel of the Revolu- 
tion, and, with outstretched arms, they invoke him, full of 
tenderness and hope. Nothing is more affecting to read, 
among other facts of this kind, than the account of the Grands 
jours d* Auvergne, the ingenuous hope of the people, the 
quaking of the nobility. A peasant, whilst speaking to a lord, 
had not uncovered ; the noble knocked his hat off : ** If you 
do not pick it up," said the peasant, ''the High Bays are 
approaching, and the king will cut your head off.'* The noble 
was afraid, and picked it up.* 

Grand, sublime position of royalty ! Would that she had 
never forsaken it ; would that the judge of all had not become 
the judge of a few, and that this God of Justice had not, like 
the God of the theologians, wished also to have his elect ! 

Such confidence, and such love ! and yet, all betrayed ! 
That weU-beloved king was hardhearted towards his people. 
Search everywhere, in books and pictures, contemplate him in 
his portraits : not a motion, not one look, reveids the least 
emotion of the heart. The love of a whole people — ^that grand 

* The gens du roi, or, parlemeniaireSf who inspired the people with bo 
much confidence (and who, it is true, have done important semces) did not, 
however, represent Justice more seriously than the priests represented Grace. 
This regal justice was, after all, subject to the king^s good pleasure. A great 
master of Machiavelism, Cardinal Dubois, explains, with much good sense 
and precision, in a memorial to the regent against the States-Oeneral (vol. i. 
of the Monit€V/r)f the very simple mechanism of this parliamentary game, 
the steps of this minuet, the figures of this dance, up to the lit de Justice 
wliich ends the whole affair, by putting Justice under the feet of the king^s good 
pleasure. As to the States-General, which were- a subject of dread to Dubois, 
Saint Simon,.his adversary, recommends them as an expedient at once innocent, 
agreeable and easy, for dispensing one from paying one^s debts, for rendering 
bankruptcy honourable, ca/rumizing it, to use his own expression ; more- 
over, those States are never seriously effective, says he very properly : verba, 
voces, nothing more. I say that there was, both in the States and in the 
parliaments, one thing most serious ; which is, tbat those vain images of liberty 
occupied, employed, the little vigour and spirit of resistance that subsisted. 
Tbe reason why France could not have a constitution, is, that she believed she 
hod one. 



38 FAMINE IK THE EIGHTEENTH CESTUBT. 

rarity, ibat true nuradd — has Bucceeded ovkj in making of 
their idol a miracle of egotism. 

He took Adoration at its word, aod boUeyed himself a God. 
But he comprehended nothing in that word God. To be a 
God is to lire for all ; but he becomes more and more the 
king of the court ; the few he sees, that band of gilded beggars 
who beset him, are his people. A strange Diyinitj, he con- 
tracted and stifled a world in one man, instead of extending 
and aggrandizing that man to the measure of a world. His 
whole world now is Versailles ; and eyen there, look narrowly ; 
if you find some petty, obscure, dismal closet, a liying tomb^ 
that is all he wants ; enough for one indiyidual,* 



SECTION 11. 

FAMINE IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. 

I WILL presently inyestigate the idea on which France sub- 
sisted — the goTernment of grace and paternal monarchy ; that 
Inquiry will be mnch pr(»Bioted perhaps, if I first establish, by 
authentic proofs, the results in which this syst^ga had at Inigth 
terminated. A tree is known by its fruits. 

First, nobody will deny that it secured for this people the 
glory of a prodigious and incredible patience. Read the foreign 
trarellers of the last two centuries ; you behold them stupified, 
when trayelling through our plains, at their wretched appearance, 
at the sadness, the solitude, the miserable poverty, the dismal, 
naked, empty cottages, and the starving, ragged populatioii. 
There they learn what man is able to endure without dying ; 
what nobody, neither the English, the Butch, nor the Germans, 
would have suj^orted. 

What astonishes them still more, is the resignation of this 
people, their respect for their masters, lay or ecdeaastical, 
«nd their idolatrous attachment for their kings. That thej 
should preserve, amid such sufferings, bo much patience and 
meekness, such goodness and docility, so little rancour for 

* I allude to tke litfele 'dafk apartment of Madame de Maiatenon, where 
Jjoiiis XIV. expired. For his pMeonal helicif of his own divinity, see espedaUy 

his snrprising Memoirs written before his face and revised hj himself. 



FASTuro Of *mE AAuttsB OP ^JOB lor. 39 

opproBsitti, is indeed a .8ti*ange myvtevy. It porbaps ex|^aliks 
itself parfiy bj'tiie ]d»d '6f ear^M jiiilosophy, the too in* 
dSfflRerent faeilHy t^^ Wbach ^ i^enefamaoi weie<«ios bad 
wealb^'; it ^U be ^e t^am moaner or later ; rain to*day, 
fsrmii^Mne toMUorroir. He does not gemsMe at a> rainy day. 

Fren<^h '0^bi*iely ako, tb«t mak^mtlj milkmj qtiality, aided 
tbeir refiigMitioB. Oar soldieffi, in tbis matter, as in every 
other, have ^mrn the linits 'of fanniati endurance. Tfaeir 
fasting, in painful marches and excessive toils, would haVe 
frightened the la2y hex»^ts of 1^ TiietMoa, such as Anthony 
atid Paebeni«s. 

We most ieam i^om Marsfafiil Villars ho«r the armies of 
Louis XIV. used to live : " Several -tifties we thought that 
bread would absolutely fail us ; ^leo, by great efforts, wc got 
together enough for half a'«by : the next day is got over by 
fasting. When M. d'Avtagnan nuirdied, the brigades not 
marching were obliged to fast. Oar sustenance is a miracle, 
aaxd the yirtiie anfd fivmness of our soldiers are mairdlous. Pa- 
nem noitrmn quottdiamm da nobis hodie, say they to me as I 
pass through the ranks, after they have but the quarter and 
the half ration. I eucourage them and give them promises; they 
inerely shrug np tbeir shoulders, and gaze at me with a look of 
resignation that affects me. * The Marsdial is right,' say they ; 
^ we mnst learn to suilfer sometimes.* *' 

Patienee ! Virtue ! RecHgoation ! Can any one help being 
affected, on meeting with such traces of the goodness of our 
fathers ? 

Who will enable me to go through the history of their long 
fluffdnngs, their gentleness and moderation •? It was long the 
astonishment, sometimes the taughing^took of Europe ! Great 
merriment was it for the English to see those soldiers half- 
Btarred and almost naked, yet cheerful, lamiable, and good 
towarde their officers; perfwi ni a g^ witiiout a murmur, immense 
ttfarches, and, if th^ found notini]^ in 'the ievening^ making 
tiieir supper Of songs* 

If patience merits heaven, this people, in the two last 
centuries, trafy surpassed all the mierits of the saints ; but 
how shall we make ili» legend? Tfaeir Testiges are widely 
diffused. Misery is a general fact ; the yirtue to support 4t>« 
tiftue BO eoHHuoA ^^esamg m, jOwb 4iBteiia»6 veMoiii deigii to 



40 DIFFICULTY OF DESCRIBINO THOSE MISERIES. 

notice it. Moreover, History is defective in the eighteenth 
century ; France,- after the cniel fatigues of the wars of Louis 
XIY., suffers too much to relate her own story. No more 
memoirs ; nobody has the courage to write his individual life ; 
even vanity is mute, having but shame to tell. Till the philo- 
sophical movement, this country is silent, — like the deserted 
psJace of Louis XIY. — ^surviving his own family, like the 
chamber of the dying man who still governs, the old Cardinal 
Floury. 

It is difficult to describe properly the history of those times, 
as they are unmarked by rebellions. No people ever had fewer* 
This nation loved her ' masters ; she had no rebellion, — 
nothing but a Revolution. 

It is from their very masters, their kings, princes, ministers, 
prelates, magistrates, and intendants, that we may learn to 
what extremities the people were reduced. It is they who are 
about to describe the restraints in which the people were held. 

The mournful procession in which they all advance one after 
the other in order to recount the death of France, is led by 
Colbert in 1681 : « One can go on no longer," says he, and he 
dies. — They do go on however, for they expel hsM a million of 
industrious men about 1685, and kill still more, in a thirty 
years' war. But, good God ! how many more die of misery ! 

As early as 1698, the result is visible. The intendants 
themselves, who create the evU, reveal and deplore it. In the 
memorials which they are asked to give for the young duke of 
Burgundy, they declare that such a province has lost the 
quarter of its inhabitants, another a third, and another the 
half. And the population is not renewed ; the peasant is 
so miserable that his children are all weak, sickly, and unable 
to live. 

Let us follow attentively the series of years. That deplor- 
able period of 1698 becomes an object of regret. *' Then," 
says Boisguillebert, a magistrate, " there was still oil in the 
lamp. To-day (1707) it goes out for want of nourishment.'' — 
A mournful expression ; and he adds & threatening sentence ; 
one would think it was the year '89 : " The trial will now be 
between those who pay, and those whose only function is to 
receive.** 

The preceptor to the grandson of Louis XIY., the Archbishop 



lUSEBT UNBEB THE BSGENCY. 41 

of Cambrai, is not less revolutionnaire than this petty Norman 
magistrate : ** The people no longer live like men ; it is no 
longer safe to rely upon their patience* The old machine will 
break up at the first shock. We dare not look upon the state 
of exhaustion which we have now attained ; all we can do is to 
shut our eyes, open our hands, and go on taking." 

Louis XIY. dies at last, and the people thank God. Happily 
we hare the regent, that good duke of Orleans, who, if Fenelon 
still lived, would take him for his counsellor ; he prints 
Telemctchw; France shall be a Salentum. No more wars. 
We are now the' friends of England ; we give up to her our 
commerce, our honour, nay eren our State secrets. Who 
would believe that, in the bosom of peace, this amiable prince, 
in only seven years, finds means to add to the two billions and 
a half of debts left by Louis XIY., seven hundred and fifty 
millions (of francs) more ? — The whole paid up in paper. 

" If I were a subject, " he used to say, " I would most certainly 
revolt 1 '* And when he was told that a disturbance was about 
to take place, '* The people are right, *' sud he; *' they are good- 
natmred fools to suffer so long ! 

Fleury is as economical as the regent was lavish. Does 
France improve? I doubt it, when I see that the bread 
presented to Louis XV. as the bread that the people ate, is 
bread made of fern. 

The Bishop of Chartres told him, that, in his diocese, the 
men browsed with the sheep. What is perhaps still stronger, 
is, that M. d*Argenson (a minister) spei^ng of the sufferings 
of those times, contrasts them with the good time. Guess 
which. That of the regent and the duke, — the time when 
France, exhausted by Louis XIY., and bleeding at every pore, 
sought a remedy in a bankruptcy of three billions ! 

Everybody sees the crisis approaching. Fenelon says, so 
early as 1709 : ** The old machine will break up at the 
first shock." It does not break up yet. Then Madame de 
Chateauroux, about 1742 : << I see plainly that there will be a 
general overthrow, if no remedy be used." — Yes, Madam, every- 
body sees it, — ^the king and your successor, Madame de 
Pompadour, as well as the economists, the philosophers, 
foreigners, everybody. All admire the longanimity of this 
people ; it is Job sitting among the nations. meekness ! 



42 THE LAKD KCOBiBS SIBKItX. 

patienoe ! — Wft]p#le laagiis at it, Imt I momn oyer it. That 
lafertimate -peof^ still tms ; BtiQ bdter^s ; is obslniate in 
hoping. It is evvr wailu^ ior its svmur. Wlu«ii ? Its 
God-man, its king. 

RidicDdoBB yet affeetiag idolatry— 'What vaXL this ' God, this 
king, do ? He possesses neilfaer^e fiim mil, nar the power, 
peiiiaps, to cnre the deej^-Tooted, inretenite, unifersal evil 
now oonsmning, parcfahig, fumduBg ihe x^auaaamtj, dnuning 
its life's blood from its yeins,--^froiitits Tery heart. 

The evil consists in this, that the nation, f vom the highest to 
the lowest, is organised so as- to go xm pvodacing less ^and less, 
and paying mere amd more. She will go on defining, wasting 
away, giving, after her blood, her MM a - r oiw ; and titere will be no 
end to it, tiU having reaehed the last ga^, and just expiring, 
the conYulsion of the death-stru^e arouses her onee more, 
and raises that pale feeble body on its legs — ^Fedile ?»^gnmn 
strcmg periiaps by Airy ! 

Let us minutely ezamiae, if you will, these ^evds producmg 
less and less. They are exact to the letter. 

As early as under Louis XIY. the excise (aides) already 
weighed so heavily, that at Mantes, Etampee, and elsewhere, 
idl Ihe vines were plueked up. 

The peasant having no goods to seize, the- exchequer can lay 
hold of nothing but the cattle ; it is gradually extenninated. 
No more manure. The cultivation of com, though extended in 
the sevmteenth century, by immense dealings of waste land, 
decreases in the eighteenth. The eart^ cam no longer repair 
her generative strength ; she £Mts, ttnd becomes exhansted ; 
as the cattle may beoome extlaet, so also the land now appears 
dead. 

Not only does the knd prodixee less, but it is less eidtivated. 
In many places, it is not wxnth ydtik^ to cidtivate it. Large 
proprietors, tired of advancing to their peasants sums that 
never return, neglect the hmd -which -would require expensive 
improvements. The portion caltivateA gMws less, awd the 
desert expands. People lialk of agrieiiltare, write books on it, 
make expensivoexpertmenls, paMiioxieal«chmnes.of cvdtivation; 
—and agriculture, devoid of sueeour, of vattle, grows wild* 
Hen, women, aad ch^dren, <yoke ithemsehrss -to 'the piengh. 
l%ey would dig the ground'witiai'tibeir 'Mails, if our ancient laws 



ANCIfiNT FACTOKAflEiBf 'CTB5 aMg UT B EH T H CENTUBT. 43 

did not, at least, .defend the iplauglifihare, — ^tke last poor imple- 
ment that -furroits the eartli. How cim we be surprised that 
the crops should fail with sueh 'haif*staryed husbandmen, or that 
the land should suflfer and refuse to j^ield ? The yearly produce 
no longer suffices for the year. As we approach 1789, Nature 
yields less and less. Like a beast over fatigued, unwilling te 
move one step further, and preferring to lie down and die, she 
waits, and produces no .sMre. Liberty is not only the life of 
man, hut also that of Bature. 



SECTION m. 

1>9ES AITCIENT PATRONAOB BTJBSIST IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY 1 

Never accuse Nature of being a bad mother. B^iere not 
that God has withdrawn the beneficent light of his countenance 
from the earth. The earth is . always :a good and bountiM 
mother, ever ready and wiUiiig to hdp mankind ; though supw- 
fioially she may appear sterile and ungrateful, yet slie lores 
him ienderlj in her innermost deptJu. 

It is man who has ceased to lo^e, — man who is the enemy 
of ntajakind. The maledietion which weighs htm down is his 
owxi, the eurse of regotism and injustice, tiae load of an unjust 
society. Whom must he blame ? Nei^er nature, nor God, 
but himself, his work, his idols, his gods, whom he has created. 

He. has transferred his idolatry from (me to another. To his 
wooden gods he has said, <V'Protectme,bemy saviours !" He 
has aaid-so to the priest, he has scud so to the noble, he has -said 
so to the king. — ^Alas 1 .poor man, be thy own saviour, — save 
thyself. 

He loved theo^, — ^that is his excuse ; it ezplidns his blind* 
ness. How he loved, how he believed ! What artless faith in 
ihe£fOod ik»'</^in.the dear, kofy vnem 4^ God! How he would 
fall on his knaes b^ereithem on the puhlic road, and kiss the 
dust long after they Jutd passed! -Himv obstinately he put 
his trust and his hopes in them, aven whoi spurned and 
tnuxipled on ! Beuainiiig.evcr a miBer, — an infemt, he felt a 
sort of .filial delight tn coneealiag nothisg irma them, in ivtmst- 
iag .t9 .their ^baods the <whob osre of his &toie. ^' I hare 



44 CLEVERNESS OF THE CLERQT TO GIVE NOTHING. 

notliing :• I am poor ; but I am the baron's man, and belong to 
tbat fine ckdteau yonder !'' Or else, " I have the honour to 
be the serf of that famous monastery. I can never want for 
anything." 

Go now, go, good man, in the day of thy need ; go and 
knock at their gate. 

At the chateau ? But the gate is shut ; the large table, 
where so many once sat down, has long been empty ; the 
hearth is cold ; there is no fire, no smoke. The lord is at 
Versailles. He does not, however, forget thee. He has left 
his attorney behind, and his bailiff, to take care of thee. 

** Well ! I will go to the monastery. Is not that house of 
chanty the poor man's home ? The Church says to me every 
day : ' God so loved the world ! — He was made man, and 
became food to nourish man ! ' Either the Church is nothing, 
or it must be charity divine realised upon earth." 

Ejiock, knock, poor Lazarus ! Thou wilt wait long enough. 
Dost thou not know that the Church has now withdrawn from 
the world, and that all these affairs of poor people and charity 
no longer concern her ? There were two things in the middle 
ages, — wealth and functions, of which she was very jealous ; 
more equitable, however, in modern times, she has made two 
divisions of them ; the functions, such as schools, hospitals, 
alms, and the patronage of the poor, — all these things which 
mixed her up too much with worldly cares, she has generously 
handed over to the laity. 

Her other duties absorb all her attention, — ^those principally 
which consist in defending till death the pious foundations of 
which she is the trustee, in allowing no diminution of them, 
and in transmitting them with increased wealth to future gene- 
rations. In these respects she is truly heroic, ready for mar- 
tyrdom, if necessary. In 1788, the State, weighed down with 
debt, and driven to its last extremity, at a loss to devise new 
schemes for draining a ruined people, applies as a suppliant to 
the clergy, and entreats them to pay their taxes. Their an- 
swer is admirable, and should never be forgotten : '* No, the 
people of France is not taxable at pleasure." 

What ! invoke the name of the people as a ground to excuse 
themselves from succouring the people ? That was the utmost, 
truly the sublimest pitch, which Phariseean wisdom could ev^ 



ILLNESS OF LOUIS XT. 45 

hope to attain. Come at length to tHe ever-memorable year 
of '89. The clergy is after all but mortal. It must share 
the common lot. But it can enjoy the thought, so consoling in 
our last moments, to have been consistent till death. 

The mystery of Christianity, a God giving himself to man — 
a God descending into man, — that doctrine, harsh to reason, 
could be imposed on the heart only by the visible continuation 
of the miracle, — alms ever flowing without a capability of 
exhaustion, and spiritual alms deriving a never-failing support 
from a similar doctrine ; in this you might see some evidence 
of a God ever present in his Church. But the Church of the 
eighteenth century, sterile, and no longer giving anything, 
either material or intellectual, demonstrates precisely the very 
contrary of what religion teaches, (Oh, impiety !) I mean, 
" The absence of God in man.*' 



SECTION IV. 

ROYAL POPULARITY. 



In the eighteenth century, the people no longer hoped for 
anything from that patronage which supported them at other 
times, — the clergy and the nobility. These will do nothing for 
them. But they still believe in the king ; they transfer to the 
infant Louis XV. both their faith and their necessity of loving. 
He, the only remains of so great a family, saved like the 
infant Joas, is preserved apparently that he may himself save 
othera. They weep on beholding that child ! How many 
evil years have to run their course! But they wait with 
patience, and still hope ; that minority, that long tuition of 
twenty or thirty years, must have an end. 

It was night when the news reached Paris, that Louis XV., 
on his way to the army, had been seized with illness at Metz. 
'* The people leaped from their beds, rushed out in a tumult, 
without knowing whither. The churches were thrown open 
in the middle of the night. Men assembled in the cross-roads, 
accosted, and asked questions, without knowing one another. 
In several churches, the priest who pronounced the prayer for 
recovery of the king, interrupted the chanting with his sobs, 
and the people responded by their cries and tears. The 



46 THE REOAL INOARNATION HAS PERISHED. 

OQurierwlH) Inrouglii the news of his recovery, was hugged, 
and ahnost. stifled ^ thej kissed his horse, and led him. in 
trhimpfav Every* stroet. re-echoed the same joyful, cry : * L% 
Roi est guiri!^ " 

This, in 1744-. Louis XV. is named the TF^/Z-^ibofe/. Ten 
yearsvpass. Tl«e same people believe that the . well^beloved 
takes baths of luiman blood ; that, in order to renew his ex- 
hausted, frame, he bathes himself in children's blood. One 
day, wli^i the polieev aoeording to their atrocious custom, were 
carrying off men, diildrea .wandering in the streets, and little 
giris (ei^oially such as were pretiy), the mothers screamed, 
the people flocked together, and a riot broke out. From that 
moment, the king never resided in. Paris. He sddom passed 
thnwgh it, except to go from Versailles to Compidgne. He 
had a road made in great haste, which avoided Paris, Mid. 
enabled the king to escape the observation of his people. 
That road is still called Le Chemin de la RSvolte. 

These ten years (1744 — 1754) are the very crisis of the 
century. The king, that God, that idol, becomes an object of 
horror. The dogma of the regal incarnation perishes irre- 
coverably. And in its place arises the sovereignty of the 
mind. Montesquieu, Buflbn, and Voltaire, in that short interval 
publish their grand works ; Rousseau was just beginning his. 

Unity till then had reposed on the idea of an incarnation, 
either religious or political. A human God was an essential 
requisite — a God of flesh, for- the purpose of uniting either the 
church or the state. Humanity, still' feeble; placed its unity 
in a sign, a visible living sign, a man, an individual. Henee- 
f<H*th, unity, more* pure, and free from this material condition', 
will consist in the union of hearts, the community of the mind, 
the profound union of sentiments and ideas arising from identity 
of opinions. 

The great doctors of the new churerh, mentioned before, 
though dissenting in secondary matters,, are admirably agreed 
on two essential points, wfarch constitute the genius of the- age 
in which they lived, as ^ell as that of future tknes/ 

1st. Their mind is free- from all forms- of incarnation ;* dis* 
entangled from that' corporeal vesture which had so long^ 
invested it. 

2dly. The mind, in* their oprnionr, is not only* inteHtgesco', it 



TOLTAIBS BAViaBlSD FROM GOTTRT. 47 



is wamtliv hsw^f an-' ard^t: love- fbc nuuiisiDd : lore in itself, 
a»LBO(^aii2>J6ot to coFtaia dogmaiar, or oonditioiia of religious 
poHcy. Tlid' ekariUf. of. the middle. agseB, a slave to Theology, 
but too easily folkniFed her iraferious mirtress ; too docile, 
indeed, and so«confliiiatiDg as to admit whatevorcoidd be tole- 
rated' by> bateb Wfaai is the value of & oharity whick could 
enact the Massaore of Saint BoKthoIomew, fire the faggots at 
the stake, attd organise the InqaiaitnMr ? 

'Wbilstendearouiing'to divestTeligion of its carnal character, 
aanl* to- reject^ the doctrine- of a religions incarnation, this 
century, at first timid in its ^andacity,. remained for a long timo 
canMii in its politics, and seemedonxdous to respect- the doctrine 
of a regal incarnation, — and- through the king, that God* 
man, te achieyo the happiness ' of mankind* It is the chimera 
of the philosophers and ■■ economists, of such men, I mean, as 
Voltaire and Turgot, to accomplish the revolution by. the king. 

Nothing is more curious than to: behold this idol disputed as 
it were by both parties. The {^loaopheie pnll him to the 
right, tho- priests to the left. WhowilLcarry him off? Women. 
This god is a god- of flesh* 

The woman who secures him for- twenty years, Madame de 
Pompadour (whose maiden name was Poisson) would like, at 
first, to make an ally for herself of the public, against the 
court. The philosophers are summoned. Voltaire writes tho 
king's history, and poems and dramas for the king ; d*Argcnson 
is made minister ; and the comptroll^-general, Machault, de- 
maftds a statement of eeclesiastieal property. That blow 
aivtakcna the cleigy. The Jesuits do not* waste time in 
arguing the* point -witb atweman.; they bring another woman 
to oppose her, and they triumfdi; But what woman ? The 
lDDg*s own- daughter. Here we wiurt Suetonius. SucIl things 
had never been since the days of the tw^vo C»8ars» 

Vdtaire waS' dismissed ; aoiid'. so was d.'Argenson, and 
MaehauU later.- Madame de Pompadour humbled herself, 
took the Commuuion, and put Iierself at the feet of the queen. 
Meanwhile, shetWasipMiparing aniofiAmons and.pttiinl machine, 
liihereby.:8he 'regained and kept.posassuon/of the king till his 
death : a seraglio,. reeruited by children whom they. bought. 

And thore slowly expired Louis XV. The god df flesh 
abdieated every vestige of mind. 



48 DEATH OF THE PEOPLE. 

Avoiding Paris, shunning his people, ever shut up at Ver- 
sailles, he finds even there too many people, too much daylight. 
He wants a shadowy retreat, the wood, the chace, the secret 
lodge of Trianon, or his convent of the Parc-aux-cerfs. 

How strange and inexplicahle that those amours^ at least 
those shadows, those images of love, cannot soften his heart. 
He purchases the daughters of the people ; hy them he lives 
with the people ; he receives their childish caresses, and 
assumes their language. Yet he remains the enemy of the 
people ; hard-hearted, selfish, and unfeeling ; he transforms 
the king into a dealer iu com, a speculator in famine. 

In that soul, so dead to sentiment, one thing still remained 
alive : the fear of dying. He was ever speaking of death, of 
funerals, and of the grave. He would often forehode the 
death of the monarchy ; but provided it lasted his time, he 
desired no more. 

In a year of scarcity (they were not uncommon then), he 
was hunting, as usual, in the forest of S6nart. He met a 
peasant carrying a bier, and inquired " whither he was convey- 
ing it ? — To such a place. — For a man or woman ? — ^A man. — 
What did he die of ?— Hunger." 



SECTION V. 

NO HOPE BUT JUSTICE. 

That dead man is Ancient France, and that bier, ihe coffin 
of the Ancient Monarchy. Therein let us bury, and for ever, 
the dreams in which we once fondly trusted, — paternal roy- 
alty, the government of grace, the clemency of the monarch, 
and the charity of the priest ; filial confidence, implicit belief 
in the gods here below. 

That fiction of the old world, — ^that deceitful legend, which 
was ever on its tongue, — ^was to substitute hve in the j)lace 
of law. 

If that world, almost annihilated under the title of love, 
wounded by charity, and heart-broken by grace, can revive, 
it will revive by the means of law, justice, and equity. 

blasphemy ! They had opposed grace to law, love to 
justice. As if unjust grace could still be grace * as if those 



THE STATE OF WEAKNESS OF MORAL LIFE. 49 

things which our weakness divides, were not two aspects of 
the same truth, — the right and the left-hand of God. 

They have made justice a negatire thing, which forhids, 
prohihifcs, excludes, — an ohstacle to impede, and a knife to 
slaughter. They do not know that justice is the eye of Pro- 
vidence. Love, hlind among us, clear-sighted in God, sees hy 
justice — a vital-ahsorhing glance. A prolific power is in the 
justice of God ; whenever it touches the earth, the latter is 
hlest, and hrings forth. The sim and the dew are not enough, 
it must have Justice. Let her hut appear, and the harvests 
come. Harvests of men and nations will spring up, put forth, 
and flourish in the sunshine of equity. 

A day of justice, one single day, which is called the Revo- 
lution, produced ten millions of men. 

But how far off? Bid it appear, in the middle of the eighteenth 
century, remote and impossihle? Of what materials shall I 
compose it ? all is perishing around me. To huild, I should 
want stones, lime, and cement ; and I am empty-handed. The 
two saviours of this people — ^the priest and the king — have 
destroyed them, heyond the possibility of restoration. Feudal 
life and municipal life are no more, — both swallowed up in 
royalty. Religious life became extinct with the clergy. Alas I 
not even a local legend or national tradition remains : — no more* 
of those happy prejudices which constitute the life of an infant 
people. They have destroyed everything, even popular delu* 
sions. Behold them now stripped and empty,— to^e^/a ra9a; the 
future must write as best it may. 

0, pure spirit, last inhabitant of that destroyed world ; uni> 
versal heir of all those extinct powers, how wilt thou guide us 
to the only bestower of life? How wilt thou restore to us 
Justice and the idea of Right ? 

Here, thou beholdest nothing but stumbling-blocks, old 
ruins, that one must pull down, crumble to powder, and neglect. 
Nothing is standing, nothing living. Do what thou wilt, thou 
wilt have at least the consolation of having destroyed only that 
which was already dead. 

The working of the pure spirit is even that of God — the art 
of God is its art. Its construction is too profoundly harmo- 
nious within, to appear so without. Seek not here the straight 
lines and the angles, the stiff regularity of your buildings of 

E 



50 BUTFOVy SDNBBOT* TBB TBRBB HODBKS OF lUOHT. 



Stone and marble. In a living organiaatioii, haimony of a £ur 
superior strength is ef&r deepty seated within. 

First, let this new world hare material life ; let ns giTe it for 
a be^nning, for a first foondatiim, — the eoloesal Mistoire 
NatureMe:* let ns pat eider in Natnie; lor her order is justice. 

But order is as jet impoeaible. From the bosom of Nature^ 
-*-<glowing, boiling, as when Etna awakes,*— flames forth an 
knmense Tolcano.t Everj smnee and ererj art bnnts finrtL 
The emptkn over, a maas reQains,-^«n enonnoas mass mingled 
with dross and gold : the EnofdopMe* 

Beh<^ two ages of 1^ yoong wodd>-^-two days of the crea- 
tion. Order is wanting, and so is UBity. Let us make man, 
tiie wniiy of <he world, and with him let Order come* and with 
her, the Divinity whose advent we espeet, the hmg-desired 
majesty of Divine Jostiee. 

Man appoars under three flgwes: Montesqpiieii, Voltaire^ 
and Bonsseao, three interpretos of the Just and Bight. 

Let OS note law ; Irt us seek law ; periiaps we may yet find 
it in some comer of the ^be. There may perhaps be some 
elime favourable for justice,'— seme better land whieh naturally 
yields the fruit ef equity. The traveUw, the in<purer, who 
pivsues it through Ihe earth* is the eahn, mi^estic Montesquieu. 
But justice flies before him ; it r^nains relative and moveable ; 
law, in lus estimation, is a relation, — merely abstract, and 
inanimate ; it is not endowed with vitality.]: 

Montesquieu maybe resigned to this result; but not soVoltaire. 
Voltaire is the one who suffers, who has taken upon him all the 
agony of mankind, who feels and hunts out every iniquity. 
All the iUs that fanaticism and tyranny have ever inflicted upon 
the world, have been inflicted up<m Voltaire. It was he, the 
martyr, the imiversal victim, whom they slaughtered in their 
Saint Barliiolomew, whom they buried in the mines of the new 

* Bufibb ; the fint voluae, 17i8. See the edition of MM. Geoffiroy- 
Saint-Hilaiif. 

*t* Diderot, who puhlithed the two fint yolmnefl of the BMi^fSfi/p4dAt in 
1751. M. G^nin has just written an article on him, whidi everybody will 
find witty, hriUiant, full of emiiaeinent, charming. I find it penetnkting ; it 
goes to the very miffrow of the suhject, 

X Montesqnieu^s B^pni des Loin appeared in 1748. I shall frequently 
have occasion to explain how very little that great genms possessed the povep- 
tion of Right. He is, unwittingly, the founder of eur ahturd Ikigliik sohooL 



woridy whom ilhffj Iramed at SenBe, whom the parliament of 
Tooloose broke on the wheel with Calaa. — He weeps, he laughs^ 
in his agony, — a terrible laugh, at which the bastilles of tyrants 
and the temples of the Pharisees ftJl to ihe gromid.* 

And down fSeH at the same thne all those petty barriers 
wiChin which every choreh intrenched itself, calling itself sni« 
rersal, and wishing to deslafoy all odiers. They hXL beforo 
Voltaire, to make room for the humtm ehmish, for liiat catholic 
ckotth which will reeeiye and contain them all in justioe and in 
peace. 

Yoltaffe is tlie witness of Itight,'-^H8 apostle and its martyr. 
He has settled the eld question pot from the origin of the workL: 
Is tiiere religion withont justice, without humani^ ? 



SECTION VL 

TfiB nnss 1CAST8R Mums* 

MoKTSSi^mstT IB the writer, the hiterpreter of Right ; Voltaire 
weeps and clamours for it ; and Rousseau fcmnds it. 

It was a grand moment, which found Voltaire orerwhelmed 
by a new calamity, the disaster of Lisbon ; when, blinded by 
tears^ and doubting Heaven, Rousseau comforted him, restored 
God to him, and upon the ruins of the world proclaimed the 
existence of Proridence. 

Far more than Lisbon, it is ^e world which is tumbling to 
pieces. Religion and the State, morals and laws, ererything is 
perishing. — ^And where is the family ? When is loTe ? — even 
the child — ^the future ? Oh ! what must we think of a world 
wherein eren maternal love is perishing ? 

And is it thou, poor, ignorant, lonefy, abandoned workman, 
hated by the philosophers and detested by the clergy, sick in 
the depth of winter, dying upon the snow, in thy unprotected 
pavilion of Montmorenci, who art wUling to resist alone, and 
to write (though the ink freezes in thy pen) to protest against 
death! 

* Bead, en V^taiie, four pigM, ftunped with the leal of gesiui, which ne 
man of mete talent o<mld ever have written.— -Quinet, Ultnmontanism. — (See 
my translation of this hook, Jtonum Chvrch ind Modern Societjff pp. 117, 
118, 119^ 120. Chapman : London 1845, 0.C.) 

e2 



52 B0U8SEAU BECOMMENCES RIGHT. 

Is it indeed with thjr spinet and thy " ViUage Curate," poor 
musician, that thou art going to re-oonstmct a world ? Thou 
hadst a slender voice, some energy and warmth of language on 
thy arrival at Paris, rich in thy Pergol^se, in music, and in hope. 
It is long since then ; soon thou wilt have lived half a century ; 
thou art old ; all is over. Why dost thou speak of regenera- 
tion to that dying socie^, when thou thyself art no more ? 

Tes, it was truly difficult, even for a man less cruelly treated 
by fate, to extricate his feet from the quicksand, from ^t deep 
mire where everything was swallowed up. 

What was the resting-point whereon Uiat strong man, finding 
a footing, stopped, held fast — and everything stood firm? 

What footing did he find ? feeble world, ye of little 
faith, degenerate sons, forgetful of Rousseau and the Revolu- 
tion? 

He found it in what has grown too faint among you — ^in 
his heart. In the depths of his suffering he read, and read 
distinctly, what tiie middle ages were never able to read : A 
Just God. And what was said by a glorious child of Rousseau ? 
<< Biffht is the sovereign of the tcorld,*' 

That splendid motto was uttered only at the end of the 
eentury ; it is its revelation, — ^its profound and sublime 
formula. 

Rousseau spoke by the mouth of another^ by Mirabeau ; yet 
it is no less the soul of Rousseau's genius. When once he 
severed himself from the false science of the time, and from a 
no less false society, you behold in his writings the dawn of a 
celestial effulgence, — Duty, Right ! 

Its sweet and prolific power shines forth in all its brilliancy 
in the profession of faith of the Vicar of Savoy. God himself 
subject to Justice, subject to Right ! — Let us say rather that 
God and Right are identical 

If Rousseau had spoken in tiie terms of Mirabeau, his lan- 
guage would not have taken effect. Necessities change with 
tiie times. — To a world ready to act, on the very day of action, 
Mii^abeau said: "Right is the sovereign of tiie world," you 
are the subjects of Right. — To a world still slumbering, inert, 
feeble, and devoid of energy, Rousseau said, and said well : 
** The general will is right and reason." Tour will is Right. 
Then arouse yourselves, ye slaves I 



BOUBBEAU ACTS BT SENTDIENT. 53 

** Your coUectiye ¥rill is Reason herself." In other words. 
Ye are Gods ! 

And who, indeed, without helieving himself God, could ever 
do anything great ? Then it is that you may fearlessly cross 
the hridge of Areola ; then it is, that, in the name of duty, 
you sever yourself from your dearest affections, your heart. 

Let us he God ! The impossible becomes possible and easy. 
Then, to overthrow a world is a mere trifle ; why, one creates 
a world: 

This it is which explains how a feeble breath from a manly 
breast, a simple melody arising from the heart of the poor 
musician, raised the dead. 

France is moved in her inmost soul. All Europe is changed 
by it. The vast massy German empire rocks on her old founda- 
tions. They criticise, but obey. " Mere sentimentality," say 
they, with an attempt to smile. And yet these dreamers 
follow it. The very philosophers, the abstractors of quint- 
essence, take, in spite of themselves, the simple path of the 
poor Vicar of Savoy. 

What, then, has happened ? What divine light has shone, to 
produce so great a change ? Is it the power of an idea, of a 
new inspiration, of a revelation from above ? Yes, there has 
been a revelation. But the novelty of the doctrine is not what 
affects us most. We have here a more strange, a more 
mysterious phenomenon, — an influence felt even by those who 
do not read, and could never comprehend. Nobody knows 
why, but since that glowing language impregnated the air, 
the temperature has changed ; it seems as though a breath of 
life had been wafted over the world ; the earth begins to bear 
fruits that she would never else have boroe. 

What is it ? Shall I tell you ? It is what vivifies and melts 
the heart ; it is the breath of youth ; and that is why we all 
yield to its influence. In vain would you prove to us that this 
language is weak, or overstrained, or of vulgar sentiment. 
Such is youth and such is passion. Such have we been, and, 
if we occasionally recognise therein the foibles of our early 
youth, we do but feel more vividly the sweet yet bitter charms 
of the time that will return no more. 

Warmth and thrilling melody, such is the magic of Rousseau. 
His power, as it is in Ms *' Emile" and the ** CorUrat Social,** 



54 TOLTAIBE SX8UXES THS FIGHT OF JU8TI0E. 

may be discusaed and ooodbaied. But, bj his *' Con&saons " 
and his '* Reveries," by bis weakness, be bas 'VBnquisbed us^ 
and drawn tears from every eye. 

Foreign, hostile gemufieft were able to reject the light, but 
they have aU felt the influence of the warnrth. They did not 
listen to the words ; but the music subdued them* The gods 
of prc^ound harmony, tho rirals of the storm, which thun- 
dered from the Rhine to the Alps, ihemselTes felt the all- 
powerful incantation of that sweet melody, that soft* human 
voice, — ^the little morning ditty, sung for the first time beneath 
the vine at Channettes. 

That youthful afiEecting voice, that melody of the heart, is 
heard long i^ter that tender heart has been buried in the earth. 
The *' Confessions," which aj^ieared aliter the death of Rousseau, 
seem a sigh from the tomb. Qje returns— rises from the dead, 
more potent, more admixed, mora adored than ever. 

That miracle he shares in common with his rival, Voltaire* 
His rival ?-^No. Enemy ?-^No. Let them be for ever upon 
the same pedestal, those two Apostles of Humanity.* 

Voltaire, nearly octogenarian, buried among the snows of 
the Alps, broken dowa by age and labour, nevertheless rises 
also frixm the dead. The gmnd thought of the century, 
inaugumted by him, is also, to be dosed by him ; he who was 
the first to open, is alao to resume and finish the chorus. 
Glorioua century ! Well daw ik deserve to be called for ever 
the heroic age of the mind.. An old man on; the verge of the 
grave; he baa seen the o^ors, Montesquieu, Dideroj;, and 
Buffim pass away ; he has witnessed tho extraordinary success 
of Rousseau» — ^three books in three yean. *^ And the earth wa9 
silent.'' Voltaire is not ^Moumged.; bdiold him enffflag, 
lively and young, upon a new career. Where, then, is the old 
Voltaire ? He was dead.. But: a voiee hae roused him all aliFO 
from the tomb, tiiat. voiQe iriuah.IiAd oyer giren. him li£eb*^tbe 
v(ttce of HunuuHily. 



* A iMble'Hid teute idaa. of ]fidH»e>£liB4 nUeh •!»«■ iMryviiiit rites 
s«iperior ta Uiote Ytit^ npywtiom whkb the mgfi* d0 9i/Hkm ciealet for it«elf 
between those great witneBses, of tmth not.oppoMd, but hannMUBuiij^ When 
it yna lately propoeed to raiffe statues to ToUalre and Roosseau, MMhrne fibnd, 
ip an admiiaUe loftter, re<|iie«ted that tho two iMeneSed feBiufle» Bujj^t be 
placed vpMk thefune pedtilaL KoUethoughti eoine team the htmt^ 



TOLTAnuB BBonra tbb BByoLimoN. 55 

Ancient ehampion, to thee ihe crown ! Here thoa art egaio, 
conqueror of conquerors. Throughout a century, in cTeiyliind 
of warfare, with every weapon and doctrine, oj^osite, contrary, 
no matter what, thou hast pursued, without ever deviating, 
one interest, one cause — ^holy Humamty. And yet they have 
called thee a sceptic ! And Uiey have termed thee changeable ! 
They thought to surprise thee in the seeming contradictions of 
a flexible language ever serving the selfsame thought ! 

Thy faith shcdl be crowned by the very work of faiih. 
Others have spoken of Justice, but thou shalt perform it ; thy 
words are acts, realities. Thou defendest Galas and La Barre, 
thou savest Sirven, and dost annihilate the scafibld of the 
Protestants. Thou hast conquered for religious liberty, and 
moreoTer, for civil freedom, as advocate of the last serfs, for 
the reform of our barbarous legislation and criminal laws, 
which themselves were crimes. 

Behold in all tliis the dawn of the Revolution. Thou dost 
make it, and see it. Look for thy reward, look, behold it 
yonder I Now thou mayest die ; thy firm faith deserved ^at 
thou shouldst not take thy flight before thou hadst seen the 
holy land. 



SECTION vn. 

THE BEVOLUTIOK COMMENCES. 

When those* two men havo passed^ the B^volution is accom- 
plished in the intellectual worid. 

Now it becomes the duty of their sons, legitimate and 
iUegitimste, to expound and diffuse it in a hundred ways : somo 
in eloquence and fiery satire, others will strike bronie medals 
to transmit it from hand to hand ; Mirabeau, Beaumarchais, 
Baynal, Mably, and Sieyes, are now to do their work. 

The Rervoktion is on her march, with RousieaKi and Voltaire 
still in front. Kings themselves are in her train ; Frederick, 
Catherino, Joseph, Leopold — that is the court of the two 
chieftains of the age. Reign, great men, yo true sovereigns of 
the worid ; reign, my kings ! 

JiXi appear converted, all wish for the Revolution ; though 
every one, it is tnie, wi^ies it, not for himself, but for otheni. 



56 ALL DE8IBE THE RETOLUTION : 

The nobilitj would wiUin^jr make it against the clergy, and 
tbe dergj against the nobilitj. 

Tnrgot is the touchstone for all : he summons them to say 
whether they wish truly to amend ; they all unanimously 
answer : No, let what .ought to be done, be done ! 

Meanwhile, I see the Reyolution OTerywhere, eyen in Ver- 
sailles. All admit it to a certain limit, where it will not hurt 
them : Louis XVI. as far as the plans of Fenelon and the 
Duke of Burgundy, and the Count d*Artois as far as Figaro ; 
he forces the king to allow the trying drama to be played. 
The queen wishes for the Eevolution, at least in her palace, 
for the parvenus ; that queen, deyoid of prejudices, turns all 
her grand ladies out of doors, in order to keep her beautiful 
friend Madame de Polignac. 

Necker, the harrotDer, himself discredits his loans by pub- 
lishing the misery of the monarchy. A revoltUionnaire by 
publicity, he belieyes he is so by his little proyincial assem- 
blies, wherein the priyileged are to say what must be taken 
from the priyileged. 

The witty Calonne comes next, and being unable to glut the 
priyileged eyen by breaking into the public treasury, he takes 
his course, accuses them, and hands them oyer to the hatred of 
the people. 

He has accomplished the Reyolution against the notables ; 
Lomenie, a philosophical priest, accomplishes it against the 
parliaments. 

Calonne said admirably, when he ayowed the deficit, and 
pointed to the yawning gulf : '* What remains to fill it with ? 
Theahuses.*' 

That seemed clear to eyerybody ; the only thing obscure was 
whether Calonne did not speak in tbe name of the very Prince 
of abuses, of him who sustained all others, and was the key- 
stone of the whole wretched edifice? In two words, was 
Royalty the support or the remedy of those abuses denounced 
by the KiDg*s own creature. 

That the clergy was an abuse, and the nobility an abuse, 
seemed but too eyident. 

The priyilege of the clergy, founded on teaching, and the 
example they formerly set the people, had become nonsense ; 
nobody possessed the faith less. In their last assembly, they 



BUT TO A CERTAIN LIMIT. 57 

Btriye hard to get the philosophers punished, and, to make the 
demand, they are represented hy an atheist and a sceptic : 
Lom6nie and Talleyrand. 

The privilege of the nohility had likewise hecome nonsense : 
formerly they paid nothing hecause they paid with their sword; 
they famished the ban and arriere-hcm ; a vast undisciplined 
multitude, called together for the last time in 1674. They 
continued to furnish the army with officers, hy shutting out all 
others from the career, and rendering the formation of a real 
army impossihle. The civil army, the administration, the 
hureau-cracy, was invaded hy the nohility ; the ecclesiastical 
army, in its higher ranks, was also filled with nohles. Those 
who made it their profession to live in grand style, that is to 
say, to do nothing, had undertaken to do all ; and everything 
remained undone. 

Once more, the clergy and the nohility were a harden to the 
land, the malediction of the country, a gangrene which it was 
necessary to cut away ; that was as clear as daylight to 
everyhody. 

The only ohscure question was that of Royalty ; a ques- 
tion, not of mere form, as people have so often repeated, hut a 
fundamental, intimate question, more vital than any other in 
France ; a question not only of poHtics, hut of love and religion. 
No people ever loved their kings so dearly. 

The eyes of men, open under Louis XY., shut again under 
Louis XVI., and the question remained once more in the dark. 
The hope of the people stUl clung to royalty ; Turgot hoped, 
Voltaire hoped, that poor young king, so ill horn and hred, 
would have desired to do good. He struggled, and was 
dragged away. The prejudices of his hirth and education, 
even his hereditary virtues, hurried him to his ruin — a sad 
historical prohlem ! Honest men have excused him, and honest 
men have condemned him. Duplicity, mental reservations, (hut 
little surprising, no douht, in a pupil of the Jesuit party,) 
such were his faults ; and lastly his crime, which led him to 
death, his appeal to foreigners. With all that, let us not forget 
that he had heen sincerely anti- Austrian and anti-English; 
that he had truly, fervently desired to improve our navy ; that 
he had founded Cherhourg at eighteen leagues from Ports- 
mouth ; that he helped to cut England in two, and set one part 
of England against the other. That tear which Camot shed 



58 THE BED BOOK. 

on Bigning his death-wAirant, remains for him in history; 
History, and even Justice, in judging him, will weep. 

Every day brings on his punishment. This is not the time 
for me to rdate those things. Let it suffice to say here that 
the best was the last — ^great lesson of Providence 1 — so that it 
might appear plain to aU that the evil was less in the man than 
in the institution itself ; that it might be more than the condem- 
nation of the king — ^the condemnation of ancient royalty. That 
religion is at an end. Louis XY. or Louis XVI,, infamous or 
honest, the god is nevertheless stiU a man ; if he be not so by 
vice, he is by virtue, by easy good nature* Human aDdfieeble, 
incapable of refusing, of resisting, every day sacrificing the 
people to the courtiers, and like the God of the priests, 
damning the many, and saving his ele&t. 

As wo have already said : The religion of grace, partial for 
the elect, and the g&mmmeKt of gr^iee^ in the hands of 
favourites, are perfectly analogous. Privileged mesdioity, 
whether it be filthy and monastic, or gilded, as at VarsaiUeSy 
is ever mendicity. Two paternal powers : ecclesiastical paternity, 
characterised by the Inquisition; and monarchioal paternity, by 
the £ed BoQk.and the Bastille* 



SECTION vm. 

THE BED BOOK* 



When Queen Aime of Austria was regent, " there remained,*' 
says Cardinal Bets, '* buttwo little words in the language : ' The 
queen is so good ! ' " 

From that day France declines in energy; the elevation 
of the lower classes, which notwithstanding the harsh adminis- 
tration of Richelieu had been so remarkable, subudes and dis- 
appears. Wherefore ? Because the '' queen ia good ; ** she 
loads with presents the brilliant crowd besetting her palace ; all 
the provincial nobility who flediinder Biohelieu return, demand, 
obtain, take, and pillage; the least they expect is to be 
exempted from, taxation. The peasant who haa managed to 
purchase a few acres has tiie sole duty <^ paymAnt; he must 
bear all — ^he is obliged, to sell again, aad.onse more beoomes a 
tenant,^ steward,, or & poor domestic. 



THE BSB^ BOOK* 59 

Louis X]^V. 18 severe at fliat ; no exemption &om taxes ; 
Colbert oancelfr 40,000 of them. The countiy thriveA. But 
Louis XIV . grows good-aaiured ; he is more and more affeoted 
by the £Eitd o£ the poor nobUitj ; eraything is for them, — 
grades, places, pensions, even benefices, and Saint-Cyr for 
noble young la£es. The nobility flourishes, and Fnmce is at 
her last extremity- 
Louis XYI. is also severe at first, grumbles, and even 
refuses; the courliers jest bitterly about his mcivililr^ and 
rough answers {oovps de houioir). The reasmi is, he has a bad 
minister — ^that inflexible Turgot : and, alas ! the queen has no 
power yet. In 1778, the king at last yields ; the reaction of 
nature acta powerfully in favour of the queen ; he ean no 
longer refuse anytiiing, neither to her nor to her brother. The 
most amiable man in France becomes comptroller-general ; 
M. de Calonne uses as nmch wit and grace to give, as his 
predeceas(M*s had used AiH to elude and re&ise. ** Madam,,*' 
he would say to the queen, << if it be possible, it is done; 
if impossible* it shall be done." The queen purchases 
Saint Cloud ; the king, so pariumonjous till then, allows him* 
self to ba seduced, and buys EambouiUet. Vandreuil, the 
disinterested friend. o£ the Count d' Artois^ will receive nothing ; 
he sells to the erown,. for a million,, his estatea in America, 
receiver them>baok and ^epa them* Who ean say how many 
estates aitd what sub» JDume de Felignac, by deverly direeting 
Jules de Polignao,. managed to secure 1 The erowned Eosina, 
haaring beoene in eourae of timet Countess Almavwa,. ODvid 
zafose nothing to Soaamie, — ^to the veraatf channs of her 
who.was- Suzanne or Chenibino.. 

The lUvolutaQn spoiled all* It vm^j t«re aaiiie' the 
graceful: veil, that maeked. the pidblic ruin.. The veil, being 
XMnovsd^ revealed' the vessel, of the Danaidea. The monstrous 
affair of the Puy Faulin and Fenestrange, those miUioBB 
aqnandered (between aifEunine and a hankmptoy), fltrng- away 
h^ a silly womao into* a. woman's^ lap, far surpassed anytlnng 
that satire had exposed. People laughed, — ^with horror.. 

The inflexi.bief repexter of the Committee of FiaaBcesi ac- 
^nauatadtbob aas^sbly with &myatery unkaMU to.OErazylMd^v r 
'*In expenditure,, the king ift the Mfe afmc^or." 
T3iQ. only staaibrd.o£ exfendilive waaihekingis gaadnHtairei. 



€0 RUINOUS OOOD-NATUBE OF THE KINO. 

Too tender-hearted to refdse — ^to grieve those whom he saw 
about him^ — ^he found himself m reality dependent on them. At 
the slightest inclination towards economy, they were moody and 
sullen. He was obliged to yield. Several of them were still 
bolder ; they spoke out, loud and resolutely, and took the 
king to task. M. do Coigny (the queen's first or second lover, 
according to dates), refused to submit to a retrenchment which 
they had proposed in one of his enormous pensions ; a scene 
ensued, and he got into a passion with Louis XYI. The king 
shrugged up his shoulders, and made no answer. In the even- 
ing, he said : '' Indeed, had he beaten me, I should have 
submitted to it." 

No noble family in difficulties, no illustrious mother marrying 
her daughter and son, but draws money from the king. '* Those 
great families contribute to the splendour of the monarchy 
and the glory of the throne," &c. &c. The king signs with a 

heavy heart, and copies into his Red Book : To Madam , 

500,000 francs. The lady carries the order to the minister : 
« I have no money. Madam." She insists, threatens ; she 
may be troublesome, being in high favom* with the queen. 
The minister ultimately finds the money. He will rather 
postpone, like Lom^nie, the payment of the small pensioners ; 
let them starve, if they will ; or else, as he did, he will take 
the charitable funds intended to repair the disasters of storms 
and fire ; nay, even plunder the funds of the hospitals. 

France is in good hands. Everything is going on well. So 
good-natured a king, such an amiable queen. The only diffi- 
culty is, that, independently of the pri^eged paupers at Ver- 
sailles, there is another class, no less noble, and far more 
numerous, the provincial privileged paupers, who have nothing, 
receive nothing, say they ; they rend the air with their excla- 
mations. Those men, long before the people, will begin the 
Revolution. 

By-the-bye, there is a people. Between these paupers and 
those paupers, who are all persons of fortune, we had forgotten 
the people. 

The people ! Oh ! that is the business of the farmers of 
the revenue. Things are altered. Formerly, financiers were 
hard-hearted men. Now they are all philanthropists, kind, 
amiable, and magnificent ; with one hand they starve, it is 



rHILANTHBOPT OF REVENUE FARMERS. 61 

true ; but often they nourieh with the other. They reduce 
thousands to beggary, and give aUns. They build hospitals, 
and fill them. 

"Persepolis," says Voltaire, in one of his stories, "has 
thirty kings of finance, who draw millions from the people 
and give a little to the king/' Out of the gahelle*^ for 
instance, which brought in one hundred and twenty millions, 
the Ferme generale kept back sixty, and deigned to leave some 
fifty or sixty for the king. 

Tax-gathering was nothing but an organised warfare ; it 
caused an army of two hundred thousand drones to oppress 
the soil. Those locusts devoured, — wasted everything. To 
drain substance out of a people, thus devoured, it was neces- 
sary to have cruel laws, terrible penalties, the galleys, gibbets, 
racks. The farming agents were authorised to employ arms ; 
they murdered, and were afterwards judged by the special 
tribunals of the Ferme gSniraU, 

The most shocking part of the system was the easy good 
nature of the king and the farmers of the revenue. On one 
hand the king, on the other the thirty kings of the exchequer, 
gave away (or sold cheap) exemptions from taxation ; the king 
created nobles ; the farmers created for themselves fictitious 
empilogiSf who, under that title, were exempt. Thus, the 
exchequer was working against itself; whilst it was augmenting 
the sum to be paid, it diminished the number of the payers ; 
the load weighing upon fewer shoulders, became more and 
more oppressive. 

The two privileged orders paid whatever they pleased, — the 
clergy a gratuitous non-collectible tax ; the nobles contributed 
for certain imposts, but according to whatever they thought 
proper to declare, which the treasury-agents registered with a 
bow, without either examination or verification. The neigh- 
bours had to pay so much the more. 

0, heaven! 0, earth I 0, justice! If it were through con- 
quest, or by a master's tyranny, that the people were perishing, 
they could endure it. But they perish through good nature ! 
They would perhaps endure the hard-heartedness of a Richelieu ; 
but how can they endure the good nature of Lomenie and 

* Dutiei on tali, &c., C.C. 



62 THB BASnLLE. 

Cakmiie, ihe tender-lientedbess cf the finmeiers, and iSke plii- 
laniliiupU o€ "tfie funiMsm of tiie ief¥Ciiii6 ! 

Suffer and die : be it bo ! But to snff^ hy dectian, to die 
liuoiigli mere neeeaeity — bo thai grace for one is death and 
min for ihe other ! ^! Aat is too madi, too nmeh by half. 

Eind-heaited men, job who wseep orer the erila of the Revo- 
hition (doidrtleaa wilii too much reason), dbed also a few tears 
for tiie efvib which ooeaamed it. 

Come and see* I beseeeh joa, this people lying in the dust, 
like poor Job, amid their ftlse ^nends, Ibw patrons, their 
inflnentifll protectors — the fAer^ and roynlty. Behold the look 
of angiDBh that they torn fxpon. their king, without peaking. 
What langoage is in dat look ! 

•* king, niiom I made my god, to whom I erected an 
ahar, and to whom I prayed even before QoA himself, from 
whom, in the jaws of death, I implored for salvation ; yon, my 
only hope, yon, whom I have adored. What ! hare yon then 
ielt nodimg?" 



SECTION IX- 

THE BABTILLX. 

The illostrions Qnesnay, phynoian to Louis XY. and to 
Madame de Pompadour, who lived in the hoose of the latter 
at Versailles, saw the king one day msh in snddeidy, and 
felt alarmed. Madame du Hansset, the witty femme de 
tkambre, who has left snch cmions memoirs, in^[aired of him 
why he seemed so uneasy. '< Madam/' returned he, '^ ^enerer 
I see the king, I say to myself: ' There is a man who can cut 
myheadoff.'" '<0h*'* said she <<1be king is ftw^vMcT/'* 

The lady's maid thus summed up, in one wwd, the guarantees 
of the monarchy. 

The king was too good to cut a man's head off ; that was no 
hmger agreeable to custom. But he could, with one word, send 
him to the Bastille, and {hete/wyet him. 

It remains to be decided wlu^ is best,— 4o perudi by one 
blow, or to suffer a lingering death for durty or f(«ty years. 

There were some twenty Bastilles in France, of which dx 
only (in 1775) contained three hundred prisoners. At Paris, 



JESITITS DIRECnNa THB BABXZULES. 63 

in '79, tkore were about thirty piiMfiB where pec^e might be 
incareerated without any sentence. An infinite number of con- 
Tents weve 8ub«diarj to these BastiileB. 

AH l^ese state-^sons, towards tite ciese of the reign of 
Louis XiY., were, like eyerytbiiig eke, oontrolied by the Jesuits. 
They were, in their hands, instmmenis of torture for the Pro- 
testants and liie Jansenists — dens for conversion. A secrecy 
more prolbimd than that of the iemik and the wdls of Venice, 
the obliTion of the tomb, enshrouded everyiMug. The Jesuits 
wero the confessors of the Bastille, and of many other ptnons ; 
the prisoners who died were buried under false sames in the 
church of the Jesuits. Every means of terror was in their 
hands, espeeially tiiose dungeons whence liie prisaners oec»- 
nonally came out with their «aFs or noses gn«wed away by the 
rats. Not only of terror, but of flattery also— both so potent with 
female piisonars. The almoner, to render grace nam effica- 
ckns, emj^yed even cuXmarff argmnents, starving, feedangt 
pampering the fair captive according as fdie yielded or resisted. 
More tham one state-prkon is montiwied in whidi the gaolers 
and the Jesuits paid idteraate visits to tiie faiale prisoners, and 
had «3uidren by tliem. One preferred to strangle herself. 

The lieutenant of police went, from time to time, to break- 
last at the Bastille. That was reckoned as a visit, — a magis- 
terial saporision. That magistrate was ignorant of everything ; 
and yet it was he alone who g^e an aocoont to the minister. 
One family, one dynasty, Chateauneof, his s(m La Vrilliere, and 
his grandson Saint-Florentin (who died in 1777) possessed, for 
a century, the department of the state-prisons and the lettres- 
de-eaehet. For this dynasty to subsist, it was necessary to have 
prisoners ; when tiie Protestants were liberated, their places 
were filled up with .the Jansenists; next, they took men of letters, 
^bilosephers, the Voltaires, Fr^rets, Diderots. The minister 
used to ^ve g^ierouidy blank let^s-de'eiKh4t to the intendants, 
the bishops, and people in the adminstration. Saint-Florentin, 
alone, gave away as many as 50,000, Never had man's 
dearest treasure, liberty, been more lavishly squandered. 
These letters were the object of a profitable traffic ; they were 
sold to fathers who wanted to get rid of their sons, and given 
to pretty women, who were inconvenienced by their husbands. 
Thw last cause ^ knprisonment was one of the most commoiL 



64 FORGOTTEN IN THE BASTILLE. 

' And all through good-nature. The king was too good to 
refuse a lettre-de-cachet to a great lord. The intendent was too 
good-natured not to grant one at a lady's request. The govern- 
ment-clerks, the mistresses of the clerks, and the friends of 
these mistresses, through good-nature, ciyility, or mere polite- 
ness, ohtained, gave, or lent, those terrihle orders hj which a 
man was buried aliye. Buried ; — ^for such was the carelessness 
and levity of those amiable clerks, — almost all nobles, fashion- 
able men, all occupied with their pleasures, — that they never 
had the time, when once the poor fellow was shut up, to think 
of his position. 

Thus, the government of grace, with all its advantages, — 
descending from the king to the lowest clerk in the adminis- 
tration, — disposed, according to caprice or fancy, of liberty, 
of life. 

Let us understand this system well. Why does such an one 
succeed? What does he possess, that everything should thrive 
with him? He has the grace of God, and the king's good 
grace. Let him who is in disgrace, in this world of grace, go 
out of the world, — ^banished, sentenced, and damned. 

The Bastille, the kUre-de^acket, is the king's excommunica- 
tion. 

Are the excommunicated to die ? No. It would require a 
decision of the king, a resolution painful to take, which would 
grieve the king himself. It would be a judgment between him 
and his conscience. Let us save him the task of judging, of 
killing. There is a middle term between life and death : a 
lifeless, buried life. Let us organize a world expressly for 
oblivion. Let us set falsehood at the gates within and widiout, 
in order that life and death be ever uncertain. The living 
corpse no longer knew anything about his family. " But my 
wife ? " Thy wife is dead — I make a mistake — ^re-married. 
" Are any of my friends alive ? Do they ever remember me ?" 
" Thy friends, poor fool, why, they were the persons who be- 
trayed thee.'.' Thus the soul of the miserable prisoner, a prey 
to their ferocious merriment, is fed on derision, calumny, and 
lies. 

Forgotten ! terrible word ! That a soul should perish 
among souls! Had not he whom God created for life the 
right to live at least in the mind ? What mortal shall dare 



THE BASTlLLEy THE PRISON OP THE MIKD. 65 

inflict, eyen on the most guilty, this worst of deaths, — ^to he 
eternally forgotten ? 

No, do not helieye it. Nothing is forgotten, — ^neither man 
nor thing. What once has heen, cannot he thlis annihilated. 
The very walls will not forget, the pavement will hecome accom« 
plice, and conyey sounds and noises ; the air will not forget ; 
from that small skylight, where a poor g^l is sewing, at the 
Porte Saint-Antoine, they have seen and understood. Nay, 
the very Bastille itself wHl he affected. That surly turnkey 
is still a man. I see inscrihed upon the walls the hymn of a 
prisoner to the glory of a gaoler, his henefactor. — Poor henefit I 
A shirt that he gave to that Lazarus, harharously ahandoned, 
devoured hy vermin in his tomh ! 

Whilst I have heen writing these lines, a mountain, a Bas- 
tille has heen crushing my hreast. Alas ! why stay so long 
talking of dilapidated prisons, and wretches whom death has 
delivered ? The world is covered with prisons, from Spielherg 
to Siheria, from Spandau to Mont-St.-Michel. The world is 
a prison 1 

Vast silence of the glohe, stifled groans and sohs from the 
ever-silent earth, I hear you hut too plainly. The captive 
miod, dumh among inferior animals, and musing in the har* 
harous world of ^^ca and Asia, thinks, and suffers in our 
Europe! 

Where does it speak, if not in France, in spite of chains ? It 
IS ever here that the mute genius of the earth finds a voice,— 
an organ. The world thinks, France speaks. 

And it is precisely on that account that the Bastille of 
France, the Bastille of Paris (I would rather say the prison of 
thought), was, of all other Bastilles, execrahle, infamous, and 
accursed. From the last century, Paris was already the voice 
of the globe. The earth spoke hy the voice of three men—- Vol • 
taire, Jean- Jacques, and Montesquieu. That the interpreters 
of the world should behold unworthy threats perpetually sus- 
pended over them, that the narrow issue through which the 
agony of mankind could breathe its sighs, should ever be shut 
up, was beyond human endurance. 

Our fathers shivered that Bastille to pieces, tore away its 
stones with their bleeding hands, and flung them afar. After- 
wards, they seized them again ; and, having hewn them into 

p 



66 THE AFFAIR OF LATUDE. 

a different form, in order i&at thej might be trampled under 
foot i)j the people for ever, built with them the Bridge of Revo- 
lution ! 

All other priaons had become more m^ciful ; but this one 
had become more cruel. From reign to reign, they diminished 
what the gaolers would laughingly term, — ^tibe liberties of the 
Bastille. The windows were walled up one after another, and 
other bars were added. During die reign oi Louis XYL, the 
use of the garden and the walk on die towers were prohibited. 

About this period two circumstances occurred which added 
to the general indignation, — Lingnet*s memoirs, which made 
people acquainted with the ignoble and ferocious interior; and, 
what was more decisive, the unwritten, unprinted caae of La- 
tude : whispered mysteriously, and tcansoriltted from mouth 
to mouth, its effect, was only rendered more terrible. 

For my part, I must acknowledge the extremely agonizing 
effect which the prisoner's letters produced on me. Though a 
sworn enemy to barbarous fictions about evexlasting pimish- 
ments, I found myself praying to God to construct a heQ for 
tyrants. 

Ah ! M. de Sariines, Ah ! Madame de Pompadour, how 
heavy is your burden ! How plainly do we perceive, by that 
history, how, having once embraced injustice, we go on from bad 
to worse ; how terror, descending from the tyrant to the slave, 
returns again niore forcibly to torment the tyrant. Having 
once kept this man a prisoner without judgment, for some 
trifling fault, Madame de Pompadour and M. de Sartines are 
obliged to hold him captive for ever,. and seal over him with an 
eternal stone the hell of silence. 

But that cannot be. That stone is ever restless ; and a low, 
terrible voice — a sulphurous blast — ^is ever arising. In *81, 
Sartines feels its dread effect, — ^in *84, the king himself is hurt 
by it, — ^in '89, the people know all, see all, even the ladder by 
which the prisoner escaped. In ^93, they guillotine the family 
of Sartines. 

For the confuaon of tyrants, it so happened that they had 
in that prisoner confined a daring, terrible man, whom nothing 
could subdue, whose voice shook the very walls, whose spirit 
and audacity were invincible. A body of iron, indestructible, 
which was to wear out all dieir prisons, the Bastille, Yincennes, 



THE PHILANTHROPISTS DO NOTHING. 67 

Oharenton, and lastly the horrors of Bicdtre, wherein any othei' 
would have perished. 

What makes the accusation heavy, overwhelming, and with- 
out appeal, is, that this man, good or bad, after escaping twice, 
twice surrendered himself by his own acts. Once, from his 
hiding-place, he wrote to Madame de Pompadour, and she 
caused him to be seized again ! The second time, he goes to 
Versailles, wishes to speak to the king, reaches his ante- 
chamber, and she orders him again to be seized. What ! In 
not even the king's apartmenir a sacred asylum ? 

I am unfortunately obliged to say that in the feeble, effemi- 
nate, declining society of that period, there were a great many 
philanthropists, — ^ministers, magistrates, and great lords, to 
mourn over the adventure ; but not one stirred. Malesherbes 
wept, and so did Gourgues, and Lamoignon, and Rohan, — ^they 
all wept bitterly. 

He was lying upon his dunghill at Bic^tre, iiteraUy devoured 
by vermin, lodged underground, and often howling with hunger. 
He had addressed one more memorial to some philanthropist or 
other, by means of a drunken turnkey. The latter luckily lost 
it, and a woman picked it up. She read it^ and shuddered ; 
she did not weep, but acted instantly. 

Madame Legros was a poor mercer who lived by her work, — 
by sewing in her shop ; her husband was a private teacher of 
Latin. She did not fear to embark in that terrible undertaking. 
She saw with her firm good sense what others did not, or 
would not, see : that, the wretched man was not mad, but the 
victim of a frightful necessity, by which the government was 
obliged to conceal and perpetuate the infamy of its old trans- 
gressions. She saw it, and was neither discouraged nor afraid. 
No heroism was ever more complete : she had the courage to 
undertake ; ike energy to persevere ; and the obstinacy to 
sacrifice every day and every hour ; the courage to despise the 
threats, the sagacity, and saintly plots of every kind in order 
to elude and foU the calumny of the tyrants. 

For three consecutive years, she persevered in her endeavours 
with an unheard-of obstinacy ; employing in the pursuit of 
justice and equity that singular eagerness peculiar to the 
huntsman or the gamester, and to which we seldom resort but 
for the gratification of our evil passions. 

f2 



68 MADAME LEGBOS RESOLVES TO SATE BIM. 

All kinds of misfortunes beset her ; but she will not 
giye up the cause. Her father dies ; then her mother ; she 
loses her little business, is bkuned by her relations, nay, 
subjected to villanous suspicion. They tax her with being 
the mistress of that prisoner in whom she is so much interested. 
The mistress of that spectre, that corpse, devoured with filth 
and vermin ! 

The temptation of temptations, are these comphdnts,, these 
unjust suspicions about him for whom she is dying and sacri- 
ficing herself ! 

Oh ! It is a grand sight to see that poor woman, so ill- 
dressed, begging from door to door, courting the valets to gain 
admittance into the mansions, pleading her cause before 
grandees, and demanding their assistance* 

The police are furious and indignant, Madame Legros may 
be kidnapped, shut up, lost for ever ; everybody gives her 
warning. The lieutenant of police sends for her, and threatens 
her ; he finds her firm and unalterable ; it is she who makes 
him tremble. 

Happily, they manage to get her the protection of Madame 
Duchesne, a femme de cKamhre to the princesses. She sets 
out for Versailles, on foot, in the depth of winter ; she was 
in the seventh month of her pregnancy. The protectress was 
absent ; she runs after her, sprains her foot, but still runs on. 
Madame Duchesne sheds many tears, but alas ! what can she 
do ? One femme de ehambre against two or three ministers ; — 
it is a difficult game ! She was holding the memorial, when an 
abbs of the court, who happened to be present, tore it out of 
her hands, telling her that it was all about a miserable mad- 
man, and that she must not interfere. 

Nothing more was wanting to freeze the heart of Marie- 
Antoinette, who had been made acquainted with the matter. 
If she had tears in her eyes, and they joked her, all was over. 

There was hardly a better man in France than the king. 
At length they applied to him. Cardinal de Rohan (a 
debauchee, but charitable after all) spoke three times to 
Louis XVI., who thrice refused to interfere. Loius XVI. was 
too good not to believe M. de Sartines. He was no longer in 
power, but that was no reason for dishonouring him, and 
handing him over to his enemies. Setting Sartines out of tho 



THE KINO RECUSES — ^MADAME LEGBOS PERSISTS. 69 

question, we must say that Louis XYI. was fond of the 
BastiUe, and would not wrong it, or injure its reputation* 

The king was yeiy humane. He had suppressed the deep 
dungeons, of the Ghitelet, done away with Yincennes and 
created La Force to receiye prisoners for deht, to separate 
them from criminals. 

But the Bastille ! the Bastille ! That was an old servant 
not to be lightly ill-treated by the ancient monarchy. It was a 
mystery of terror, what Tacitus calls, "Instrumentumregni." 

When the count d'Artois and the Queen, wishing to have 
Figaro played, read it to him, he merely obsenred, as an un* 
iinswerable objection, '' Then must the Bastille be suppressed ? *' 

When the Revolution of Paris took place, in July '89, the 
king, indifferent enough, seemed to be reconciled to the matter. 
But when he was informed that the Parisian municipality had 
ordered the demolition of the Bastille, he seemed as if he had 
been shot to the heart ; << Oh ! *' said he, '* this is awful ! " 

He was unable, in 1781, to listen to a request that com- 
promised the Bastille. He rejected also the one which Rohan 
presented to him in favour of Latude. But noble ladies insisted. 
He then made a conscientious study of the business, read all 
the papers ; they were few, save those of the police and people 
interested in keeping the victim in prison until death. At 
length he decided that he was a dangerous man, and that he 
could never restore him to liberty. 

Never ! Any other person would have stopped there. Well 
then, what is not done by the king shall be done in spite of 
him. Madame Legros persists. She is well received by the 
Cond6 family, ever discontented and grumbling ; welcomed 
by the young duke of Orleans and his kind-hearted spouse, 
the daughter of the good Penthi^vre ; and hailed by the 
philosophers^ by the Marquis de Condorcet, perpetual secretary 
of the Academy of Sciences, by Dupaty, by Villette, Voltaire's 
quasi son-in-law, iac, &c. 

The public voice murmurs louder and louder, like a flood, or 
the waves of the rising tide. Necker had dismissed Sartines ; 
his friend and successor, Lenoir, had also fallen in his turn. 
Perseverance will presently be crowned. Latude is obstinately 
bent on living, and Madame Legros as obstinately bent on 
delivering Latude. 



70 THE KING CONSENTS. 

Tlie queen's man, Breteuil, succeeds in *83 : he wished 
to immortalise her. He permits the Acadony to award 
the prize of virtue to Madame Legros, — ^to crown her — 
on the singular condition, that the crown should not he 
required. 

At length, in 1784, they force from Louis XVI. the delirer- 
ance of Latude.* And a few weeks after, oomes a strange and 
whimsical ordinance enjoining the intendants never more to 
incarcerate anybody, at the request of famihes, without a well' 
grounded reason, and to indicate the duration of confinement^ 
&c. That is to say, they unveiled the depth of the monstrous 
abyss of arbitrariness into which France had been plunged. 
She already knew much ; but the government confessed still 
more. 

From the priest to the king, from the Inquisition to the 
Bastille, the road is straight, but long. Holy, holy Revo- 
lution, how slowly dost thou come ! — I, who have been 
widting for thee for a thousand years in the furrows of the 
middle ages, — ^what ! must I wait still longer ? — Oh ! how 
slowly time passes ! Oh ! how I have counted the hours ! — 
Wilt thou never arrive? 

Men believed no longer in its near approach. All had fore- 
seen the Revolution in the middle of the century. Nobody, at 
the end, believed in it. Far from Mont-Blanc, you see it; 
when at its foot, you see it no more. 

"Alas! it is all over,'* said Mably, in 1784; "we have 
fallen too low ; morals have become too depraved. Kever> 
oh ! never now will the Revolution appear ! " 

ye of little faith, do you not see that as long as it re- 
mained among you, philosophers, orators, sophists, it could do 
nothing ? God be praised, now it is everywhere, among the 
people and in women. — Here is one who, by her persevering, 
unconquerable will, bursts open the prisons of State ; she 
has taken the Bastille beforehand. — The day when liberty— 
reason, emerges from arguments, and descends into nat^e. 
into the heart (and the heart of hearts is woman), all is over. 
Everything artificial is destroyed. — Rousseau, now we 

* Latude*B admirable letters are atill unpublished, sare the few quoted hf 
Delort They refute but too well the vain polemics of 1787. 



LONG EXPECTATION OF THE RBYOLUTION. 71 

-understand thee ; thou waA trulj right in sajing, " Return to 
nature ! *' 

A woman is fighting at the Bastille. Women gain the 5th 
qf October. As early as February '89, I read with emotion 
the courageous letter of the women and girls of Angers : 
" Having read the decrees of the male portion of our youthful 
community (messieurs de la jeunesse), we declare that we will 
join the nation, reserving to ourselves the care of the baggage 
and provisions, and such consolations and services as may de- 
pend on us ; we wiU perish rather than abandon our husbands, 
lovers, sons, and brothers.'* 

France, you are saved ! world, you are saved ! — 
Again do I behold in the heavens my youthful star in which I 
so long placed my hope, — the star of Joan of Arc. What 
matters, if the maid, changing her sex, has become a youth, 
Hoche, Marceau, Joubert, or Kleber ! 

Grand period, sublime moment, when the most warlike of 
men are nevertheless the harbingers of peace ! When Right, 
so long wept for, is found at the end of ages ; when Grace, in 
whose name Tyranny had crushed us, is found to be consonant, 
identical with Justice. 

What is the ancient r^gimCj the king and the priest in the 
old monarchy ? Tyranny, in the name of Grace. 

What is the Revolution ? The re-action of equity, the tardy 
advent of Eternal Justice. 

Justice, my mother ! Right, my father ! ye who are but 
one with God! 

Whom else should I invoke, I, one of the crowd, one of 
those ten millions of men, who would never have existed, but 
for oUr Revolution. 

Justice, pardon me ! I believed you were austere and 
hard-hearted, and I did not perceive that you were identical 
with Love and Grace. And that is why I have been no enthu- 
siast of the middle ages, which have ever repeated the word 
Love without performing the offices of Love. 

But now, absorbed in deep reflection, and with all the ardour 
of my heart, I humbly crave forgiveness, heavenly Justice 
of God. 

For thou art truly Love, and identical with Grace. 

And as thou art Justice, thou wilt support me in this book,. 



73 TRIUMPH OF JUSTICE. 

where my path has been marked out by the emotions of my 
heart and not by private interest, nor by any thought of this 
sublunar world. Thou wilt be just towards me, and I will be 
so towards all. For whom then haye I written this, but for 
thee, Eternal Justice ? 



January SIst, 1847. 



BOOK I. 

APRIL TO JULY, 1789. 



CHAPTER I, 

ELECTIONS OF 1789, 

The whole People called to chooee the Electors, and send in their Complaints 
and Requests. — The Ministry had relied on the IncqMcity of the People. 
— ^Certainty of the Popular Instinct ; Firmness of the People ; their 
Unanimity.— The Convocation of the States, and the Elections of Paris 
delayed. — First Act of the Sovereignty of the Nation. — The Electors 
troubled by a Riot. — The R^eillon Riot and the Persons interested in 
it.— The Elections completed.— (January to April, 1789.) 

The conyocation of the States-General, in 1789, is the true 
era of the birth of the people. It called the whole nation to the 
exercise of their rights. 

They could at least write their complaints, their wishes, and 
choose the electors. 

Small republican states had already admitted all their mem- 
bers to a participation of political rights ; but never had a great 
kingdom, — an empire like France. The thing was new, not 
only in French annals, but even in those of the world. 

Accordingly, when, for the first time, in the course of ages, 
these words were heard : All shadl assemble to elect,* all 

■ • See theilc^ in the first vol. of the Moniteur, The tax-papen of more 
than twenty-five years of age were to choose the electors, who were to name 
the deputies, and concur in the drawing-up of the returns. As taxation 
affected everybody, at least by poll-tox, the whole of the population, excepting 
lenrants, was thus called upon. 



74 THE PEOPLE ARE TO ELECT THE ELECTORS. 

shall send in their complaints, there was an immense, pi-o- 
found commotion, like an earthquake ; the mass felt the shock 
eyen in ohscure and mute regions, where moyement would hare 
been least expected. 

All the towns elected, and not the ^ood towns only, as in the 
ancient States-General ; country districts also elected, and not 
the towns alone. 

It is afBrmed that fire millions of men took part in the 
election. 

Grand, strange, surprising scene ! To see a whole people 
emerging, at once, from nonentity to existence, who, till then ' 
silent, suddenly found a voice. 

The same appeal of equality was addressed to populations, 
prodigiously unequal, not only by position, but by worship, by 
their moral state and ideas. How would that people anwser? 
That was a great question. The exchequer on one side, 
feudality on the other, * seemea striving to brutalise them under 
the weight of miseries. Royalty had deprived them of their 
municipal rights, — of that education which they derived from 
business connected with the commune. The clergy, the teachers 
thrust upon them, had not taught ihem for a long time past. 
They seemed to have done everything to render them dull, 
dumb, speechless, and senseless, and then they said to them, 
''Arise now, walk, and speak!" 

They had relied, too much relied, upon that incapacity ; 
otherwise they would never have ventured to make this grand. 
move. The first who pronounced the name of the States-General, 
— ^the parliaments which demanded them, — the ministers who 
promised them, — Necker who convoked them, — all, believed 
the people incapable of taking any serious part therein. They 
only thought, by this solemn convocation of a great lifelesB 
mass, to frighten the privileged classes. The court, which was 
itself the privilege of privileges, the abuse of abuses* had no 
desire to make war on them. It merely hoped, by the forced 
contributions of the clergy and nobility, to fill the public coffers* 
from which they filled their own. 

And what <Hd the queen desire ? Given up to parventUf 

* This expression is not ill-employed. Feudality -vras very oppressive in 
1789, more fiscal than ever, being entirely in the hands of intendants, attor- 
neys, &c. Names and forms had changed, — nothing more. 



AND WAITE TBMSB, HGmPLAJKTS, 75 

hm^^ooned by the nobility, gradually despised, and alone, she 
wanted to bave a sligbt revenge on tbose revilers, to intimidatQ 
tbem, and oblige tbem to rally round tbe king. Sbe saw her 
brother Joseph attempting, in the Netherlands,, to oppose the 
smaller towns to the larger, to the prelates and grandees.* 
That example, doubtless, rendered her less adrerse to Necker'ft 
ideas ; she consented to give to the Tiers (or Third Estate) as 
many deputies as the nobility and clergy had together. 

And what did Necker desire ? Two things at once,-*^to 
pretend much and do little. 

For ostentation, for glory, — ^to be celebrated and extolled by 
the saloons and the immense body of the public, it was neces- 
sary to double generously the number of the deputies of the 
Third Estate. 

In reality, they wanted to be generous at a cheap rate, t 
The Third Estate, more or less numerous, would neyer be any- 
thing but one of three orders, — would have but one yote 
against two ; Necker reckoned surely on maintaining the voting 
by orders, which had so often before paralysed the ancient 
States-General. The Third Estate, moreover, had at all times, 
been very modest, very respectful, too well-bred to wish to be 
represented by men of its own class. It had often named 
nobles for deputies, mostly newly-created nobles, parliament 
people and others, who prided themselves on voting with the 

* See, for the reTolution in Brabant, go different from ours, the documents 
collected by Qachard (1834), Gerard (1842), and the histories by Giom- 
Hoffinger (1837), Borgnet (1844), and Ramshom (1845). That revolntioa 
of dbb^Sy of which the Capuchin-fiiars were the terrorists, deceived everybody 
here (in France), both the court and our Jacobins. Dumouriez alone com- 
prehended, and said, that it ma pnmitiYely the work of the powerful abbA of 
the Netherlands. M. Mercy d''Argenteau, the Austrian ambassador, believed 
at first, and doubtless made Marie- Antoinette believe, that in France, as in 
Belgium, the peril was on the side of the aristocracy. Hence, many fidse 
steps. 

f For all this, one must see Necl^er^s curious confessions, his pleading for. 
the Third Estate. ((EuvreSt vi., 419, 443, &c.) Therein, as in all his 
works, one always perceives the foreigner anything hut esteemed in France, a 
clerk ever clerk-like, who stands bowing before the nobility,— a Protestant 
who wants to find grace with the clergy. To reassure the privileged classes 
about the poor ThiM Estate, he presents it to them feeble, timid, and subser- 
vient ; he seems to be telegraphing secretly with them. He, moreover, gives 
them to understand that his client is an easy sort of person, — easily duped. 



76 CERTAINTT OF THE FOFULAU INSTINCT. 

nobility, against the interests of the Third Estate which had 
named them. 

A strange circumstance, but a proof that thej had no real 
intention, — ^that they merely wanted by this grand phantasma* 
goria, to overcome Uie selfishness of the pri?ileged classes, and 
open their purses, is, that in these States, called against them, 
they managed nevertheless to secure them a predominant 
influence.* The popular assemblies were to elect by acclama- 
tion {d halite wnac). They did not suppose that inferior people, 
in such a mode of election, in presence of the nobles and 
notables, would possess sufficient firmness to oppose them, — 
enough assurance to pronounce other names than those which 
were dictated to them. 

. In calling the people of the coimtry, of the villages, to the 
election, Necker, no doubt, expected to do someuiing very 
political ; in proportion as the democratical spirit was aroused 
in the towns, in such proportion the country-places were 
influenced by the nobles and the clergy, — the possessors of two 
thirds of the lands. Millions of men arrived thus at elec- 
tion, who were dependent on the privileged classes, as tenants, 
cultivators, &c., or who indirectly would be influenced, or inti- 
midated, by their agents, stewards, attorneys, and men of 
business. Necker knew, from the experience of Switzerland 
and the history of the petty cantons, that universal suffi-age may 
be, with certain conditions, the stay of the aristocracy. The 
notables whom he consulted, so completely adopted this idea, 
that they wanted to make even their servants electors. Necker 
would not consent to it, as then the Section would have fallen 
entirely into the hands of the large proprietors. 

The result deceived all their calculations, f This people, 
though wholly unprepared, showed a very sure instinct. When 
they were called to election and informed of their rights, it was 

* The privileged orden were doubly fitvoured : Ist. They were not sub- 
jected to ^e two degrees of election ; ihltiy elected their deputies in a direct 
manner. Sdly. The nobles were all electors, and not the nomes who hadfi^a 
exclusively, as in the ancient states ; the privilege was the more odious still, as 
being extended to a whole generation of nobles ; the pretenuons were the 
more ridiculous. 

*t* Very uncertiun calculations. The king confesses, in the convocation of 
Paris, that he. does not know the number of the inhabitants of the best-known 
town in the kingdom, that he cannot guess the number of the electors, &c 



ITNANIMITT OF THE PEOPLE. 77 

found tliat little remained to be taught them. In that prodi- 
gious movement of five or six millions of men, there was some 
sort of hesitation, through their ignorance of forms, and espe- 
cially, because the majority knew not how to read. But they 
knew how to speak ; wey knew how, in presence of their lords, 
without infringing upon their respectful habits, or laying aside 
their humble demeanour, to select worthy electors, who all 
nominated safe and certain deputies. 

The admission of the country districts to election had the 
imexpected result of placing even among the deputies of the 
privileged orders a numerous democracy, of whom they had 
never thought, two hundred cut^b and more, very hostile to 
their bishops. In Brittany, and in the South, the peasant wil* 
lingly nominated his cur/, who, moreover, alone knowing how 
to write, received the votes, and directed all the election.* 

The people of the towns, rather better prepared, having 
been somewhat enlightened by the philosophy of the age, 
evinced an admirable eagerness, a lively consciousness of their 
rights. This appeared plain at the elections, by the rapidity, 
the certainty with which crowds of inexperienced men took 
this their first political step. It appeared evident in the uni- 
formity of the memorials {cahier^) in which they recorded their 
complaints,— an imexpected, powerful combination, which im- 
parted irresistible strength to the will of the people. How 
long had those complaints existed in every heart ! It was but 
too easy to write them. Many a memorial of our districts, 
containing almost a code, was begun at midnight, and finished 
at three in the morning, f 

A movement so vast, so varied, so wholly unprepared, and 
yet so unanimous, is most wonderful ! All took part in it, 
and (except an insignificant number) they all desired the 
same thing, j: 

Unanimous ! There was a complete and unreserved con- 
cord, a perfectly simple state of things, — the nation on one 
mde and privilege on. the other. Yet, there was no possible 

• HoxeeTer, in Bovenl CMMMtnet,, sworn scrivcncre were appointed to 
^nrite down the votes. — Dncbatellier, La, iZevo^tc^ion en Bretagney i., 281. 

■t* Mimoiret de BaiHy^ !., 12. 

X The same thing in eveiy essential point. To which everjr corporation 
and every town added something special. 



78 THE CONVOCATION OP THE STATES DELAYED. 

distinction then in the nation between the people and the 
citizens ;* only one distinction appeared, — the instructed and 
the ignorant ; the educated alone spoke and wrote ; but they 
wrote the thoughts of all. They drew up into a formula the 
general demands ; and they were the demands of the mute 
masses as much as, and more than their own. 

Oh ! who would not be touched by the remembrance of that 
unrivalled moment, when we started into life ? It was short- 
lived ; but it remains for us the ideal whereunto we shall ever 
tend, the hope of the future ! sublime Concord, in which 
the rising liberties of classes, subsequently in opposition, em- 
braced so tenderly, like brothers in the cradle, — diall we never 
more see thee return upon our earth ? 

This union of the different classes, this grand appearance of 
the people in their formidable unity, struck terror to the court 
which used every effort with the king to prevail on him to 
break his word. The Polignac faction had contriyed, in order 
to place him in an uncomfortable position, to get the princes 
to write and sign an audacious letter in which they menaced 
the king, assumed to be the chiefs of Ihe privileged dasses, 
spoke of refusing taxes, of divisions, almost of civil war. 

And yet, how could ike king ehide the States ? Recom- 
mended by the Court of Aides, demanded by the Parliaments, 
and by the Notables, promised by Brienne, and again by Necker, 
they were at length to open on the 27th of April. They were 
further prorogued till the 4th of May. A perilous delay ! To 
so many voices then arising another was added, alas ! one 
often heard in the eighteenth century, — the voice of ike earth — 
the desc^ate, sterile earth refuidng food to man ! The winter 
had been terrible ; the summer was dry and gave nothing : 
and famine began. The bakers being uneasy, and always in 
peril before the starving riotous crowd, themselves d^iounced 
companies who were monopolising the com. Only one thing 
restrained tiie people, and made them fast patiently and wait, 
— ^their hope in the States-QeneraL A vague hope ; but it 

*■ It WM a viUl enor of the authon of the SiUoirt ParlemefUairet to 
mark this distinction at that important momffldt wh«n nohody saw it. It wiU 
come hut too soon ; we must wait. Thus to he hlind to- the real conse- 
quence of fiusts, and to drag them fordhly forward before their time by a sort 
of systematic pre-arrangement, is precisely contrary to history. 



FIBST ACT OF BOfSBBiaNTT OF THB NATION. 7d 

supported them ; ^e forthcoming asBembl j was a Messiah ; it 
had only to ipeak, and the stones were to change into bread. 

The elections, so long delayed, were still longer postponed 
at Paris. They were not conyoked till the eve of the assembling 
of the States. It was hoped that the deputies would not be 
present at the first sittings, and that before their arrival, they 
would secure the separation of the three orders, which gare a 
majority to the privileged. 

There was another cause for discontent, and one most serious 
for Paris. In that city, the most enlightened in the kingdom, 
election was subjected to more severe conditions. A special 
regulation, made after the convocation, called, as primary 
electors, not all who were taxed, but those only who paid a 
rate of six francs. 

Paris was filled with troops, every street with patrols, and 
every place of election surrounded with soldiers. Arms were 
loaded in the street, in face of the crowd. 

In presence of these vain demonstrations, the electors were 
very firm. Scarcely had they met> when they rejected the 
presidents given to them by the king. Out of sixty districts^ 
three only re-appointed the president named by the monarch, 
making hun declare that he presided by election. A serious 
measure, — tHe first act of the national sover^gnty. And it 
was indeed that which it was necessary to acquire, — ^it was 
Bight that it was necessary to found. Questions of finance 
and reform would come idfterwards. Without Right, what 
guarantee was there, or what serious reform ? 

The electors, created by these district assemblies, acted in 
precisely the same manner. They elected as president the 
advocate Target ; Camus, the advocate of the clergy, as vice- 
president, and the academician Bailly and Doctor Guillotin, a 
philanthropical physician, as secretaries.* 

The court was astonished at the de<HBion, firmness, and re- 



* This assembly, so firm in its first proceedings, was nevertheless composed 
of notables, functionaries, merchants, or advocates. The latter led the 
assembly ; they were Camus, Target, Treilhard, the advoeate of the Ferme 
OSniraU, Lacretelle Senior, and Desdze. In the second xank came the 
•ndonicianB, — Bailly, Thouin, and Cadet, Gaillard, Suard, Mannontel. Next, 
the bankers, such as Lecouteulz, and the printers, librarians, and stationers, 
Pankoucke, Baudouin, R^veiUon, &c. 



80 THE ELECTORS TROUBLED BT RIOT. 

j^ularitj, with which twenty-five thousand piimaiy electors, so 
new to political life, then prpceeded. There was no disturbance. 
Assembled in the churches, they transferred thither the emotion 
of the great and holy task they were accomplishing. The 
boldest measure, the destitution of the presidents named by the 
king, was effected without any noise or exclamation, with the 
forcible simplicity imparted by a consciousness of right* 

The electors, under a president of their choice, were sitting 
at the Archbishop's Palace, and about to make a total of the 
district polls, and to draw up one common resolution ; they 
were already agreed on one point, which Sieyes had recom- 
mended, — the utility of prefacing with a declaration of the 
rights of man. In the middle of this delicate and difficult 
metaphysical task, they were interrupted by a terrible uproar. 
A ragged multitude had come to demand the head of one of 
their colleagues, of R^yeillon, an elector, — ^a paper-manufacturer 
in the Faubourg Saint- Antoine. B^veillon was concealed ; but 
the riot was not less dangerous on that account. It was now 
the 28th of April ; the States-General, promised for the 27th, 
and then postponed again till the 4th of May, ran a great risk, 
if the riots lasted, of being adjourned once more. 

The riot broke out precisely on the 27th, and it was but too 
easy to spread, entertain, and increase it, among a starving 
population. A report had been spread in the Faubourg Saint- 
Antoine, that lUveillon, the paper-manufacturer, — a workman 
grown rich, — ^had said unfeelingly that it was necessary to 
lower wages to fifteen ^ous a day ; and, it was added, that he 
was to receive the decoration of the cordon-noir. That report 
was followed by a great commotion. First, a band, in front of 
Beveillon*s door, take his effigy, decorated with the cordon, 
carry it in procession to La Gr^ve, and bum it with much 
ceremony beneath the windows of the n6tel-de-yille, before the 
eyes of the municipal authority, who remain perfectly unmoved. 
This authority and the others, so vigilant just before, seemed 
fast asleep. The lieutenant of police, the preVost Flesselles, 
and Berthier the intendant, — all those court-agents, who lately 
surrounded the elections with soldiery, had lost their activity. 

The band exclaimed aloud that it would go, on the morrow, 
to do justice at E4veiUon's. It kept its word. The police, 
though so well warned, used no precaution. The colonel of the 



THE BK7EILL0N EIOT. Sl 

French Guards sends, of bis own accord, some thirty men, — 
a ridiculous force ; in a compact crowd of a thousand or two 
thousand pillagers and a hundred thousand idle spectators, the 
soldiers will not, cannot, act. The house is broken open, and 
everything demolished, shattered to pieces, and burnt. No- 
thing was carried away, except fiye hundred louis d*or,* Many 
took up their quarters in the cellars, drauk the wine, and the 
colours of the manufactory, mistaking them for wine. 

What seems incredible is, that this shameful scene lasted all 
day. It took place too at the yery entrance of the faubourg, 
under the cannon of the Bastille, at the gate of the fort. 
Reveillon, who was concealed there, saw all from the towers. 

A few companies of the French Guards were sent from time 
to time, who fired, first with powder, and next with ball. The 
pillagers paid no attention to them, though they had only 
stones to thi'ow in return. Late, yery late, the commandant, 
Besenyal, sent some Swiss ; the pillagers still resisted, and killed 
a few men ; the soldiers replied by some destructiye discharges, 
which left a number of dead and wounded on the payemcnt. 
Many of these bodies in rags had money about them. 

If, during those two long days, when the magistrates were 
asleep and Besenyal abstained from sending troops, tho faubourg 
Saint-Antoine had allowed itself to be seduced to follow the 
band that was sacking B4yeiUon's house, — if fifty thousand 
workmen, without either work or bread, had, on that example, 
set about pillaging the rich mansions, every thing would have 
changed its aspect ; the court would then haye an excellent 

* According to the statement of R^eillon himself: Expos^ ju8i\fieatiff 
p. 422, (priftted at the end of Feni^res). The JBistoire ParlemefUaire is 
again inexact here. It makes of all this, without the least proof, a war of the 
pci^le ^[ainst the citizens. It exaggerates the extent of the riot, the numher 
of the dead, &c. Bailly, on the contrary, and no less wrongfully, in p. 28 of 
his Memoirs, reduces it to nothing : ** Nohody perished, as far as I know/* A 
very important testimony, on the Reveillon riot, is that of the illustrious 
surgeon Desault, who received several of the wounded at the H6tel-Dieu : 
** 2/8 n^avaient Vair gtie du crime f<mdnyy^ ; au contraire, Us blesses de la 
BcutUief"* &c.: See VCEwore de» 8ept J(mr8f p. 411. What showed plainly 
that the people did not consider the pillage of R^veillon*s house as a patriotic 
act is, that they were near hanging, on the 16th of July, a man whom they 
mistook for the cibbi Roy, accused of having excited this Hat (Bailly, ii., 
p. 51), and of having suhsequently offered to the court a means of slaughtering 
Paris. — (Prochs^et^al des Electeurs, ii., p. 46.) 

a 



82 TTHO WAS INTERESTED IN IT ? 

motive to concentrate an anny on Paris and Yers^dUes, and a 
specious pretext for adjourning the States. But the great mass 
of the faubourg remained honest, and abstained ; it looked on, 
without moying. The riot, thus confined to a few hundred 
people, drunkards and thieres, became a disgrace to the 
authority that permitted it. Besenval at length fbund his part 
too ridiculous ; he acted, and terminated all very roughly. The 
court did not thank him for it ; it durst not blame him, but it 
did not say one word to him.* 

The parliament could not, for its honour, dispense with open- 
ing an inquiry; but the inquiry stopped short. It has been 
said, without sufficient proof, that it was forbidden in the king's 
name to^proceed. 

Who were the instigators? Perhaps nobody. Fire, on 
those stormy occasions, may burst forth of its own accord. 
People did not fail to accuse " the revolutionary party." What 
was that party? As yet, there was no ax;tive association. 

It was said that the Duke of Orleans had given money. 
Why ? What did he then gain by it ? The great movement 
then beginning offered to his ambition too many legal chances, 
for him, at that period, to need to have recourse to riots. True, 
he was led on by intriguing persons, ready for anything ; but 
their plan at this period was entirely directed towards the 
Btates-General ; they felt sure, from their duke being the only 
popular one among the princes, that he was about to take the 
lead. Every event that might delay the States, appeared to 
them a misfortune. 

Who desired to delay them ? Who found an advantage in 
terrifying the electors ? Who derived a profit from riot ? 

The court alone, we must confess. The affair happened so 
exactly at the right time for it, that it might be believed to be 
the author. It is nevertheless more probable that it did not 

• Mimoires de Besenval^ ii., p. 947.— Madame de Genlis and other 
friends of the ancien rigime, -will have it, that these memoirs, so oyer- 
whelming against them, were drawn np by the Yicomte de S^gnr. Let it be 
so : he must then have written from the notes and memory of Besenval. 
The memoirs do not the less belong to the latter. Besenval was, I know, 
but little able to write ; but without his eonfideneeSf the amiable lampooner 
would never have made this book so strong, so historical under an aspect of 
levity ; the truth bursts forth and shines there, often with a terrible light ; 
nothing remains but to cast down our eyes. 



THE ELECTIONS ARE FINISHED. 83 

begin it, but saw it with pleasure, did nothing to prevent it, 
and regretted it was so soon over. The faubourg Saint-Antoine 
had not then its terrible reputation ; a riot under the yery 
cannon of the Bastille did not seem dangerous. 

The nobles of Brittany had given an example of troubling 
the legal operations of the provincial States, bj exciting the 
peasants, and pitting against the people a populace mingled 
with lackejs. Even at Paris, a newspaper, the Ami du JRai, 
a few days before the Reveillon affair, seemed to be attempt- 
ing the same manoeuvre : — ** What matter these elections ? " 
said this journal, in a hypocritical tone, " the poor will ever be 
poor ; the lot of the most interesting portion of the kingdom ia 
forgotten," &o. As if the first results of the Revolution 
which liiese elections were beginning, — the suppression of 
tithes and that of th6 octroi duties, and the aides, and the sale, 
at a low price, of half the lands in the kingdom, had not pro- 
duced the m(^ sudden amelioration in the condition of the 
poor that any people had ever witnessed ! 

On the morning of the 29th, all had become quiet agun. 
The assembly of the electors were able peaceably to resume 
their labours. They lasted till the 20th. of May ; and the 
conrt obtained the advantage that it had pirpposed to itself by 
this tardy convocation, — the preventing the deputation of Paris 
from being present at the first sittings of the States-General. 
The last person elected by Paris, and by France,, was he who, 
in public opinion, was the first of all, he who had traced before- 
hand for the Revolution so straight and simple a path, and had 
marked its first steps, one by one. Everything was marching 
forward, according to the plan given by»6ieyes with a motion 
mc^estic, pacific, and firm, like the Law. Law alone was 
about to reign ; after so many ages of despotism and caprice, 
the time was arriving when nobody would be right against Right. 

Let, then, those dreaded States-General at length assemble 
and open. They who convoked them, and now would wish 
they had never spoken of them, cannot alter the matter. It is 
a rising ocean : causes infinite and profound, acting from the 
depths of ages, agitate the boiling mass. Bring against it, I 
pr&J you, all the armies in the world, or an infant's finger ; it 
makes no difference. God is urging it forward ; tardy justice, 
the expiation of the past, the salvation of the future ! 

g2 



84 



CHAPTER II. 

OPENING OF THE STATES-GENERAL. 

. Procenion of the States-General. — Opening on the 5th of May. — Necker*8 
Speech. — Question ahout the Separation of the Orders. — The Third 
Estate invites the others to unite. — Inaction of the Assembly.— Snares 
kid for it— (4th of May to 9th of June, 1789.) 

On the ere of the opening of the States-General, the Mass of 
the Holy Ghost was solemnly said at Versailles. It was cer- 
tainly that day or never, that they might sing the prophetic 
hymn : — " Thou wilt create peoples, and the face of the earth 
shall be renewed." 

That grand day was the 4th of May* The twelve hundred 
deputies, the king, the queen, the whole court, heard the Vent 
'Creator at the Church of Notre-Dame. Next, the immense 
f>rocession, passing through the whole town, repaired to Saint- ' 
Louis. The broad streets of Versailles, lined with French 
guards and Swiss, and hung with tlie crown tapestry, could 
not contain the crowd. All Paris was there. The windows, 
the very roofs, were loaded with people. The balconies were 
adorned with precious stuffs, and ornamented with brilliant 
womeii, in the coquettish and whimsical costume of that period, 
diversified with feathers and flowers* All that mass of beings 
was moved, affected, full of anxiety and hope.* Something 
grand was beginning. What would be its progress, issue, and 
results ? who could tell ? The splendour of such a sight, so 
varied and majestic, and the music which was heard at dif- 
ferent intervab, silenced every other thought. 

A grand day, — ^the last of peace, yet the first of an immense 
fiiiare ! 

The passions were doubtless strong, diverse, and opposite, 
but not embittered, as they soon became. Even they who had 
the least desired this new era, could not help sharing the com- 
mon emotion. A deputy of the nobility confesses that he wept 

* See the e^e-witnesses, Fem^res, StiAfl, &c. 



PROCESSION OF THE STaVeS-OENERAL, B5 

for joy ; " I saw FraDce, my native land, reclining on Religion, 
saying to us : ' Stifle your quarrels.' Tears flowed from my 
eyes. My God, my country, my fellow-citizens, had become 
jnyself.*' 

At the head of the procession appeared first a mass of men 
clothed in black, — the strong, deep battalion of the ^we hundred 
and fifty deputies of the Third Estate ; in that number, more 
than three hundred jurists, adrocates, or magistrates, repre- 
sented forcibly the advent of the law. Modest in their dress, 
firm in their look and deportment, they marched forward slill 
imited, without any distinction of party, all happy on that grand 
day. which they had made and which was their victory. 

The brilliant Uttle troop of the deputies of the nobility came 
next with their plumed hats, their laces, and gold ornaments. 
The applause that had welcomed the Third Estate suddenly 
ceased. Among those nobles, however, about forty seemed as 
warm friends of the people as the men of the Third-Estate. 

The same silence for the clergy. In this order, two orders 
were distinctly perceptible : a Nobility and a Third Estate : 
some thirty prelates in lawn sleeves and violet robes ; and 
apart, and separated from them by a choir of musicians, the 
humble troop of the two hundred cures, in their black, priestly 
robes. 

On beholding that imposing mass of twelve hundred men 
animated with noble passion, an attentive spectator would have 
been struck with one thing in particular. They presented very 
few strongly-delineated individualities ; doubtless many men 
both honourable and of highly prized talents, but none of those 
who, by the united authority of genius and character, have the 
right to transport the multitude, — no great inventor, — no hero. 
The powerful innovators who had opened the way for that 
century, then existed no more. Their thought alone remained 
to guide nations. Great orators arose to express and apply 
that thought ; but they did not add to it. The glory of the 
Bevolution in her earlier moments, — ^but her peril also, — ^which 
might render her less certain in her progress, was to go without 
men, to go alone, by the transport of ideas, on the faith of pure 
reason, without idols and false gods. 

The body of the nobility, which presented itself as the depo- 
sitary and guardian of our military glory, showed not one 



86 PBOGESSION OF THE STATES-OENERAL. 

celebrated general. "Obscure men of illustrious origin were 
all tbose grand lords of France." One alone perhaps excited 
some interest, he who, in spite of the court, had been the first 
to take a part in the American war, — the young and fur 
Lafayette. Nobody then suspected the prominent part which 
fortune was about to thrust upon him. The Third Estate, in 
its obscure mass, already contained the Conyention. But who 
could hare seen it ? Who recognised, among that crowd of 
adyocates, the stiff form and pide face of a certain lawyer of 
Arras? 

Two things were noticed: the absence of Sieyes, and ihe 
presence of Mirabeau. 

Sieyes had not yet come : in that grand moyement, people 
looked for him whose singular sagacity had seen, regulated^ cal- 
dilated, and directed it beforehand. 

Mirabeau was present, and attracted eyerybody's attention. 
His immense mass of hair, his lion4ike head, stamped wi^ 
extreme ugliness, were astounding, almost frightful ; nobody 
could take his eyes off him. He indeed was yisibly a man, and 
the others were but shadows, — a man, unfortunately, of bis 
time and dass, yicious, like the higher society of the day, 
moreoyer scandalous, noisy, and courageous in yice : that i& 
what ruined him. The world was full of the romance of his 
adyentures, amours, and passions. For he had had pasaons, 
yiolent, furious ones. Who then had such ? And the tynumy 
of those pasuons, so exacting and absorbing, had of^ led him 
yery low. Poor by the harsh treatment of his family, he suf- 
fered moral misery, the yices of the poor besides iha&e of tiie 
rich. Family tyranny, state tyranny, moral, internal tyranny, 
— that of passion. Aii 1 nobody could hail more furently that 
aurora of liberty. He did not despair of tliere finding liberty, 
the regeneration of the soul ; he used to say so to his friends.* 
He was about to grow young with France, and throw aside his 
old stained cloak. Only, it was necessary to liye longer ; on 
the threshold of this new life opening before him, though strong, 
ardent, and impassioned, he had neyertkeless seriously 
injured his constitution ; his complexion was altered, and his 
cheeks had fallen. No matter ! He still bore his enormous 

* £t Dumont, Souvenin,^. 27. 



PROCESSION OF THE STATES-OESTERAL. 37 

head erect, and his looks were full of audacity. Everybody 
seemed to forebode in him the ]oud appalling voice of France. 

The Third Estate was in general applauded ; next, among 
the nebiUty, the Duke of Orleans alone ; and lastly the King, 
whom they thanked for having convoked the States. Such 
iraa the justice of the people. 

On the passage of the Queen, there were a few murmurs ; 
a few women shouted : *' Vive le due d* Orleans ! '' thinking to 
pique her the more by naming her enemy. This made a great 
impression upon her ; she was nearly fainting, and they had 
to support her ; * but she recovered very soon, carrying erect 
her haughty and still handsome countenance. She attempted 
from that moment to meet the public hatred with a stedfast, 
disdainful stare. A sad effort, which did not heighten her 
beauty. In her solemn portrait which was left ns in 1788, by 
her painter, Madame Lebrun, who loved her, and must have 
adored her with her very affection, we perceive nevertheless 
something already repulsive, disdainful, and hardened, t 

Thus ^3 grand festival of peace and imion, showed symp- 
toms of war. It pointed out a day for France to unite and 
embrace in one common thought, and at the same time went 
the very way to divide it.« On merely beholding that diversity 
of costumes imposed on the deputies, one found the harsh but 
true expression of Sieyes at once realised : ** Three orders ? 
no : three nations ! " 

The . court had hunted into old books, to find out the 
odious details of a gothio ceremonial, those oppositions of 
classes, those signs of social distinctions and hatred which it 
should rather have buried in oblivion. Blazonry, figures, and 
symbols, after Voltaire, after Figaro ! It was late. To tell 
the truth, it was not so much the mania for old costumes that 
had guided the court, as the secret pleasure of mortifying and 
lowering those petty people who, at the elections, had been 

* Campan, ii., p. 37. 

*{* Compare the three portraits at Versailles. In the first (in white satin) 
fhe is a coquette, still pleasing ; she feels she is loveil. In the second (in red 
velvet and furs) surrounded by her children ; her daughter is leaning gently 
upon her ; but all in vain ; the "vrant of feeling is incurable ; her look is fixed, 
dull, and singularly harsh (1787). In the third (in blue velvet, 1788), 
alone, \nth a book in her hand, quite a queen, but melancholy and unfeeling. 



88 OPENING, 5th may, 1789, 

acting the part of kings, and to remind tbem of their low 
origin. Weakness was playing at the dangerous game of 
liumiliating the strong for the last time. 

As early as the 3rd of May, on the ere of the Mass of the 
Holy Ghost, the deputies being presented at Versailles, the 
king, at that moment of cordiality and easy emotion, chilled 
the deputies, who had almost all arrived farourably disposed 
towards him. Instead of receiving them mingled together by 
provinces, he made them enter by orders : the clergy, the 
nobility first — then, after a pause, the Third Estate* 

They would willingly have imputed such petty insolence to 
the officers and valets ; but Louis XVI. showed but too plainly 
that he himself was tenacious of the old ceremonial. At the 
sitting on the 5th, the king having covered himself, and the 
nobility after him, the Third Estate wished to do the same ; 
but the king, to prevent it from thus assuming an equality with 
the nobility, preferred to uncover himself. 

Who would believe that this mad court remembered and 
regretted the absurd custom of making the Third Estate 
harangue on their knees. They were unwilling to dispense 
from this ceremony expressly, and preferred deciding that the 
president of the Third should make no speech whatever. That 
is to say, that, at the end of two hundred years of separation and 
silence, the king dismissed his people and forbade them to speak. 

On the 5th of May, the Assembly opened, not in the king's 
palace, but in the Paris avenue, in the 8aUe des Menus, That 
hall, which unfortunately no longer exists, was inmiense ; it 
was able to contain, besides the twelve hundred deputies, four 
thousand auditors. 

An ocular witness, Madame de Stael, Necker's daughter, 
who had gone thither to behold her father applauded, tells us 
accordingly that he was so, and that on Mirabeau taking his 
place, a few murmurs were heard. Murmurs against the im* 
moral man ? That brilliant society, dying of its vices, and 
present at its last festival, had no right to be severe.* 

* *' When the king went and placed himself upon the throne, in the middle 
of that assembly, I experienced, for the first time, a feeling of dread. First, 
I noticed that the queen was much moved ; she arrived later than the hour 
appointed, and the colour of her complexion was altered.^^-^Stafe'I, CaU" 
ndercUion^i i., ch. zvi. 



OPENING, 5th may, 1789. 89 

The Assembly had to suffer three speeches, — the king's, that 
of the keeper of the seals, and Necker*s, all on the same text, 
and all unworthy of the occasion. The king at length found 
himself in presence of the nation, and he had no paternal 
speech to utter, not one word from his heart for their hearts. The 
exordium was an awkward, timid, sullen grumbling about the 
spirit of innoTation. He expressed his sensibility for the two 
superior orders, ** who showed themselves disposed to renounce 
their pecuniary privileges." A pre-occupation of money pre- 
vailed throughout the three discourses ; little or nothing on the 
question of right, that which filled and exalted every soul, the 
right of equality. The king and his two ministers, in awkward 
phrase, in which bombastic style contends alternately with 
baseness, seem convinced that the matter in question is merely 
one of taxation, of money, subsistence, — a question of feeding. 
They believe that if the privileged classes grant, as alms, to the 
Third Estate an equality of taxation, everything will be ami- 
cably settled at once.* Hence, three eulogiums, in the three 
speeches, on the sacrifice of the superior orders, who are so 
kind as to forego their exemption. These eulogiums go on 
even crescendo up to Necker, who sees no heroism in history 
comparable to it. 

These eulogiums, which look rather like an invitation, an- 
nounce too clearly that this admirable and extolled sacrifice is 
not yet made. Let it be made then, and quickly ! This is 
the whole question for the king and the ministers, who have 
called the Third Estate there as a bugbear, and would willingly 
send it away. They have as yet^but partial, dubious assur- 
ances of that great sacrifice : a few lords have offered it, but 
they have been laughed at by the others. Several members 
of the clergy, contrary to the known opinion of the Assembly 
of the clergy, have given the same hope. The two orders are 
in no great haste to explain themselves in this matter; the 
decisive word cannot leave their lips ; it sticks in their throat. 
It requires two months, and the most serious and terrible cir- 

* First, to speak only of money, what was called the iinpdt was but a very 
small portion of the total impost, of what was paid under different names to the 
clergy and nobility, as tithes or feudal tributes. And then i^n, money was 
not all. For the people, the question was not to pick up a few sous flung to 
them, but indeed to assume their rights : nothing more and nothing less. 



90 iteckeb's bpeecs. 

cumstanoes, — ^the victory of the Third Estate, — for the clergy, 
on the 26th of June, at length subdued, to reuounce, and even 
th»i the nobility to promise only to. do the same. 

Necker spoke for three hours on finance and morality : 
«< There is nothing," said he, << without public morality and 
private morality." His speech was not the less on that ac- 
count an immoral enumeration of the means possessed by the 
king to do without the States-General, and continue despotism. 
The States, from that moment, were a pure gift, a granted 
«nd revocable favour. 

He avowed imprudently that the king was uneasy. He 
expressed the desire that the two superior orders, remaining 
alone and free, should accomplish their sacrifices, with the 
exception that they might unite with the Third Estate in order 
subsequently to discuss questions of common interest A dan- 
gerous insinuation ! The minister being once free to derive 
the taxes from those rich sources of large property, would not 
have insisted much on obtaining the union of the orders. The 
privileged classes would have preserved tlieir false majority ; 
and two orders leagued against one would have prevented every 
reform. What matter ! The bankruptcy being avoided, the 
scarcity having ceased, and public opinion slumbering again, 
the question of right of security was adjourned, and inequality 
and despotism strengthened ; Necker reigned, or rather the 
court, who, once safe from the danger, would have sent the 
sentimental banker back to Geneva. 

On the 6th of May, the deputies of the Third Estate took 

C session of the large hallf and the impatient crowd, that had 
n besieging the doors, rushed in after them. 

The nobility apart, and the cl^gy apart, take up their 
quarters in their chambers, and, wit-hout losing time, decide 
that the powers ought to be verified by each order and in its 
own circle. The majority was great among liie nobility, and 
small among the clergy ; a great many curates wanted to join 
the Third Estate. The Thurd, strong in its great number, and 
master of the large hall, declares that it is waiting for the 
two other orders. The emptiness of that immense hcJl seemed 
to accuse their absence : the very hall spoke. 

The question of the union of the orders contained every 
other. That of the Third, already double in number, was 



QUS8TI0N OF THE SEPABATION OF THE ORDERS. 91 

likely to gain the votes of some fifty nobles and a hundred 
curates, thereby commanding the two orders with an immense 
majority, and becoming their judges in everything. Privilege 
judged by those against whom it was establidied ! It was 
easy to foresee the sentence. 

So, the Third waited for the clergy and the nobility ; it 
awaited in its strength, and patiently, like everything immor- 
tal. The privileged were agitated ; they turned round, when 
too late, towards the source of privilege, the king, their natural 
centre, which they themselves had disturbed. Thus, in that 
time of expectation, which lasted a month or more, things 
became classed according to their affinity : the privileged with 
the king, — ^the Assembly with the people. 

It lived with them, spoke with them, all the doors being 
wide open ; and as yet no barriers. Paris was sitting at 
Versailles, pell-mell with the deputies. A continual com* 
munication existed all along the road. The assembly of the 
electors of Paris, and the irregular tumultuous assembly held 
by the crowd in the Palais- Royal, were asking every moment 
for news of the deputies ; they questioned with avidity who* 
ever came from Versailles. The Third, that saw the court 
becoming more and more irritated, and surrounding itself 
with soldiers, felt it had but one defence, the crowd that was 
listening to it, and the press, which caused it to be listened to 
by the whole kingdom. The very day of the opening of the 
States, the court endeavoured to stifle the press ; a decree of 
the Council suppressed and condemned the journal of the 
States-General, published by Mirabeau ; another decree for- 
bade ihe publication of any periodical without permission. 
Thus was censorship, which for several months had remained 
inactive and as if suspended, re-established in face of the 
assembled nation, — re-established for the necessary and indis- 
pensable communications of the deputies and those who had 
deputed them. Mirabeau paid but little attention to this, and 
went on publishing under this title : Letters to my Constituents, 
The assembly of the electors of Paris, still working at their 
written resolutions [cahiers) left off (on the 7th of May), to 
protest unanimously against the decree of the Council.* This 

* Procea-verbal des electeurs, ridigt par Bailly et Thweyrler^ i., 34. 



92 THS THIBD DfYITES THE OTHER OBDERS TO UNITE, 

^as the first time Paris interfered in general affairs, The 
great and capital question of the liberty of the press was thus 
carried in a trice. The court might now bring together its 
cannon and its armies ; a more powerful artilleiy, that of the 
press, was henceforth thundering in the ears of the people ; 
and all the kingdom heard it. 

On the 7th of May, the Third, on the proposal of Malouet 
and Mounier, permitted some of its members to invite the 
clergy and the nobility to come and take their seats. The 
nobUity went on and formed themselves into an assembly* 
The clergy, more divided and more timorous, wanted to see 
what course things would take ; the prelates, moreover, beliey* 
ing that, in time, they should gain votes among the curates. 

Six days lost. On the 12th of May, Rabaud de Saint- 
Etienne, a Protestant deputy from Nimes, and the son of the 
old Martyr of C6vennes, proposed a conference to bring about 
the union. To which the Breton Ghapelier wished to have 
substituted *' a notification of the astonishment of the Third* 
Estate at the absence of the other orders, of the impossibility 
of conferring elsewhere than in a common union, and of the 
interest and right that every deputy had to judge of the 
validity of the title of all ; the States being once opened, there 
is no longer any deputy of order or province, but representa- 
tives of the nation ; the deputies of privilege gain by it, their 
functions being aggrandized." 

Babaut's motion was carried, as being the more moderate. 
Conferences took place ; but they only served to embitter things. 
On the 27th of May, Mirabeau reproduced a motion that he 
had already brought forward, to attempt to detach the clergy 
from the nobility, and invite them to the union << in the name 
of the God of peace." The motion was one of good policy ; a 
number of cur^ were waiting impatiently for an opportunity 
to unite. This new invitation nearly carried away the whole 
order. With great difficulty, the prelates obtained a delay. 
In the evening, they ran to the castle, to the Polignac party. 
By means of the queen,* they got from the king a letter in 

* Droz, ii., 189. — The testimony of M. Droz has often the vreight of « 
contemporary authority ; he frequently transmits to us the verbal information 
and revelation of Malouet and other important actors of the Kevolution. 



IlfAOTION OF THE ASSEMBLT. 93 

which he declared ** that he desired that the conferences niight 
he resamed in presence of the keeper of the seals and a royal 
commission." The king thus impeded the union of the 
clergy with the Third, and made himself Tisihly the agent of 
the priyileged classes. 

This letter was a snare unworthy of royalty. If the Third 
Estate accepted, the king, arhiter of the conferences, could 
quash the question hy a decree of the council, and the orders 
remained divided. If the Third alone refused and the other 
orders accepted, it hore alone the odium of the common inac- 
tion ; it aloiie, at that moment of misery and famine, would 
not take one step to succour the nation. Miraheau, in point- 
ing out the snare, advised the assemhly to appear duped, to 
accept the conferences, whilst protesting hy an address. 

Another snare. In these conferences, Necker made an 
appeal to sentiment, generosity, and confidence. He advised 
that each order should intrust the validity of its elective returns 
to the others ; and, in case of difference of opinion, the king 
ahotdd judge. The clergy accepted without hesitation. If the 
nohility had accepted, the Third remained alone against two. 
Who drew it out of this danger ? The nohility themselves, 
mad, and running headlong to their ruin. The Polignac com" 
mittee would not accept an expedient proposed hy theiif enemy, 
Necker. Even hefore reading the king's letter, the nohility 
had decided in order to bar every chance of conciliation, that 
deliberation by orders and the veto of each order on the deci- 
sions of the others, were constituent principles of the monarchy. 
Necker's plan tempted many moderate nobles ; two new nobles 
of great talent, only violent and weak-headed, Cazales and 
d'Eprlmesnil, embroiled the question and contrived to elude 
this last means of salvation, — to reject the plank which the 
king presented to them in their shipwreck (June 6th). 

A month lost, after the delay of the three adjournments 
which the convocation had suffered ! One month, in open 
famine ! Observe, that in this long expectation, the rich kept 
themselves motionless, and postponed every kind of expenditure. 
Work had ceased. He who had but his hands, his daily labour, 
to supply the day, went to look for work, found none, begged, 
got nothing, robbed. Starving gangs oveiTan the country ; 
wherever they found any resistance, they became furious. 



94 SNAKES LAID TOB IT. 

killed, and burned. Horror spread far and near ; communi- 
cations ceased, and famine went on increasing. A thousand 
absurd stories were in circulation. They were said to be 
brigands paid by the court. And the court flimg back tiie 
accusation on the Duke of Orleans. 

The position of the Assembly was difficult. It was obliged 
to sit inactiye, when eveiy remedy that could be hoped for was 
in action. It was obliged to shut its ears, in a manner, to the 
painful cry of France, in order to save France herself, and 
found her liberty ! 

The clergy aggravated that cruel position, and contrived a 
truly Phariseean invention against the Third Estate, A pre- 
late came into the Assembly, to weep over the poor people and 
the misery of the rural districts. Before the four thousand 
persons present at that meeting, he drew from his pocket a 
hideous lump of black bread : *' Such," said he, " is the 
bread of the peasant.'* The clergy proposed to act, to form a 
commission to confer together on the question of food and the 
misery of the poor. A dangerous snare. Either the Assembly 
yielded, became active, and thus consecrated the separation of 
the orders, or else it declared itself insensible to public misfor- 
tunes. The responsibility of the disorder which was every- 
where beginning, fell on it at once. The usual orators 
however remained silent on this compromising question. But 
some obscure deputies, MM. Popuhis and Robespierre,* 
expressed forcibly and with talent the general sentiment. 
They invited the clergy to come into the common kaU to deli- 
berate on these public calamities by which the Assembly was 
no less touched than they. 

This answer did not lessen the danger. How easy was it 
henceforth for the court, the nobles, and the priests, to turn 
the people ? What a fine text was a proud, ambitious assembly 
of advocates, that had promised to save France, and let 
her die of misery, rather than give up Miy of their unjust 
pretensions ! 

The court seized this weapon with avidity, and expected te 

* Robespierre retorted happily. He said, very deverly: *'The onciait 
canons authorise, for the relief of the poor, to sell even the sacred yascs/* 
The Monit^uVj incomplete and inexact, as it so often is, needs to be com- 
pleted here by Etienne Dumont. — SowwmrSy p. 60. 



NATIONAL ASSEMBLY. 0^ 

destroy the Assembly. The king said to the president of the 
clergy, who came to submit to him the charitable proposal of 
his order on the question of food : ** That he should see with 
pleasure a commission formed of the States-General that could 
assist him with its counsels.^' 

Thus, the clergy were thinking of the people, and so was the 
king ; nothing prevented the nobility from uttering the same 
words. And then, the Third would be quite alone. It was 
about to be stated, that ererybody desired the welfare of the 
people except the Third Estate. 



CHAPTER III. 

NATIONAL ASSEMBLY. 



Last Sammons of the Third on the lOtb of June. — It assumes the name of 
Ccmmtmet. — ^The Communes take the Title of National Attembly on 
the 17th of June. — They Assume the right of Taxation. — The King 
orders the Hall to he shut up.— The Assembly at the Tennis-Court (/«• 
de Paume), June 20th, 1789. 

On the 10th of June, Sieyes said, on entering the Assembly r 
" Let us cut the cable ; it is time." Since that day, the 
vessel of the Revolution, in spite of storms and calms, delayed, 
but never stopped, sails onwards to the future. 

That great theorician, who had beforehand calculated so 
exactly, showed himself here truly a statesman ; he had said 
what ought to be done, and he did it at the right moment. 

Everything has its right moment. Here, it was the 10th of 
June, neither sooner nor later. Sooner, the nation was not 
sufficiently convinced of the hard-heartedness of the jnivileged 
classes ; it required a month for them to display clearly all 
their ill-will. Subsequently, two things were to be feared, 
either that the people, driven to extremity, might abandon their 
freedom for a bit of bread, and the privileged finish all, by 
renouncing their exemption from taxes ; or else, that the 
nobility, uniting with the clergy, might form (as they were 
advised) an upper chamber. Such a chamber, which, in our own 
days, has no part to play but that of being a machine convenient 
to royalty, would, in *89, have been a power by itself : it would 



96 LAST aUMMONS OF THIRD EfifTATE!. 

hare assembled together those who then possessed the half or 
the two-thirds of the lands in the kingdom, those who, by their 
agents, tenants, and innumerable servants, had so many means 
of influencing the rural districts. The Netherlands had just 
given an example of the concord of those two orders, which had 
led away the people, driven out the Austrians, and dispossessed 
the emperor. 

On Wednesday, the 10th of June, 1789, Sieyes proposed to 
stmimon the clergy and nobility for the last time, to warn them 
that the call would be made in an hour, and that default would 
be the sentence for non-appearance. 

This summons in the judiciary form, was an unexpected 
blow. The deputies of the commons were taking, towards 
those who contested equality with them, a superior position, 
somewhat like that of judges. 

T&is was wise ; for tiiere was too much risk in waiting ; but it 
was also bold. It has often been said, that they who had a whole 
people behind them, and a city like Paris, had nothing to fear ; 
that they were the stronger party, and advanced without any 
danger. After the event, and everything having succeeded, 
the thesis may be supported. Doubtless, they who took that 
step felt themselves very strong ; but this strength was by no 
means organised ; the people were not military as they became 
at a later period. An army surrounded Versailles, partly of 
Germans and Swiss (nine regiments at least out of fifteen) ; a 
battery of cannon was before the Assembly. The glory of the 
great logician who reduced the national mind to a formula, and 
the glory of the Assembly that accepted the formula, was to see 
nothing of that, but to believe in logic, and to advance in their 
faith. 

The court, very irresolute, could do nothing but assume a 
disdainful silence. Twice the king avoided receiving the pre- 
sident of the commons ; he was out hunting, so they said, or 
else, he was too much afflicted at the recent death of the 
Dauphin. But it was known that he received every day the 
prelates, nobles, and parlementaires. They were beginning to 
be alarmed, and now came to offer themselves to the king. 
The court listened to them and then bargained and speculated 
on their fears. However, it was evident that the king being 
besieged by them, and their prisoner to a certain degree, would 



COMMONS TAKE THE TITLE OF NATIONAL ASSEMBLT. 97 

belong to them entirely, and show himself more and more what 
he was, a partisan of privilege at the head of the privileged 
classes. The situation of parties became clear and easy to be 
defined, — privilege on one side and right on the other. 

The Assembly had spoken out. It expected its proceeding 
would cause it to be joined by a part of the clergy* The cur 4% 
felt they were the people, and wished to go and take their true 
place by the side of the people. But habits of ecclesiastical 
subordination, the intrigues of the prelates, their authority and 
menaces, with the court and the queen, on the other hand, kept 
them still immovable on their benches. Only three ventured, 
then seven, — ^ten in all. Great was the merriment at court 
about this fine conquest made by the Third Estate. 

The Assembly must either perish or go on and take a 
second step. It was necessary for it to look boldly on the plain 
but terrible situation to which we alluded just now, — right 
opposed to privilege — the right of the nation concentrated in the 
Assembly. Neither was it sufficient to see that ; it was neces« 
fiary to show it, cause it to be promulgated, and to give to the 
Assembly its true name : The National AuerMy^ 

In his famous pamphlet, which everybody knew by hearty 
Sieyes had said these remarkable words, which did not fall to 
the ground : " The Third alone, they will say, cannot form the 
States-General. — Well ! so much the better ; it shall compose 
a Natumal Aasembfy.** 

To assume this title, — ^thus to entitle itself the nation, and 
realize the revolutionary dogma laid down by Sieyes — The 
Third is everything, was too bold a step to be taken all at once. 
It was necessary to prepare minds for it, and march towards 
that goal gradually and step by step. 

At first the woitls Natumal Aemnbly were not uttered in the 
Assembly itself but at Paris, among the electors who had elected 
Sieyes, and were not afraid to speak his language. 

On the 15th of May, M. Boissy d'Anglas, then obscure and 
without influence, pronounced the words, but only to set them 
aside and adjourn them, warning the Chamber that it ought to 
be on its guard against every kind of precipitation, and remain 
free from the least reproach of levity. Before the movement 
began, he wanted already to efface the appellation. 

The Assembly finally adopted the name of CommuneB^ which. 



98 cauKoire take the title of itatioital asoqcblt* 

In its Inimlfld and ill-de(fined signification, divested it lioirever 
c^ the peHty, inappopriate, and special name of Third JSstote. 
The nobilifjr strangly protested. 

On the Idth of June, Sieyes, "with boldness and prudence, 
demanded that the Commons should assnme the title d Astern- 
bfy of the hnown and acknomledged representatives of the Frendt 
ntxtion. It seemed to express only a £ACt impossible to be eoib- 
tested ; the deputies of the Oommons had subjected their 
powers to a publie rerification, «iade solemnly in tl^ great open 
hall and before the crowd. The two other ordnrs biid verified 
among themscilyes with dosed dooie. The nmpto .werd, aie^ 
kfuneied^ed deputies, reduced ihe others te iite name ef 
presumed deputies. Could tiie latter jnwyent tiie 'Others from 
acting f Could the absent pandyse the present ? Sieyes 
reminded them that the latter represented alreatfy the ninety-'Six 
hundred^ (at least) ef^ nation. 

They knew Sieyes too well not to suspect that this pnyposid 
was a MStep to lead to anotiber, bolder and more dectsire. 
Mirabeau reproached him from the rery first, ** with impelling 
the Assembly into the career, without showing it the goal te 
which he wanted to urge h." 

And indeed, <on the second day of Ite batlile, the light imnt 
fbith. TIVo depotiies served as preomvors to Sieyea. Ji. 
L^gnmd proposed that ihe Assembly should constitate itself a 
Gfeneral Assembly, and allow itself to be stopped bytnoifaing that 
might be separate from the indMMiliiy qfa NaXiimdJicseenddy. 
M. Galand demanded that, as the dergy aad nobfiity "were 
simply two corporations, and the nation one and mdiviaible, ihe 
Assembly should CiMistitute itself the legitimate «nd aotiTO 
Assembly of the representatitfes of M« fhindh natian. Sieyes 
then laid aside eyery obscurity and circumlocution, and -pro- 
posed the title of National Assemhfy. 

Since the "sitting of the IDth, Miiabeau had seen Sieyes 
advancing under ground, and was frightened. That march 
led straight to a point, where it found itself feme to face wiili 
royalty and the aristocracy. Would it halt out of respect 
for that 'werm-eaten idol ? It did not appear •l&ely. Now, in 
spite Of ^e cruel discipline by which iyranny formed Mirabeau 
for liberty, we must say that the famous tribune was an aristo- 
crat by taste 'and manners, and a royaUst in heart:; he was so 



C01QC0V8 TAKE THE TITLE OF NATIOKAL ASSEJKBLT^ 99 

in ^hot by birdi and blood. Two matiTBB, -one grand, and the 
other base, Hbewke impeUed him. Surrounded by greedy 
women, he wanted money ; and monarchy appeared to him 
wil^ open lavish hands, squandering gold and farouiB. That 
royalty had been tsruel and hard-hearted to him ; but even 
that now interested him the more : he would have considered it 
noble to save a king who had so ofieaa signed the order for his 
imprisonment. Such was this poor great man, so magnanimous 
and generous, that one would wish to be able to attribute bis 
vices to his deplorable acquaintances, and the paternal barbarity 
which excluded him from his family. His father persecuted 
him throughout his life, and yet he requested, with ^his dying 
breath, to be buried by his side.* 

On the 10th, when Sieyes proposed to pronounce default for 
non-appearance, Mirabeau seconded that severe ^proposition, and 
i^oke with firmness and energy. But, in the 'evening «eeing 
the peril, he took upon himself to go and see Jus enemy, 
Necker;t he wishea to enlighten him «n the situation of 
things, and offer royalty the succour of his poweifuL'OE8toiy4 
Altho^h m-reoeived and offended, 'he did sot the less under- 
take to block up the road against '^eyes, and he, ihe tribune, 
raised but yesterday by the Revolution, and who had no power 
but in her, eren he wanted to throw himself before her, and 
imagined he could stop her. 

Any other would have perished at once, without ever being 
able (to 'extricate himself. That he should have fallen more 
than onee into unpopiilarity, and yet been able to regain his 
footing, is what gives a very grand idea of Idie power of elo- 
quenee upon this nation, -sensitive b^ond all others, to the 
gwdvs of eratoiy. 

What could be more difficult -than Mirabeau's thesis f In 
pvesenoe .of that excited and transported multitude, before a 
people exalted above themselves by the grandeur of the .enas, 
ke endew^oored to establish *' that the people were not inte-^ 
rested in such discussions ; that' all 'they asked for was .to pay 
only what 'they cotdd, and to bear their misery peaceably. " 

After these base, afflicting, discouraging words, false ^more-i 

* M^moires de Mirdbecm, ^dite par H. Lucas de Montigny, t. viii., liv. x. 
f Compare the different, but reoancileable, versions of E. Diimont and 
Broz, (yAHi follow the oral testimony of Malouet). 

h2 



100 COMMONS TAKE THE TITLE OF NATIONAL ASSEMBLY* 

over in terms, he yentured to put the question of principle: 
*' Who convoked you ? The king. Do your mandates and 
written resolutions authorize you to declare yourselves the 
Assembly only of the known and acknowledged representa^ 
tires ? and if the king refuses you his sanction ? The con- 
sequence is evident. You will have pillage and butcheries: 
you will not have even the execrable honour of a civil war.*' 

What title then was it necessary to take ? 

Mounier and the imitators of the English government pro- 
posed: Representatives of the Major pari of the Nation, in the 
absence of the Minor part. That divided the nation into two 
parts, and led to the establishment of two Chambers. 

Mirabeau preferred the formula : Representatives of the 
French People. That word, said he, was elastic, — might 
mean little or much. 

This was precisely the reproach brought against him by two 
eminent legists, Target (of Paris), and Thouret (of Rouen). 
They asked him whether jfec^^ meant j^^be or poptdtu. The 
equivocation was laid bare. The king, the clergy, and the 
nobility would doubtless have interpreted people in the sense of 
plebs, or inferior people, — a ehn^le part of the nation. 

Many had not perceived the equivocation, nor how touch 
ground it would have caused the Assembly to lose. But they 
all understood it, when Malouet, Necker's friend, accepted the 
word people. 

The fear which Mirabeau attempted to inspire with the 
royal veto, excited only indignation. Camus, the Jansenist, 
one of the firmest characters in the Assembly, replied in these 
strong terms : " We are what we are. * Can the veto prevent 
truth from being one and immutable ? Can the royal sanction 
change the order of things and alter their nature ? " 

Mirabeau, irritated by the contradiction, and losing all pru- 
dence, became so angry as to say : '* I believe the Jdng^s veto 
BO necessary, that I would rather live at Constantinople than 
in France if he had it not. Tes, I declare 1 know nothing 
more terrible than the sovereign aristocracy of six hundred 
persons, who might to-morrow render themselves irrevocable, 
hereditary the day after, and end, like the aristocracies of every 
country in the world, by invading everything." 

Thus, of two evils, one possible, the other present, Mirabeau 



COMMONS TAKE THE TITLE OF NATIONAL ASSEMBLY. 101 

preferred the one present and certain. In the hypothesiB that 
this Assembly might one daj wish to perpetuate itself and 
beoome an hereditary tyrant, he armed, with the tyrannical 
power of preventing every reform, that incorrigible court which 
it was expedient to reform. !Z%« king ! the king ! Why should 
they ever abuse that old religion? Who did not know that 
since Louis XIY. there had been no king. The war was 
between two republics : one, sitting in the Assembly, com- 
posed of ^e master minds of the age, the best citizens, was 
France herself; the other, the republic of abuses, hdd its 
coimcil with the old cabinets of such as Dubois, Pompadour, 
and Du Barry, in the house of Diana de Polignac. 

Mirabeau^s speech was received with thunders of indignation 
and a torrent of imprecations and abuse. The eloquent rhe- 
toric with which he refuted what nobody had said (that the 
workpeople is vile) was unable to dupe his auditory. 

It was nine in the evening. The discussion was closed in 
order to take the votes. The singular precision with which 
the question had been brought to bear on royalty itself, caused 
some apprehension that the court might do the only thing that 
it had to do to prevent the people from being king on the 
morrow ; it possessed brute force, — an army round Versailles, 
which it might employ to cariy off the principal deputies, dis- 
solve the states, and, if Paris stirred, famish Paris. This 
bold crime was its last cast, and people believed that it was 
going to be played. They wished to prevent it by consti- 
tuting the Assembly that very night. This was the opinion 
of more than four hundred deputies ; a hundred, at most, were 
against it. That small majority precluded, all night, by shouts 
and violence, every possibility of calling over the names. But 
this shameful sight of a majority being tyrannized over, and the 
Assembly endangered by a delay, toge^er with the idea that, 
one moment or other, the work of liberty, the salvation of the 
future, might be annihilated, — ^all contributed to transport with 
fury Ihe crowd that filled the tribunes ; a man rushed for- 
ward and seized Malouet, the principal leader of the obstinate 
shouters, by the collar.^ 

* The principal witness, Bailly, does not give this circumstance, which M» 
Droz alone relates, doubtless on the authority of Malouet, 



102 CCklOfOllS TJOa THE TTILB OV N;li3«)lf^AI< ASfiHUfBLT.. 

Thd man escaped. The siiouts continued. In- presence of 
that tumult, says Bailly, wiio preadedy. thet aeaemblj remained 
firm and worthy ; as patient as strong, it ivwited in silenoe till 
that turhoknt band had exhausted itself with shouting. Aot 
hour afiber midnight, the deputies being leas nwnexous, noting 
was formally postponed till the moraow. 

On the follbwittg morning, at the moment of YoiksQr the 
president was informed that he was sumsMned torthe eAonos^ 
lerie ta reeeiye* a letter from the king. This letter^ in whiek 
he reminded them that they could do nothing without the- t&a* 
ourroice. of the three orders, would haTe anrired just at the 
right moment to furnish a text for the hundred opponents, to 
give rise to long speeches, and unsettle and diaalSeet many 
weak minda. The Assembly, with royal gr»rity„ a^urned 
the king's letter, and forbade its president to lewro tiie hall 
before the end* of the meeting. It wanted to Tote and voted* 

The difierent motioM mi^t be reduced to thsee, an rather 
to two : — 

1st. If hat of Bieye^-^Nationai AssemUy. 

2ndly. That of Mounier — Assembly of the Bepresoitativeaol 
iskuQ M»jer part of the Nation, in the absence of the Minor part* 
The equivocal formula of Mirabeau was equivalent to Mounier* b« 
as the word people could be taken in* a limited sense, and' as the 
major peart tfthe itatkm* 

Mounier had the apparent advantage of a judicial literalnesa, 
an arithmetical exactness, but was fiindamentally contrary te 
justice. It brought into symmetrical opposition, luid compared, 
as on a level, two things of an enormou^y different vahie* The 
Assembly represented ihe nation, minus the privileged ; that ia 
to say, 96 or 98 hundredths to 4 hundredths (according to 
Sieyes), or 2 hundredths (according to Neeker). Why should 
such an enormous importance be ^ven to these 2 or 4 huii'- 
dredths ? Certainly not for the moral power they contained ; 
they no^ longer had any. It was, in reality, because all the 
large properties of the kingdom^ the two^thh'dB of the lands* 
were in their possession. Mounier was the advocate of the 
landed property against the population, — of the land against 
man : — a feudal, English, and materialist point of view. 
Sieyes bad given the true French formula. 

With Mounier's arithmetic and unjust justness, and with 



THEY amZB OK THE BISHT OT TAJUTION. 103 

M]xabeau*& eqiitiVoc»fciQn, ihe natioa remoilied a dam^ and tha 
fixed property — ^the jiandi — confitituted also c^ dam in face.of the 
nation. We remamed in the injastice of antiquiij ; the !&l]ddle 
Ages wat' peFpetaated — the barbaroiuh system by whieh the 
ground w«& rackoaed move pre(nous than man ; and the landi 
manure,, and ashes, were the liege lorda of the mind. 

Sie^B, bemg put to the vote at ooee, had near five hundred 
votes for him> and not one hundred against him.^ Therefore 
the Assembly was proclaimed Naiional Assembly, Many cried» 
VioekMoif 

Two intanrnptioBB again intervened, as if to stop the Assembly, 
*--oiiefiom the nobility, ^asent for a mere psetext; the- other 
from oertain deptDties, who wanted to have a president, and a 
legdar buareaiu created before everything else. The AAsembly 
]nx>ceeded immediately to the solemnity ^ the oath. In presenee 
of a multitttde of fiiur thousand deeply afEiseted speetattwa,. the 
six hundred deputies, standing in profound silence, witiii ii^aised 
bands and contemplating the calm, honest aountenanee of their 
president^ liatened to him whilst reading the foimiila^ and 
ezdaimodi '' We swear." A universal seniiment of vespeot 
wd raligiott filled every heart.. 

The Assembly waa founded ; it existed ; it laeked but 
atseng^, the oertaiiity of living. It seewred thia by assert* 
11^ the right of taxation. It declared that the impost^, tiU then 
iBegalf i^ould be collected provisimailfy *' till the day of the 
separation of the presmit Assembly." This was» with <»e 
blow, condemning idl the past and sensing upon the future. 

It adopted <^nly t^e question of honour, the; public debt, 
and guaranteed it. 

And all these royal acts were in royal language, in the very 
fivmulis which the king alone had hitherto taken : *^ The Aa- 
aambly intends and decrees* ' ' 

Fiimlly, it evinced much concern about public subsistences. 
.The administrative power having declined as much as the 
others, the legislature, the only authority then respected, was 
£areed to interfere. It demanded, moreover, for its committee 
of sttbsiatenoe, what the king himself had offered to the 

*' Four hundred and ninety-one votes against ninet^^. IfinlMaii dtuit not 
vote either for or against, and remained at home. 



104 rSOJBCTS OF A COUP D*BTAT* 

deputation of the olergj, — a commiiiiicati<Hi of the information 
that would throw a light upon this matter. But what he had 
then offered, he was no longer willing to grant. 

The most surprised of all was Necker ; he had, in his sim- 
plicity, beUered he could lead the world ; and the world was 
going on without him. He had erer regarded the young 
Assemhly as his daughter — ^his pupil ; he warranted the king 
that it would he docile and well-behaved ; yet, behold, all on a 
sudden, without consulting its tutor, it went alone, advanced 
and climbed over the old barriers without deigning even to look 
at them. When thus motionless with astonishment, Necker 
received two counsels, one from a royalist, the other from a 
republican, and both came to the same thing. The royalist 
was the intendant Bertrand de MoUeville, — an impasdoned 
and narrow-minded intendant of the ancien regime; the re- 
publican was Durovray, one of those democrats whom the 
king had driven from Geneva in 1782. 

It is necessary to know who this foreigner was, who, in so 
serious a crisis, took so great an interest in France, and ven- 
tured to give advice. Durovray, settled in England, pensioned 
by the English, and grown English in heart and maxims, was, 
a little later, a chief of emigrants. Meanwhile, he formed a 
part of a little Genevese coterie which, unfortunately for us, 
was circumventing Mirabeau. England seemed to be Bur<* 
rounding the principal organ of French liberty.^ Unfavourable 
towards the English till then, the great man had allowed him- 
self to be taken by those ex-republicans, — ^the self-termed 
martyrs of liberty. The Durovrays, the Dumonts, and other 
indefatigable writers of mediocrity, were ever ready to assist 
his idleness. He was already an invalid, and going the very 
way to render himself worse and worse. His nights destroyed 
his days. In the morning he remembered the Assembly and 

* These Genevese were not precisely agents of England. But tlie pensions 
they received from her, — the monstrous present of more than a million (of 
francs) that she made them to found an Irish Geneva (which remained on 
paper), — all that imposed on them the ohligation to serve the English. More« 
over, they hecame two parties. Yvernois hecame EInglish and our most cruel 
enemy ; Clavi^re alone was French. What shall we say of Etienne Dumont, 
who pretends that those people, with their leaden pens, wrote all Miraheau^a 
orations ? His Sowoemrs hear witness to a base ingratitude towards the maa 
of genius who honoured him with his friendship. 



THE7 CIBGUICVENT THE XING« 105 

business, and eollected his thoughts ; he had there, ready at 
hand, the English policy, sketched by the Geneyese ; he re- 
c^yed it with his eyes shut, and embellished it with his talent. 
Such was his readiness and his lack of preparation, that, at 
the tribune, even his admirable language was occasionally only 
a translation of the notes which these Genevese handed to him 
from time to lime, 

Durovray, who was not in communication with Necker, made 
himself his officious counsellor in this serious crisis. 

Like Bertrand de Molleville, his opinion was that the king 
should annul the decree of the Assembly, deprive it of its 
name of National Assembly, command the union of the three 
orders, declare himself the Froviiumal Legislator of 'France, 
and do, by royal authority, what the Commons had done with- 
out it, Bertrand believed justly, that, alter this coup d^itat, 
the Assembly could but dissolve. Durovray pretended that 
the Assembly, crushed and humiliated under the royal pre- 
rogative, would accept its petty part, as a machine to make 
laws.* 

On the evening of the 17th, the heads of the clergy, 
Cardinal de Larochefoucauld, and the Archbishop of Paris, 
had hastened to Marly, and implored the king and the queen. 
On the 19th, vain disputes in the Chamber of the nobility ; 
Orleans proposed to join the Third, and Montesquieu to imite 
with the clergy. But there was no longer any order of the 
clergy. The very same day, the curis had transferred the 
majority of their order. to form a union with the Third, and 
thus divided the order into two. The cardinal and the arch- 
bishop return the same evening to Marly, and fall at the feet 
of the king: << Religion is ruined!" Next, come the Par- 
liament people : ** The monarchy is lost, unless the States be 
dissolved." 

A dangerous advice, and already impossible to follow. The 
flood was rising higher every hour, Versailles and Paris were 
in commotion. Necker had persuaded two or three of the 

* Compare the two plans in Bertrand's if emoifiM and Dumont*8 48atfv«nir«. 
The latter confesses that the Genevese had taken good care not to confide their 
fine project to Mirabeau ; he was not informed of it till after the event, and 
then said with much good sense : '* T^is is the way kings are led to the 
scaffold." 



106 THE KUfO OBimSS THE HAUL TO BE SHUT. 

mmiflton, and even the Idng^ that his poojeot was Ike onlj 
means of aalvadon. Tl»t projeet had heen read over agnm 
in n last and dafinitiye council on Eridaj evening, ifaa 19th ; 
ererjtfaing^ wsa finished and agreed : ** The pertfriiios were 
ahseady hmag shut np»" says Neoker^ *' when one o£ the rojal 
s^rantft inddBnlj entered ; he whispesed to the hing ; and 
His Majesty immediately arose, commanding hu ministen to 
remaini in tiieir places* M. da Montmorin, sitting hy my side, 
said to ma: *We have efieoted nothing; the queen alone 
eenld hare* ventuved to interrupt the Council of State ; the 
pnnees, apparratly, harm circumyented her.' " 

Erfflrything was- stopped : this might have heen foreseen ; 
it W8S» doubtlesB^ for this that tile long had been brought to 
Marlyv away firom Versailles and* the people; and, done witfa,th« 
queen, more a&ctionaAe and liaUe to be infikonced by her, in 
dyeir comnBon afflietioni for the deiAh of theb child. A fine 
opportunity^, an exeellent chance for the snggestions of the 
priests ! Was not the Bai^hin^s death a seyere- jadgmont of 
Providence, when the king was yielding to the dangerous wm»^ 
yations of a Protestant minister 1 

. The hing,. still ondecidJed^ but ahready ahnost oyercome,. was 
contented to command (in ordw to prevotit the dergy from 
uniting with the Third Estate) that ike ball should be shot 
on the nwMTPOw , . (Saturday June 20th) ; the pretext; was tiie 
prepavation& neeesuiy for a royal meeting to be held on the 

All thm was settled in the night, and placarded in Versailies 
ait six in the momu^^ The president of the National Assembly 
learned, by mere chance, that it could not be held. It was 
past seven when he received a letter^ not from the king (as 
was natural, the king being accnstomed to write with his own 
hand to the president of the Parliament), but simply a no^o 
from young Br6s6, l^e master of the ceremonies; It was not 
to the president, to M. BaiUy, at his lodgings, that such a 
notice ought to haye been given, but to the Assembly itselfi- 
Bailly had no power to act of himself. At eight o'clock, the 
hour appointed the night before, he repaired to the door of the 
hall with a great number of deputies. Being stopped by the 
sentineb, he protested against the hindrance, and declared the 
meetiug convened. Several young members made a dhow of 



THE ASSEMBLY IK TBE TEITNIS-OOUBT. 107 

breaking open tlie door ; the officer commanded his soldiers to 
arm, thus announcing that his orders contained no reservation 
for inviolability. 

Behold our new kings, put out, kept out of doors, like unruly 
scholars. Behold them wandering about in the rain, among 
the people, on the Paris avenue. AH agree about the necessity 
of holding the meeting and of assembling. Some shout. Let 
us go to the Place d'Armes ! Others, to Marly I Another, 
to Pans ! This last was an extreme measure ; it was firing 
ihe powder-magazine. 

The deputy Guillotin- made a less hazardous motion, to vepair 
to Old Versailles, and take up their quarters in the Tennisr 
court (Jeu-de-Paume), — a miserable, ugly, poor, and unfur- 
nished building, but the better on that account. The Assembly 
also' was poor, and represented the people, on that day, so 
much the better. They remained standing all day long, having 
scarcely a wooden bench. It was like the manger of the new 
religion, — its stable of Bethlehem ! 

One of those intrepid cur^a who had decided the union of 
the clergy — the illustrious Gr^goire— long after, when the 
Empire had so cruelly ef^ced every trace of the Revolution, 
its parent, used often to go near Versailles to visit the ruins of 
Port-Royal ; one day (doubtless on his return), he entered the 
Jetc^e-Paume* — the one in ruins, the other abandoned — 
tears flowed from the eyes of that firm man, who had never 
shown any weakness. Two religions to weep for I this was too 
much for the heart of man. 

We too revisited, in 1846, that cradle of Liberty, that place 
whose echo repeated her first words, that received, and still 
preserves her memorable oath. But what could we say to it ? 
What news could we give it of the world that it brought forth ? 
Oh ! time has not flown quickly ; generations have succeeded 
one another ; but the work has not progressed. When we 
stepped upon its venerable pavement, we felt ashamed in our 
heart 'of what we are,— of the little w<e have done*. We felt 
we were unw«rfchyr and quitted that saered place. 

* JBT^moirea deCfrigwre, i., p. 380. 



108 



CHAPTER IV. 

OATH AT THE JEU-DE-PAUME. 

Oath at the Jeu-cJe-PatttiM, June 20tli, 1780. — The Assembly wandering. — 
ACoupd^£t(U; Necker's Project; the King's Declaration, June 23rd, 
1789; the Assembly Refuses to Separate. — The King entreats Necker to 
remain, but does not revoke his Declaration. 

Behold them now in the Tennis-court, assembled in spite of the 
king. But what are the j going to do ? 

Let us not forget that at that period the whole Assembly was 
royalist, without excepting a single member.* 

Let us not forget that on the 17th, when it assumed the title 
of National Assembly, it shouted Vive le Boi ! And when it 
attributed to itself the right of voting the impost, declaring 
illegal the impost collected till then, the opposition members 
had left the Assembly, unwilling to consecrate, by their presence, 
this infringement of the royal authority.! 

The king, that shadow of the past, that ancient superstition, 
80 powerful in the hall of the States-General, grew pale in the 
Tennis-court. The miserable building, entirely modem, bare, 
and imfurnished, has not a single comer where the dreams of 
the past can yet find shelter. Let, therefore, the pure spirit 
of Reason and Justice, that king of the future, reign here ! 

That day there was no longer any opponent ;f the Assembly 
was one, in thought and heart. It was one of the moderate 
party, Mounier of Grenoble, who proposed to the Assembly the 
celebrated declaration : That wherever it might be forced to 
unite, there was ever the National Assembly; that nothing could 
prevent it from continuing its deliberations. And, till the com- 

* See further, the 22nd of July, a note relating to Robespierre. 

'Y As appears to me by comparing the numbers of the votes. The illegality 
of the impost not consented to, &c., was voted wna/aimously by the four 
hundred and twenty-six deputies alone remaining in the hall. — Archives d\h 
Royavmt^ Procea-verbaux MS8. de I* Assemble NatumcUe. 

X There was only one. The ninety opponents of the 17th of June jbined 
the majority. 



OATH AT THE JEU-DE-PAUME. 109 

pletion and establishment of the constitution, it took an oath 
never to aejxtrate, 

Baillj was the first who took the oath ; and he pronounced it 
80 loud and distinctly that the whole multitude of people crowd- 
ing without could hear, and applauded in the excess of their 
enthusiasm. Shouts of Vive le Boi I arose from the Assembly 
and from the people. It was the shout of ancient France, in 
her extreme transports, and it was now added to the oath of 
resistance.* 

In 1792, Mounier, then an emigrant, alone in a foreign land, 
questions and asks himself whether his motion of the 20th of 
June was founded on right ; whether his loyalty as a royalist 
was consistent with his duty as a citizen* And even there, in 
emigration, and among all the prejudices of hatred and exile, 
he replies, Tes ! 

"Yes," says he, "the oath was just; they wanted the 
dissolution, and it would have taken place without the oath ; 
the court, freed from the States, would never have convoked 
them; it would have been necessary to renounce the founding of 
that constitution claimed unanimously in the old writings of 
France." That is what a royalist, the most moderate of the 
moderate, a jurist accustomed to find moral decisions in positive 
texts, pronounces on the primordial act of our Revolution. 

What were they doing all this time at Marly ? On Saturday 
and Sunday, Necker was contending with the Parliament 
people, to whom the king had abandoned him, and who, with 
the coolness sometimes possessed by madmen, were overthrow- 
ing his project, abridging it of what^ might have caused it to 
pass, and took from it its bastard character, in order to convert 
it into a simple but brutal coup d^itat, in the manner of Louis 
XV., a simple lU de jicstice, as the Parliament had suffered so 
many times. The discussion lasted till the evening. It was 
not till midnight that the president, then in bed, was informed 
that the royal meeting could not take place in the morning, — 
that it was postponed till Tuesday. 

* The Assemblj' Trent no further. It rejected the strong, but true motion 
of Chapelier, who was hold enough to speak out plainly what was in the minds 
of aU. He proposed an address : ** To inform His Majesty that the enemies of 
the country were besieging the throne, and that their Gounaels t«nded to pUnee 
the monarch tU the hmd of a pasty.** 



110 A tfoup d'btat. 

The nobility had come to Marly on the Sondaj in great 
numbers and with much turbulence. They had again showed 
to the kmg, in an address, that "^e question now conoemed 
him much more than the nobility. The oomi; was animated 
with a chivalrous daring ; these swordsmen seemed to irait only 
for a signal to resist the champions ef tiie pen. The Count 
B^ArtoiSy amid these breEvadoes, became «o intoxicated witii 
insolence, as to 'send-word to the Tenme-«ourt that he would 
play on the morrow. 

On the Monday morning, therefore, the Assembly found itself 
once more in the open -streets of VersailleB, wandering about, 
without house or home. Fine amusement for the court ! The 
master of the haU was afraid ; he feared the princes, l^e 
Assemhly does not succeed better at the door cf tiie RecoUets 
where it next knocks ; the monks dare not compromise them- 
selves. IVlio then are these vagrants, this dan^rous band, 
before whom every door is shut ? Nothing less thiin tiie Nation 
itself. 

But w'hy not deliberate in the open air ? What more neible 
canopy than the sky ^ But on that day ihe majorily of -^ 
clergy wish to come .and sit with l^e commons. TVheEe >ere 
they to receive them ? Luckily, -f^e hundred and thirfy-kfeor 
curSs, with a few prelates at their head, had already taken up 
their quarters, in the morning, in the church df Saint-Louis. 
The Assembly iras introduced there into the nave ; and the 
ecclesiastics, at first assembled in the choir, then came forth, 
and took their places among its members. A grand moment, 
and one of sincere joy! "The temple < of religion," says 
an orator, with emotion, " became the temple of the native 
land ! '• 

On that very day, Monday the 22nd, Necber was «till con- 
tending, but in vain. Hie project, fatal to liberty 'because hd 
preserved in it a shadow of moderation, had to give way to 
another more liberal and better calculated to place things in 
their proper light. Necker iras now nothing more than a 
guilty mediator between good and evil, preserving a semblance 
of equilibrium between the just and the unjust, — a courtier, at 
the ^ame time, of the people and the enemies of the people. 
At the last council held on Monday at Versailles, the princes, 
who were invited to it, did liberty the essential service of 



TmOSJBSk'H iFHOJECT, 111 

vemoTuig iSbiB eqmvooal unediatar, who preventod reason and 
nnreifioatibleiieBs from seeing each other plamlj faee to face. 

Before the sitting hegins, I wish to examine bolih projects, — 
Necdeer 6 and tifae ooort's. In what conoernfi the fosmer, I will 
heHeiwiuniB hot Neoker himself. 

hecsbr's fbojbct. 

In his book of 1796, written at a time of decided reaction, 
Keeker avows to us confidentially what his project was ; he 
^hows that that project was, bold, very "bold — ^in favoor of the 
pririleged. 'This confession is rather painful for him, and he 
makes it by an effort. '" The defect of my project was its being 
too bold ; I risked all that it was possible for me to risk. Ex- 
plain yourself. I will, and I ought. Deign to listen to me."^ 

He is speaking to the emigrants, to whom this apology is 
addressed. A vain undertaking ! How will they ever for- 
give him for having called the people to political ISe, and made 
five millions df electors ? 

1st. Those necessary, inevitable reforms, which the court 
had so long refused, and which they accepted only by force, he 
promulgated by the king. He, who ^ew, to his cost, that the 
king was the pnj)pet of the queen and the court, a mere cipher, 
nothing more, — even he became a party for the continuing of 
that sad comedy. 

Liberty, that sacred right which exists of itself, he made a 
present from the king, a granted charier ^ as was the charter of 
the invasion in 1814. But it required thirty years of war, 
and all Europe at Paris, for France to accept that constitution 
of falsehood. 

2ndly. No legislative tmity, — ^o-Ghandters, at least. This 
was like a timid advice to France to become Snglssh ; in 
which there were two advantages : to strengthen the privileged^ 
prieefts and nobles, henceforth concentrated in one upper Cham- 
ber ; next, to mikke it easier for Ihe king to amuse the people, 
to refuse ^y the upper Chamber, instead of refusing by 'himself, 
and of having (as we see to-day) two vetos for one. 

3rdly. The king was to permit the three orders to deliberate 
in common on general afiairs ; but as to privileges of personal 
distinction, of honour, and as to righiB cOtaehed to fitf^y no disr 



112 NECKEB*S PBOJECir« 

eussion in common. Now this was preciselj what France con- 
sidered as the superlatively ^ei2«ra/ business. Who then dared 
to see a special business in the question of honour ? 

4thlj. These crippled States-General, now united, now sepa* 
rated into three orders, at one time active, at another supine, 
through their triple movement, Necker balances, shackles, and 
neutralises still more, by provincial SicUen^ thus augmenting 
division, when France is thirsting for unity. 

5thly. That is what he gives, and as soon as given, he takes 
away again. This fine legislative machine is never to be seen 
at work by anybody ; he grudges us the sight of it ; it is to 
work with closed doors : no publicity of iU sittings. The law 
is thus to be made, far from daylight, in the dark, as one 
would make a plot against the law. 

6thly. — The law ? What does this word mean, without 
personal liberty? Who can act, elect, or vote freely, when 
nobody is sure of sleeping at home ? This first condition of 
social life, anterior to, and indispensable for political action, is 
not yet secured by Necker. The king is to invite the Assembly 
to seek the means thai might permit the abolition of the lettres- 
de-cachet. Meanwhile, he keeps them together with the arbi- 
trary power of kidnapping, the state-prisons, and the Bastille. 

Such is the extreme concession which ancient royalty makes, 
in its most favourable moment, and urged on by a popular 
minister. Moreover, it cannot go even thus far. The nominal 
king promises ; the real king, the court — ^laughs at the pro* 
mise. Let them die in their sin ! 

THE KING^S DEGLABATION (jUNE 23, 1789). 

The plan of the court is worth more than the bastard plan of 
Necker ; at least it is plainer to understand. Whatever is bad 
in Necker is preciously preserved, nay richly augmented. 

This act, which may be called the testament of despotism, is 
divided into two parts: 1st. The prohibition of securities: 
under this head. Declaration concerning the present holding of 
the States. 2ndly. The reforms and benefits as they say,* 

* The style on a par \ritliihe matter; now bombastic, now flat, and strongly 
sayouring of false Tsloar : ** Never did a king do so mucli ! ^ Towards the 
end is a phrase of admirable impudence and awkwardness (Necker claims it 
accordingly, tome ix.,p. 196) : ** Reflect, gentlemen, that non« of your projects 
can have the force of law without my spedal approbation.'* 



THE king's declaration. 113 

Declaration of the king's intentions^ of hid wishes and desires 
for future contingencies. The eyil is sure, and the good pos- 
sible. Let us see the detail. 

1. The king annihilates the will of five millions of electors, 
declaring that their demands are only information. 

The king annihilates the decisions of the deputies of the 
Third Estate, declaring them ''null, illegal, imconstitutional. " 

The king will have the three orders remain distinct, that one 
may be able to shackle the others (that two hundredths of the 
nation may weigh as much as the whole nation). 

Ifihey wish to meet, he permits it, but only /or this time, and 
also only for general business ; in this general business is 
included neither the rights of the three orders, the constitution 
of the future States, the feudal and seigneurial properties, nor 
the privileges of money or of honour. All the ancien rSgime 
is thus found to be an exception. 

AU this was the work of the court. Here is, according to 
eyery appearance, the king's manifesto, the one he fondly che- 
rished, and wrote himself. The order of the clergy shall have 
a special veto (against the nobility and the Third Estate) for 
everything relating to religion, the discipline and government 
of the secular and regtdar orders. Thus, not one monk less ; 
no reform to be made. And all those convents, every day 
nfOre odious and useless, and unable any longer to be recruited, 
the clergy wanted to maintain. The nobility was furious. It 
lost its dearest hope. It had reckoned that, one day or 
other, that prey would fall into its hands ; at the very least, it 
hoped that, if the king and the people pressed it too much to 
make some sacrifice, it would generously make that of the 
clergy. 

Veto on veto. For what purpose ? Here we have a refine* 
ment of precautions, far more sure to render every result 
impossible. In the common deliberations of the three orders, 
it is sufficient that the two-thirds of one order protest against 
the deliberation, for the decision to be referred to the king. 
Nay more, the thing being decided, it is sufficient that a hundred 
members protest for the decision to be referred to the king. 
That is to say, that the words assembly, deliberation, and 
decision, are only a mystification, a farce. And who could 
lay it without laughing ? 

I 



114 lEB KDVO'S BECLAKATKW. 

II. N<Mr cdmetibe BEifEFrra : puUieitj for finance, Totmg of 
UkxeSf reguUticHD of tbo expenditure for wiuek the States tnU 
indicate the means ^ and his Majesty '^ will; adopt them, if tftdy 
'beeompixfAle with the hinglp dignity^ aad tlie despatdi of the 
public service." 

Seeond benefit : The king will soactixm the cquslitj of tax- 
atioBy wkem the derg^ and the mobility duxU be willing to renounce 
their peeunimy privUegea^ 

Third hea^: Properties shall be reBpeeted,eip«BMriZ3rtt<^> 
feudal rights, and duties. 

Fowdi beneit : Individuallibevty ? No^ The hii^inTites 
the States to Mdb for and to pr^fose to him means for vesomesk^ 
ia/kg the aboHtionr of the kHres^-eadut, widk the pveoantioBB 
neeessaarg either for protecluig tile honoar ef fannliBSy or for 
repressiBg the eomoiencenteml of sedition, ho. 

Fifth : Liberty of the press ? Ii«. The Stetev shall seek 
the means of reameSing.i^ Kberty of the press with Ike respect 
date to reHgien, the merals^ and the honour of the citxzensw 

Sixth : Admission to emj employaeot f No. Refitted 
eapreesfyfbr the army. The king dedases, in the most decided 
numner, that he will preserve entire, and without the sHghtesI 
aMeratian, the instkuition of the army. That is to say, that the 
plebeiaa shall never aitkain any grade; he. Thus does tiw 
idiotic legislaior subjeet ererything to violence, foree^ and tibs 
sword : and tins is the very moment he chooses to break Ms 
own. Let him now eall soldiers, surround the assembly witii 
them^ and urge them towards Paris ; tiiey are so maay defenders 
that he gives to the Revolution* 

On the eve o£ the grand day, three depulies of tiie nol^ity, 
MM. d'Aiguillon, de Menou, and de Montmorency, came at 
midnsght to inform tiie presidttat of the results oi the last 
eooncU, held tiie same evening at Versailles : '' M. Neeker 
will not eonntenanee, by his preseaee, a project contrary to his 
own; he will not come to the meeting; and will doabtiess 
depart." The meeting opened at ten o'clock ; sad Bailiy 
was diie to teH the deputies, and the latter many othen, the 
grand seciet of the day. Opinions might have been divided 
and doped, had the popular minister been seen sitting beside the 
king ; he being absent, the king remained discovered, and 
forsaken by public opinion. The court had hoped to play tii^r 



iHB king's dbclabatiok. 115 

game at Necker's expense, and to- be siieltered by him ; tkej 
have never forgiven him for not having allowed himself to be 
ftboBed and (^honoured by them. 

What proves that everything was known is, that on his. vesy 
exit from; the eafitle» the king found the crowd sullieidy silait.* 
The affair had got abroad, and the grand aeene, so highly 
wEonghty had not the kaat effects 

The miserable petty spirit of insolence whiek swayed tko 
court, hftd suggested the idea of eausing the two su^erioir 
orders to enter in &ont, by the grand entrance^ and the 
commons b^iind, and to keep them imdesr a shedi. half in 
the rain. The Third Estate, thus humbled, wet and dirty, 
was to have entered crest-fallen,, to receive its lessoB^ 

Nobody to introdoee them ; the door shut ; and the guard 
within. Mirabeau to the president : *' Sir, conduct the nation 
into the presence of the king T* The president knocks at the 
door. The body-guards frc«& within: "PreeenftLy*" The 
president : " Gentlemeny where is then the master of the 
ceremonies?" The body-guards: " We know nothing about 
it." Tke depujfcies : ^' Well then, let ua go ; come away I" 
At last the president suoeeeds in bringmg fortb the ca|Ktain of 
the guards^ who goes in quest of Bt€z6» 

The deputies, filing in one by one, find, in the hiJl, tke 
clergy and the nobiUty^ who, already in th^r ^aeee^ and 
hoi^ng the meeting, seem to be awaiting them, like jiidgei; 
In other respects, the hall was empty. Nothing ewM be 
more desolate than that h&H, from wkick the poK^^ weie 
excluded. 

The king road, with hia usual pkimesa of mann^, the 
speech composed for him, — ^that despotic language so strange 
&om his lipo. He perceived but little its provoking violence, 
for he appeared surprised at the aspect of the Assembly. The 
nobles having applauded the article consecrating feudal rights, 
loud distinct voices were heard to utter : ** Siknee there I '* 

The king, after a moment's pause and astonishment, cob- 
cluded with a grave, intoleraMe sentence, which flung down 
the gauntlet to the Assembly, and began the war : '' If you 
abandon me Ib ao excellent an enterprise* I will, alcme^ effect 

* Dumont (on eyo-witnew), p* 91. 
l2 



116 THE king's DECLABATIOir. 

the welfare of my people ; (ilone, I shall consider myself as 
their true representative ! " 

And at the end : '< / order you, gentlemen, to disperse 
immediately, and to repair to-morrow morning to the chambers 
appropriated to your order, there to resume your sitting." 

The king departed, followed by the nobility and the clergy. 
The commons remained seated, calm, and silent.* The master 
of the ceremonies then entered, and said to the president in a 
low tone : ** Sir, you heard the king's order !'* He replied : 
" The Assembly adjourned after the royal meeting ; I cannot 
dismiss it till it has deliberated." Then turning towards his 
colleagues near him : '' It seems to me that the assembled 
nation cannot receive any orders." 

That sentence was admirably taken up by Mirabeau, who 
addressed it to the master of the ceremonies. With his 
powerful and imposing voice, and with terrible dignity, he 
hurled back these words: ''We have heard the intentions 
suggested to the king ; and you, sir, who can never be his 
organ to the National Assembly, you, who have here neither 
place, voice, nor right to speak, you are not a man to remind 
us of his discourse. Go and tell those who send you, that we 
are here by the will of the people, and are to be driven hence 
only by the power of bayonets, "t 

Brez6 was disconcerted, thunderstruck ; he felt the power 
of that new royalty, and, rendering to the one what etiquette 
commanded for the other, he retired walking backwards, as 
was the custom before the king4 

The court had imagined another way to disperse the com-* 
mens, — a brutal means formerly employed with success in the 



* There iros neither hesitation, nor consternation, notwithstanding what 
Dumont says, who was not there. The ardent, like Gr^goire (M^m., i., 381 ), 
and the moderate, like Malouet, were perfectly agreed. The latter says, on 
this head, these fine and simple words : ** We had no other coarse to take. 
We owed France a constitution.** — Malouet, Comjpte^rend'Vk tL mes Com-' 
mettants. 

"t* This version is the only one likely. Miraheau was a royalist ; he would 
never have said : *^ Oo and teU your fnaster,^' nor the other words that have 
been added. 

X Related by M. Frochot, an eye-witness, to the son of Mirabeau. (M^., vi., 
p. 39). That fiunily has thought proper to contest a few details of this well« 
known scene, forty-four years after the event. 



THE ASSEHBLT REFUSES TO SEPARATE, 117 

States-General, — ^merely to have the hall dismantled, to de- 
molish the amphitheatre and the king's estrade. Workmen 
accordingly enter ! but, at one word from the president, they 
stop, lay down their tools, contemplate with admiration the 
calm majesty of the Assembly, and become attentire and 
respectful auditors. 

A deputy proposed to discuss the king's resolutions on the 
morrow. He was not listened to. Camus laid down forcibly, 
and it was declared : ** That the sitting was but a ministerial 
act, and that the Assembly persisted in its decrees." Bamaye, 
the young member for Dauphiny : " You hare declared what 
you are ; you need no sanction." Glezen, the Breton: '< How 
now ! does the sovereign speak as a master, when he ought to 
consult !" Petion, Buzot, Garat, Gr^goire, spoke with equal 
energy; and Sieyes, with simplicity: " Gentlemen, you are to- 
day what you were yesterday." 

The Assembly next declared, on Mirabeau's proposal, that 
its members were inviolable ; that whoever laid hands on a 
deputy was a traitor, infamous, and worthy of death. 

This decree was not useless. The body-guards had formed 
in a line in front of the hall. It was expected that sixty depu- 
ties would be kidnapped in the night. 

The nobility, headed by their president, went straightway 
to thank their protector, the Count d' Artois, and afterwards to 
Monsieur, who was prudent and took care not to be at home. 
Many of them went to see the queen, who, triumphant and 
smiling, leading her daughter and carrying the dauphin, said 
to them : " I intrust him to the nobility." 

The king was far from sharing their joy. The silence of 
the people, so new to him, had overwhelmed him. When 
BrSz6, who came and informed him that the deputies of the 
Third Estate remained sitting, asked for orders, he walked 
about for a few minutes, and said at last, in the tone of one 
tired to death : " Very well ; leave them alone." 

The king spoke wisely. The moment was fraught with 
danger. One step more and Paris marched against Versailles. 
Versailles was already in commotion. Behold five or six 
thousand men advancing towards the castle. The queen sees 
with terror that strange and novel court, which, in a moment, 
fills the gardens, the terraces, and even the apartments. She 



118 MOVEMENT OF PAIOS. 

1>^B, site entvesto &e king to undo •wh«t she 1m» done, to 
yeMU Keeker. Hk retmn did not take hmg; ka wu tkere, 
newr at iwaid, oomdnoed, «e usual, tkat nolMHg coidd ever 
go K)n iv i l l i o iit kim. LomB KYI. said t0 kim good-naturedly : 
«< For my pairt I am not at all tenaciois of that dedaration«" 

Necker required no more, and made no condition. His 
Tonity enoe satidfied, his deligkt in beanng ererybody ekout 
Neokgrf iKiprived him of every o^er tkought. He went out, 
ovBijoyed, into the great oourt of ihe casSe, and to oomfort; 
the multitude, passed in tbe midst of likem. There « few silly 
persons fell on their knees and kissed his hands. He, much 
affected, said : ** Yes, my children, — yes, my ohildren, — I re- 
main; be comforted." He burst into tears, and then shut 
himself up in his cabinet. 

The poor tool cff ike court remained 'without exacting any- 
thing ; he remained to shield the eabal wi^ his name, to serve 
them as an advertisement, and reassure them against the 
people ; he restored courage to those worthies, and gave 
them the time to summsn more troops. 



CHAPTER Y. 

MOVEMENT OF PAJEIIS. 



Assembly of die ISecton, ITune 26tli. — ^Insurrection of the Frencli Onards. — 
Agitation of Htub Palais Royal. — Iirtngues of the Orleans party. — The 
King commands the junction of the Orders, June 27th.— The people- 
deliver the French Guards, June 30th. — The Court prepares for War. — 
Paris demands permission to arm. — ^Necker dismissed, July 11th, 1789. 

The situation ^ things was strange,— 0viden% temporary. 

The Asfiembly had not 'oikeyed. But the king had not re- 
voked ann^thiBg. 

The king had recalled Keeker ; hut he kept the Assembly 
like a prisoner among his troi^s ; he had esefaided the public 
firom tibe sittb^ ; the .grand entranoe remained shut ; the 
Assembly entered by the small €iie,tand debated with (dosed 
doers. 

The Assembly protested feebly and but slightly. The resist- 
ance, on tfae^Srd, seemed to have exhausted its sti>6iigth. 



AdBGUBLT OF THE SLEC70SB OF PAKIS. 119 

Paris i£d BOt imitate its weakness. 

It was not content to fi»e its d^uties making laws in pxisoii* 

On lite 24Eh ihe Seaemeat was tenible. 

On ike 25tk it burst out in three different wajs at once ; bj 
tiie electors, by ^e crowd, and by ihe soldiery. 

The seat of ilhe Eoirolntion fixes kseif at Paris* 

The electors had agreed to meet again after ^ elections, in 
order to complete their instraotions to tibe depnties whom they 
had elected. Though <the ministry refused its pennission,* 
the coup d'itatf on i^e 23t6., uiged them em ; th^ had like- 
wise their coup d'^tigt, and assembled, ti their own accord, on 
the 25th, in the E»e Daiq^hine. A wretched assembly-room, 
ooonpied at that moment by a wedding-party, which made room 
for them, reoeired, at first, the Assembly of the eleotorsof Paris. 
This was ^leir Tennis-court. There Paris, through their 
medium, made an engagement to support the National Assem- 
bly. One of them, Thuriot, advised them io go to the Hotel- 
de-Yille, into the great hall of SabtJean, whidi nobody durst 
refuse tiliem. 

These eleetors were mostly rich men, cxtisens of note ; the 
aristocracy was numerous in this body ; but among th^n were, 
also, men of over-exeited minds. Eirst, two men, fervent 
revolutUnmaireSf with a singular tendency to myatieism ; one 
was iJde ahb^ Fauchet, eloquent and intrepid ; the other, his 
friend Bonneville, (the translator of Sihakespeare). Bodh, in 
the thirteenth century, would have caused themselves, most 
certainly, to be burnt as heretks. In l^e nineteenth they 
were as forward as any, or rather the first, to prcrpese 
resbtance ; which was scarcely to be expected £rem ihe burgess 
assembly af the electors.t On the Oih of June, Bonneville 
proposed that Paris should be armed, and was the first to cry, 
" To arms," J 

* Compare the MSmwres de BaiUy -with the Prows-wrhal des JSleaUun, 
diKwn up hj Baillp et Duveyrier. 

+ Yet, nowhere had more reliance heen placed on the 'weakneffi of ihe 
people. I^ wsU-known gentleness of Farisian manners, ihe multitade of 
government peq)le, and financiers, who «onld but lose in a rebellion, the 
crowds of those -who lived on abuses, had altogether created -a belief^ before 
the elections, that Paiis would prove very citizen-like, easy, and timid. See 
Bailly, pp. 16, 150. 

t Dussaulx, (Ewore de9 Sept Jours, p. 271, (ed. 1822). 



120 INSdRRECTION OF THE FRENCH GUARDS, 

Fauchet, Bonneyille, Bertolio, and Carra, a violent journalist, 
made these bold motions, which ought to haye been made from 
the first in the National Assembly: — ^firstly, the Cftizen Guard; 
secondly, the early organization of a true, elective, and annual 
Commune ; thirdly, an address to the King, for the removal of 
the troops and the liberty of the Assembly, and for the revoca- 
tion of the coup (T^tat of the 23rd. 

On the very day of the first assembly of the electors, as if 
the cry to arms had resounded in the barracks, the soldiers 
of the French Guards, confined for several days past, over- 
powered their guard, w^ed about in Paris, and went to fraternise 
with the people in the Palais Royal. For some time past, 
secret societies had been forming among them ; they swore 
they would obey no orders that might be contrary to those of 
the Assembly. The Act of the 23rd, in which the king 
declared, in tiie strongest manner, that he would never change 
the institution of the army; that is to say, that the nobility 
should for ever monopolize every grade, and that the plebeian 
could never rise, but that the common soldier would die in the 
ranks : — that unjustifiable declaration necessarily finished 
what the revolutionary contagion had begun. 

The French Guards, residents in Paris, and mostly married 
men, had seen the depot in which the children of the soldiers 
were educated, free of expense, shortly before suppressed by 
M. Du Chatelet, their hard-hearted colonel. The only change 
made in the military institutions, was made against them. 

In order to appreciate properly the words institution of the 
army, we should know, that in the budget of that time, the 
officers were reckoned at forty-six millions (of francs), and 
the soldiers at forty-four.* We should know, that Jourdan, 
Joubert, and Kleber, who had served at first, quitted the 
military profession, as a desperate career, — a sort of no 
thoroughfare. Augereau was an under-officer in the infantry, 
Hoche a sergeant in the French Guards, and Marceau a com- 
mon soldier ; those noble-hearted and aspiring youths were 
fixed in this low condition for ever. Hoche, who was twenty- 
one years of age, nevertheless completed his own education, as 
if about to be a General-in-Chief ; he devoured everything, 

* Necker, AdminUtratim, ii., 422, 435. (1784). 



AGITATIOK IN THE PALAIS BOYAL. 121 

literature, politics, and even pliiloBopliy ; must we add, that 
this great man, in order to purchase a few books, used to 
embroider officers' waistcoats, and sell them in a coffee-house.* 
The trifling pay of a soldier was, under one pretence or other, 
absorbed by deductions, which the officers squandered away 
among themselves. t 

The insurrection of the French Guards was not a pretorian 
mutiny, a brutal riot of the soldiery, — ^it came in support of 
the declarations of the electors and the people. That truly 
French troop, Parisian in a great measure, followed the lead of 
Paris, followed the law, the living law, — ^the National Assembly* 

They arrived in the Palais Royal, saluted, pressed, embraced, 
and almost stifled by the crowd. The soldier, 'that true paria 
of the ancient monarchy, so ill-treated by the nobles, is 
welcomed by the people. And what is he, under his uniform, 
but the very people ? Two brothers have met each other, the 
soldier and the citizen, two children of the same mother ; they 
fall into each other's arms, ajid burst into tears. 

Hatred and party-spirit have vilified all that, disfigured those 
grand scenes, and soUed the page of history, at pleasure. A 
vast importance has been attached to this or that ridiculous 
anecdote ; a worthy amusement for petty minds I All these 
immense commotions they have attributed to some miserable, 
insignificant causes. Paltry fools ! try to explain by a straw, 
washed away by the waves, the agitation of the ocean. 

No : those movements were those of a whole people, true, 
sincere, immense, and unanimous ; France had her share in 
them, and so had Paris ; all men, (each in his own degree,) 
acted, some with their hands and voices, others with their 
minds, with their fervent wishes, from the depths of their hearts. 

But why do I say France ? It would be more true to say 
the world. An envious enemy, a Genevese, imbued with every 
English prejudice, cannot help avowing, that at that decisive 
moment, the whole world was looking on, observing with uneasy 
sympathy the march of our Revolution, and feeling that France 
was doing, at her own risk and peril, the business of mankind. J 

Arthur Young, an English agriculturist, a positive, special 

* RouBselin, Fie de ffoehe, i., 20. 

i* The single regiment of Beauce believed it was cheated of the sum of 
240,727 francs. X ^* Domont, Sotwmirs,^, 135. 



122 DTTBiaUES OF THE OBLEAKB PABTT. 

man, who had, wininaieaHj enough, come to Franoe, to otvdy 
its modes of agrienltiire, ct Ba<^ a moment, is aBtomshad at 
the deep sikiiee reigniDg about Paris ; no ooaeh, har^ a 
man. The teirible agttati<Hi concentrating ererything withm, 
made a desert of ail beyond. He enters ; the tomolt frighteiui 
him ; he traverses, in astonishment, that noisy capital. He is 
taken to the Palais Royal, the centre of the conflagration, the 
burning focas of the furnace. Ten thousand men were speak- 
ing at once ; ten thousand lights in the windows ; it was a day 
of yietory for the people ; fire-works were let off, and bonfires 
made. Dacsled and confounded by that moving Babel, he 
hastily retires. Yet the lively and excessive emotion of that 
people, united in one common thought, soon gains upon the 
traveller ; he gradually becomes associated, without even 
being aware of his change of sentiments, to the hopes of 
liberty ; the Ihigiishman prays for France.* 

All men forgot themselves. The place, that strange place 
where the scene was passing, seemed, at such moments, to 
forget its^. The Palais Royal was no longer the Palais 
Royal. Vice, in the grandeur of so sincere a passion, in the 
heat of enthusiasm, became pure for an instant. The most 
degraded raised their heads, and gazed at the ^y ; their past 
life, like a bad dream, was gone, at least for a day ; they 
could not be <rirtDOus, but they felt themselves heroic, in the 
name of the liberties of the world ! Friends of the people, 
brothers to one another, having no longer any seflfish feeling, 
and quite ready to share everything. 

That there were interested agitators in that muHitnde, can- 
not be doubted. The minority of the nobility, ambitious men, 
fond of nrase, such as Lameth and Buport, worked upon the 
people by their pamjdilets and agents. Others, still worse, 
joined them. All that took place, we must say, beneath die 
windows of the Duke of Oiieans, before the eyes of tiiat 
inlriguing, greedy, polluted court. Alas ! who would not pity 
our RevcSution ? That ingenuous, dieinterested, sublime move- 
ment, ^ied and overlooked by these who hoped one day or 
other to turn it to their advantage ! 

* Of course mtb many ezoeptiona, and on condition that France adopts the 
constitution of England. Arthur Youug^s Trayels, voL i., jpcunnu 



INnaOUES OF THE OBUULNB FliKET« 123 

Let UB l«ok at liiOBe windowB. There I see diskitiedj a 
pope womsa aad a wicked man. These «re Virtue and Yice^ 
tbe king's ceimsellorB, Madame de OenliB and ChodezioB id» 
Lades. The parts ore distinetilj nefiarated. In Ihat hmam^ 
where eTeEything is fabe, Virtue is represested bj Madame de 
Ge&hs, — ^hard-keartedness and mock senailMlity, a tofrent of 
tears and ink, the quackery of a model ednett(io&, jmd tk« 
eonstant exhiliitioii of the pretty Pismela.* On thiB side of the 
paikee is the phiknthropic hureau, where charity is organised 
with much ostentation on the eve of dteotions.i' 

The time has gone by wlien~ ikke jock^-prinoe used to lay a 
wager after supper to run stark naked from Parn to Bagatelle. 
He is now the statesman before eveiytibing e^se, the head of 
a party ; his mistresses will have it so. They hare fondly 
wished for two things, — a good law for divoroes, and a change 
of . dynasty^ The political ocnfidant of the prince is tlwt 
gloomy taciturn man^ who seems to aay : *' I oansfore, we 
conspire." That mystmous Ladoa who, by his little book. 
Liaisons dangereusssy flatters himself that he has caused the 
romantic to pass from ^e to crime, and insiaiNKtes therein 
that flagitious gallantly is a useful prelude to political Tillany. 
That is the name he covets of all others, jmd Ihnt part he acta 
to perfection. Many, in order to flatter the prmoe, say: 
*^ Lados is a villain.'' 

It was not easy, however, to make a leader of this Buke ttf 
Orleans ; he was broken down at that period, wasted in body 
and heart, and of very weak mind. Swindlers made him fabri- 
eate geld in the garrets of the PalaiB £oyal, and tiiey had 
made Imn acquainted wi<h the devil. | 

* £T«n w> fiff ftB to Bend hex:, on honebttdk, into the middle of the riot, 
followed by a demesticin the Orleans livery. — Read the ^Sbtn^eniftf (i., p. 189,) 
of Madame Lebrun, who was a witness of this scene. 

+ Brissot worked there some time. — Wimoires, ii., p. 430. 

t The prince made gold, as it is ever made, wHfa gold. Hiomtrme, among 
other ingfedtents, it wna necessary to have a hmnan skeleton that had been 
buried so many years and days. They sought among such dead bodies as wen 
known, and it so happened that Pascal exactly fulfilled the conditionarequired. 
They bribed the keepers of Saint Etienne-du-Mont, and poor Pascal was 
handed over to Ute crucibles of the Palais ^ftoyal. Suck, at least, is the 
aceouDt of a person, itko, ksxring long JEnnd wiih Madamedefifeafis, received 
ftasfi her this stiange anecdote. 



124 INTBIGUEB OF THE OKLEANS FABTT, 

Another diAcultj was, that this prince, besides all hia 
acquired vices, possessed a natural one, both fundamental and 
durable, which does not cease with exhaustion, like the others, 
but remains faithful to its master: I mean avarice. ^'I would 
give," he would saj, '* public opinion for a six-franc piece/* 
This was not an idle word. He had put it well in practice, 
when, in spite of public clamour, he built the Palais Royal. 

His political advisers were not skilful enough to raise him 
from such abasement. Thej caused him to commit more than 
one false and imprudent step. 

In 1788, Madame de Oenlis' brother, a jouih without any 
other title than that of oflEicer in the house of Orleans, writes 
to the king, to ask nothing less than to be prime minister, — ^to 
get the place of Necker or Turgot ; he will undertake to re- 
establish in a moment the finances of the monarchy. The 
Duke of Orleans allows himself to be the bearer of the 
incredible missive, hands it to the king, recommends it, and 
becomes the laughing-stock of the court. 

The sage counsellors of the prince had hoped thus to bring 
the government quietly into his hands. Deceived in their 
hopes, they acted more openly, endeavoured to make a Guise 
a Cromwdl, and courted the people. There, also, they met 
with great difficulties. All were not dupes ; the city of 
Orleans did not elect the prince ; and, by way of retaliation, 
he unceremoniously withdrew from it the benefits by which 
he had expected to purchase his election. 

And yet nothing had been spared, neither money nor intrigue. 
Those who had the management of the business had had the 
precaution to attach a whole pamphlet of Sieyes to the electoral 
instructions which the duke sent into his domains, and thus 
to place their master under the name and patronage of that 
great thinker, then so popular, who however had no kind of 
connection with the Duke of Orleans. 

When the Commons took the decisive step of assuming the 
title of Natumal Assembly, the Duke of Orleans was informed 
that the time was come to show himself, to speak and act, and 
that a leader of a party could not remain mute. They pre- 
vailed upon him at least to read a speech of some four lines to 
engage the nobility to unite with the Third Estate. He did so ; 
but whilst reading, his heart failed him, and he fainted. On 



INTRIGUES OF THE ORLEANS FARTT« 125 

opening His yest, they saw that, in the dread of being assassin 
nated by the court, this over-prudent prince used to wear, by 
way of cuirass, five or six waistcoats.* 

The day the coup (Titat failed (June 23), the duke belieyed 
the king lost, and himself king on the morrow, or next day ; 
he could not conceal his joy.t The terrible fermentation in 
Paris on that Evening and the next morning, sufficiently 
announced that a vast insurrection would burst forth. On the 
25th, the minority of the nobility, perceiving that they must 
decline in importance if Paris should be the first to begin, 
went, with the Duke of Orleans at their head, to join the Com- 
mons. The prince's man, Sillery, the convenient- husband 
of Madame de Genlis, pronounced, in the name of all, an ill- 
concocted discourse, such as might have been made by a 
mediator, an accepted arbiter between the king and the people : 
'< Let us never lose sight of the respect that we owe to the best 
of kings. He offers us peace ; can we refuse to accept it ?'' 
&c. In the evening, great was the rejoicing in Paris for this 
imion of the noble friends of the people. An address to the 
assembly was lying at the Cafg de Foy ;, everybody signed it, 
as many as three thousand persons, in haste, and most of them 
without reading it* That article, drawn by an able hand, con- 
tained one strange word respecting the Duke of Orleans : 
" This Prince, the object of public veneration,'' Such a word, 
for such a man, seemed cruelly derisive ; an enemy would not 
have been more bitter. The duke's awkward agents belieyed 
apparently that the boldest eulogium would also be the best paid. 

Thank God ! the grandeur, &e immensity of the movement^ 
spared the Revolution that unworthy mediator. Ever since 
the 25th, the excitement was so unanimous, and the concord so 
powerful, that the agitators themselves ; hurried along by it, 
were obliged to abandon every pretension of directing it. Paris 
led the leaders. The Catalines of the saloons and cafes had 
only to follow in its train. An authority was suddenly found 
to be in Paris, which had been supposed to be without any chief 
or guide, the assembly of the electors. On the other hand, as 
the French Guards began to declare themselves, it was easy to 

• Ferri^res, i., p. 52. 

i* Arthur Young, who was dining with him and other dqiuties, was shocked 
at seeing him laughing in his sleeve. 



126 THE .FBOPLE BSI<]nrBR THE ltKa»CR OUARDS. 

fooee tiiai tlie new anthonfy weold not be windng in fosoe. 
To flam up all in one word, these anzioua meditttors noght 
remain quiet ; if the assembly wadi a prisoner at Vemaille^ it 
had its asylum here, in the very heart of FzafBoa,. and, if neces- 
sacy, Paris for aa army. 

The oomrt,. trembling with anger and ind^ation, and still 
Bn»» with fear,, decided, on the eyening of tbe 26th» to gEBut 
the lewunion of the ordera. The king invited the- noMity to ii, 
and in oeder to reaerre to himself a means of protesting agmnat 
atf that was being done, the Coimt d'Artoia waA made to write 
thoie impradenl words (then untme) : ^' The king's life ia in 
dasgeE." 

Chk the 27tii, therefore, the long-expeeted unioB ai leaigth 
took plaee. The rejoicing at Y ersailles waa ezeeaaiye, fooliBk, 
and ui^govemable. The people made bon£iffes^ and shouted 
** Vine k^ Bmnef " The queen was obliged to appear in the 
balcony. The crowd then asked her to show them the dauphin, 
as a token of eomplete reconeihatioa and ohLmon. She ceiir 
sented again, and re-appeared widt her child* ^le did baft, so 
much the more despise that ereduleua crowd ; and she senifar 
trails. 

She had taken no part in the union o£ the ordera. And eeiJd 
it truly be called & union ? They were still enemies,, theo^ 
now asaembled in the selfiaame hall, brought into cantad, and 
Iwding at one anotho*. The deigy had made their ezpresa 
restrietioBS. The protest ci the nqblea were bronght for- 
ward one by one, like so many challaiges, and engrossed the 
whole time of the Assraibly ; such as came, did not condescend 
to sit, but wandered about, or stood gazing like shn^ specta^ 
tonk They did sit, but elsewhere, — in a sKetii^ of their own. 
Many had said that they were leayiag, but atill remaaaed at 
YeraailleB ; endaitly, they were waiting. 

The i^sembly was wasting time. The lawyers, whe con^* 
posed the mn^onty, spoke frequently and at great kogth^ 
trusting too much to language. According to themv if tiie eon> 
stitutioa were bat made, eT»ything was sayed. As if a 
eonstitutbn can be anything with a goyemment eeaifcinaally 
conspiring ! A paper liberty, written or verbal, whilst despotism 
possesses the power and the sword I This is nonsense,. — 
absurdity ! 



THE PEOPLE MOJYBB Tiffl FRENCH GUARDS. 127 

But neither the court nor P%rift desired any compromise* 
Sverythiiig was inclining towards open "^didenee* The military 
gentlemen of the court were impatient to act. M, Du Ch^telet, 
the colonel of the French Guards, had already sent to the 
Abbaye eleven of those soldiers who had sworn to obey no 
orders eom.trary to these of the Assembly. Neith^ did he st(^ 
there. He wanted to remove them from the military prison, 
and send them to the one for thieves, to that horrible sink, 
gaol and hospital at once, which subjected to the sane lash the 
galley-slaves aitd the vmerieMj^ The terrible ease of Latude. 
east there to die,^ had revealed Bic^tre, — thrown the first 
light upon it ; and a recent book, by Mirabeau, had filled every 
hMurt with disgust and every mind with tenor.f And it was 
there they were going to imprison men whose greatest oienee 
was to wish to be only the soldiers of the law. 

The vevy day they wwe to be transferred to BiedtBe, the 
news reached the Palais Royal. , A young num standing upon 
a ehair, called out, '' To the Abbaye I and let us deliver those 
who would not fire upon the people ! ' ' Soldiers e£fer themselves; 
but the citizens thank them, aobd go alone. The crowd increases 
on the road, and is jmned by woria](ien with strong iron bars. 
At the Abbaye, they we^e four thousand in number. They 
burst open the wicket, and break down the large inside doors 
with thdbr maUets, axes, and crow-bMrs. The victims are 
liberated. As they were going out, they met a body of hussars 
and dragoons, who were ^arriving full gallop with their swwds 
drawn. The people rush at thair bridles; an ezplanatioa 
ensues ; the soldiers will not massacre the soldiers' dc^verers ; 
they sheathe their swords, and take off their helifiets ; wine is 
brought ; and they all drii^ together to the king and the nation. 

Everybody in the prison was set at liberty at the same time* 
The erowd conduct their ccmquest home» — to the Palais RoyaL 
Among the prisoners delivered, they carried off an old soldier 
who had been rotting many years in the Abbaye, and was no 

* Will it be believed tbat in 1790, tbey still executed at Bic^tre tbe old: 
barbarouB ordinances which prescribed that the medical treatment of such pa- 
tients should begin by a flagellation P The celebrated doctor CuUorier stated 
the fiict to one of my friends. 

t ObterwUioni d^un An^ie 9ur Bk^ire, trad. e$ €Oinmm §ie a per 
Mira^eaUf 1788. 



128 THE PEOPLE DELIYEB THE PRENCH 6UABDS. 

longer able to walk. The poor fellow, who had so long been ac- 
customed to receire nothing hut ill-treatment, was overpowered 
bj his emotion : ''I shall die, gentlemen," said he, ** so much 
kindness will kiU ine ! " 

There was only one great criminal among them, and he was 
taken back to prison. All the others, citizens, soldiers, and 
prisoners, forming an immense procession, arrive at the Palais 
Royal. There they place a table in the garden, and make them 
all sit down. The difficulty was to lodge them. They house 
them for the night in the ThSatre des Varies, and mount 
guard at the door. The next morning, they were located in 
an hotel, under the arcades, and paid for and fed by the people. 
All night, either side of Paris had been illuminated, the neigh- 
bourhood of the Abbaye and the Palais Royal. Citizens, work- 
men, rich and poor, dragoons, hussars, and French Guards, sM 
walked about together, and no other noise was heard but the 
shouts of " Vive la nation ! " They all gave themselves up to the 
transports of that fraternal imion, to their dawning confidence 
in the birth of liberty. 

Early in the morning, the young men were at VersaiUes, at 
the doors of the Assembly. There, everything wore a freezing* 
aspect. A military insurrection and a prison broken open, 
appeared, at Versailles, most ill-omened. Mirabeau, avoiding 
the chief question, proposed an address to the Parisians, to 
advise them to be onlerly. They at length came to the con- 
clusion (not very comfortable for those who claimed the inter- 
ference of the Assembly) of declaring that the affair belonged 
to nobody but the king, and all they could do was to implore 
his clemency. 

This was on the 1st of July. On the 2nd, the king wrote, — 
not to the Assembly, but to the Archbishop of Paris, — ^that if the 
eulprits returned to prison, he might pardon them. The crowd 
Considered this promise so unsatisfactory, that they repaired to 
the Hotel-de-Ville and demanded of the electors what they were 
to believe. The latter hesitated a long time ; but the crowd 
insisted ; and was increasing every instant. An hour after 
midnight, the electors promise to go on the morrow to 
Versailles, and not to return mthout tite pardon. Trusting to 
their word, the liberated again returned to prison, and were 
soon enlarged. 




PARIS ASKS PERMISSION TO ARM. 129 

This was not a state of peace. Paris was surrounded by 
war : all the foreign troops had arrived. The old Marshal De 
Broglie, that Hercides and Achilles of the old monarchy, had 
been called to command them. The queen had sent for 
Breteuily her confidential man, the ex-ambassador at Vienna, 
a valiant penman, but who, for noise and bravado, was equal 
to any swordsman. '' His big manly voice sounded like energy; 
he used to step heavily and stamp with his foot, as if he woidd 
conjure an army out of the earth." 

All this warlike preparation At length aroused the Assembly. 
Mirabeau, who had read on the 27th an address for peace, 
without being listened to, now proposed a new one for the 
removal of the troops ; that sonorous and harmonious speech, 
extremely flattering for the king, was very much relished by 
the Assembly. The best thing it contained, a demand for a 
citizen guard, was the only part they suppressed.^ 

The Paris electors, who had been the first to make this 
request now rejected by the Assembly, resumed it energetically 
on the 10th of July. Garra, in a very abstract dissertation, in 
the manner of Siey^s, set forth the right of the Commune, — 
an imprescriptible right, and, said he, even anterior to that of 
the monarchy, which right specially comprehends that of self- 
protection. Bonneville demanded, in his own name, and in 
that of his friend Fauchet, that they should pass on from theory 
to practice, and think of constituting themselves as a com- 
mune, preserving provUionally the pretended municipal body. 
Oharton wished moreover the sixty districts to be assembled 
again, their decisions to be transmitted to the National As- 
sembly, and a correspondence to he formed with the chief citicM 
of the kingdom. All these bold motions were made in the 
great hall of Saint- Jean, in the Hotel de Ville, in presence of 
an immense multitude. Paris seemed to crowd fondly about 
this authority which it had created, and to trust to no other ; it 
wanted to obtain from it the permission to organize and arm 
itself, and thus to work out its own salvation. 

* It is not unlikely that the Duke of Orleans, seeing that his mediation • 
vas by no means solicited, urged Mirabeau to speak, in order to perplex the 
court, before it had completed its preparations for vm. M. Droz assigns to 
thu period the first connexion of Mirabeau Tvith Lados, and the money he 
received from him. 

K 



130 iTECKER sisms&sx). 

The weakness of tlie National Assembly was not calculated 
to give it comfort. On the 11th of Julj it had reoeired the 
king's answer to the address, and remained satisfied with it. 
Yet, whal was the answer ? That the troops were there to secure 
the liberty of the Assembly ; but that, if they gare mnbrage, 
the king would tnmsfbr it to Noyon or Soissons ; that is, would 
place it between two or three divisions of the army. Mirabean 
could not prevail on them to innst on the troops being removed. 
It was evident that the junctioa of the five hnadred depotieB of 
the ckigy and nobility had. enervated the Assembly*. It set 
the grand bunness aside, and gave its attentioB ter a dedaiar 
tion of the rights of man presented by Lafayette. 
. One of the moderate,, most moderate members, the pldlan^ 
tkropic GuiUotin, went to Paris on purpose to communiestethift 
state of tranqoillity to the assembly of the electors.. Thai hcmest 
man, doubtless deceived, assured them that everytiung waa 
going on prosperondy, and that M. Necker wa» stranger than 
even. That excellent news was hailed with loud applanse, and 
the deetORi, no less duped than* the Aasembly, amused them- 
selves inrlike nnamoD with admiring the dedication, of rights 
which, by gsed fortune, was also just brought fisom Yer- 
saiUes. Thitt veiy day, whilst honest Guillotin. was speak- 
ing, IL Noeker, dismissed^ was siieady Tery far. on his eomL to 
Bmsselsr 

When Neoker received the order to depart immediately, it 
vras three o'clock, «nd he was sitting down to table. Tha poor 
man, who always so tenderly embraced the ministry, and never 
left it without weeping, contrived however to reafcraiB hb cdhk 
tion before his guests, and to keep his conntenaxKe. A£ker 
dinner he d^arted with his mie, without even giving notice to 
his daughter, and took the nearest way out of the country, — 
the road to the Netheriands. The queen's party, siattneM to 
rdate, were anxious te have him arrested ; they were so little 
aeqaaintod idAi Necker, ihat ^ey were afraid ho m^ht dis- 
obey the king, and throw himself into Paris. 

MM. de Broglie and de Breteuil, the first day they were 
summoned, had themselves been frightened to see the dangers 
into which they were running; Broglie was unwilling that 
Necker should be s^t away. Breteuil is said to have ex- 
claimed : *' Give us then a hundred thousand men and a 



THE G0T7RT PREPARES EOR WAR. 131 

hundred millions.'* '* You shall have them," said the queen. 
And they set ahout secretly fabricating paper-money.* 

M. de Broglie, taken unawares, stooping breath his burden 
of seventy-one years, bustled about but did nothing. Orders 
and counter-orders flew to and fro. His mansion was the head- 
quarters, full of scribes, ordinances, and aides-de-camp, ready 
to mount on horse-baok. " They made out a list of genenJ. 
officers and drew up an order of battle.."t 

The military authorities were not too well agreed among 
themselyes. There were no less than three commanders. 
Broglie, who was about to be minister, Fuys^gur, who was so 
still, and lastly Besenval, who had had for eight years the 
command of the provinces of the interior, and to whom they 
intimated' unceremoniously that he would have to obey the 
old marshal. Besenval explained to him the dangerous posi- 
tion of things, and that they were not en mmpagne^ but before 
a city of eight hundred thousand souls in a state of feverish 
ezcitementNi> Broglie would not listen to him^ Strong in his 
conceit of his Seven< Years' War, being acquainted with nothing 
but soldienhand physical force, full of contempt for oitiEens, he 
felt perfectly convinced that at the mere sight of an uniform the 
people would run away. He did not consider it necessary- to 
send titwps to Paris; he merely surrounded it with foreign 
regimentS) being quite unconcerned about thus inoreasmg l£e 
popular excitement. All those German soldiers presented the 
appearance of a Swiss or an Austrian invasion. The outlandish 
namee of the regiments sounded harsh to the ear: Royal- 
Cravste was at €harenton, Reinach and Diesbach at Sevres, 
Nassau at Versailles, Salis-Samade at Issy, the hussars of 
Bereheny at the Militaiy School ; at o^er stations were Oha- 
teauvieux, Esterazy, Roemer, <Scc. 

The Bastille, sufficiently defended by its thick walls, had 
just received a reinforcement of Swiss soldiers. It had ammu- 
nition and a monstrous quantity of gunpowder, enough te blow 
up the town. The cannon, mounted en batterte upon the towers 
ever since the 30th of June, frowned upon Paris, and ready - 
loaded, thrust their menacing jaws between the battlements. 

* " Several of my colleagues told me they bad seen printed ones.^ — BaiUy, i., 
pp. 395, 331. 

f Becenval, ii., 359. 

x2 



132 



CHAPTER VI. 

INSURRECTION OP PARIS. 

Danger of Paris. — Explosion of Paris, July 12th, 1789. — Inaction of Ver- 
sailles. — ^Provocation of the Troops ; Paris arms. — The National Assembly 
applies in yain to the King, July 13th. — The Electors of Paris authorise 
the People to arm.— Organisation of the Citizen Guard. — Hesitation of 
the Electors.— The People seize on the^ Powder Magazines and search 
for Guns. — Security of the Court. 

Fbom the 23rd of June to the 12th of July, from the king's, 
menace to the outbreak of the people, there was a strange 
pause. It was, says an observer of those days, a stormy, heavy, 
gloomy time, like a feverish, painful dream, full of illusions and 
anxiety. There were false alarms, false news, and all sorts of 
fable;3 and inventions. People knew, but nothing for certain. 
They wished to account for and guess at everything. Profound 
causes were discovered even in indifferent things. Partial 
risings began, without any author or project, of their own 
accord, from a general fund of distrust and suUen anger. The 
ground was burning, and as if undermined ; and, undemeath» 
you might hear already the grumbling of the volcano. 

We have seen that, at the very first assembly of the electors, 
Bonneville had cried: "To arms!" — a strange cry in that 
assembly of the notables of Paris, and which expired of itself. 
Many were indignant, others smiled, and one of them said pro- 
phetically : '* Young man, postpone your motion for a fortnight. " 

To arms ? What, against a ready organised army at the . 
saies ? To arms ? when that army could so easily fambh the . 
iHj. 'ffhen famine was ali«ady be^ning to be felt, and when 
the crowd was hourly growing larger at the doors of the bakers. 
The poor of the neighbouring countiy were flocking to town by 
every road, wan and ragged, leaning on their long walking- 
staflia. A mass of twenty thousand beggars, employed at 
Montmartre, was suspended over the town ; and if Paris made 
a movement, this other army might come down. A few had 
already attempted to bum and pillage the barrier-houses. 

It was almost certain that the court would strike the first 



EXPLOSION OF PABIS. 133 

blow. It was necessary for it to compel the king to lay aside 
his scruples, his hankering for peace, and do away at once with 
every compromise. To effect this it was necessary to conquer. 

Young officers in the hussars, such as Sombreuil and Polig- 
nac, went even into the Palais Royal to defy the crowd, and 
left it sword in hand. Eyidently, the court fancied itself too 
strong ; it wished for violence.* 

On Sunday morning, July 12th, nobody at Paris, up to 10 
o'clock, had yet heard of Necker's dismissal. The first who 
spoke of it in the Palais Royal was called an aristocrat, and 
insulted. But the news is confirmed ; it spreads ; and so 
does the fury of the people. It was then noon, and the can- 
non of the Palais Royal was fired. ** It is impossible," says 
the Ami du Rot, ** to express the gloomy feeling of terror 
which pervaded every soul on hearing that report." A young 
man, Gamille Desmoulins, rushed from the Caf6 de Foy, leaped 
upon a table, drew a sword, and showed a pistol : — ** To 
arms ! " cried he ; " the Germans in the Champ de Mars will 
enter Paris to-night, to butcher the inhabitants ! Let us hoist 
a cockade ! " He tore down a leaf from a tree, and stuck it 
in his hat : everybody followed his example ; and the trees 
were stripped of their leaves. 

** No theatres ! no dancing ! This is a day of mourning ! " 
They go and fetch, from a collection of wax-figures, a bust of 
Necker ; others, ever at hand to seize the opportunity, add 
one of the Duke of Orleans. They cover them with crape, and 
carry them through Paris : the procession, armed with staves, 
swords, pistols, and hatchets, proceeds first up the Rue Riche- 
lieu, then turning the boulevard, and the streets St. Martin, 
Saint-Denis, and Saint-Honor6, arrives at ihe Place Yen- 
dome. There, in front of the hotels of the farmers of the 
revenue, a detachment of dragoons was waiting for the people ; 
it charged them, put them to flight, and destroyed their Necker; 
one of the French guards, unarmed, stood his ground, and was 
killed. 

* <* Take care,'* said Doctor Marat, a philanthropic physician, in one of the 
innnmerahle pamphlets of the day, ** take care, consider what would he the 
fatal consequences of a seditious movement. If you are so unfortunate as to 
engage in it, you are treated as rebels ; blood flows," &c. This prudence was 
con^icuous in many people. 



134 nucnoK of tbbsahaes. 

The bazriers, which were scarcely fiiiiBhed,-^ho8e o^pceMiye 
little bastiUeB of the farmers of the reyenue,— ^were attaokecL 
everywhere on that same Sunday, by the people, and but ill- 
defended by the troops, who however killed a few persons. 
They were burnt during the n%ht. 

The court, so near Paris,, could not be ignorant of what was 
passing. It remained motionless, and sent neither orders nor 
troops. Apparently, it was waiting till the disterbance, increas- 
ing to rebellion and war, should give it what the Reveillon riot 
(too «OQn appeased) had not been able to give-^ft specious pre- 
text for dissolving the Assembly. Therefore, it allowed Paris 
to go on doing mischief at pleasure. It guarded well Ver- 
sailles, the bridges of Sevres and fiaint-Cloud, -eat off all 
communication, and believed itself sure of being able, if things 
oame to the worst, to famish the city of Paris. As for itself, 
surrounded by troops, of which two-thirds were €lennan, what 
had it to fear ? Nothing, but to lose France. 

The minister of Paris (there was one still) remained at Yer- 
.sailles. The other authorities, the lieutenant of police, Fles- 
aellefithe provost, and Berthier the intendant, appeared eq^ially 
inactive. Flessdles, summoned to court, was unable to go 
there ; but it is likely he received instructions.* 

Beeenval, the commander, without any responsibility, since 
he could act ouly hj the orders of Broglie, remained idly at 
the unitary SdiooL fie durst not make use of the French 
guards, and kept them confined. . But he had several detach- 
ments of different corps, and three disposable regiments, one 
of Swiss, and two of Geranan ca^ralry. Towards the after- 
noon, seeing the -riot increasing, he posted his Swiss in the 
Champg-M^aeles with four pieces of cannon, and drew «p his 
cavaliy on the Place Louis XY. 

Before evening, before the hour at which peof^ return h<Nne 
on Sunday, the crowd was coming back by the Ghamps-ElystloB, 
and filling the gardens of the Tuileries ; they were, for the 
most part, quiet people taking their walk, families who wanted 
to return home early ** because there had been disturbances." 
However, the sight of those German soldiers, drawn up in 

* As we leam from the king himself. See his first rq>l7 (July 14th) to 
the National Assembly. 



PARIS $atm»^ , lis 

order of battle on tke spot, necessarilj excited some indigna- 
tion. S<»ae of the men abuaed them, and ehildren threw 
stones.* Then Besenval, fearing at length lest he ^ould be 
reproached at YersaHles with having done nothing, gave the 
insensate, barbarous order, so like his thoughtlessness, to drive 
the people f(»rward with the dragoons. Thej could not move 
in that dense orowd without trampling on some of them. Their 
colonel, prinee of Lambesc, entered the Tuileries, at first at a 
alow pace. He was stopped bj a barricade of chairs ; and 
beiog aasaiied by a shower of bottles and stones, he fired upon 
the crowd. The women shriieked, and the men tried to shut 
the gsAea behind the prinee. He had ihe presence of naind to 
retircu Qne man was thrown down and trampled upon ; and 
.an old man whilst trying to escape was grievously wounded. 

The crowd, rushing out of the Tuileries, with exclamations 
4)f horror and indignaiion, filled Paris with the account of this 
brutality, of those Germans driving their horses against women 
and duldjpeoi, and e^i^en the old man wounded, so they said^ by 
the hand of ihe prince himself. Then they run to ^e gun- 
fimiths and take whatever they .find. They hasten also to the 
Hdtel de Yille to demand arms and xing the alaxm-beU. No 
municipal magistrate was at his post. A few electors, of their 
own ^ood-^will, repaired thither about six in the evening, 
4)ocupied their resi^ ved seats in the great hall, and tried to caka 
ihe multitude. But b^iind that crowd, already ctntered, there 
WAS Another in the square, shouting ** Arms ! '* who believed 
the town possessed a secret arseiiAl, and were < threatening to 
burn everything. They overpowered the guard, invaded the 
hall, pushed down the barriers, and pressed the electors as far 
as their bureau. Then they related to them a thousand 
aecounts At onoe of what has just happened. The electors 
could not refuse the arms of the city guards ; but the crowd 

* If there hud been any pistols fixed by the people, or any dragoons wounded, 
as Besenval has stated, Deseze, his very clever defender, would not have &iled 
to make the most of it in his •Observationa ntr U rapport tfwcumtion. See 
ibis report m the Sistovpe Pai^hmentairey iv., p. 69 ; and Des^e, at the end 
of Besenval, it, p. 369. Who is to be believed, Deseze, who pretends that 
Betenval gwe j» ordoriy or Besenval, who conliBsaeB before his judges that he 
hmd a strong deaire to drive away that crowds and that he gave orders to 
charge ? — Mist, ParLj ii., p. 89. 



136 THB AaSBMBLT APPLIES TO THE KING IN TAIN. 

had sought, found, and taken them ; and already a man in his 
shirt, without either shoes or stockings, had taken the place 
of the sentinel, and with his gun on his shoulder was resdutelj 
mounting guard at the door of the hall.'*^ 

The electors declined the responsihilitj of authorising the 
insurrection. Thej only granted the convocation of the 
districts, and sent a few of &eir friends '* to the posts of the 
armed citizens, to entreat them, in the name of their natire 
land, to suspend riotous meetmgs and acts of riolence." Thej 
had hegun that evening in a very serious manner. Some 
French guards having escaped from their harracks, formed m 
the Palais Royal, marched against the Germans, and av^iged 
their comrade. They killed three of the cavalry on the bauli^ 
vard, and then marched to the Place Louis XV., which thej 
found evacuated. 

On Monday, July 13th, Guillotin the deputy, with two 
electors, went to Versailles, and entreated the Assemhly to 
*' concur in estahlishing a citizen guard." They gave a 
terrihle description of the crisis of Paris. The Assemhly 
voted two deputations, one to the king, the other to the city. 
That to the king obtained from him only a cold unsatisfactory 
answer, and a very strange one when blood was flowing : 
That he could make no alterations in the measures he had 
taken, that he was the only judge of their necessities, and 
that the presence of the deputies at Paris could do no good. 
The indignant Assembly decreed : — 1st, that M. Keeker bore 
with him the regret of the nation ; 2ndly, that it insisted on 
the removal of the troops ; 3rdly, that not only the ministers, 
but the king's counsellors, of whatever rank they might be, were 
personally responsible for the present misfortunes ; 4thly, that 
no power had the right to pronounce the infamous word "bank- 
ruptcy." The third article sufficiently designated the queen 
and the princes, and the last branded them with reproach. 
The Assembly thus resumed its noble attitude ; unarmed in the 
middle of the troops, without any other support than the law» 
threatened that very evening to be dispersed or made away 

* Prock- Verbal deg J^lecteurSy i., p. 180. Compare Dussaulz, (Euvre des 
Sept Jours, Dussaulx, who wrote some time after, often inverts the order or 
the facts. 



THE ELEGTOBS AUTHORISE THE PEOPLE TO ABM. 137 

with, it yet bravely branded its enemies on their brow with 
their true name : bankrupts.* 

After that vote, the Assembly had but one asylum — ^the 
Assembly itself, the room it occupied ; beyond that, it had not 
an inch of ground in the world ; not one of its members durst 
any longer sleep at home. It feared also lest the court should 
seize upon its archives. On the preceding evening, Sunday, 
6r6goire, one of the secretaries, had folded up, sealed, and 
bidden all the papers in a house at yer6aille8.t 

On Monday he presided, per interim, and sustained by his 
courage the weak-hearted, by reminding them of the Tennis- 
Gourt, and the words of the Roman : ** Fearless amid the crush 
of worlds." (Impavidum ferient ruinie.) 

The sitting was declared permanent, and it continued for 
seventy-two hours. M. La&yette, who had contributed not a 
little to the vigorous decree, was named vice-president. 

Meanwhile Paris was in the utmost anxiety. The Fauboui^ 
Saint-Honore expected every moment to see the troops enter. 
In spite of the efforts of the electors, who ran about all night to 
make the people lay down their arms, everybody was arming ; 
nobody was disposed to receive the Croats and the Hungarian 
hussars peaceably, and to carry the keys to the queen. As 
early as six o'clock on Monday morning, all the bcdls in every 
Church sounding alarm, a few electors repaired to the H6tel- 
de-Ville, found the crowd already assembled, and sent it off to 
the different districts. At eight o'clock, seeing the people were 
in earnest, they affirmed that the citizen guard was authorised, 
which was not yet the case. The people were perpetually 
shouting for arms. To which the electors reply : If the town 
has any, they can only be obtained through the mayor. ** Well 
then," cried they, " send for him ! " 

The mayor, or provost, Flesselles, was on that day summoned 
to Versailles by the king, and to the Hdtel-de-Yille by the 
people. Whether he durst not refuse the summons of the crowd, 
or thought he could better serve the King at Paris, he went to 
the Hdtel-de-Ville, was applauded in La Grdve, and said in a 

* They were going to make payments with a paper-money, without any 
other guarantee than the eignatuije of an iiuolvent king. See amte, p. 131. 
f M^moire8 de Or^goire, i., p. 382. 



138 QBOASI8AZION OF THE CITIZEN GUABD. 

fatherly tone : " You diall be Batiafied, my fneadfi, I am your 
father." He declared in the hall that he would preside only 
by eleclioa of the pec^e. Thereupon, a fresh burst of en- 
thusiasm. 

Though there was as yet no Parisian army, they were^already 
discufisiqg who should be its general. The American Moreau 
de Saint-Mery, the president ci the electors, pomted to a bust 
of Lafayette, and that name waa received with applause. Others 
proposed and obtained that the command shoidd be offered to 
the Duke d'Aumont, who demanded twenty-four hours for 
reflection, and then refused. The second in command was the 
Marquis de la Salle, a well-tried soldi^, a patriotic writer, full 
of devotion and probity. 

All this was wasting time, and the crowd was in a fever of 
impatience ; it was in a hurry to be armed, and not without 
reason. The beggars of Montmartre, throwing away their 
spades, came down upon the town ; crowds of unknown 
vagrants were prowling about. The frightful misery of the 
xunJ districts had poured, from all sides, thmr starving popula- 
tions towards Paris : it was peopled by famine. 

That same morning, on a report that there was some com at 
Saint-Lazare, -the cpowd ran thither, and found indeed an 
enormous quantity of flour, amassed by the good friars, enough 
to lead more than fifty carts which were driven to macket. They 
broke open everythii^, and ate and drank what was in the 
house ; hmrover, they carried nothing away ; the first who 
attempted to do so, was hung by the people themselves. 

The prisoners c^ Saint-Lazare had escaped. Those of La 
Porce who had been imprisoned for debt were set at liberty. 
The criminals of Xe Chatelet wanted to take advantage of the 
opportunity, and were already iM'eaking down the doors. The 
gaoler called m a band of die people who were passing ; it 
entered, fired upon the rebeb, and forced them to becoBoe 
wderly again. 

The arms of the store-room were carried off, but subsequently 
all restored. 

The electors, being unable to defer the arming any longer, 
attempted to keep it wilhin limits. They voted, and the pro- 
vost pronounced : That each of the sixty districts should elect 
and arm two hundred men, and that all the rest should be dis- 



HSSIIAIIOK OF THE SLEOTOBS, 139 

armed. It was aa anaj of twelve thousand respectable perflmis, 
wonderfuUj good for pdioe, but very bad for the defence. Paris 
would have been given up. In the afternoon of the same day, it 
was decided : That the Parisian police should consist oiforty^ 
eight thousand men. The cockade was to be of the colours of 
the city, blue and red.* This decree was confirmed on the 
same day by all the districts. 

A permanent committee is nam^ed to watch night and day 
over public order. It is formed of electors. ''Why elect<»*3 
alone? " said a man, stepping forward. << Why, whom would 
y<»i have named ? " <' Myself," said he. He was appointed 
by acclamation. 

The provost then ventured to put a very serious question : 
'< To whom shall the oath be taken ? " '' To the Assembly of 
the Citizens,'' exclaimed an elector with energy. 

The question of subsistence was as urgent as that of arms. 
The lieutenant of police, on being summoned by the electora, 
said that the supplies of com were entirely beyond his 
jurisdiction. The town was nece&sarily obliged to think about 
obtaining provisions as it could. The roads in every directiien 
were occupied with l^oops ; it was necessary for the farmers 
and traders who brought their merchandise to run the risk of 
passing through military posts and camps of foreigners, who 
spoke nothing but German. And even supposing they did arri^, 
they met with a thousand difficulties in re-passing the barriers. 

Paris was evidently to die of hunger, or conquer, aoid to 
conquer in one day. How was this miracle to be expected ? 
It had the enemy in the very town, in the Bastille, and at the 
Military School, and every barrier besieged ; the French 
guards, except a small number, remained in their barracks, 
and had not yet made up their minds. That the mirade 
should be wrought by tibe Parisians quite alone, was alniudst 
ridiculous to suppose. They had the reputation of beii^ a 
gentle, quiet, good-natured sort of population. That rsnch 
people should b^ome, all of a sudden, an anny, and a warlike 
army, was most unlikely. 

This was certainly the opinion of the cool-headed notables 

* But M t^y were ako tiiose of tke house of Orleans, white, the old 
colour of France, was added, on the proposal of M. de Lafayette. — 6ee h\& 
M4iMire»^ ii., p. 2^6. *' I give you,*' said he, " a oockade which wiU go raiutd 
the world." 



140 THE PEOPLE SEIZE SOJfE GUNPOWDER. 

and citizens who composed the committee of the town. Thej 
wanted to gain time, and not to increase the immense respon- 
uhilitj which weighed already upon them. They had go- 
verned Paris ever since the 12th ; was it as electors ? did 
the electoral power extend so far ? They expected every mo- 
ment to see the old Marshal de Broglie arrive with idl his 
troops to call them to account. Hence their hesitation, and 
their conduct so long equivocal ; hence, also, the distrust of 
ihe people, who found in them their principal obstacle, and did 
business without them. 

About the middle of the day, the electors who had been sent 
to Versailles, returned with the king's threatening answer, and 
the decree of the Assembly. 

There was nothing left but war. The envoys had met on 
ihe road the green cockade, the colour of the Count d'Artois. 
They had passed through the cavalry and all the German 
troops stationed along the road in their white Austrian cloaks. 

The situation of things was terrible, unprovided for, almost 
hopeless, considering the materials. But the courage of the 
people was immense ; everybody felt his heart waxiug hourly 
stronger within his bosom. They all marched to the H6tel- 
de-Vnie, to offer themselves for the fight ; there were whole 
corporations, whole quarters of the town forming legions of 
volunteers. The company of arquebusiers offered its services. 
The school of surgery came forward with Boyer at its head ; 
the Basoche wanted to take the lead and fight in the vanguard : 
all those young men swore they would die to the last man. 

Fight ? But with what ? Without arms, guns, and powder ? 

The arsenal was said to be empty. The people however 
were not so easily satisfied. An invalid and a peruke-maker 
kept watch in the neighbourhood ; and soon they saw a large 
quantity of powder brought out, which was' going to be em- 
barked for Rouen. They ran to the Hdtel-de-Ville, and 
obliged the electors to command the powder to be brought. A 
brave ahb^ undertook the dangerous mission of guarding it and 
distributing it among the people.^ 

* This heroic man was the dbh^ Lefebvre d^Ormesson. Nobody rendered 
a greater service to tho Revolution and the city of Paris. He remained forty- 
eight hours upon that volcano, among madmen fighting for the powder ; they 
filed at him several times ; a drunken man went and smoked upon \Jb» open 
casks, &C. 



THE PEOPLE SEARCH FOB GUNS. 141 

Nothing was now wanting but guns. It was well known 
that there was a large magazine of them in Paris. Berthier, 
the intendant, had caused thirty thousand to be imported, and 
had commanded two hundred thousand cartridges to be made. 
The provost could not possibly be ignorant of these active 
measures at the intendant 's office. Urged to point out the 
depot, he said the manufactory at CharleviUe had promised . 
him thirty thousand guns, and moreover^ twelve thousand were 
momentarily expected. To support this falsehood, waggons 
inscribed with the word ArtiUerie are seen passing through La 
Greve. These must evidently be the guns. The provost 
(Hrders the cases to be stowed in the magazines. But he must 
liave French guards to distribute them. The people run to 
the barracks ; but, as they might have expected, the officers 
will not give a single soldier. So the electors must distribute 
the guns themselves. They open the cases! Judge what 
they find. Rags ! The fury of the people knows no bounds ; 
they shout out '< Treason !" Flesselles, not knowing what to 
say, thinks it best to send them to the G^lestin and the Char* 
treux friars, saying: — ** The monks have arms concealed." 
Another disappointment : the Chartreux friars open and show 
everything ; and not a gun is found after the closest search. 

The electors authorised the districts to manufacture fifty 
thousand pikes ; they were forged in thirty-six hours ; yet 
even that dispatch seemed too slow for such a crisis. Every- 
thing might be decided in the night. The people, who always 
knew things when their leaders did not, heard, in the evening, 
of the grand depot of guns at the Invalides. The deputies of 
one district went, the same evening, to Besenval, the com- 
mandant, and Sombreuil, the governor of the H6tel. '' 1 will 
write to Versailles about it," said Besenval, coldly. Accord- 
ingly, he gave notice to the Marshal de Broglie. Most strange 
to say, he received no answer ! 

This inconceivable silence was doubtless owing, as it has 
been alleged, to the complete anarchy that reigned in the 
council : all differing on every point, excepting a very decided 
one, the dissolution of the National Assembly. It was like- 
wise owing, in my opinion, to the misconception of the court, 
who, over cunning and subtle, looked upon that great insur- 
rection as the effect of a petty intrigue, believed that the 



142 THE TAKINO OF THB BASTILLE. 

Palais Royal did everything, and that Orleuis paid for all. A 
puoile explanation* Is it possible to bribe millions of men ? 
Had' the duke paid also the insurrections at Lyons and in 
Danphin^, whieh, at that very moment, had loudly refdsed to 
pay the taxes ? Had he bribed the cities of Brittany, which 
were rising up in arms, or the soldiers, who^ at Rennes, revised 
to fire npon.tibie citixens T 

The prince's efBgy had, it is true, been carried in triumph. 
But the prince himself had come to Versailles to sorrendeF 
to his enemies, and to protest ^at he was as much afraid of 
the riot as anybody, or eveoi nior0 so. Be was requested to 
have the goodness to sleep at ike castle. The t^mrt, having 
him under its hand, thought it held fast Ihe fkibricator of the 
whole machination, and felt more at its ease. l%e old mar- 
shal, to whom all the military forces were intrusted at that 
moment, surrounded himself well willi troops, hdd the king in 
safety, put Versailles, which nobody thought of, in a state of 
defence, and looking upon> the insurrection of Paris as so much 
smoke, IdBb it to subside of itself. 



CHAPTER Vn. 

THE TAKING OF THE BASTILLE, JULY 14, 178^, 

IMfBcultj of taking tixe Bastille. — Tbe Idea of the Attack belongs to the 
People. — Hatred of the People towards the Bastille. — The Joj of the 
World on hearing of the taking of the Bastille. — ^The People eany off 
the Guns from the Invalides. — The Bastille was in a State of Defence. — 
Thuriot summons the Bastille to surrender. — The Electors send to it 
uselessly several Deputations. — Last Attack ; Elie, Hulin. — Danger of 
Delay. — Tlie People believe themselves betrayed; they menace the 
Provost and the Electors. — The Conquerors at the Hdtel-de^Yille. — 
How the Bastille surrendered. — Death of the Governor. — ^PrisonesB put 
to Death. — ^Prisoners Pardoned. — Clemency of the People. 

VsBSAiLLBS, with an organised governmait, a king, ministers, 
a general, and an army, was all hesitation, doubt, uncertainty, 
and in a state of the most complete moral anarohj. 

Paris, all commotion, destitute of every legal authmty, and 
in the utmost eonfurion, attained, on the 14th of July, what is 
morally the highest degree of order, — unanimity of feeling. 



DIFFICULTT OF TAEINO TRET BASTILLE. 143 

On the 13tii, Paris thtmgbt only of defendmg^ itsdf ; on the 
r4th, iti attacked. 

On the evening of the 13th, some doubt still existed, hut 
lidne- remaioed in the morning. The evening had been stonn j, 
agitated by a whirlwind of ungovemaUe frenzy. The morning 
was still and serene, — ^an awM calm. 

With daylight, one idea dawned upon Paris, and all 
were iHmnined with the same ray of hope. A light broke 
upon erefy mind, and the same voice thnlled through every 
heart : << Go ! and thou shalt take the Bastille ! " That was 
impossible, tmreasoRable, preposterous. And yet everybody 
believed it. And the thing was done. 

The Bastille, though an old fortress, was nevertheless 
impregnable, unless besieged for several days and- with an 
abundance of artillery. The people had, in that cricns, neither 
the time nor the means to make a regular siege. Had they 
done so, the Bastille had no cause for fbar, having enough 
provisions to wait for succour so- near at hand, and an im- 
mense suppfy of ammunition. Its walls, ten feet thick at 
the top of the towers, and thirty or forty at the base, might 
long laugh at cannon-balls ; and its batteries firing down upon 
Paris, could, in the meantime, demolish the whole of the Marais 
and ^e Faubourg Saint-Antoine. Its towerB, pierced with 
windows and loop-holes, protected by double and triple gratings, 
enabled the garrison, in full security, to make a dreadful 
carnage of its assailants. 

The attack on the Bastille was by no means reasonaMe. It 
was an act of faith. 

Nobody proposed ; but all believed, and all acted. Along the 
streets, the quays, the bridges, and the boulevards, the crowd 

shouted to the crowd : '' To the Bastille ! The Bastille ! " And 

It 

the tolling of the toesin thundered in eveiy ear : '* a la BagHUe !** 
Nobody, I repeat, gave the impulse. The orators of the Palais 
Boyal passed the time in drawing up a list of proscription, in 
condemning the queen to death, as well as Madame de Polignac, 
Artois, FlesseUes the provost, and others. The names of the 
conquerors of the Bastille do not include one of these makers 
of mqtifms. The Palais Eoyal was not the starting-point, 
neither was it to the Palais Royal that the conquerors brought 
back ihe spoils and prisoners. 



144 THE IDEA OF THE ATTAOK BELONGS TO THE PEOPLE. 

• 

StUl less had the electors, assembled ia the H6tel-de->Ville, 
the idea of the attack. On the contrary, in order to prevent 
it, as ^vell as the carnage which the BastiUe could so easily 
make, they went so far as to promise the goyemor, that if he 
withdrew his cannon he should not be attacked. The electors 
did not behaye treacherously, though they were accused of 
having done so ; but they had no faith. 

Who had? They who had also the devotion and the 
strength to accomplish their faith. Who ? Why, the people, 
—everybody. 

Old men who have had the happiness and the misery to see 
all that has happened in this unprecedented half centuiy, in 
which ages seem to be crowded together, declare, that the 
grand and national achievements of the Republic and the 
Empire, had nevertheless a partial non-unanimous character, 
but that the 14tii of July alone was the day of the whole 
people. Then let that grand day remain ever one of the 
et&maX /(Stes of the human race, not only as having been the 
first of deliverance, but as having been superlatively the^day 
of concord! 

What had happened during that short night, on which 
nobody slept, for every uncertainty and difference of opinion to 
disappear with the ^ades of dtu*knes8, and all to have the 
same thoughts in the morning ? . 

What took place at the Palais Royal and the H6tel-de- 
Yille is well known ; but what would be far more important 
to know, is, what took place on the domestic hearth of the 
people. 

For there indeed, as we may sufficiently divine by what 
followed, there every heart summoned the past to its day of 
judgment, and every one, before a blow was struck, pronounced 
its irrevocable condemnation. History returned that night a 
long history of sufferings to the avenging instinct of the people. 
The souls of fathers who, for so many ages, had suffered and 
died in silence, descended into their sons, and spoke. 

brave men, you who till then had been so patient, so 
pacific, who, on that day, were to inflict the heavy blow of 
Providence, did not the sight of your families, whose only 
resource is in you, daunt your hearts ? Far from it : gazing 
once more at your slumbering children, those children for 



HATBED OF THE PEOPLE TOWARDS THE BASTILLE. 145 

whom that day was to create a destinj, your expanding minds 
embraced the free generations arising from their cradle, and 
felt at that moment the whole battle of the future ! 

The future and the past both gave the same reply; both cried 
Advance ! And what is beyond all time, — beyond the future 
and the past, — immutable right said the same. The immortal 
sentiment of the Just imparted a temper of adamant to the flutter- 
ing heart of man ; it said to him : '* Go in peace ; what matters ? 
Whateyer may happen, I am with thee, in death or victory ! " 

A^d yet what was the Bastille to them ? The lower orders 
seldom or never entered it. Justice spoke to them, and, 
a voice that speaks still louder to the heart, the voice of 
humanity and mercy ; that still small voice which seems so weak 
but that overthrows towers, had, for ten years, been shaking 
the very foundations of the doomed Bastille. 

Let the truth be told ; if any one had the glory of causing 
its downfall, it was that intrepid woman who wrought so long 
for the deliverance of Latude against all the powers in the 
world. Royalty refused, and the nation forced it to pardon ; 
that woman, or that hero, was crowned in a public solemnity. 
To crown her who had, so to speak, forced open the state- 
prisons, was already branding them with infamy, devoting 
them to public execration, and demolishing them in the hearts 
and desires of men. That woman had shaken the Bastille to 
its foundations. 

From that day, the people of the town and the faubourg, 
who, in that much-frequented quarter, were ever passing and re- 
passing in its shadow, never failed to curse it.** And well did 
it deserve their hatred. There were many other prisons, but 
this one was the abode of capricious arbitrariness, wanton , 
despotism, and ecclesiastical and bureaucratical inquisition. 
The court, so devoid of religion in that age, had made the 
Bastille a dungeon for free minds, — ^the prison of thought. 
Less crowded during the reign of Louis XVI., it had become 
more cruel ; the prisoners were deprived of their walk : more 
rigorous, and no less unjust : we blush for France, to be 

* EUe ieratait la rue Saint^ArUotnet is Lingnet^s energetical expression, 
p. 147. The best known conquerors of the Bastille were, either men of the 
Faubourg, or ol the quarter Saint-Paul, of the Culture-Sainte-Catherine. 

L 



146 JOY <» THE WORED AT ITB CA7TUBS. 

obliged ;to say tfast the crime of ene of Ae pfiBoners wms lo 
hmve given a useful Becret to o«r vkvj I Thej wboeb a&aid 
lest he should tell it elsewhere. 

The Bast^ was known and dcffeested by ihse whole irorld. 
Bastille and tyranny were, in eir^y lai^nage, sjnanyzBOUB 
tems. fiyery natien, at the news cf its jlestruetiAn, belief?ed 
it had Teoe^rered its liberty. 

In Jtusaa, ihat empire of mystery and mlaaaOj itiiat mon- 
streus Bastille between Europe and Asia* soanoely had the 
Dews flrmed when yon might fasire aaen jaen^cf eveiy.oaation 
abeutiiig and weeping for joy in the open Create ; tkey roafaed 
into ;eaoh others arms to teU the news: '^*Who oaa hdp 
weeping Ibr joy ? The BaMk ia 4ttken.'* » 

On l£e Tery smming of thadi great day, ihe ^loc^^ Ihad as 
yet no arms. 

The powder they had taken frcon jdie aoEMnal iin night 
before, and put in the Hotel^de-Ville, was slowly disttftaubedAo 
ihem, during the ni|^t, by only thne men. ^Nie ^diatiibukion 
having eeased foe a nuunent, about, two o'elook, the deaperate 
crowd hammered down ;the ikors of the maganne, eiBiy Uow 
striking £re on the nails* 

No guns ! — ^It was neeessary to go and take tfaem, to eaaa*y 
them is from the Invalides ; .that was very haaardous. The 
IMd >de8 Inttiidu is, it is true, an ^ipen mansian ; but 
Sombreuil, the goyemor, a brave old soldier, had i*eeetyed a 
strong detaehment of artillery and someeannon, without count- 
ing those he had already. Should-those cannon be brought to 
act, the -crowd ini^t be taken in tiie &ink, and easily dispemed 
by the rqgiments tbat Besenval liad at the military sriiooL 

Would those foreign regiments have refused to act ? In 
spite of what Besenyal says to the eonteary, there is reason to 
doubt it. What is much plainer, is, that being left without 
orders, he was himself fiill oS. hesitation, and appeared paralysed 
in mind. At fiye o^olook that same morning, he had veodiyed 
a strange yisit ; — ^a sian rushed in ; his eountenanoe was lind, 
his ejoes Baded fire, his language was impetuous and Inief^ and 

* This &Gt is lelftted hf a witness above suspLcion, Count de £Wgar« am- 
bassador at the court of Russia, who was fiir from shiuing that enthusiasm : 
'' This madness which I can hardly believe whilst relating it,"^ &c. iS^^, 
Mlmwrea iii., p. 508. 



TME VEQSSm £LiRRT OEF SHE GUNB. 1A7 

-fak maimer aucbcioiis. Hhe old ooxcsmb, wlw uras the most 
friTolottB ofieer of the anden regime, but braffre and ^seUeetod, 
^ased s,t tike man, and waa atruek -wiih admiration. ** Baron,'* 
eaid the man, ** I eome (to adviEte jou to Biake oio sesbtafioe ; 
the barriers will be burnt to-day ;* I am sure ef it, but oaanot 
frovent it ; aeither can yon — do not try.** 

Besenyal was not afraid ; but he had, neyertlieleas, MA c&e 
dbnck, and Buffered its moral effect. ** There was aoBi^ihing 
elo^penit in :tiiat man/* Bays he, **' that strudc me ; 1 cvgiit to 
faave had him arrested, and yet I did not." It hmw thft anden 
regime and the iRe^olution meeting fftoe to face, and the latter 
left the former knt in asteniBhment. 

Before nme o'eleek thirty thouBand men were in .front «f the 
ilaTalides ; tiie Attomey Qeneral of tiie City ^ras at ^eiriiead : 
the committee of .the eleoton had not darod to seAue him. 
Among them were ;fle6n a few ^lompaniestof the Freneh Ghurds, 
ivffho /had esea^d irom ibeir harraeks, iihe Qlecktt of ihe 
IBasoche, m their old red deeaBes, and the Osraitoief Saint- 
Bticme^La^Mont, who, being named president of the AflMEnfaly 
formed in his ehuBch, ^did not dedine the penkius jaffiee oi 
heading this armed multitude. 

Old Sombreuil acted very ;adreitly. He showed iiixnsdf at 
the gate, said it was true he had guns, but that tfa^ had been 
intrusted to hmi ws a deposit, and that his honoiff, as a leoldier 
«nd a gentlenum, -daSi not allow him to be a traitar* 

ThM miezpected ailment stopfped ihe axywd at oiaoe ; a 
proof of the admkable vsandoor of the people in &at early age 
of the Reyolntiim. Sembreuil added, tluut he had sent a 
courier to YeraaiUeB, and was eiyeeting the answio* ; backing 
all this with numerous pratestations of -attachment and Mend- 
ehip fofr the M6tdi-de-Yi]ile and itiie city in generals 

The majority was willing to wait. Luckily, there was one 
man present who was less scrupukns, and prevented the crowd 
from being «o easily mystified, t 

* By these words we perceive that at .five o^dbock, ao plan had heen formed. 
The man in queation, vA» was net one of tlto people, repeated, i4>parently, the 
rumours of the Palais Royal — The Utopians had long heen talking ef the 
utility of destroying the Butille, forming plans, &c. ; hut the heroic, wild idea 
of taking it in one day, could he conceived only hy the people. 

t One of the sssemhled dtizens. Prock-'vm'bil deB ikitmn, i., p. 300. 

l2 



148 THE PEOPLE CABBT OFF THE GUNS. 

*' There is no time to be lost/' said he, *' and whose arms 
are these but the nation's ?** Then they leaped into the trenches, 
and the Hotel was invaded ; twenty-eight thousand muskets 
were found in the cellars, and carried off, together with twenty 
pieces of cannon. 

All this between nine and eleven o'clock ; but, let us hasten 
to the Bastille. 

The govemor, De Launey, had been under arms ever since 
two o'clock in the morning of the 13th ; no precaution had 
been neglected ; besides his cannon on the towers, he had 
others from the arsenal, which he placed in the court, and 
loaded with grape-shot. He caused six cart-loads of paving- 
stones, cannon-balls, and old iron, to be carried to the tops of 
the towers, in order to crush his assailants.* In the bottom 
loop-holes he had placed twelve large rampart guns, each of 
which carried a pound and a half of bullets. He kept below 
his trustiest soldiers, thirty-two Swiss, who had no scruple in 
firing upon Frenchmen. His eighty-two Invalids were mostly 
distributed in different posts, far from the gates, upon the 
towers. He had evacuated the outer buildings which covered 
the foot of the fortress. 

On the 13th, nothing save curses bestowed on the Bastille 
by passers by. 

On the 14th, about midnight, seven shots were fired at the 
sentinels upon the towers. — ^Alarm ! — The governor ascends 
with staff, remains half-an-hour, listening to the distant mur- 
muring of the town ; finding all quiet he descends. 

The next morning many people were about, and, from tim* 
to time, young men (from the Palais Royal, or others) were 
•aUing out tibat they must give them arms. They pay no 
attention to them. They hear and introduce the pacific depu- 
tation of the H6tel-de-ViUe, which, about ten o'clock, intreata 
the governor to withdraw his cannon, promising that if he does 
not fire, he shall not be attacked. He, willingly, accepts, 
having no orders to fire, and highly ddighted, obliges the 
envoys to breakfast with him. 

As they were leaving, a man i^rrives who speaks in a ver j 
different tone. 

* Siographie Michaud,^article Jk Launejf^ written from information fur- 
nished by his family. 



THURIOT SUMMONS THE BASTILLE TO SURBENDEB, 149 

A violent, bold man, unacquainted with human respect, fear- 
less and pitiless, knowing neither obstacle nor delay, and bearing 
in his breast the passionate genius of the Revolution — ^he came 
to summon the Bastille. 

Terror accompanied him. The Bastille was afraid ; the 
governor, without knowing why, was troubled and stammered. 

That man was Thuriot, a monster of ferocity, one of the 
race of Danton. We meet with him twice, in the beginning 
and at the end. And twice his words are deadly ; he destroys 
the Bastille,^ and he kills Robespierre. 

He was not to pass the bridge ; the governor would not allow 
it ; and yet he passed. From the first court, he marches to a 
seoond ; another refusal ; but he passes on, and crosses the 
second ditch by the draw-bridge. Behold him now in front of 
the enormous iron gate by which the third court was shut. 
This seemed a monstrous well rather than a court, its eight 
towers united together, formmg its inside walls. Those frightful 
gigantic towers did not look towards the court, nor had they a 
single window. At their feet, in their shadow, was the prisoners* 
only walk. Lost at the bottom of the pit, and overwhelmed 
by those enormous masses, he could contemplate only the stem 
nudity of the walls. On one side only, had been placed a 
clock, between two figures of captives in chains, as if to fetter 
time itself, and make the slow succession of hours still more 
burdensome. 

There were the loaded cannon, the garrison, and the staff. 
Thuriot was daunted by nothing. '* Sir," said he to the 
governor, " I summon you, in the name of the people, in the 
name of honour, and of our native land, to withdraw your 
cannon, and smrender the Bastille." — Then, turning towards 
the garrison, he repeated the same words. 

If M. De Launey had been a true soldier, he would not thus 
have introduced the envoy into the heart of the citadel ; still 
less would he have let him address the garrison. But, it is 
very necessary to remark, that the officers of the Bastille were 
mostly officers by favour of the lieutenant of police ; even 
those who had never seen service, wore the cross of Saint 

* He destroyed it in two ways. He introduced division and demoralization ; 
and when it was taken, it was he who proposed to have it demolished. He 
killed Robespierre, by refusing to let Mm speak, on the 9th thermidor. 
Thuriot was then president of the Convention. 



15Q THCREOr SRDlBfOirS THir BASTILEE TO SUB&SNDEIU 

Loins. AH' of iiiem> £ninr fhe go^enMr down ta the aenfiroiis, 
had fasBgfatlhdr'plBeeB, and tamed them to the hest adv&n- 
tageL The- gwerimi; foimd bbomis to add ererf jmat to his 
salary of sixty thousand francs, (£2400), & sbbl quite as hu^ 
bj his rapine. He sapj^ed his estaUishii^nt at tibe priaimevs* 
expense ^ h» Imd redneed their snpply of fbewaod, and made 
a profit on: their wine,* and l^eir misemble famiturev What 
was most: in£Euno«is usd harbaiovs, waav that he let out to a 
gardener the little garden of the Baetille, over a bastion ; aaid, 
for that miserable profit, he had depraved the* prisoneva of ihat 
walk, as well as of that on the* towers ; tfaBt- is to aay, of air 
and light. 

Thai greedy, sordid soid had moreofer good reason to he 
dispirited ;. he felt he was known ; Linguet's terrible memoirs 
had rendered Be Laimey infamous thron^oat Europe. The 
Bastille was hated ; but the goyemor was personally detested. 
The fiirious imprecations of the people, whiek he heard, he ap- 
propriated to himself ; and he was full of anxiety and fear. 

Thuriot's words acted differently on the Swiss and the 
French. The Swiss did not understand them ; their captain, 
M. de Fhie, was resolved to hold out. But the Staff anid the 
Inyalids were much shaken ; those old soldiers, in habitual 
eommumcation witii the people of Ihe fiiubourg, had no desire 
to fire upon tiiem. Thus the garrison was divided ; what will 
these two parties do ? If they cannot agree, will they fire upon 
each other ? 

The dispirited governor said, in as apologetical tone, whathad 
juirii been agreed with .the town, fie swore, and made the gar- 
rison swear, that if they were not attacked they wonld not begin. 

Tknriot did not stop< thare. He deured to ascend to the top 
of the towers, to see whether the cannon were really withdrawn. 
De Launey, who had been all this time repenting of having 
allowed hna already to penetrate, so far, rinsed ; but, being^ 
pressed by his officers,, he ascended with Thuriot. 

The cannon were drawn back and masked, but slall pointed. 
The view^ firom tiiat height of a hundred and {ortj- fbet ws» 

* The governor had the privilege of ordering in a hundred pieces of wine free 
of duty. He sold tiiat lig^t to a tavern, and received from it vinegar to give 
to the prisonen ; Linguet, p. 86. See in La BasHUe DivoiUe, the history oT 
a rich prisoBer^-whom De Lanney used to conduct, at nighty to a iemaie, whonk 
he, De Launey, had kept, hut would no longer pay. 



THUmOT SUlCMaNS THE BABTILLE TO SCSKEar-DSB. 151 

immteie and startttng: ; the atreets and opcniiiga foil of peo]^^ 
and all tlio garden of the arsenal &nmded witb arated men. 
But, on the oiiMr aide^ a Uaek mass was advancing.. It waa 
the, fauhourg Saiait Antoine. 

The governor tianied pale. He grasped Thunot hj the arm t 
<<-Wha1} have you done? Yon abuse your pmnlege as.aa- 
euYoy ! You have betrayed ose.! " 

They ireie both standingea the' brinh, and Be Launecy had 
a sentinel on the tower. Everybody iathe Bastille was bound 
by oath to the gerenior ; in his fbrtmss, he was kin^ and the 
law. He was still able to- avenge himself. 

But, on the contrary, it was Thursot who made him afraid : 
*' Sir," said he, *' one word more, and I swear to yoa tiaat one 
of us two shall be hurled headlong into ihe moati ! '** 

At the same moment, the sentinel approached, as frightened 
as the governor, and, addressing Thunot : ** Fray, Sir," said 
he, '' show yourself ; there is no time to lose ; they are march- 
ing forward. Not seeing you, they will attack.us. ' ' He leaned 
oveir through the battlements ; and ihe people seeing him alive, 
and standing' boldly upen the tower, uttered deafening shouta 
of joy and apfurobation. 

Thuriot descended with> the governor,, again crossed through 
the court, and addressing the garrison once more : '* I am 
going to give my report," said he ; ^'1 hope the. people will 
not r^se to furnish a citizen guardf to keep the Bastille 
with you." 

The people expected to enter the Baafcille as soon as Thuiiot 
came forth. When they saw him depavt, to make his report 
to the H6tel-de-yille, they took him for a traitor, and threatened 
him. Their impatience was growing into fiiry. The crowd 
seized on three Inva^dsy and wanted to tear them to pieces. 
They also seized on a young lady whom, they beHerved to be t^e 
governor B daughter, and some wanted to bunrher, if he refused 
to surrender. Others dragged her from them. 

What will become of usy said they, if the Bastille be not 
taken before night ? The burly Santerre, a brewer, whom the 
faubourg had elected its commander, proposed to burn the 

* Account' of M. Thoriot's conduct, at tbe end of Dusmirlx, (Ewfrt detaept 
jours^ p. 408. — Compare the Proces-verbal des fkctev/rs^ i., p. 310. 

f Thns bold, dignified lanfaage is related by the besieged. See their 
declaration at the end of DoasaidZy p. 449. 



152 DEPUTATION OF ELECTORS TO THE BASTULE. 

P^ACe by throwing into it poppy and spikenard oil* that they 
had seized the night before, and which they could fire with 
phosphoruB. He was sending to fetch the engines. 

A blacksmitii, an old soldier, without wasting time in idle 
talk, sets bravely to work. He marches forwiurd, hatchet ia 
hand, leaps upon the roof of a small guard-house, near the first 
drawbridge, and, under a shower of bullets, coolly plies his 
hatchet, cuts away, and loosens the chains; down falls the 
bridge. The crowd rush over it, and enter the court. 

The firing began at once from the towers and from the loop- 
holes below. The assailants fell in crowds, and did no harm 
to the garrison. Of all the shots they fired that day, two took 
effect : only one of the besieged was killed. 

The committee of electors, who saw the wounded already 
arriying at the H6tel-de-Yille, and deplored the shedding of 
blood, would have wished to stop it. There was now but one 
way of doing so, which was to summon the Bastille, in the name 
of the city, to surrender, and to allow the citizen-guard to 
enter. The provost hesitated for a long time ; Fauchet 
insisted ; t and otiier electors entreated him. They went as 
deputies ; but in the fire and smoke, they were not even seen ; 
neither the Bastille nor the people ceased firing. The deputies 
were in the greatest danger. A second deputation, headed by 
the city proctor, with a drum and a flag of truce, was pereeiyed 
from the fortress. The soldiers who were upon the towers 
hoisted a white flag, and reversed their arms. The people 
ceased firing, followed the deputation, and entered the court. 
There, they were welcomed by a furious discharge, which 
brought down several men by the side of the deputies. Very 
probably the Swiss who were below with De Launey, paid no 
attention to the signs made by the Invalids, f 

The rage of the people was inexpressible. Ever since the 
morning, it had been said that the governor had enticed the 
crowd into the court to fire upon them ; they believed them- 
selves twice deceived, and resolved to perish, or to be revenged 

* He hinuelf boasts of this follj. Procei-verbal dea ^leeteurgf i., p. 385. 

i* If we may believe him, he had the honoar of being the fint to propose it. 
Fauchet, Discoun sur la liberU pronomce It 6 ASut 89 h Saint Jacgues, 
p. 11. 

X This is the most satisfiMtoly way of reconciling the apparently contradictorj 
declazations of the besieged and of Uie deputation. 



LAST ATTACK — ELIE — ^HULLIN. 153 

on the traitors. To those who were calling them hack, they 
exclaimed in a transport of frenzy : '* Our hodies at least shall 
serve to fill the moats I " And on they rushed ohstinately and 
nothing daunted, amid a shower of hullets and against those 
murderous towers, as if, hy dying in heaps, they could at length 
overthrow them. 

But then, numhers of generous men, who had hitherto taken 
no part in Ihe action, heheld, with increased indignation, such 
an unequal struggle, which was actual assassination. They 
wanted to lend their assistance. It was no longer possihle to 
hold hack the French Guards ; they all sided with the people. 
They repaired to the commandants nominated hy the town, and 
ohliged them to surrender their &ve cannons. Two columns 
were formed, one of workmen and citizens, the other of French 
Guards. The former took for its chief a young man, of heroic 
stature and strength, named Hullin, a clockmaker of Geneva, 
hut now a servant, heing gamekeeper to the Marquis de 
Conflans ; his Hungarian costume as a cJumeur was douht- 
less taken for a uniform ; and thus did the livery of servitude 
guide the people to the comhat of liherty. The leader of the 
other column was £lie, an officer of fortune helonging to the 
Queen *s regiment, who, changing his private dress for hishril- 
liant uniform, showed himseif hravely a conspicuous ohject to 
both friends and foes. 

Among his soldiers, was one admirable for his valour, youth, 
and candour, Marceau, one of the glories of France, who 
remained satisfied with fighting, and claimed no share in the 
honour of the victory. 

Things were not very far advanced when they arrived. 
Three cart-loads of straw had been pushed forward and set on 
fire, and the barracks and kitchens had been burnt down. 
They knew not what else to do. The despair of the people 
was vented upon the Hdtel-de-Ville. They blamed the provost 
and the electors, and urged them, in threatening language, to 
issue formal orders for the siege of the Bastille. But they 
could never induce them to give those orders. 

Several strange singular means were proposed to the electors 
for taking the fortress. A carpenter advised the erection of a 
Roman catapult, in wood-work, to hurl stones against the walls. 
The commanders of the town said it was necessary to attack 
in a regular way, and open a trench. During this long and 



154 DAIieBB OP lOlAT. 

lueleia debate, a letter act that xnmDcait laterceptecl, ims 
brought in and read ; it was from Besenval to de Launej, com- 
manding him to hold oat to the last extremity* 

To appreciate the vahie of time at that mMii^ntous erisia, 
and understand the dread felt at any delay, we mnst knovr that 
there were false alarms every instant. It was supposed that 
the court, informed at two o'clock of the attack on the Bastille, 
which had begun at nocm, would take that oppwtumty of 
pouring down its Swiss and Germam troops upoaParis. Agadn, 
would those at the Military School pass the day in inaction ? 
That waa imlikely. What Besenval says about the little 
reliance he could place on his troops seems Uke an excuse. 
The Swiss showed themselyes Tory firm at the Bastille, ae 
appeared from the carnage ; the German dragoons had, on the 
12th, fired several times, and killed some of the French 
Guards ; the latter had killed several dragoons ; a spirit of 
mutual hatred ensured fidelity. 

In the faubourg Saint Honor6, the paving-stones w^e dug 
up, the attadk being expected every momtet ; La Yillette was 
in the same state, and a regiment really came and occupied it, 
but too late« 

Bvery appearance of dilatoriness appeared treason. The 
provost's shuffling conduct caused him to be suspected, as well 
as the electors. The exasperated crowd perceived it wa« 
losing- time with them. An old man exclaimed: '< Friends, 
why do we remain with these* traitors ? Let us rather hasten 
to the Bastille ! ' ' They all vamriied. The electors, tiiunder- 
struck, found themselves alone. One of them goes out,- but 
returns with a livid, spectral countenance : ** You have not 
two minutes to live," says he, 'Mf you remain heret. L& 
Grfeve is- filled by a furious crowd. Here they ate coming. " 
They did not, however, attempt to fly ; and that saved their lives. 

All the fury of the people was now concentrated on the 
provoet. The envoys of the difier^it districts came succes- 
sively to accuse him of treachery to his face. A part of the 
electors, finding themselyes compromised with the people, by 
his imprudence and falsehood, turned round and accused him. 
Others, the good old Dussauk (the translator of Juvenal), 
and the intrepid Fauchet endeavoured to defend him, innocent 
or guilty, and to save him fn«n death* Beii^ forced by the 
people to remove from their bureau into the grand hall of Saint 



THE PSOF£E BSUSTE TSSSESEEWS BBT&ATED. 155 

Jean/ '^My'stDTOunded him, and Fandset sat down bj Ins side. 
The terrors of death were imjM'eBBed- om laa oountenance. ** I 
8ffw Inm/' says Dnmauhe^ '^chewing bis lastmeiElfafiilof bread ; 
it stuck in bid teetb, and be' kept it in kis moutfa two be«r& 
befere be could swallow it." Surrounded witb- papers, letteors, 
and people who came to speak to him on businese, and amid 
shouts of death, he strove bard ta reply with* affalsilit j; The 
crowds of the Palais Boyal and from the district of Saint Rooh, 
being* the most inyeterate, Fauchet hastened to them to pray 
for pardon. The district body was assembled in tiie church of 
Saint Roeh; twice did Fauchet ascend the pulpit, praying, 
weeping, and uttering the fervent language which lus noble 
heai4 £etated in that ho&F of need ;^ his robe, torn to tatters 
by the bullets of the Bastille,* was eloquent also ; it prayed 
for the people, for the honour of that great day, and ^at 
the cra^e of liberty might be left pure- and undefiled. 

The provost and the electors remaaned in the hall of Saint 
Jean, between Kfe and death> guDB> being levelled at them 
several times. All those who were present, says Bussaubc, 
were like savages ; sometimes they would listen and look 
on in silence ; sometknes a terrible murmur, £ke distant 
thunder, arose from the crowd. Many spoke and shouted ; 
but: the greater number seemed astounded by the novelty of 
the' sight. The uproar, the exclamations, the news, the alarms, 
the intercepted letters, the discov^es, true or false, so many 
secrets revealed, so many men brought before the tribunal, 
perplexed the mind and reason. One of the electors exclaimed : 
'^ Is not doomsday come ? " So dizzy, so confounded was the 
crowd, that they had forgotten everything, even the provost 
and the Ba8lille.t 

It was half-past five when a shout arose from La. Grerve. 
An immense noise, like the growling of distant Grander, re- 
sounds nearer and nearer, rushing on with the rapidity and 
roaring of a tonpest. The Bastille is taken. 

That hall already so fdU is at once invaded by a thousand 
men, and ten thousand pushing b^xind. The wood-work cracks, 

* Fauchet, Bmtckt.de far. No. XVL, Nov. 96, t. iiL, p. 244. 

*t* The Proc^ verbal shows, however, that a new deputation was heing 
prepared, and that De la Sidle, the commandant, meant at length to take a 
pavtia- the aoti«i* 



156 HOW THE BASTILLE SUBEENDEEED. 

the benches are thrown down, and the barrier driven upon the 
bureau, the bureau upon the president. 

All were armed in a fantastical manner ; some almost naked, 
others dressed in every colour. One man was borne aloft upon 
their shoulders and crowned with laurel ; it was £lie, with all 
the spoils and prisoners around him. At the head, amid all 
that din, which would have drowned a clap of thunder, ad- 
vanced a young man fiill of meditation and religion ; he carried 
suspended and pierced vrith his bayonet a vile, a thrice-accursed 
object, — ^the regulations of the Bastille. 

The keys too were carried, — ^those monstrous, vile, ignoble 
keys, worn out by centuries and the sufferings of men. Chance 
or Providence directed that they should be intrusted to a man 
who knew them but too well, — a former prisoner. The National 
Assembly placed them in its Archives; the old machine of 
tyrants thus lying beside the laws that had destroyed them. 
We still keep possession of those keys, in the iron safe of the 
Archives of France. Oh! would that the same iron-chest 
might contain the keys of all the Bastilles in the world I 

Correctly speaking, the Bastille was not taken; it sur- 
rendered. Troubled by a bad conscience it went mad, and 
lost all presence of mind. 

Some wanted to surrender ; others went on firing, especially 
the Swiss, who, for &ye hours, pointed out, aimed at, and 
brought down whomsoever they pleased, without any danger or 
even the chance of being hurt in return. They killed eighty- 
three men and wounded eighty-eight. Twenty of the slain 
were poor fathers of families, who left wives and children to 
die of hunger. 

Shame for such cowardly warfare, and the horror of shed- 
ding French blood, which but little affected the Swiss, at 
length caused the Invalids to drop their arms. At four o'clock 
the subaltern officers begged and prayed De Launey to put an 
end to this massacre. He knew what he deserved ; obliged to 
die one way or other, he had, for a moment, the horribly fero- 
cious idea of blowing up the citadel : he would have destroyed 
one-third of Paris. His hundred and thirty-five barrels of 
gunpowder would have blown the Bastille into the air, and 
shattered or buried the whole faubourg, all the Marais, and 
the whole of the quartier of the Arsensd. He seized a match 



THE BASTILLE INYABED BT THE PEOPLE. 157 

from a cannon. Two subaltern officers prevented the crime ; 
thej crossed their bayonets, and barred bis passage to the 
magazines. He then made a show of killing himself, and 
seized a knife, which thej snatched from him. 

He had lost his senses and could give no orders.* When 
the French Guards had ranged their cannon and fired (accord- 
ing to some), the captain, of the Swiss saw plainly that it was 
necessary to come to terms ; he wrote and passed a note,t in 
which he asked to be allowed to go forth with the honours of 
war. Refused. Next, that his life should be spared. Hullin 
and Elie promised it. The difficulty was to perform their pro- 
mise. To preyent a revenge accumulating for ages, and now 
incensed by so many murders perpetrated by the Bastille, was 
beyond the power of man. An authority of an hour's exist- 
ence, that had but just come from La Gr^ve, and was known 
only to the two small bands of the vanguard, was not ade- 
quate to keep in order the hundred thousand men behind. 

The crowd was enraged, blind, drunk with the very sense of 
their danger. And yet they killed but one man in the fortress. 
They spared their enemies the Swiss, whom their smock- 
frocks caused to pass for servants or prisoners ; but they 
ill-treated and wounded their friends the Invalids. They 
wished to have annihilated the Bastille ; they pelted and broke 
to pieces the two captives of the dial; they ran up to the 
top of the towers to spurn the cannon ; several attacked the 
stones, and tore their hands in dragging them away. They 
hastened to the dungeons to deliver the prisoners : two had 
become mad. One, frightened by the noise, wanted to defend 
himself, and was quite astonished when those who had battered 
down his door threw themselves into his arms and bathed him 
with their tears. Another, whose beard reached to his waist, 
inquired about the health of Louis XV., believing him to be 
still reigning. To those who asked him his name, he replied 
that he was called the Major of Lnmensity. 

The conquerors were not yet at the end of their labours : in 

* Even in the morning, lecoTding to Thuriot*i testimonj. See the Proek' 
ttrbal deB iUcUu/n. 

f To fetch it, a pknk was placed on the moat. The fifst who ventured, 
fell ; the second (Ami ?— or Maillard ?) was more luckj and brought back the 
note. 



158 imAXR OF XHE OOTEBSrOB. 

the Rue Saimt Antoine they had to fight a battle of a diffBre&t 
kind. On approaching La Greye, t^j came ERiooessfuMj on 
crowds of men, who, having heen nnaUe to take any p«rt 
in the fight, wanted at all erents to do Bomething, wove it 
merely to massacre the prisoners. One wae killed at the 
Ene des Tonmdles, and another on the quay. Women, with 
dishereQed hair, came rushing forward, and reco^gnizing Ihmr 
husbands -amon^ the dain, left ihem to fiy upon th^r aesassins; 
one of Ihem, foaming at the mouth, ran i^oot asking eteiy- 
body for a knife. 

De Launey was conducted and supported -in ihat extreme 
danger by two men of ex<»iiordinary courage and strength, 
Huffiuj and another. The latter went with him m far «b ilie 
Petit Antoine, but was there torn from his side hy the rush of 
the crowd. HuHin held fast. To lead his man from ihat flpot 
to La Grere, which is eo near, was more than the tw^e 
labours of Hercules. No loirger knowing how to act, and 
perceiving ihat they knew De Launey oidy hy his braig lAone 
wi&out a hat, he conceived the heroic idea of putting his -own 
upon his head ; and, Ifrom that moment, he received Ihe blows 
intended for iihe governor.* At length, he 'passed the Arccbde 
Saint Jean ; if he could but get him on ^e fiight of steps, 
and push him towards the stairs, all was over. The crowd saw 
that very plainly, and accordingly made a desperate onset. 
The'Herculean strength hitherto displayed by Hullin no longer 
served -him here. Stifled by the pressure of the crowd around 
him, as in the crushing fold of an enormous boa, he lost his 
footing, was hurled to and fro, and thrown upon the pavement. 

* The royslist tradition -wbicli aspires to the diflSeult task of inspiring 
interest for the least interesting of men, has pretended iliat De Lawiey, still 
moBB hetreic than Hullin, gave hun his hat back again, ifnshiag rather to die 
X}m3ii expose him. The «ame tradition attributes the honour of a similar deed 
to Berthier, the intendant of Paris. Lastly^ they relate that the major of .the 
Bastille, on being recognized and defended at La Gr^ye, by one of his former 
prisoners, whom he had treated with kindness, dismissed him, saying : ** You will 
ruin yourself without saying me.^^ This last story, being authentic, yery 
pipfaablyigave rise to the two others. As-for De Launey and Berthier^ there 
is nothing in their preyious conduct to incline us to believe in the her^sm -of 
tiar laat momenta. The silence of Bftichaud, the biographer, in the srticle 
De Xctmcy, drawn up from information furnished by that AoBoSij, sufficiently 
shows that they did not believe in that tradition. . , 



PBISONBSS PAfiDONXD 37 TES PEOPLE. 159 

Twice he regained iuB feet. The second time he beheld aloft 
the head of Be Launey at the end of a pihe. 

Another scene imA passing in the hall of Samt Jean. The 
prisoners irere there, in great danger of death. The people 
were especiaBy inveterate towards three laralids, whom thej 
supposed to have been the cannoneers of the BastiUe. One 
was wounded; De la Salle, the commandant, by incredible 
eSorts, and pFodadming loudly his title of eommandant, xtiast 
managed to save him ; whilst he was leading him out, the two 
others wove dxagged out and hmng up to the lamp at theeomer 
of l^e Vannerie, faoingthe Hdtel-de^Yille. 

All tills gzBat commotMrn, which seemed to have eaused 
ftenelles to be iorgotten, was neTertheless what caused his 
destroction. iEEis implacable accusers of the Palais Bqyal, 
Ib?^ in namber, but disoontented to .see 1^ erowd^oceupied with 
any mother business, kept close io the bureau, meaadng him, 
and summoning him to f olfaiw them. At length he yielded : 
whether the long expectation of desifii appeared io him worse 
than.death itsdf, or that he Imped to esoBpein the unurersal 
pre-occupation about the great event cf flm day. *' Well ! 
gentlemen," said he, ''let Jis go to. the Palais Boyal.*^' He 
had net reached the .quay before a young .man shot hizn through 
the head with a pistol baliet. 

The dense multitude crowding the hall did not wish for 
bloodshed ; according to an eye-witness, they were stupefied 
on beholding it. They stared gaping at that strange, pro- 
digious, grotesque, and maddening spectacle. Arms of the 
middle ages and of every age were mingled together ; centuries 
had come back again. £lie, standing on a table, with a helmet 
on his brow, and a sword hacked in three places, in his hand, 
seemed a Roman warrior. He was entirely surrounded by 
prisoners, and pleading for them. The French Guards demanded 
the pardon of the prisoners as their reward. 

At that moment, a man, followed by his wife, is brought or 
rather carried in ; it was the Prince de Montbarrey, an ancient 
minister, arrested at the barrier. The lady fainted ; her hus- 
band was thrown upon the bureau, held down by the arms of 
twelve men, and bent double. The poor man, in that strange 
posture, explained that he had not been minister for a long 
time, and that his son had taken a prominent part in the revo- 



160 CLEMENCY OF THE PEOPLE. 

lution of his province. De la Salle, the commandant, spoke for 
him, and exposed himself to great danger. Meanwhile, the 
people relented a little, and for a moment let go their hold. 
De la Salle, a very powerful man, caught him up, and carried 
him off. This trial of strength pleased the people, and was 
received with applause. 

At the same moment, the hrave and excellent £lie found 
means to put an end at once to every intention of trial or con- 
demnation. He perceived the children of the Bastille, and 
began to shout : '' Pardon ! for the children, pardon ! ** 

*Then you might have seen sunburnt faces and hands 
blackened with gunpowder, washed with big tears, falling like 
heavy drops of rain after a shower. Justice and vengeance 
were thought of no longer. The tnbunal was broken up ; for 
£lie had conquered the conquerors of the Bastille. They made 
the prisoners swear fidelity to the nation, and led them away ; 
the Invalids marched off in peace to their H6tel ; the French 
Guards took charge of the Swiss, placed them in safety within 
their ranks, conducting them to their own barracks, and gavft 
them lodging and food. 

What was most admirable, the widows showed themselvea 
equally magnanimous. Though needy, and burdened with 
children, they were unwilling to receive alone a small sum 
allotted to them ; they shared it with the widow of a poor 
Invalid who had prevented the Bastille from being blown up» 
but was killed by mistake. The wife of the besieged was thua 
adopted, as it were, by those of the besiegers. 



END OP BOOK I. 



BOOK 11. 

JULY TO OCTOBER, 1789. 



CHAPTER I. 

THE HOLLOW TRUCE. 

VorsaillcB, on the 14th of July. — The King at the Assemhly, July 15th. — 
Paris in Mourning and Misery. — Deputation of the Assembly to the City 
of Paris, July 15th. — Hollow Truce. — The King goes to Paris on the 
17th of July. — First Emigration : Artois, Cond^, Polignac, &c. — The 
King's isolated Position. 

The AsBembly passed the whole of the 14th of July in a state 
of two-fold trepidation, between the violent measures of the 
Oourt, the fury of Paris, and the chances of an insurrection, 
which, if unsuccessful, would stifle liberty. They listened to 
every rumour, and with their ears anxiously open imagined they 
heard the faint thunder of a distant cannonade. That moment 
might be their last ; several members wished the bases of the 
constitution to be hastily established, that the Assembly, if it 
was to be dispersed and destroyed, should leave that testa- 
mentoiy evidence behind, as a beacon for the opponents of 
tyranny. 

The Court was preparing the attack, and little was wanting 
for its execution. At two o'clock, Berthier, the intendant, 
was still at the military school, giving orders for the details of 
the attack. Foulon, his father-in-law, the under-minister of 
war, was at Versailles, completing the preparations. Paris 
was to be attacked, that night, on seven points simultaneously.* 
The council was discussing the list of the deputies who were 

• Bftilly, i., pp. 391, 392. 
M 



162 YEBSAILLESy ON THE FOURTEENTH OF JULY. 

to be carried off that evening ; one was proscribed, another 
excepted ; M. de Breteuil defended the innocence of Bailly. 
Meanwhile the queen and Madame de Polignac went into 
the Orangerie to encourage the troops and to order wine 
to be giyen to the soldiers, who were dancing about and 
singing roundelays. To complete the general intoxication, 
this lovely creature conducted the officers to her apartments, 
excited them with liqueurs, with sweet words and glances. 
Those madmen, once let loose, would have made a fearful night. 
Letters were intercepted, wherein they had written : " We 
are marching against the enemy." "What enemy? The law 
and France. 

But see ! a cloud of dust is rising in the Avenue de Paris; 
it is a body of cavalry, with Prince de Lambesc and all his 
officers flying before the people of Paris. But he meets with 
those of Versailles : if they had not been afraid of wounding 
the others, they would have fired upon him. 

De Koailles arrives, saying : *' The Bastille is taken. '^ De 
Wunpfen arrives : " The governor is killed ; hje saw. tha deed, 
and was nearly treated in the same way." At lastj two envoys 
of the electors come and acquaint the Assembly wiih the 
fr^htfiil state of Paris. The Assembly is furious, and invokes 
against the Court and the ministers the vengeance of G-odaiid 
men. " Heads! ** cried Mirabeau; ^< We must have De Brog- 
lie's head !'•♦ . 

A deputation of the Assembly waits upon the king, hut it 
can get from him only two equivocal expressions : he sends 
officers to take the command of t^e local nulitia, jand orders the 
troops in the Champ-de-Mars to fall back. A^movement very 
well devised for the general attack. 

The Assembly is furious and clamorous ; it sends a second 
d^[>utation. " The king is heart-broken, but he can do no 
more." 

Louis XYI., whose weakness has been so often deplored, 
here made a show of deplor&ble firmness. Berihier had come 
to stay with him ; he was in his closet and comforted lum,t 
telling him there was no great harm done. In the pzeseat 
troubled state of Paris, there was still every chance .of the 

* Ferridres, i., p. 132. 

t Jtapport d'AocfuoHoHf Ht8$, Pari,, iv.^ p. 83. 



ySOBAXLLBS, OK THB. EOUBUHEKSH . .€!P OXOiX^. 163 

grand attack in -the evenkig. However, ibsj soon dijsMSOiored 
that the. town was on its guard. It had abeadj plaeed cannon 
on Montmartre, which covered La Yilletitey and' kept Saint- 
Denis in cheek. 

Amid the comtradictorj reports, the king gave- no orders ; 
and, faithfdl to his. usual hahits, retired to rest at an early 
hour. The Buke de Liancourt, whose duties gave him the 
privilege of entenng at an j hour, even in the night, oould not 
see him perish thus in his apathy and ignorance. He. entered, 
and awoke him. He. loved the king, and wanted to save 
him. He told him the extent of his danger, the importanee 
of the movement, its icresistihle force; that he ou^ht to meet 
it, get the start x)f the<Duke of Orleans, and secure' the feiend- 
ship of the AssemUy. Lotus XYL, half asleep (and who was 
never entirelyiawake) :- '''What then," saidhe, ^'isii aimroli?" 
'' Sire^ it is a^Bevohitinn." 

The yng conoealedi nothing' from i^e queen ; so eietytUng 
was known in the apartment of the Count d'Artois. :His 
followers were much, alarmed ; royalty might aaRro itsdf at 
their expense. One of them, who knew -the jadnoe. And ithat 
fear was. the. weak .point in» his' character, seoored him hy 
aajdng that h&was prosesihed at the Palais Boyal^ Ubo Fles- 
seUeaaad Be Launey, and that he loaght temqmflise* every 
•mmd hy uidtiiig with the king in. litepopokr'meaaiire dictated 
hy necessity. The aame man, who was a deputy* ran to the 
AssemUy (itwas then midnight); he tbere found iho-word]^ 
BaiUy^who durst- not retire to rest, and aaioed him» in: the 
name of 'the prince, for aapeechithat the kingvmi^tt/ifiadion 
the morrow. 

Thero was one maa at Y ersaillea wlio grieved as aoneh as 
any, I mean the Buke of Orleans. On. the 12th of Jvlj, his 
effigy had been carried in triumph, and then hmtally broken 
topieeee. There the matter rested ; nobody had^eared about 
it. On the 13th, a few had spolun of tibue deetion of a 
lieirteBant-geiieral^ but the crowd seemed deaf, and eiidi«r did 
']iot> or wouidnot^ hear. 'On the moming^of the lidih,.Madame 
de Gkniis took the daring and ineredtble step, of sending her 
Pamela with ahudDey in red livery into the imddle of ihft.riot.* 

^ MftdameLobnui^ S(mummy i, p.' 199. 

m2 



164 .YEBSAILUBS, OK THE FOURTEENTH OF JULY. 

Somebody exclaimed: "Why it is not the queen!" And 
those words died away. AH their petty intrigues were 
swamped in that immense commotion, every paltry interest 
was smothered in the excitement of that sacred day. 

The poor Duke of Orleans went on the morning of the 15th 
to the council at the castle. But he had to stay at the door. 
He waited ; then wrote ; not to demand the lieutenancy-general, 
not to offer his mediation (as had been agreed between him, 
Mirabeau, and a few others), but to assure the king, as a good 
and loyal subject, that if matters grew worse, he would go 
over to England^ 

He did not stir all day from the Assembly, or from Ver- 
sailles, and went to the castle in the evening ;* he thus made 
good an alibi against every accusation of being an accomplice, 
and washed his hands of the taking of the Bastille. Mirabeau 
was furious, and left him from that moment. He said (I soften 
the expression) : " He is an eunuch for crime ; he would, but 
cannot ! ** ^ 

Whilst the duke was being kept waiting like a petitioner 
at the council door, Sillery-Genlis, his warm partisan, was 
striving to avenge him; he read, and caused to be adopted, an 
insidious project of address, calculated to diminish the effect 
of the king's visit, deprive it of the merit of being spontaneous, 
and chill, beforehand, every heart : '^ Come, sire, your majesty 
will see the consternation of the Assembly, but you wUl be 
perhaps astonished at its calmness," &c. And, at the same 
time, he announced that loads of flour going to Paris had been 
stopped at Sevres. << What if this news reached the capital! " 

To which, Mirabeau, addressing the deputies whom they 
were sending to the king, added these alarming words : *' Gro, 
and tell the king that the foreign hordes by which we are 
invested, were visited yesterday by the princes and princesses, 
by his male and female favourites, who lavished on them 
their caresses, presents, and exhortations. Tell him that all 
night long, those foreign satellites, gorged with wine and gold, 
have predicted, in their impious songs, the servitude of France, 
' and that their brutal vows have invoked the destruction of the 
National Assembly. Tell him that in his very palace, his 

• Fenieres, i., p. 135. Ihfoz, ii., p. 342 



THE KINO AT THE ASSEKBLT. . 165 

courtiers danced to the sounds of tbat barbarous music, and 
that such was the prelude to the massacre of Saint Bartho- 
lomew. Tell him that king Henry, whose memory is adored 
by the universe, that ancestor of his whom he affected to wish 
to take as his model, ordered provisions to be sent into revolted 
Paris, which he was besieging in person ; whilst his ferocious 
counsellors have driven back the com which conmierce was 
bringing to his starving but faithful Paris." 

As the deputation was departing, the king arrives. He enters 
without his guards, accompanied only by his brothers. He ad- 
vances a few paces into the hall, and, standing in front of the 
Assembly, announces that he has given orders to the troops to 
remove^OTW Paris and Versailles, and he engages the Assembly 
to give this information to Paris. A sad confession that his own 
word will obtain little credit unless the Assembly affirmed that 
the king has not told a lie ! He added, however, more nobly 
and adroitly : '^ People have dared to spread a report that 
your persons are not in safety. Can it be necessary to reassure 
you against such wicked rumours, already belied by my well- 
known character ? Well then, I, who am but one with the 
nation, I come to intrust myself to you ! " 

To remove the troops from Paris and Versailles, without 
stating any distance, was yet but an equivocal, uncertain 
promise, that gave but little comfort. But the Assembly were 
generally so alarmed at the obscure immensity opening before 
them, so stupefied by the victory of Paris, and had so much 
need of order, that they showed themselves credulous, enthu- 
siastic for the king, even so far as to forget what they owed 
to themselves. 

They all rushed round him and followed him. He returned 
on foot. The Assembly and the people crowded about him to 
suffocation ; the king, who was very corpulent, was quite 
exhausted in crossing the Place d'Armes in such scorching 
weather ; deputies, among whom was the Duke of Orleans, 
formed a circle around him. On his arrival, the Swiss band 
played the air : " Oit, peut on itre mieux qu^qu sein de sa 
jfamiUe ?'* A family too limited in number: the people formed 
no part of it ; the gates being shut against them. The king 
gave orders to open them again. However, he declined to 
receive the deputies who wished to see him once more ; he 



166 PABU. IN VOUBVlNa Aira.HISEBT. 

was going* to his chapel to return tbanks to God.* The 
queen 'appeared in the balcony with her children, and those of 
tiie Oount d'Artoie, with all the appearance of great delight, and 
hardlj* knowing what to think- of an enthueiasm eo ill deserred. 

YerBaiyeB was overcome with joy. Paris, in spite of its 
yictoiy, was* still in alarm and affliction. It was burjing its 
dead ; many of them had left famUies without resource. Such 
as had no family received the last duties from their companions. 
They had placed a hat beside one of the dead, and said to pas- 
sengers : "'Sir, somethdng for this poor fellow who was kOled 
for the nation ! Madaam, it is for thito poor fellow who wus 
kflled for the nation!'*! An humble and simple funeral 
oration for men whose death gave life to France. 

Bveiybody was guarding Paris ; nobody was working. 
There was no work ; food was scarce and dear. The Hdtel- 
de-Yille mtaintained that Taris had provision enough for a 
fortnight ; but it had not enough for three days. It was- neces- 
sary to order a tax for the subsistence of the poor. The 
supplies of flour had been stopped at Sevres and Saint-Denis. 
,Two fresh regiments arrived while' they were promising to send 
back the troops. The htissars came and reeonnoitered iftie 
barriers ; and a report* was spread that they had attempted to 
surprise* the Bastille. At length the alarm was so great, that, 
at two o'clock, the electors could not refuse the people' an order 
to unpave Paris. 

At two o'clock precisely, a man arrives breathless and 
almost fainting.^ He had run all the way from Sevres, where 
the troops wanted to stop him. " It is all over ; the Revolu- 
tion is finished ; the king came into the Assembly, and said : 
* I trust myself to yon.' A hundred deputies are now on their 
roadlrom Tersailles, sent by the Assembly to the city of Paris." 

Those deputies had immediately set forth ; Bailly would not 
dine. The electors had barely the time to run to meet them, 
just as they were, in disorder, not having been to bed for 
several nights. They wanted to fire the cannon ; but they 
were still ranged en batterie, and could not be got ready. 

* Paint du Jour, No; d5, t. i., p. 207. 

+ IttUres ^crkeB de France a un Amii p. 2d, quoted in Dui8mi1x'» Notes, 
p. 333. 
t Proch'verbal dea ^lecteurSf ridigi par Dtweyrier, i., p. 431. 



BXFin^&TZON OF THE AB8BHBLT. 167 

There was no need of them to solemiiise the fiie, Paris was 
grand enoi^h with its sun of Julj, its commotion, and all that 
population in anns. The hundred d^uties, preceded by the 
French Guards, the Swiss, the officers of the city militia, and 
by the dqiuties of the ^electors, marched up the Roe Saint 
Honov6 to the sound of trumpets^ Erreiy arm was stretdied 
towards them, and eyery heart leaped with joy. From erery 
window were showered flowers, blessings, and tears. 

The National Assembly and the people of Paris, the oath 
of the Jeu-de-Paume and the taking of the Bastille ; yictory 
and riotoiy, kissed 'each other. 

Several deputies kissed and w^ oyo:^* the flags of the Frendi 
Gkiards : "Flags of our nstiToland !** cried they, "flags of 
fiberty!" 

On their ^axriral «t the Hi5tel-de^Ville, La&yette, Bailly, 
the archbishop of Paris^ Siey^^and dermont^TonDEerre were 
made to sit* at the bureau. Lafayette spoke coolly aad ^u- 
dntly ; next, Laiiy Tollendal with his Irish impetuosity and 
easy tears. It was at tliat siune Greve &at Lally^s father, 
thirty ^yeaars before, had been gapped and behtoded by the 
cmcMn rigime ; his speech, full of enwdon, was nothing but a 
Bort of amnesty for the anden rSffime, an amneety certainly 
too premature, whdlst.it.still kept Paris surrounded by troc^s. 

Emotion neyertheless took effect also in the dtiaenrassembly 
of the Hdtel'^de-Ville. " The fattest of tender-hearted men," 
as Lally was called, was orowned widi flowers, and led, or 
rather carried, to &e window, and -shown to the crowd. Resisting 
as much as he could, he put his crown on the head of Bailly, 
the first president the National Assembly had. Bailly like- 
wise refus(9d ; but it' was hedd and £etstened on his head by the 
hand of the arohbishc^ of Paris. A strange and whimsical spec- 
tacle, which shewed, in a strong light, the false position of 
the parties. Here was the pesident of the Jeu-de-Paume, 
crowned by the prelate, who advised the coup d^etat, and forced 
Paris to conquer. The contradiction was so ' little perceived,' 
that the archbishop did not fear to propose a Te Deum, 
and everybody followed him to Notre Dame. It was rather 
a De ProfundM that he first owed to those whose deaths he 
had occasioned. 

Not^thstanding the general emotion, the people remained 



168 DEPUTATION OF THE ASSEMBLY. 

in tbeir senses. They ^d not tamely allow their victory to 
be meddled with ; that, we must say, was neither fair nor 
useful ; that victory was not yet sufficiently complete to sacri- 
fice and forget it so soon. Its moral effect was immense, but 
its material result still feeble and uncertain. Even in the Eue 
Saint Honors, the citizen guard (then it was all the people) 
brought before the deputies, with military music, that French 
Guardsman who had been the first to arrest the governor of the 
Bastille ; he was led in triumph in De Launey's chariot, 
crowned with laurel, and wearing the cross of Saint Louis, 
which the people had snatched from the gaoler to put upon hia 
conqueror. He was unwilling to keep it ; however, before he 
gave it back, in presence of the deputies, he adorned himself 
with it, proudly showing it upon his breast.* The crowd 
applauded, and so did the deputies, thus sanctioning with their 
approbation what had been done the day before. 

Another incident was still clearer. Among the speeches 
made at the Hdtel-de-Ville, M. De Liancourt, a good-natured, 
but inconsiderate man, said that the king willingly pardoned 
the French Guards. Several of them, then present, stepped 
forward, and one of them exclaimed : '* We need no pardon. 
In serving the nation, we serve the king ; the intentions which 
he displays to-day prove sufficiently to France that we alone 
have been faithful to the king and the country." 

Bailly is proclaimed mayor, and Lafayette conunandant of 
the citizen militia. They depart for the Te Deum. The arch- 
bishop gave his arm to that brave Mi Lefebvre who had 
guarded and distributed the gunpowder, who left that den for 
the first time, and was still quite black. Bailly was, in like 
manner, conducted by HuUin, applauded by the crowd, pressed, 
and almost stifled. Four f usileers followed him ; but, notwith- 
standing the rejoicings of that day and the unexpected honour 
of his new position, he could not help thinking ** tiiat he looked 

* • Camille Desmoulins, 80 amunng here and everywhere else, triumphed 
also in his manner : " I marched with my sword drawn," &c., {^Correspondance^ 
p. 28, 1836). He took a fine gun with a hayonet and a pair of pistols from 
the Invalids; if he did not make use of them, it is hecanse unfortunately the 
Bastille was taken so quickly ! He ran there, hut it was too late. Several go 
BO far as to say, that it was he who caused the Revolution (p. 33) ; for his part, 
he is too modest to helieve it. 



A HOLLOW PEACE. 169 

like a man being led to prison." Had he been able to foresee 
better, he would have said : to death ! 

What was that Te Demn, but a falsehood? Who could 
belieTe that the archbishop thanked God heartily for the taking 
of the Bastille ? Nothing had changed, neither men nor prin- 
ciples. The court was still the court, the enemy ever the 
enemy. What had been done was done. Neither the National 
Assembly nor the electors of Paris, with all their omnipotence, 
could alter the past. On the 14th of July, there had been a 
person conquered, who was the king, and the conqueror was the 
people. How then were they to undo that, cause that not to 
be, blot out history, change . the reality of actual events, and 
dnpe the king and the people, in such a manner that the former 
should condder himself happy in being beaten, and the latter, 
without distrust, should give themselves up again into the hands 
of a master so cruelly provoked ? 

Mounier, whilst relating on the 16th, in the National 
Assembly, the visit of the hundred deputies to the city of Paris, 
made the strange proposal (resumed on the morrow and voted 
at the H6tel-de-Ville) to raise a statue to Louis XVI. on the site 
of the demolished Bastille. A statue for a defeat ! that was 
something new and original. The ridicule of it was apparent. 
Who was to be thus deceived ? Was the victory indeed to be 
conjured away by thus allowing the vanquished to triumph ? 

The obstinacy of the king throughout the whole of the 14th 
of July, made the most simple perceive that his conduct on the 
15th was by no means spontaneous. At the very moment the 
Assembly was conducting him back to the castle, amid this 
enthusiasm, feigned or real, a woman fell at his knees, and was 
not afraid to say : '< Oh ! Sire, are you really sincere ? Will 
they not make you change ? " 

The population of Paris was full of gloomy ideas. They 
could not believe that with forty thousand men about Versailles, 
the court would make no attempt. They believed the king's 
conduct to be only intended to lull them into security, in order 
to attack with greater advantage. They distrusted the electors ; 
two of the latter, deputed to Versailles on the 15th, were 
brought back, menaced as traitors, and in great dauger. The 
French Guards were afraid of some ambush in their barracks, 
and refused to return to them. The people persisted in believing. 



170 ▲ Hioixair yjbmie« 

that if the «onrt diitfst not fight, it would be rerenged hj some 
dark plot, that it might haive flouBwhere a mme to blow Fans 
into the air. 

Fear was<itot ridicidoyfi, bnt confidence moat oertainlj was. 
Why should they have felt> secure ? The troops, in spite of 
the pvomise,. did not withdraw^ The baron de Falokenhmm, 
who. eomiB«nded at 'Saini*>DeniB, siud he had no orders. Two 
of his oflGleeis whcf had come to neeonnoitre, had been airested 
at the barrier. What was still more 'serious> was, that the 
lientenant of poliee had given in lus resignadoai. Berthkr the 
intendatrt had absconded, and with hint, all the p^sons chai{^ 
witii the adminittmiienof pveviaiena. In:a dayor two, peifaapa^ 
the muket would be without com, and the people would gatto 
the H6tel*d»«yiUe to demand bvea^and the hcads^of ^le maigift* 
trates. The electors seBt seveml of iheir bedy to fetch com 
from Senlis, Vernon, and even.fiDom BMre, 

Faris was-watiing for Ihe king. It thought that if he had 
spoken candidly and from his haiart^ he woidd leave his Ver- 
sailles and his wicked advisers, ami cast himself into the anoB 
of the peopla I^oiiung 'would have been better timed, or haye 
had a greater effoct.onthe 15th:«^ — he •should have d^acted fov 
Paris, on leaving thftiAsaembly, and have trusted himsdf, not 
in words only, but tmlyi, and with his person, bddfy entering 
the crowd, and miaglmg with that armed population. The 
emotion, stall so gxoat^ would have tamed 'emtirely in his 
favour^ 

That is what the people expected, what they believed and 
talked of. Th^ said so atthe HdteUie^Ville^ and repeated it 
in the streets. The king hesitated, consulted, postponed foe 
one day, and all was lost. 

Where did he pass that irreparable day ? From the <evenng 
of the 15th to the morning of the 1 6th, he nras still shot up with 
those same miniBtors, whose audacious folly had filled Faris 
with bloodshed, and shaken the throne for ever. At 'that 
council, the queen wanted to fly, cany off the >king, put him 
at the head of the troops, and begin a civil war. But, were 
the troops very sure ? What would happen if war broke out in 
the army itself, between the French soldiers and the foreign 
mercenaries ? Was it not better to temporise, gain time, and 
amuse the people ? liouis XVI., between these two opinions. 



A HOLLOW PSAOX. 171 

had none oi hk own, — no will;* he was ready to foUow eiiher 
indifferently. The majority of the council were for the latter 
opinion ; so the king remained. 

A mayor and a commandant of Paris appoimled hy the 
electors without the king's consent, those places accepted hy man 
of such importsDceas Baiily and Lafayette, and their nominations 
confirmed by the Assembly, without asking the king for ai^ 
permission, was no longer an insunpeotion, but a well and duly 
organized Reyolution. Lafayette, ** net doubting but all the 
eommwnes would be wiUing to intrust their defence to armed 
citizens," proposed to call the citizen militia Natimml Chiarda 
(a name already imrented by Sieyds). This name seemed to 
generalize, and extend the arming of Paris to all. the kingdom, 
OTon as the blue and red cookade of the eity,> aiagmenled with 
white, the old French colours, became' that of all France. 

If the king remained at Versailles, if he delayed, he risked 
Paris. Its attitude was becoming more hostile er^ moment. 
On the districts being engaged to join their deputies to those of 
the Hotel-de-Ville, in-order to go and thank the king,. several 
replied, " There was no oecasien yet to return thanks." 

It was not tiU the evening of <the 16th, that Baiily having 
happened to see Yicq d'Azir, the queen's physiciui, gave him 
notice that the city of Paris wished for and expected.tbe kin^* 
The king promised to go, and the same- evening wrote to 
M. Necker to engage him to return. 

On the 17th, the king departed at nine-o 'clock, very Beriovs, 
melancholy, and pale ; he had heaxd mass, taken the com- 
munion, and giFon to Mamieur his nommation as lieutenant- 
general, in case he wasikiUed or detained prisoner ; the queen, 
in his absence, wrote, with a tremibliiig hand, the speech she 
would go and pronouoee at the Assembly,. if <1^ king should be 
detained. 

Without guards, but surrounded by ihree-cor foor hvmbed 
deputies, he anrived atthe (city). barrier at timee o'eieok. Th« 
mayor, on presenting him the keys, said : " These are the 
same keys that were presented to Henri lY. ; he had re- 

* The HtMUnm FankiMntaire is- wrong in qnoting^a pretended letter fimn 
Louis XVI. to the Count d'Arteis (v. ii.,^ 101), an apoerypbal end ridioidoai 
letter, like meet of thoBe published hy Miss Willinne, in the Comipondim<» 
inedite, so well criticised and condemned by MM, Barhicr and-Bendiot» 



172 THE KINO GOES TO PARIS. 

conquered his people, now the people have re-conquered their 
king." 

Those last words, so true and so strong, the fiill meaning of 
which was not perceived, even by BaiUj, were enthusiastically 
applauded. 

The Place Louis XY. presented a circle of troops, with the 
French Guards, drawn up in a square battalion, in the centre. 
The battalion opened and formed into file, displaying cannon in 
the midst (perhaps those of the Bastille). It put itself at the 
head of the procession, dragging its cannon siier it — and the 
king followed. 

In front of the king's carriage rode Lafayette, the command- 
ant, in a private dress, sword in hand, with the cockade and 
plume in his hat. Everything was obedient to his slightest 
gesture. There was complete order and silence too ; not one 
cry of Vit>e le Rot,* Now and then, they cried Vive la 
Nation. From the Point-du-Jour to Paris, and from the barrier 
to the H6tel-de-Ville, there were two hundred thousand men 
under arms, more than thirty thousand guns, fifty thousand 
pikes, and, for the others, lances, sabres, swords, pitchforks, 
and scythes. No imiforms, but two regular lines, throughout 
that immense extent, of three, and sometimes of four or five 
men deep. 

A formidable apparition of the nation in arms ! The king 
could not misimderstand it ; it was not a party. Amid so 
many weapons and so many different dresses, there was the 
same soul and the same silence ! 

Everybody was there ; all had wanted to come ; nobody was 
missing at that solemn review. Even ladies were seen armed 
beside their husbands, and girls with their fathers. A woman 
figured among the conquerors of the Bastille. 

Monks, believing also that they were men and citizens, had 
come to take their part in that grand crusade. The Mathurins 
were in their ranks under the banner of their order, now become 

* Save one miahap ; one gun went off, and a woman was killed. There 
was no bad intention towards the king. Everybody was royalist, both the 
Assembly and the people : even Marat was till 1791. In an unpublished letter 
of Robespierre^s (which M. De George communicated to me at Arras), he 
seems to believe in the good faith of Louis XVI., whose visit to the city of 
Paris is therein related, (23rd of July, 1789). 



THE KING aOES TO PABIS. 173 

the standard of the district of that name. Capucins were there 
shouldering the sword or the musket. The ladies of the Place- 
Mauberi had put the revolution of Paris under the protection of 
Saint Geneyi^ve, and offered on the preceding evening a picture 
wherein the saint was encouraging the destroying angel to over- 
throw the Bastille, which was seen falling to pieces with hroken 
crowns and sceptres. 

Two men only were applauded, Bailly and Lafayette, and no 
others. The deputies marched surrounding the king's carriage, 
with sorrowful, uneasy looks ; there was something gloomy 
about that procession. Those strange looking weapons, those 
pitch-forks and scythes, were not pleasing to the eye. Those 
cannon reclining so quietly in the streets, silent, and bedecked 
with flowers, seemed as though they would awake. Above all 
the apparent signs of peace hovered a conspicuous and significant 
image of war, — the tattered flag of the Bastille. 

The king alights, and Bailly presents to him the new cockade 
of the colours of the city, which had become those of France. 
He begs of him to accept ''that distinguishing symbol of 
Frenchmen." The king put it in his hat, and, separated from 
his suite by the crowd, ascended the gloomy stairs of the H6tel- 
de-Ville. Over head, swords placed crosswise formed a canopy 
of steel ; a singular honour, borrowed from the masonic cus- 
toms, which seemed to have a double meaning, and might lead 
to suppose that the king was passing under the yoke. 

There was no intention to cause either humiliation or dis- 
pleasure. On the contrary, he was received with extraordinary 
emotion. The great hall, crowded with a confused mass of 
notables and men of every class, presented a strange spectacle; 
those in the middle remained kneeling, in order not to deprive 
the others of the happiness of seeing the king, and all had 
their hands raised towards the throne, and their eyes full of tears. 

Bailly, in his speech, had pronoimced the word- alliance be- 
tween the king and the people. The president of the electors, 
Moreau de Saint M^ry (he who had been chairman during the 
great days, and given three thousand orders in thirty hours) 
ventured a word that seemed to engage the king : *< You come 
to promise your subjects that the authors of those disastrous 
councils shall surround you no longer, and that Virtue, too long 
exiled, shall remain your support." Virtue meant Necker. 



174 THZ! Elire OOBS TO Fi»I8. 

The. king, from timidity op prudence, sud netiiiDg. Tlie 
citjr proctor then made a proposal to raise a statue on the 
Place da la Bastille ; it was Toted unammomlj. 

Next, LaUj, alwajs eloquent, only too tender-hearted- and 
lachr]^i]i0se, avowed the king's chagrmy and ike need he had of 
tHmsdaium. This- was showing lum as conquered, instead of 
associating him with the victory of the people over the minis- 
ters who were departing. '' WeU, citizens^ are you satisfied ! 
Behold the king," &c. That Behold, thrioe repeated, seemed 
like a sad parody of Ecce iHomo. 

Those lAio had noticed that similitude found it ecaet and 
complete, when Bailly showed the king at the window of &e 
Hdtelrde-ViUe, with the cockade in fos: hat. He rMnained 
theore a quarter of an hour, serious and silent. On hisde- 
jpartureit was intimated to him, in a whisper,^ that he^ooght 
to say something himself* But i^ they could get fipom hni 
was.^ iBtificati<m of ike citiien guard, the ma^r, and the 
eenmandant, and i^e ^«ry laconic sentence: ^You may 
•almaya rely ommy affection." 

The electors were satisfied, hut not so the peof^. They 
had imagined that "tibe king, rid of his had advieers^ had congie 
to fintemiBS with the ci<y of Paris. But^ what ! not <me word, 
not (me gdstave ! Nevertheless, the crowd- i^iplaud^d on his 
Yetaxm; thej^eeamed to denre to givevcotatleng^ tei^wr 
long restrained feehngs. Bvery weapon was reverised in sign 
of peace. They shoiUed V4f>e k' Rot, and he w«s carried to 
his caxriage. A market-woman flung her ttrms 'round his-neek. 
Men with hottles striped his horses, poured out wine fer his 
coachman and valets, and- drank with th^i the health of 'the 
king. He smiled^ hut still said noising. The least kind word, 
uttered 4it thai moment, vrould have hoen re-echoed and eele- 
hrated'with immense efleot. 

It was past nine in the evening when he returned to the 
castle. On the stairoBse he found the queen and his -children 
in tears^ who -came and threw themselves into his arms. Had 
the 'king then incurred some alarming danger in going to visit 
his people? Was his people his enemy? "Why what more 
wouid tdiey hove done for a king set at liberty,. fbr John ^or 
Franois I., retunung-irom London or Madrid ? 

Ob the^same day^ Friday, the 17th, a& if to protest ^at'the 



FIBST EHXCUUTION. 175 

king neither said nor did anything at Paris hut hy force and 
constraint, his hrother the Count d'Artois, the Cond^s, the 
Contis, the Polignacs, Yaudreuil, Broglie, Lamhesc, and 
others, ahsconded from France. It was no easy matter. 
They found everywhere their names held in detestation, and 
the people rising against them. The Folignacs and Yau- 
dreuHs were only ahle -to escape hy- declaiming along their road 
against Yaudreuil and Folignae. 

The compixaey of the court, .aggravated with a thousand 
popular accounts, hoth strange* and horrible, had seised upon 
every imagination, and rendered them incurably, suspicious and 
distrustful. Yersailles, excited at least as much as Faris, 
watched the castle night and day as the eenire of treason. 
That immense palace seemed a desert. Many durst no longer 
enter it. The north wing, appropriated to the Cond6B, was 
almost empty ; the' south wing, that of the Ooont d'Artois, 
and the seven vast apartments of the ladieB< Folignao were 
shut up for ever. Several of *the king's aervants woidd have 
liked to forsake their master. They were beginmng to enter- 
tain strange ideas <about him. 

For tfaveedays^ says Besenval, thelmig had •scaraeLy any- 
body about him -bat M. de Montmorin and' niyself. On the 
19th, every miniater being absent, I had entered tke king's 
apartment to ask Him to sign^ an order to have horses given to 
a o(doiiel:who was returning. As I waa* proscnting that order 
a footman placed himself between the kmg and rae^ in order 
to see what he was writing. The king turned round, perceived 
the insolent fellow, aoEB^- snatched up the* tongs. I prevented 
him from fdlowing that impulse of very natural indignation ; 
lie 'olasped my hand to thank me, and I perceived tears in his 
eye». 



176 



CHAPTER 11. 

POPULAR JUDGMENTS. 

No Power ingpires Confidence. — The Judiciary Power has lost Confidence. — 
The Breton Cluh. — Advocates, ihe Besoche. — Danton and Camille Des- 
moulini. — ^Barharitj of the Lswb, and of the Punishments. — Judjjpoaents 
of the Palais Royid. — Ia Gr^ve and Famine. — Death of Foulon and 
Berthier, July 22, 1789. 

RoTALTT remains alone. The privileged class go into exile or 
submit ; they declare they will henceforth YOte in the National 
Assembly and be subject to the majority. Being isolated and 
laid bare, royalty appears what it had been fundamentally for a 
long time : a nonentity. 

That nonentity was the ancient faith of France ; and that 
faith deceived now causes her distrust and incredulity ; it makes 
her excessively uneasy and suspicious. To have believed and 
loved, and to have been for a century always deceived in that 
love, is enough to make her no longer believe in anything. 

Where will faith be now ? At that question, they experience 
a feeling of terror and solitude, like Louis XYI. himself in the 
corner of his lonely palace. There will no longer be faith in any 
mortal power. 

The legislative power itself, that Assembly beloved by 
France, is now so unfortimate as to have absorbed its enemies, 
£ve or six hundred nobles and priests, and to contain them in 
its bosom. Another evil is, that it has conquered too much ; 
it will now be the authority, the government, the king — ^when 
a king is no longer possible. 

The electoral power, which likewise found itself obliged to 
govern, feels itself expiring at the end of a few days, and 
entreats the districts to create its successor. During the can- 
nonade of the Bastille, it had shuddered and doubted. Men of 
little faith! But perfidious ? No. That ^wr^^ome of '89, imbued 
with the philosophy of that grand age, was certainly less egotisti- 
cal than our own. It was wavering and uncertain, bold in prin- 
ciple, but timid in application ; it had been so long in bondage ! 



THE JUDICIAEY POWER HAS LOST CONFIDENCE. 177 

It is the virtue of the judiciary power, when it remains entire 
and strong, to supply every other ; hut itself is supplied hy 
none. It was the mainstay and the resource of our ancient 
France, in her most terrihle momeuts. In the fourteenth and 
sixteenth centuries, it sat immutahle and firm, so iSat the 
country, almost lost in the tempest, recovered and found itself 
still in the inviolable sanctuary of civil justice. 

Well ! even that power is shattered. Shattered by its incon- 
sistency and contradictions. Servile and bold at once, for the 
king and against the king, for the pope and against the pope, 
the defender of the law and the champion of privilege, it speaks 
of liberty and resists for a century every liberal progress. It 
also, and as much as the king, deceived the hope of the people. 
What joy, what enthusiasm, when the parliament returned from 
exile, on the accession of Louis XYI. I And it was in answer 
to that confidence that it joined the privileged class, stopped all 
reform, and caused Target to be dismissed ! In 1787, the 
people sustained it still, and, by way of recompense, the Parlia- 
ment demanded that the States-General should be restored in 
imitation of the old form of 1614, that is to say useless, power- 
less, and derisive. 

No, the people cannot confide in the judiciary power. 

What is most strange, is, that it was this power, the guar- 
dian of order and the laws, that began the riot. Disturbances 
first begin about the Parliament, at every lit dejtMtice. They 
were encouraged by the smiles of the magistrate. Young coun- 
sellors, such asd*Esprtoesnil or Duport, mindful of the^Frande, 
would willingly have imitated Broussel and the Coadjutor. The 
organised Basoche furnishes an army of clerks. It has its 
king, its judgments, its provosts, old students, as was Moreau 
at Rennes, or brilliant orators and duellists, like Bamave at 
Grenoble. The solemn prohibition that the clerks^hould not 
wear a sword, did but make them the more pugnacious. 

The first club was the one opened by counseUor Duport 
at his house in the Rue du Ohaume in the Marais. There 
he assembled the most forward of the Parliament people, 
advocates and deputies, especially the Bretons. The club being 
transferred to Versailles, was called the Breton Cltfb, On its 
return to Paris with the Assembly, and changing its cha- 
racter, it took up its quarters at the convent of the Jacobins. 

N 



178 THE BBZTOK CLVB — ^ABYOOATES. • 

Mirabean went butoneeto Duport's; he used to call Duport, 
Bamave, and Lameth, tiaie Trium^tteusaiJ* Siej^s also went 
but would not return there : *' It is a den of political banditti, 
said he ; tfaej take outrages for ezpedieAts." ElBewhere he 
designaies Ihen still more luunhly : *' One may imagine them 
to be a set of iwidced blackguards, ever in action, Bhoating» 
intriguing, and rioting lawlesslj, recklessly, and then laughing, 
at the mdfldiief they had done. To them may be attributed 
the gveatear part of the errors of the BeTolution. Happj 
wdrM it have been for France, if the snbaltecn agents of 
these- eady pertarbators, on beeoming leadeis in thrar tum, 
by a «ort of customary hereditary right in long reTol«tions, 
had ronoonced the spiiit by whicdi they had been so lung, 
agitated ! " 

These sidialteniB- alluded to by Sieyes, who will succeed ihw 
leadoMT (and who weve far mptnor to them), were especially 
two men,-^two reTohitiQauiry lev^ers, Camille Desmaulins aad 
Banton. These two men, one the king of pamphleteers, the 
other the thundeniig orator of the Pahos Royal, before he < was 
thftt of tike Conrrenlion, oannot be feather mentioned in ting. 
place. Besides, they are about to follow us, and nail «)on nerer 
leaye us. In them, or 'in. nobody, are personified the comedy 
and tragedy of the Revohition. 

Presently they will let their masters form the -chib of the 
Jacobins, and will go aad found the Cordeliers. Atthepresent^ 
all is mingled together: the grand club of a hundrad clubs, 
among the cqfeSy the gaming-houses, and women, is still the 
Palais- Royal. There it was ^at on the 12th of July, Besmou- 
lins cried : Toontis ! And there, on the night of the 13th, 
a&aUioiee was passed on Flesselles and Be Lanney. Those 
passed on the Count B*Artois, the Condes and the Folignacs, 
were forwarded to them ; and they had the astonishing effect, 
hardly to be expected from sereral battles, of making, them 
depart from France. Hence arose a fatal predilection for the 
means of terror which had so well succeeded. BesmoulinB, in 
the speech which he attributes to the lamp (lanteme) of La 
Grere, makes it say, "That strangers gaze upon it in aa 
ecstasy of astonishment ; that they wonder that a lamp should 

* Meflfiing the Tkvee KnaTes^— ci parody, of ootme, wl tiiuuvintto. — C. G» 



* C AMUSE BBSMOULINS. 179 

haye done more in two days than all tlieir heroes in a hundred 
years.'** 

Desmoulins renews eyer with inexhaustible wit the old jokes 
that filled all the middle ages on the gallows, the rope, and ike 
persons hung. That hideous, atrocious punishment, which 
renders agony yisible, was the usUld text of the most joyous 
stories, the amusement of the yulgar, the inspiration of the 
Basoche. This found all its genius in Camille Desmoulins. 
That young lawyer of Picardy, with a yery light purse and a 
still lighter chjKr&G^fii, was loitering briefless at the PataiSy 
when the Heyolutionmade him suddenly plead at the Palais 
Royal. A slight- impediment in his speech did but render him 
the more amusing. His liyely ' sallies playing about his em- 
barrassed lips> escaped like darts. He followed his ceoiic 
humem: without .mueh •considering whether it might not end in 
tragedy* The famous judgments' of the Basoehe^ those judieial 
farces which had.-so muc^ amuiied the old Pa&K«,. were not 
mme merry than ithe judgments of the Palais. Rbyal.; t the 
difference was that the laitter were often ezeeuted in La Gxdye 
(the place <>f execution). 

What is most' strange, and a subject for reflection, is, that Des- 
moulins, with his roguidb genius and mortal je8t8,.and that bull of 
a Danton,;who bellows murder, are the yery men who, four years 
later, perish for baring proposed The Committee cf Clemency ! 

Mirabeau, Duport, the Lameths, and many others more 
moderate, approyed of the acts of riolenee ; several said they 
had adrised them. In 1788, Sieyes demanded the death of 
the ministers. On the 14th of Jidy, Mirabeau demanded De 
Broglie's head ! Desmoulins lodged in his house. He marched 
willingly between Desmoulins and Danton ; and, being tired of 
his Genevese, preferred these men^ directing the former to write, 
and the latter to speak. 

Target, a yery moderate, prudenty cool-headed man, was 
intimate with Desmoulins, and ga^e his approbation to the 
pamphlet De la Lanteme. 

* Camille Desmoulini, DUcowfg de laLaaderneaux Parmem, p. 2. He 
insinuattB, however, rather adroitly, that those rapid condemnations are not 
without inconvenience, that they are liable to cause mistakes, &c. 

f See the judgment of Duval d'Espr^mesnil, related by C. Desmoulins in 
his letters. 

h2 



180 BABBABITT OF THE PUNISHMENTS. * 

This deserves an explanation : Nobody believed in justice, 
save in that of the people. 

The legists especially despised the law, the jurisprudence of 
that time, in contradiction to all the ideas of the age. They 
were well acquainted with the tribunals, and knew that the 
Revolution had not more passionate adversaries than the Par- 
liament, the High Court of Justice {le Chdtelet), and the judges 
in general. 

Such a judgment-seat was the enemy. To give up the trial 
of the enemy to the enemy, and charge it to decide between the 
Revolution and its adversaries, was to absolve the latter, render 
them stronger and more haughty, and send them to the armies 
to begin a civil war. Were they able to make one? Yes, 
in spite of the enthusiasm of Paris and the taking of the 
Bastille. They had foreign troops, and all the officers were for 
them ; they had especially a formidable body, which then con- 
stituted the glory of France, the officers of the navy. 

The people alone, in that rapid crisis, were able to seize and 
strike such powerful criminals. But if the people should mis- 
take ? This objection did not embarrass the partizans of 
violence. They recriminated. " How many times," would they 
reply, *' have not the Parliament and the Chitelet made mis- 
takes?" They quoted the notorious mistakes in the cases 
of Galas and Sirven; they reminded their opponents of Dupaty's 
terrible memorial for three men condemned to the wheel, — that 
memorial burnt by the Parliament that was unable to answer it. 

What popular trials, would they again say, can ever be more 
barbarous than the procedure of the regular tribunals, just as 
they now are, in 1789. — Secret proceedings, made entirely on 
documents that the defendant is not allowed to see; the accusa- 
tions uncommunicated, the witnesses non-confronted, save that 
last short moment when the defendant, but just emerging from 
the utter darkness of his dungeon, bewildered by the light of 
day, comes to sit on his bench, replies or not, and sees his judges 
for the two minutes during which he hears himself condemned.^ 
— Barbarous procedure, more barbarous sentences, execrable 
punishments! — We shudder to think of Damiens torn with 
pincers, quartered, sprinkled with molten lead. — ^Just before 

* A truly eloquent passage in Dupatj's memorial for three men condemned 
to be broken on tbe wheel, p. 117 (1786, in 4to.). 



LA OBETE AKD FAMINE. 181 

the Eevolution, a man was burned at Strasburg. On the 11th 
of August 1789» the Parliament of Paris, itself expiring, once 
more condemned a man to be broken on the wheel. 

Such punishment, which was torture eyen for the spectator, 
wounded the souls of men, made them furious, mad, con- 
founded eyery idea of justice, and subyerted justice itself ; the 
criminal who suffered such torture seemed no longer guilty ; 
the guUtj party was the judge ; and a world of maledictions 
was heaped upon him. Sensibility was excited into fury, and 
pity grew ferocious. History offers seyeral instances of this 
sort of furious sensibility which often transported the people 
beyond all the bounds of respect and fear, and made them 
rack and bum the officers of justice in place of the criminal. 

A fact, too little noticed, but which enables us to understand 
a great many things, is, that seyeral of our terrorists were men 
of an exquisite feyerish sensibility, who felt cruelly the suffer- 
ings of the people, and whose pity turned into fury. 

This remarkable phenomenon chiefly showed itself in neryous 
men, of a weak and irritable imagination, among artists of 
eyery kind : the artist is a man- woman.* The people whose 
neryes are stronger followed that impulse, but in the earlier 
period neyer gaye it. The acts of yiolence proceeded from the 
Palais Royal, where the citizens, adyocates, artists, and men 
of letters were predominant. 

Eyen among these men, nobody incurred the whole respon- 
sibility. A Camille Desmoulins might start the game and 
begin the hunt ; a Danton hunted it to death — in words, of 
course. But there was no lack of mute actors for the execu- 
tion, of pale furious men to carry the thing to La Greye, where 
it was urged on by inferior Dantons. In the miserable crowd 
surrounding the latter, were strange looking figures, like beings 
escaped from the other world ; spectral looking men, mad with 
hunger, delirious from fasting, and who were no louger men. 
It was stated that seyeral, on the 20th of July, had not eaten 
for three days. Occasionally, they were resigned, and died 
without injuriug anybody. The women were not so resigned ; 
they had children. They wandered about like lionesses. In 
eyery riot they were the most inyeterate and furious ; they uttered 

* I mean % complete man, who, having both sexes of the mind, is fruitful ; 
however, having almost always the sense of irritation and choler predominant. 



182 LA. COEUEiyE JemTAMSSE. 

ones of fienzy, said made 'the men a^Huned of their tudSness ; 
the sanmHay judgm^ita of La' GrerO' wore erer too long lor 
theih. They- hung at onee.* 

Sngfamd haft had in tfau oentoiy her poetij' of hiuger.f 
Who will gire* its history to Franoe ? A'terrihle hbtoiy in 
the last. centDTj, neglected, fay i^e historians, who hare re- 
served their pty for the artisans of famine. I haye attempted 
to descend into the regiona of tibat) hell, guided nearer and 
nearer by deep groans of agony. I have shown the land mcne 
and more sterile in proportion as the exchequer seised and 
destroyed the cattle, and that the earth devoid of manure is 
cond^nned to a perpetual fast. I have shown how, as the 
nobles, the exempt from taxes, multipiied, the impost weighed 
ever more heavily on an ever declining land. I have not suffi- 
cientlv shown how food became, from its very scarcity) the 
object of an eminenfly prodaatWe traffic. The profits ^ bo 
obvious, that the king wished also to take a part. The worid 
saw with astonishment a king trafficking with the lives of his 
subjects, a king speculating on scarcity and death, — a king 
the assassin of his people. Famine is no longer only the 
result of the seasons,— *-a natural phenomenon ; it is neither 
rain nor hail. It is a deed of the civil order : people starve by 
order of the king. 

The king here is the system. The people were starving 
under Louis XV., and they starve under Louis XYI. 

Famine was then a science, a complicated art of administra- 
tion and commerce. Its parents are the exeheqiier and mono> 
poly. It engenders a race apart, a bastard breed of contractors, 
bankers, fiaaneiers, revenue-farmers, intendants, oounseUors, 
and.mmisters. A profound expression on the alliance between 
the speculators «nd politicians waa uttered from the bowels of 
the people : compact of famine. 

Among. those men was one who had long been famous. His 
name Fotdon (ybtj expressive, j: and which he strove to justify) 
was in the mouth of the pecple as early as 1756. He hhd 
begun his career as an intendant of the army, and in the 

* They hang thus on the 5th of October the honest abb^ Lefehne, one of 
the heroes of the 14th of July ; luckily the rope was cut. 
f Ebenezer Elliott, Corn-law Jthymea (Manchester, 1834), &c, &c 
i As iff anions : let us trample (on the people). — C. G. 



FOULOV AKP BEETMIBB. 183 

enemy's oountry. Truly teniUe to Qasmuky, he was eiven 
more so to our soldiars. His naaauier of netuaJlii^ was 
as fatal as a battle of Rosbaeh. He had grown Int on the 
destitution of the army, doubly rich by tiba. faatiikg of the 
Fronek and the Qermans. 

Foulon was a speculator, financier, and contractor on one 
hand, and on the other a member of the Ooimcil who alone 
judge the oontraotors. He expected certainly to become minister. 
He would hare died of grief, if bankruptcy had been effected 
by any other than he. The laurels of the €ibbS Terray did not 
allow him to sleep. He had the fkult of preaehing his system 
too loudly ; his tongue counteracted his doings and rendered it 
impossible. The Court relished very much the idea of not 
paying, but it wanted to borrow, and the calling. the apostle of 
bankruptcy to the ministry was not the way to entice lenders. 

Foulon was already an old man, one of the ffoed old days, of 
Louis XV., one of Ihat insolent school that gloded in its rapine, 
boldly showing it, and which, for a trophy of depredation, 
built on the boulevard the Payillon of Hanover. For his part, 
he had erected for himself, in the most frequented thorough- 
fare, at the comer of the Hue du Tlemple, a delightful mansion, 
which was still admired in 1845. 

He was convinced that in France, as Figaro Beaumarohais 
says, ''Everything ends in a song ;" therefore he must assume 
a bold face, brave and laugh at public opinion. Hence those 
words which were re-echoed everywhere : "If they are hungry, 
let them browse grass. Wait till I am minister, I will make 
them eat hay ; my horses eat it. '* He is also stated to have 
uttered this terrible ^reat : ''France must be mowed." II 
Jhut faueker la Frctnee, 

The old man belieyed, by such bravado, to please the young 
military party, and recommend himself for the day he saw 
approaching, when the Court) wanting to strike seme desperate 
blow, would look out for a hardened viUain. 

Foulon had a son-in law after his own heart, Berthier, the 
intendant of Paris, a clever, but hard-hearted -man, as confessed 
by the royalists,* and unscrupulous, since he had espoused a 
fortune aoquired in such a manner. 

* Aceording to B«aaUeti*« ooafMUon, Mimowetf ii., p. 10. 



184 FOULON AND BB^THIER. 

Of humble extraction, being descended from a race of pro- 
vincial attorneys or petty magistrates^ he was hard-working, 
active, and energetic. A libertine at the age of fifty,' in spite 
. of his numerous family, he purchased, on all sides, so it was 
said, little girls twelve years of age. He knew well that 
he was detested by the Parisians, and was but too happy to 
£nd an opportunity of making war upon them. With old 
Foulon, he was the soul of the three days* ministry. Marshal 
de Broglie augured no good of it : he obeyed.* But Foulon 
and Berthier were very ardent. The latter showed a diabolical 
activity in collecting arms, troops, everything together, and in 
manufacturing cartridges. If Paris was not laid waste with 
fire and sword, it was not his fault. 

People feel astonished that persons so wealthy, so weU-in- 
formed, of mature age and experience, should have cast them- 
selves into such mad proceedings. The reason is, that all 
great financial speculators partake of the manner of gamblers ; 
they have their temptations. Now, the most lucrative affair 
they could ever find, was thus to undertake to effect bankruptcy 
by military execution. That was hazardous. But what great 
affair is without risk ? A profit is made on storm and fire ; 
why not then on war and famine? Nothing risk, nothing 
gain. 

Famine and war, I mean Foulon and Berthier» who thought 
they held Paris fast, were disconcerted by the taking of the 
Bastille. 

On the evening of the 14th, Berthier attempted to reassure 
Louis XVI. ; if he could but get from him the slightest order, 
he could even then pour down his Germans upon Paris. 

Louis XVI. neither said nor did anything. From that 
moment, those two ministers felt they were dead men. Ber- 
thier fled towards the north, escaping by night from place to 
place ; he passed four nights without sleeping, or even stopping, 
and yet had reached only Soissons. Foulon did not attempt 
to fly : first of all, he spread the report everywhere that he 
had not wished to be minister ; next, that he was struck with 
apoplexy, and lastly pretended he was dead. He had himself 
buried with great pomp (one of his servants having died at the 

* Alex, de Lameth, ffitt, de VAasemblA conttUuanU^ i., p. Q7. 



FAMINE. 185 

right moment.) This heing done, he repaired very quietly to 
the house of his worthy firiend Sartine, the former lieutenant 
of police. 

He had good reason to he afraid : the moYement was terrihle. 
Let us go hack a little. As early as the month of May, 
famine had exiled whole populations, driving them one upon the 
other. Caen and Rouen, Orleans, Lyons, and Nancy, had 
witnessed struggles for corn. Marseilles had seen at her gates 
a hand of eight thousand famished people who must pillage or 
die ; the whole town, in spite of the Government, in spite of 
the Parliament of Aix, had taken up arms, and remained 
armed. 

The movement slackened a moment in June. All France, 
with eyes fixed on the Assembly, was waiting for it to conquer : 
no other hope of salvation. The most extreme sufferings were 
for a moment silent ; one thought was predominant over all 
others. 

' Who can describe the rage, the horror of hope deceived, on 
the news of Necker's dismissal. Necker was not a politician ; 
he was, as we have seen, timid, vain-glorious, and ridiculous. 
But in what concerned subsistence, it is but justice to say, that 
he was an indefatigable, ingenious administrator, fiill of in- 
dustry and resources.* What is far better, he showed himself 
to be an honest, good, kind-hearted man ; when nobody would 
lend to the state, he borrowed in his own name, and engaged 
his own credit as far as two millions of francs, the half of his for- 
tune. When dismissed, he did not withdraw his security ; but 
wrote to the lenders that he maintained it. In a word, if he 
knew not how to govern, he nourished the people, and fed them 
with his own money. 

Necker and subsistence were words that had the same sound 
in the ears of the people. Necker 's dismissal and famine, 
hopeless, irremediable famine, was what France felt on the 
12th of July. 

The provincial Bastilles, that of Caen and that of Bordeaux, 
cither surrendered, or were taken by force, at the same time 
as that of Paris. At Rennes, Saint Male, and Strasburg, the 
troops sided with the people. At Caen there was a fight among 

* See Necker, (Ewfra, vi., pp. 298—324. 



186 DEATH OF FOmiON MJXD BEBTHIEB. 

the sdldierB. A few men of ike Artois legimettt were weanng 
tiie<pBtriotio symbols ; those of the Bourbon regiment) taking 
advantage of their being unarmed, tore them away. It was 
thought that Major Bekunce had paid>them to offer this insult 
to their companions. Belzunce was a smart, wittj offieer, but 
impertment, yiolent, and haughty. He was londin expresring 
his eentmnpt for the National Assembly, for the people, the 
eanedl/e ; he used to walk in the town, armed to the teeth, with 
a f«ro<»ou8*looking servant.* His looks were provoking. The 
people lest patience, threatened, and besieged the barracks ; 
an officer had the imprudence to fire ; and then the people ran 
to fetch cannon ; Belzunce surrendered, or was given up to be 
conducted to prison ; he could not reach it ; he was fired upon 
and killed, and his body torn piece-meal: a woman ate his 
heart. • 

There was blood-shed at Rouen and Lyons : at Saint (}^v 
main, a miller was beheaded : a monopolist baker was near 
being put to death at Poissy ; he was saved only by a depu- 
tation of the Assonbly, who showed themselves admirable for 
courage and humanity, risked their lives, and preserved the man 
only after having begged him of the people on their knees. 

Foulon would perhaps have outlived the storm, if he had 
not been hated by aU France. His mi^ortiyie was to be so 
by those who knew him best, by his vassals and servants. 
They did not lose sight of him, neilher had they been duped 
by the pretended burial. They followed and found the dead 
man alive and well, walking in M. de Sartine*s park : '' You 
wanted to give us hay," said they, ''you shall eat some your- 
self ! *' They put a truss of hay on his back, and adorn him 
with a nosegay of nettles, and a collar of thistles. They then 
lead him on foot to Paris, to the Hdtel-de-Viile, and demand 
his trial of the electors, the only authority that remained. 
The latter must then have regretted they had not hastened the 
popular decision which was about to create a real municipal 
power, give them successors, and put an end to their royalty. 
Royalty is the word ; the French Guards mounted guard at the 
royal palace of Versailles only on orders received (strange to 
say) from the Sectors of Paris* 

* M&mkt9 de Dwmmn»,ii^ p. 53. 



DEATH OF FOtKLOir AKD BBBTHIER. 187 

Tfant itiegal power, inyoked for eyeiyllimg, btti powerless 
in atUthingSy weakened still fiirl^er by its fOTtaitonS' assoeia- 
tlsn wiiii the ancient ^eBchefins^ haying nobody for its head but 
the worthy Bailly, Ihe new^ mayor, aaaid for its ann only La- 
fayette, the oommander of a scarcely organised nationai guard, 
was. now about. to find itself in face of a tenable neoessity. 

They heard almost at ihe same time that Bertluer had been 
arrested at Gompiegne, and that Foulon was being e(»iducted 
back again. For the former, they assumed a responsibility 
both serious and bold (fear is so sometimes), that of telling the 
people of Compiegne : " That iherQ was no reason for detain- 
ing M. fierthier. ' ' They replied that he would then be assuredly 
killed at Compiegne, and that' he oould only be saved by con- 
. ducting him to Paris. 

As to Foulon, it was decided : That heneeforth delinquents 
of that desoriptien should be lodged in the Abbaye, and that 
these words should be inscribed over the door : << Prisoners 
entrusted to the care of the nation." This general measure, 
taken in the interest of one man, secured for the ex-^ounsellor 
his trial by his fiiends and colleagues, the ancient magistrates, 
the only judges of that time. 

All that w«s too evident ; but also well watched by keen- 
sighted men, the attorneys and the Basoehe, by annuitants, 
enemies of Ihe minister of bankruptcy, and lastly, by many men 
who held- public securities and were ruined by the fall in the 
funds. An attorney filed an indictment against Berthier, for 
his deposits of guns. The Basoehe maintained that he had 
BioreoTer one of those deposits with the abbess of Montmartre, 
and obliged a search to be made. La Greve was full of men, 
strangers to the people, ''qfa decent exterior,^* «nd some very 
weU dresaed. The Exchange was at La Greve. 

People oame at the same time to the Hotel-de-Ville, to 
denounce Beaumarchais, another financier, who had stolen 
some papers &om the Bastille. They ordered tbem to be 
taken back. 

It was thought that the poor, at all events, might be kept 
silent by filling their mouths ; so they lowered die price of 
bread : by means of a sacrifice of thirty thousand francs* per 
day, the priee was fixed at thirteen sous and a half the four 
pounds (equal to twenty sous at the present time)* 



188 DEATH OF FOULOK. 

The multitude of La Qreve did not Yociferate the less. At 
two, Baillj descends ; all demand justice. *' He expounded 
the principles/' and made some impression on those who were 
witlun hearing. The others shouted : " Hang ! Hang him ! " 
Baillj prudently withdrew, and shut himself up in the Bureau 
des Submtances, The guard was strong, said he, hut M. de 
Lafayette, who relied on his ascendancy, had the imprudence 
to lessen it. 

The crowd was in a terrihle ferer of uneasiness lest Foulon 
should escape. He was shown to them at a window ; never- 
theless, they hroke open the doors : it hecame necessary to 
place him in a chair in front of the hureau, in the great hall 
of Saint-Jean. There, they hegan to preach to the crowd 
again, to *' expound the principles," that he must he judged. 
" Judged instantly, and hung ! " cried the crowd. So saying, 
they appointed judges, among others two curh, who [re^ed. 
'' Make room there for M. de Lafayette ! *' He arriyes, speaks 
in his turn, ayows that Foulon is a villain, hut says it is neces- 
sary to discover his accomplices ; '' Let him he conducted to 
the Ahhaye ! " The front ranks, who heard him, consented ; 
not so the others. ''You are joking," exclaimed a well- 
dressed man, '' does it require time to judge a man who has 
heen judged these thirty years ? " At the same time, a 
shout is heard, and a new crowd rushes in ; some say : 
*' It is the fauhourg," others : " It is the Palais Royal." 
Foulon is carried off and dragged to the lamp opposite ; ihey 
make him demand pardon of the nation. Then hoist him. — 
The rope hroke twice. They persisted, and go for a new one. 
At length, haying hung him, they chopped off his head, and 
carried it through Paris. 

Meanwhile, Berthier has just arrived hy the Porte Saint- 
Martin, through the most frightful moh that was ever seen : 
he had heen followed for twenty leagues. He was in a cahri- 
olet, the top of which they had hroken to pieces in order to see 
him. Beside him sat an elector, Etienne de la Riviere, who 
was twenty times near heing killed in defending him, and 
shielding him with his hody. A furious moh was dancing on 
hefore him ; others flung hlack hread into the carriage : — 
" Take that, hrigand, that is the hread you made us eat ! " 

What had also exasperated all the population ahout Paris 



DEATH OF BERTHIER. 189 

was, that amid the scarcity, the numerous caraby collected hj 
Berthier and Foulon, had destroyed or eaten a great quantity 
of young green corn. This havoc was attributed to the orders 
of the intendant, to his firm resolution to prevent there being 
any crop and to starve the people. 

To adorn that horrible procession of death, ihey carried 
before Berthier, as in the Roman triumphs, inscriptions to his 
glory : — ** He has robbed the king and France. He has 
devoured the substance of the people. He has been the slave 
of the rich, and the tyrant of the poor. He has drunk the blood 
of the widow and the orphan. He has cheated the king. He 
has betrayed his coimtry."* 

At the fountain Maubu^e, they had the barbarity to shew 
him Foulon's head, livid, with the mouth full of hay. At that 
sight his eyes were glazed ; he smiled a ghastly smile. 

They forced Bailly at the Hotel-de-Ville to take his examin- 
ation. Berthier alleged superior orders. The minister was 
his father-in-law, it was the same person. Moreover, if the 
hall of Saint-Jean was inclined to listen a little. La Greve 
neither listened nor heard ; the vociferations were so dreadful, 
that the mayor and the electors felt more uneasy every mo- 
ment. A new crowd of people having forced its way through 
the very mass, it was no longer possible to hold out. The 
mayor, on the advice of the board, exclaimed : "To the 
Abbaye ! " adding that the guards were answerable for the 
prisoner. They could not defend him ; but, seizing a gun, he 
defended himself. He was stabbed with a hundred bayonets ; 
a dragoon, who imputed his father's death to him, tore out his 
heart, and ran to show it at the Hdtel-de-Ville. 

The spectators in La Greve, who had watched from the 
windows the tact of the leaders in urging and exciting the 
mob, believed that Berthier's accomplices had taken their mea- 
sures well, in order that he might not have the time to make 
any revelation. He alone, perhaps, possessed the real inten- 
tions of the party. They found in his portfolio the description 
of the persons of many friends of liberty, who, doubtless, had 
no mercy to expect, if ihe court conquered. 

• Sisioire de la R&ookOion de '89,jpar deux amis de la Ubert6 (Kerverseau 
et Cla/veHn, jutgu*au t 7,) t. 2, p. 130. See alio the account of Etienne de 
la Riviere, in the Proces-verhal dea £lectew8. 



190 EMBARKAflffMrorr OF THE AflSEMBLT. 

However Hiis may be, a great numb^ of the eolnnides of 
the dragoon declared to him, that haying diBhononred the co a a 
panj he xnuat die, aad that they would iH fi^t hkn till he was 
killed. He waa killed the same ev^^ung. 



CHAPTER in. 

FRANCE IN ABUS. 



Embanaaonent of the Assembly. — It engnga ihe'Paaple>taveaiifidB in it» 
July 23id. — ^Distrust of the People ; Fean of Pans ; Alarm of the 
ProTinoes. — Conspiracy of Brest ; the Court compromised by the English 
Ambassador, July 27th. — ^Fury of the old Nobles and new Nobles: 
Menaces and Ploth-^Tenror in ^tm Rural Dbtticts;— The Peassoits take 
np4ucm8 against' the Brigands, Bum the Femdal Ghiatei8,<and sat. fire to 
BeTexal.Chilteanx«<— July to Augosty 1789. 

The .Tampixes of the tmeien r^rm, whose lives had done bo 
mmix harm to Frasce, did still mere by their death. 

Those' people, whon Mirabeau jbermed soweil'*'{he refnve 
of publie oontempt," aro as if restored to character by ptinidi- 
meni. The gallows becomes their apo^eosis. They are now 
become interesting victims, the martyrs of monarchy; their 
legend will go on increasing in pathetic fictions. Mr. Biuke 
canonized them and prayed on their tomb. ' 

The acts of vielelvee of Paris, and those of which the pro- 
vinces were the ^eatre, placed the National Assembly in a 
diffictdt position, from which it conld not well escape. 

If it did not act, it would seem to encourage anarchy and 
authorise murder, and thus filmish a text for eternal calumny. 

K it attempted to remedy the disorder; and raise fallen 
authority, it restored, not to the king, but to the- queen and 
the court, the sword that the people had shivered in their 
hands. 

In either hypothesis, despotism and caprice were about to 
be re-established, either for the old royalty or the royalty of 
the mob. At that moment they were destroying the odious 
symbol of despotism — ^the Bastille ; and behold another Bas- 
tille — arbitrary rule — again springing up. 

Ehgland rubs her hands with glee at this, and is grateful to 



EMBABBASSMBNT OF THE ASSEMBLT* 191 

the Lawteme, '* Thaak Gi>d/' says she, " the Bastille will 
never disappear." 

What would you have done ? Tell us, you officious coun- 
sellers, you friendly enemies, sages of European aristocracy, 
you who so carefully pour calumny on the hatred you have 
planted. Sitting at your ease on the dead hodies of Ireland, 
Italy, and Poland, deign to answer ; have not your revolutions 
of interest cost more blood than our revolutions of ideas ? 

What would you have done ? Doubtless what was advised 
on the eve and the morrow of the 22nd of July, by Lally- 
Tollendal, Mounier, and Malouet ; to re-establish order, they 
wished that powiBr fidiould be restored to the king. Lally put 
his whole trust in the king's virtues. Malouet wanted them 
to entreat .the king to use his power and lend a strong haad 
to the municipal authority. The king would have armed, 
and not tile people ; no national guard. Should the people 
oomplaiB, why then let them app^ to the Piuiianisiit and 
the Attomey-Oeneral. Have we not magistrates? Eoukm 
was a ma^strate. So Malouet would s^id Foulon to the 
tribunal of Foulon* 

It is necessary, they very truly said, to repress disturbaaices. 
Only it was necessary to come to a right understanding. This 
word comprehended many things : 

Thefts, other ordinary crimes, pillaging committed by a 
starving population, murders of monopolists, irregular judg* 
ment pronounced on the enemies of the people, resistance 
offered to their plottings, legal resistance, resistance in arms. 
All comprised in the word troubki. Did they wish to sup- 
press all with an equal hand ? If royal authority was charged 
to repress the disturbances, the greatest in its estimation was, 
most certainly, the taking of the Bastille ; it would have 
pimished that first. 

This was the reply made by Buzot and Robespierre on the 
20th of July, two days before the death of Foulon; and this was 
what Mirabeau said, in his jomnal, after the event. He set 
this misfortune before the Assembly in its true light, — the 
absence of all authority in Paris, the impotency of the. electors, 
who, without any lawful delegation of power, continued to 
exercise the municipal functions. He wished municipalities 
to be organised, invested with strength, and who should under- 



192 IT DEMANDS THE CONFIDENCE OF THE PEOPLE. 

take the maintenance of order. Indeed what other means were 
there than to strengthen the local power, when the central 
power was so justly suspected ? 

Barnare said three things were necessary: well-organized 
municipalities, citizen guards, and a legal administration of 
the law that might reassure the people. 

What was that legal administration to he ? A deputy-auh- 
stitute, Dufresnoy, sent hy a district of Paris, demanded sixty 
jurymen, chosen from the sixty districts. This proposition, sup- 
ported hy petition, was modified hy another deputy, who wished 
magistrates to he added to the jurymen. 

The Assemhly came to no decision. An hour after mid- 
night, heing weary of contention, it adopted a proclamation, in 
which it claimed the prosecution of crimes of lese-naUon, re- 
serving to itself the right to indicate in the canstittUion the tribu- 
nal that should judge. This was postponing for a long time. 
It invited to peace, for this reason : That the king had acquired 
nwre rights than ever to the conjldence of the people, that there 
existed a perfect accord, &c. 

Confidence! And yet there never was any confidence 
again! At the very moment the Assemhly was speaking of 
confidence, a sad light hurst forth, and firesh dangers were seen. 
The Assemhly had heen wrong; the people had heen right. 
However willing the people might he to he deceived, and be- 
lieve all was ended, common sense whispered that the ancien 
rigime being conquered, would wish to have its revenge. Was 
it possible that a power which had possessed, for ages, all the 
forces of the country, administration, finances, armies, and tri- 
bunals, that still had everywhere its agents, its officers, its 
judges, without any change, and for compulsory partisans, two 
or three hundred thousand nobles or priests, proprietors of one- 
half or two-thirds of the kingdom, — could that immense and 
complicated power, which covered all France, die like one man, 
at once, by a single blow? Had it fallen down dead, shot by a 
cannon-ball of Jdy ? That is what the most simple child could 
not have been induced to believe. 

It was not dead. It had been stnick and wounded ; morally 
it was dead ; physically it was not. It might rise again. How 
wotdd that phantom reappear? That was the whole question 
put by the people! — the one that troubled the imagination. 



DISTRUST OP THE PEOPLE. 193 

Common sense here assumed a thousand forms of popular 
' superstition. 

Eveiybodj used to go and see the Bastille ; all beheld with 
terror the prodigious rope ladder by which Latude descended 
the towers. They would visit those ominous towers, and those 
dark, deep, fetid dungeons, where the prisoner, on a level with 
the common sewers, lived besieged and menaced by rats, toads, 
and every kind of foul vermin. 

Beneath a staircase they found two skeletons, with a chain 
and a cannon-ball which one of those unfortunates had doubt- 
less to drag after him. Those dead bodies indicated crime. 
For the prisoners were never buried within the fortress ; they 
were always carried by night to the cemetery of Saint Paul, 
the church of the Jesuits (the confessors of the Bastille) ; where 
they were buried under names of servants, so that nobody ever 
knew whether they were alive or dead. As for those two, the 
workmen who foimd them gave them the only reparation the 
dead could receive ; twelve among them, bearing their imple- 
ments, and holding the pall with respect, carried and buried 
them honourably in the parish church. 

They were even hoping to make other discoveries in that 
old cavern of kings. Outraged humanity was taking its re- 
venge; people enjoyed a mingled sentiment of hatred, fear, 
and curiosity, — an insatiable curiosity, which, when everything 
had been seen, hunted and searched for more, wished to pene- 
trate further, suspected something else, imagined prisons under 
prisons, dungeons under dungeons, into the very bowels of the 
earth. 

The imagination actually sickened at that Bastille. So many 
centuries and generations of prisoners who had there succeeded 
each other, so many hearts broken by despair, so many tears of 
rage, and heads dashed against the stones. What ! had no- 
thing left a trace ! At most, some poor inscription, scratched 
with a nail, and illegible ? Cruel envy of time, the accomplice 
of tyranny, conniving with it to efface every vestige of the 
victims ! 

They could see nothing, but they listened. There were 
eertainly some sounds, groans, and hollow moans. Was it 
imagination? Why, everybody heard them. Were they to 
believe that wretched beings were still buried at the bottom of 





194 FEABS OF PABI8. 

some secret dungeon known only to the goyenior who had 
perished? The district of the lie Saint-Louis, and others, 
demanded that they should seek the cause of those lamentable 
groans. Once, twice, nay, several times, the people retiuned 
to the charge ; in ^te <xf all these searches, they could not 
make up their minds : they were full of trouble and uneasiness 
for those unfortunates, perhaps buried alire. 

Then again, if they were not prisoners, might they not be 
enemies ? Was there not some communication, under the fau- 
bourg, between the subterraneous passages of the Bastille and 
those of Yincennes? Might not gunpowder be passed from one 
fortress to the other, and execute what Be Launey had con- 
ceived the idea of doing, to Uow up the Bastille, and over- 
whelm and crush the faubourg of lib^ty ? 

Public searches were made, and a solemn and authentic in- 
quiry, in order to tranquillise the minds of the people. The 
imagination then transported its dream elsewhere. It trans- 
ferred its mine and its fears to the opposite side of Paris, into 
those immense cavities whence our monuments were dug, these 
abysses whence we have drawn the Louvre, Notre Bame, aad 
other churches. There, in 1786, had been cast, without there 
being any appearance of it (so vast are those cavtemB) aU whs 
had died in Paris for a thousand years, a terrible mass of dead 
bodies, which, dtuing that year, were transported by n^t in 
funeral cars, preceded by the clergy, to seek, from the Innocents 
to the Tombe Issoire, a final repose and complete obEvion. 

Those dead bodies were calling for others, and it was doubt- 
less there that a volcano was preparing ; the mine, from the 
Pantheon to the sky, was going to blow up Paris, and letting 
it fall again, would confound the shattered and disfigured mem- 
bers of the living and the dead, — ^a chaos of palpitating limbs» 
dead bodies, and skeletons. 

Those means of extermination seemed unneeessary ; fieimine 
was sufficient. A bad year was followed by a worse ; the little 
eom that had grown up about Paris was trodden, qwilt, or 
eaten by the numerous cavalry that had been collected. Nay, 
the com disappeared without horse-soldiers. People saw, or 
£an<Hed they saw, anned bands that came by night and cuk the 
unripe com. Foulon, though dead, seemed to return on purpose 
to perform totheletter what he had promised: ''Mow SVance." 



ALABM OF THE PBOYINOES. 195 

To cut down the green com and destroy it in the second year 
of famine, was abo to mow down men. 

Terror went on spreading ; the couriers, repeating those 
rumours, spread it every day from one end of the kingdom to 
the other. They had not seen the hrigands, but others had ; 
they were at such and such places, marching forwards, numerous, 
and armed to the teeth ; they would arrive probably that night 
or on the morrow without fail. At such a place, they had cut 
down the com in broad daylight, as the municipality of Soissons 
wrote in despair to the National Assembly, demanding assist- 
ance ; a whole army of brigands were said to be marching 
against that town. They hunted for them ; but they had dis- 
appeared in the mists of evening or in the morning fog. 

What is more real, is, that to the dreadful scourge of famine, 
some had conceived the idea of adding another, which makes us 
shudder, when we do but remember the hundred years of war- 
fare which, in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, made a 
cemetery of our unfortunate country. They wanted to bring 
the English into France. This has been denied ; yet why ? 
It is more than likely, since it was solicited at a subsequent 
period ; attempted, and foiled at Quiberon. 

But then, the question was not to bring their fleet on a shore, 
difficult of access and destitute of defence, but to establi^ them 
firmly in a good, defensible place, to hand over to them the^ 
naval arsenal, wherein France, for a whole century, had 
expended her millions, her labours, and her energies ; the head, 
the prow of our great national vessel, and the stumbling-block 
of England. The question was to give up Brest. 

Ever since France had assisted in the deliverance of America, 
and cut the British empire asunder, England had desired not 
its misery, but its ruin and utter destruction ; that some strong 
autumnal tide would raise the ocean from its bed, and cover 
with one grand flood all the land from Calais to the Yosges, the 
Pyrenees, and the Alps. 

But, there Was something still more desirable to be seen, 
which was, that this new inundation should be one of blood, 
the blood of France, drawn by herself from her own veinsy 
that she should c(mimit suicide and tear out her intestines. 

The conspiracy of Brest was a good beginmng. Only» there 
was reason to fear that England, by making friends with ihe 

o2 



196 CONSPIKACY or BREST. 

villains who were selling ber their native land, might unite 
against her all France reconciled in one common indignation , 
and that there should be no longer any party. 

Another thing might have sufficed to restrain the English 
government, which is, that, in the first moments, England, in 
spite of her hate, smiled upon our Revolution. She had no 
suspicion of its extent ; in that great French and European 
movement, which was no less than the advent of eternal right, 
she fancied she perceived an imitation of her own petty insular 
and egotistical revolution of the seventeenth century. She 
applauded France as a mother encourages the child that is trying 
to walk after her. A strange sort of mother, who was not 
quite sure whether she would rather the child should walk or 
break its neck. 

Therefore, England withstood the temptation of Brest. She 
was virtuous, and revealed the thing to the ministers of Louis 
XVI., without mentioning the names of the parties. In that 
half revelation, she found an immense advantage, that of per- 
plexing France, to complete the measure of distrust and suspi- 
cion, have a terrible hold on that feeble government, and take 
a mortgage upon it. There was every chance of its not inquiring 
seriously into the plot, fearful of finding more than it wished and 
of smiting its own friends. And if it did not inquire, if it kept 
the secret to itself, England was able at any time to unveil the 
awful mystery. It kept that sword suspended over the head 
of Louis XVI. 

Dorset, the English ambassador, was an agreeable man ; he 
never stirred from Versailles ; many thought he had found 
favour in the eyes of the queen, and had been well received. 
Nevertheless, this did not prevent him, after the taking of the 
Bastille, the importance of which he fully appreciated, as well 
as the weight of the blow that the king had received, from 
seizing every opportunity of ruining Louis, as far as lay in his 
power. 

' A rather equivocal letter from Dorset to the Count d'Artois 
having been intercepted by chance, he wrote to the minister 
that they were wrong in suspecting him of having in the least 
infiuenced the disturbances of Paris ; far from it, added he 
quietly, your Excellency knows well the eagerness I evinced in 
imparting to you the infamous conspiracy of Brest, in the begin- 



THE COURT COMPROMISED BY THE ENOLISH AMBASSADOR. 197 

nin^ of June, the horror felt by my court, and the renewed 
assurance of its sincere attachment for the king and the nation. 
And then he entreated the minister to communicate his letter 
to the National Assembly. 

In other words, he begged him to hang himself. His letter 
of the 26ih of July stated, and published to the world, that the 
court, for two whole months, had kept the secret, without 
either acting or adopting, apparently reserving that plot as 
a last weapon in case of civil war, — the dagger of mercy 
(poignard de misMcorde), as they called it in the middle ages, 
which the warrior always kept, 'so that, when vanquished, 
thrown on the ground, and his sword broken, he might, whilst 
begging his life, assassinate his conqueror. 

The minister Montmorin, dragged by the English into broad 
daylight, before the National Assembly, had but a very poor 
explanation to give, namely, that, not having the names of the 
guilty parties, they had been unable to prosecute. The Assembly 
did not insist ; but the blow was struck, and was but so much 
the heavier. It was felt by all France. 

Dorset's affirmation, which might have been believed to be 
false, a fiction, a brand cast at random by our enemies, appeared 
confirmed by the imprudence of the officers in the garrison of 
Brest, who, on the news of the taking of the Bastille, made a 
demonstration of intrenching themselves in the castle, menacing 
to subject the town to martial law, if it should stir. This it 
instantly did, taking up arms, and overpowering the guard of 
the port The soldiers and sailors, bribed in vain by their 
officers, sided with the people. The noble corps of the marine 
was very aristocratical, but certainly anything but English. 
Suspicions nevertheless extended even to them, and even 
further, to the nobles of Brittany. In vain were the latter 
indignant, and vainly did they protest their loyalty. 

This irritation carried to excess made people credit the 
foulest plots. The prolonged obstinacy of the nobility in re* 
maining separate from the Third in the States-General, the 
bitter, desperate dispute which had arisen on that occasion in 
every town, large or small, in villages and hamlets, often in the 
same house, had inculcated an indelible idea in the people, that 
the noble was an enemy. 

A considerable portion of the higher nobility, illustrious and 



198 FURY OP THE OLD NOBLES AND NEW NOBLES. 

memorable in history, did what was necessary to prove that this 
idea was false, not at all fearful of the Revolution, and believing 
that, do what it might, it could not destroy history. But the 
others, and smaller gentry, less proud of their rank, more vain- 
glorious or more frank, moreover piqued every day by the new 
rising of the people whom they saw approaching nearer them, 
and who incommoded them more, declared themselves boldly 
the enemies of the Revolution. 

The new nobles and the Parliament people were the most 
furious; the magistrates had become more warlike than the 
military ; they spoke of nothing but battles, and vowed death, 
blood, and ruin. Those among them who had been till then 
the vanguard in opposing the wishes of the court, who had the 
most relished popularity, the love and enthusiasm of the public, 
were astounded and enraged, to see themselves suddenly indif- 
ferent or hated. They hated with a boundless hate. They 
often sought the cause of that very sudden change^ in the artful 
machination of their personal enemies, and political enmities 
were still further envenomed by ancient family feuds. At 
Quimper, one Kersalaun, a member of the Parliament of 
Brittany, one of the friends of Chalotais, and very lately the 
ardent champion of parliamentary opposition, becoming suddenly 
a still more ardent royalist and aristocrat, would walk gravely 
among the hooting crowds, who, however, durst not touch him, 
and naming his enemies aloud, used to say : "I shall judge 
them shortly, and wash my hands in their blood."* 

One of these Parliament people, M. Memmay de Qmncey, a 
noble aei^eur in Franche-Comt^, did not confine himself to 
threats. Envenomed probably by local animosity, and with his 
mind in a fever of frenzy, urged likewise perhaps by that fatal 
propensity of imitation which causes one infamous crime very 
often to engender many others, he realized precisely what De 
Launey had wanted to do, — what the people of Paris believed 
they had still to fear. He gave out at Vesoul, and in the 
neighbourhood, that by way of rejoicings for the good news, he 
would give a feast and keep open house. Citizens, peasants, 
soldiers, all arrive, drink, and dance. The earth opens, and a 
mine bursts, shatters, shivers, and destroys at random ; the 

• Dttchatellier, LaRhohttion en Bretagne, i.,p. 175. 



TEaSOB OF THE BUBAL DISTBICTS. 199 

ground is strewn with bleeding members. The wiiole was 
attested by the cur4, who confessed a few of the wounded who 
suryived, attested by the gendarmerie ^ and brought on the 25di 
of July before the National Assembly. The Assembly being 
exMperated, obtained leave from the king that every power 
fihould be written tOy in order to d^nand that the guilty should 
be delivered up.* 

An opinion was gaining ground and growing stronger, that 
ihe brigands who used to cut down the com, in order to starve 
the people, were not foreigners, as had been first supposed, not 
Italians or Spaniards, as Marseilles believed in May, but French- 
Bien^ enemies to France, furious enemies of the Revolution, their 
a^nts, their servants, and bands whom they paid.t 

The horror of them increased, everybody believing he had 
exterminating demons about him. In the morning, they would 
run to the field, to see whether it was not laid waste. In the 
evening, they were uneasy, fearing they might be burned in the 
night. At the very name of these brigands, mothers would 
snatch up their children and conceal them. 

Where then was that royal protection, on the faith of whioh 
the people had so long slept ? Where that old guardianship 
which had so well re-assured them that they had remained 
minors, and had, as it were, grown up without ceasing to be 

' ^ Later, M. de Memmaj was restored on the pleading of M. Courvoiaier. 
He maintained that the accident had heen occasioned hy the barrel of gun- 
powder, left 6y chwn^ beside some drunken men. Three things had contri- 
buted to create another snspidon : 1st. M. de Memmay's absence on the day 
<if die £MSt ; he was unwilling to be present, he said, wishing to ^^ve full scope 
to the rejoicings; 2ndly, his entire disappearance; 3rdly, the Parliament, of 
which he was an ancient member, would not allow the ordinary tribunals to 
make an inquiry, called the afiair before a higher court, and reserved the trial 
to itself. 

i* The historians all affirm, without the least proof, that these alarms and 
accusations, all that great commotion, proceeded from Paris, from such and 
such persons. Doubtless, the leaders influenced the Palais Royal ; the Palais 
Royal, Paris ; and Paris, France. It is not less inexact to attribute everything 
to the Duke of Orleans, like most of the royalists; or to Duport, like M. Droz ; 
to Mirabeau, like Montgaillard, &c. See the very wise answer of Aleza&dre 
de Lameth. What be ought to have added is, that Mirabeau, Duport, the 
Lameths, the Duke of Orleans, and most of the men of that period, less ener- 
getic than is believed, were delighted in being thought to possess so much 
energy, such vast influence. They replied but little to such accusations, smiled 
modestly, leaving such to believe as would, that they were great villai&s. 



200 THE PEASANTS TAKE ARMS. 

children ? They began to perceiye that, no matter what sort 
of man Louis XVI. might be, royalty was the intimate friend 
of the enemy. 

The king's troops, which, at other times, would have appeared 
a protection, were precisely a subject of dread. Who were 
at their head ? The more insolent of the nobles, those who ^o 
least concealed their hate. They used to excite, to bribe when 
necessary the soldiers against the people, and to into:dcate 
their Germans ; they seemed to be preparing an attack. 

Man was obliged to rely on himself, and on himself alone. 
In that complete absence of authority and public protection, his 
duty as a father of a family constituted him the defender of his 
household. He became, in his house, the magistrate, the king, 
the law, and the sword to execute the law, agreeably to the old 
proverb : ** The poor man in his home is king." 

The hand of Justice, the sword of Justice : that king has his 
scythe in default of gun, his mattock, or his iron fork. Now let 
those brigands come ! But he does not wait for them. Neigh- 
bours unite, villagers unite, and go armed into the country to see 
whether those villains dare come. They proceed and behold a 
band. Do not fire however. Those are the people of another 
village, friends and relations, who are also hunting about.* 

France was armed in a week. The National Assembly 
learn every moment the miraculous progress of that Revo- 
lution ; they find themselves, in an instant, at the head of the 
most numerous army ever seen since the crusades. Every 
coiu*ier that arrived astonished and almost frightened them. 
One day, somebody came and said : '* You have two hundred 
thousand men.'* The next day, another said: "You have 
five hundred thousand men." Others arrived : " A million of 
men have armed this week, — two millions, three millions.** 

And all that great armed multitude, rising suddenly from 
the furrow, asked the Assembly what they were to do. 

Where then is the old army? It seems to have disap- 
peared. The new one, being so numerous, must have stifled 
it without fighting, merely by crowding together. 

People have said France is a soldier, and so she has been 
from that day. On that day a new race rose from the earth, — 

* Montlosier, Mimoires, i., p. 233. Toulongeon, i., p. 56, &c., &c 



TB3 PEASANTS BURN THE FEUDAL CHARTERS. 201 

children bom with teeth to tear cartridges, and with strong 
indefatigable limbs to march frotn Cairo to the Kremlin, and 
with the admirable gift of being able to march and fight with- 
out eating, of having only "their good spirits to feed and 
clothe them." 

Relying on their good spirits, joy and hope ! Who then has 
a right to hope, if it be not he who bears in his bosom the 
enfranchisement of the world ? 

Did France exist before that time ? It might be denied. 
She became at once a sword and a principle. To be thns 
armed is to be. What has neither idea nor strength, exists 
but on sufferance. 

They were in fact ; and they wanted to be by right. 

The barbarous middle ages did not admit their existence, 
denying them as men, and considering them only as things. 
That period taught, in its singular school-divinity, that souls 
redeemed at the same price are all worth the blood of a God ; 
then debased those souls, thus exalted, to brutes, fastened 
them to the earth, adjudged them to eternal bondage, and an- 
nihilated liberty. 

This lawless right they called conquest, that is to say, an- 
cient injustice. Conquest, would it say, made the nobles, the 
lords. " If that be i^," said Sieyes, " we will be conquerors 
in our turn." 

Feudal right alleged, moreover, those hypocritical acts, 
wherein it was supposed that man stipulated against himself : 
wherein the weaker party, through fear or force, gave himself 
up without reserving anything, gave away the future, the pos- 
sible, his children unborn, and future generations. Those 
guilty parchments, a disgrace to nature, had been sleeping 
with impunity for ages in the archives of the castles. 

Much was said about the grand example given by Louis XVI., 
who had enfranchised the last serfs of his domains. An im^ 
perceptible sacrifice that cost the treasury but Httle, and which 
had scarcely any imitator in France. 

What ! it will be said, were the seigneurs in '89 hard- 
hearted, merciless men ? 

By no means. They were a very varied class of men, but 
generally feeble and physically decayed, frivolous, sensual, and 
sensitive, so sensitive that they could not look closely at the 



202 THE FEASAin:S BUBir BEYBBAL CASTLES. 

nnfertunate.* Thej saw them in idyk, operas, stones, and 
romances, which caused them to shed tears of compassion ; 
they wept with Bemardin Saint-Pierre, with Gretry and Se- 
daine, Berquin and Florian ; they foimd merit in their tears, 
and would say to themselves : '*1 have a good heart." 

Thus weak-hearted, easy, open-handed, and incapaUe of 
withstanding the temptation of spending, they required money, 
much money, more than their fathers. Hence the neeessity 
of deriving large profits from Iheir lands, of handmg the pea- 
sant OTer to men of money, stewards, and agents. The nMare 
feeling the masters possessed, the more generous and philan- 
thropic they were at Paris, and the more their yassab died of 
hunger ; they lived less at Iheir castles, in order not to see 
this mraery, which would have heen too painfial for their 
sensihility. 

Such was in g^ieral Ihat feeble, worn-out, effeminate society. 
It wfllingly spared itself the sight of oppression, and oppressed 
only by proxy. However, there w^re not wanting provincial 
nobles, who prided themselves on maintaining in their castles 
the rude feudal traditions, and governed their family and 
their vassals harshly. Let us merely mention here the cele- 
brated Ami des hommesy Mirabeau's father, the enemy of his 
family, who would lock up all his household, wife, sons, and 
daughters, people the state-prisons, have law-suits with his 
neighbours, and reduce his people to despair. He relates 
that, on giving a file, he was himself astonished at the 
moody, savage aspect of his peasants. I can easily bdiere 
it ; those poor people were probably afraid lest the Ami des 
kommes should take them for his children. 

We must not be smrprised if the peasant, having once taken 
up arms, made use of them, and had his revenge. Several 
lords had cruelly vexed their districts, who remembered it 
when the time had come. One of them had walled up the 
village well, and monopolised it for his own use. Another 
had seized on the common lands. They perished. Several 
other murders are recorded, which, doubtless, were acts of 
revenge. 

* Thia is eonfessed by M. De M«itre, in lib ContidiraUona swr la Rho^ 
iuHon (ir%). 



THE PEASANTS BURN THE FEUDAL CHARTERS. 203 

The general arming of the towns was imitated in the rural 
districts. The taking of the BastiUe encouraged them to 
attack th^r own hastilles. The only subject of astonislniiaity 
when one knows what they underwent, is^ that they began so 
late. Sufferings and promises of revenge had accumulated by 
delay, and been stored np to a frightful height. When that 
monstrous avalanche, long pent up in a state of ice and snow, 
suddenly thawed, such a mass gave way, that everything was 
overwhelmed in its fall. 

It would be necessary to distinguish, in that immense scene 
of confusion what appertains to the wandering hands of pil- 
lagers, — people driven about by famine, from what the domiciled 
peasants, the communes, did against their lord. 

The evil has been carefully collected, but not so the good. 
Several lords found defenders in their vassals : for instance, 
the Marquis de Montfermeil, who, in the preceding year, had 
borrowed a hundred thousand francs in order to relieve them. 
Nay, the most furious sometimes stopped short in presence of 
weak adversaries. In Dauphine, for instance, a castle was 
respected, because they found in it only a sick lady, in bed, 
with her children ; they merely destroyed the feudal archives. 

Generally, the peasant marched at once to the castle to 
demand arms ; then, more daring, he burned the acts and 
titles. The greater part of those instruments of bondage, those 
which were the most immediate and oppressive, were much 
oftener in the register offices, with the attorneys and notaries. 
The peasant rarely went there. He preferred attacking the anti- 
quities, — t&e original charters. Those primitive titles, on fine 
parchments, adorned with triumphant seals, remained in the 
treasury of the castle to be shown on grand days. They were 
stored away in sumptuous cases, in velvet portfolios at the bot- 
tom of an oaken ark, — the glory of the turret. No important 
feudal manor but showed, near its feudal dove-cote, its tower 
of archives. 

Our country people went straight to the tower. There, in 
their estimation, was the Bastille, tyranny, pride, insolence, 
and the contempt of mankind ; for many centuries, that tower 
had seemed to sneer at the valley, sterilizing, blighting, and 
<^ressing it widi its deadly shadow. A guardian of the coun- 
try in barbarous times, standing there as a sentinel, it became 



204 DECLARATIOK OF THE RIGHTS OF MAN. 

later an object of horror, - In '89, what was it but the odious 
witness of bondage, a perpetual outrage, to repeat erery morn- 
ing to the man trudging to bis labour, the everlasting humilia* 
tion of his race! "Work, work on, son of serfs, earn for 
another's profit ; work, and without hope." 

Every morning and every evening, for a thousand years, 
perhaps more, that tower had been cursed. A day came when 
it was to fall. 

glorious day, how long you have been in coming ! How 
long our fathers expected and dreamed of you in vain ! The 
hope that their sons would at length behold you, was alone 
able to support them ; otherwise, they would no longer have 
consented to live ; they would have died in their agony. And 
what has enabled me, their companion labouring beside them 
in the furrow of history, and drinking their bitter cup, to 
revive the suffering . middle ages, and yet not die of grief? 
Was it not you, glorious day, first day of liberty ? I have 
lived in order to relate your history I 



CHAPTER IV. 

THE RIGHTS OP MAN. 



Declaration of the Rights of Man and the Citizen. — Disturbances ; the Danger 
oi France. — The Assembly creates the Committee of Inquiry, July 27th. 
— Attempts made by the Court; it "wants to prevent the Trial of 
Besenval; the Royalist Party -wishes to make a Weapon of Public 
Charity. — The Revolutionary Part of the Nobility offer to abandon the 
Feudal Rights. — Niffht of the Oh of AuguH; Chiss Privileges aban- 
doned ; Resistance of the Clergy ; Privileges of Provinces abandoned. 

Above all that great commotion, in a region more serene, the 
National Assembly, without allowing itself to be molested by 
noise and clamour, was buried in thought and meditation. 

The violence of party spirit which had divided it, seemed 
awed and restrained by the grand discussion with which its 
labours began. Then people plainly saw how profoundly that 
aristocracy, the natural adversary of the interests of the 
Revolution, had been woimded in its ideas. They were all 
Frenchmen, after all, all sons of the eighteenth century and 
philosophy. 



DEOLARATIOy OF THE RIGHTS OF MAN. 205 

Either Bide of the Assembly, preserving its opposition, 
nevertheless entered upon the solemn examination of the decla-* 
ration of rights with due solemnity. 

The question was not a petition of rights, as in England, an 
appeal to the written law, to contested charters, or to the true 
or false liberties of the Middle Ages. » 

The question was not, as in America, to go seeking from 
state to state the principles which each of them acknowledged, 
to sum up and generalize them, and construct with them (h 
posteriori) the total formula which the confederation would 
accept. 

The question was to give from above, bj virtue of a sovereign, 
imperial, pontifical authority, the credo of the new age. What 
authority ? Reason, discussed by a whole century of philoso- 
phers. profound thinkers, accepted by every mind and pene- 
trating social orddr, and lastly, ^xed and reduced to a formula 
by the logicians of the Constituent Assembly. The question 
was to impose as authority on reason what reason had found 
at the bottom of free inquiry. 

It was the philosophy of the age, its legislator, its Moses, 
descending from the mount, with the rays of glory on its brow, 
and bearing the tables of the law in its hands. 

There have been many disputations for and against the 
declaration of rights, but nothing to the point. 

First of all, we have nothing to say to such as Bentham 
and Dumont, to utilitarians and quacks, who acknowledge no 
law but the written law, who know not that right is right only 
so far as it is conformable to right, to absolute reason. Mere 
attorneys, nothing more, in the garb of philosophers ; what 
right have they to despise practical men ? Like them, who 
write the law upon paper and parchment, we would engrave 
ours on tables of eternal right, on the rook that bears the 
world : invariable justice and indestructible equity. 

To answer our enemies, let us confine ourselves to them 
and their contradictions. They sneer at the Declaration, 
and submit to it ; they wage war against it for thirty years, 
promising their people the liberties which it consecrates. 
When conquerors in 1814, the first word they address to 
France they borrow from the grand formula which she laid 



206 BECLABATION OF IHB RIGHTS OF MAN« 

down.* Conquerors did I say ? No, ecmquered Father^ and 
conquered in their own hearts ; since their most personal aet, 
the treaty of the Holy AlHanee, reproduces the right that 
they have trampled on. 

The Declaration of Rights attests the Supreme Beii^« the 
guarantee of human morality. It hreathes the s^itimiuit of 
duty. Duty, though not expressed, is no less ererywhere 
present ; erery where you peroeire its austere gravity. A few 
words honrowed from the language of Condillac, do not prevent 
us from recognising in the ensemble the true genius of the 
Revolution, — a Roman gravity and a stoic spirit. 

BiglU was the first thing to be spoken of at sudi a tnoment^t 
it was rights that it was necessary to attest and claim for the 
people. People had believed till then that iJiey had only 
duties* 

However high and general such an act may be, and made to 
last fcNT ever, can one reasonably ejq>ect it to bear no marlui of 
the troublous period of its birth, no sign of the storm ? 

The first word was uttered three days before the 14th of 
July and the taking of the Bastille ; the last, a few days before 
the people brought the king to Paris (the 6th of October). A 
sublime apparition of right between two strains. 

No circumstances wwe ever more terrible, nor any discussion 
more majestic or more serious, even in the midst of emotion* 
The crisis afforded specious arguments to both parties. 

Take care, said one, you are teaching man lus rights, when 
he perceives tiiem but too plainly himself; you are transporting 
him to a high mountain, and showing him lus boundless emjnre. 
What will happen, when, on descending, he wiU find himself 
stopped by the special laws that you are going to make, when 
he will meet with boundaries at every step ? % 

There was mxxe than one answer, but certainly the strongest 

* And verj voluntarily borrowed ; since it was done by all the kings of 
Europe at the head of eight hundred thousand soldiers. They acknowledge 
that every people has the right of choosing its government. See Alexandre 
de Lameth, p. 121. 

*t* Of right and liberty alone : nodiing more at first in that charter of en- 
franchiafimwit. I explain myself more fully in the Introdnctiony and in the 
other volomei. 

X Discours de Matowt, 



DISTURBANOBS. 207 

was ihe state of affiiirs. The crisis was then at its height, 
and the comhat still douhtfiil. It was impossihle to find too 
high a mountain whereon to fix the standard. It was necessary 
to place that fiag, if possihle, so high that the whole world 
might hehold it, and that its tricolor streamer might rallj the 
nations. Recognised as the common standard of humanity, it 
hecame invincihle. 

There are still people who think that grand disousucm ex- 
cited and armed the people, that it put the torch in their hand, 
and promoted warfare and confiagrati(»i. The first stumhling- 
block to that argument is, that the acts of yiolence began 
previous to the discussion. The peasants did not need meta- 
physical formula in order to rise in arms. Even afterwards it 
had but little influence. What armed the rural districts was, 
as we haye already said, the necessity of putting down pillage ;, 
it was the contagion of the cities taking up arms ; and, above 
all, it was the frenzy and enthusiasm caused by the taking of 
the Bastille. 

The grandeur of that spectacle and the variety of its terrible 
incidents troubled the vision of history. It has mixed together 
and confounded three distinct and even opposite facts which 
were taking place at the same time. 

1 St. The excursions of the famished vagrants, who cut down the 
oom at night, and cleared the earth like locusts. Those bands, 
when strong, would break open lone houses, farms, and even castles* 

2ndly. The peasant, in order to repel those bands, was in 
need of arms, and demanded and exacted them fhxn the castles. 
Once armed and master, he destroyed the charters, in which he 
beheld an instrument of oppression. Woe to detested nobles ! 
Then they did not attack his parchments alone, but hisperson alsa 

3rdly. The cities, the arming of which had brought about 
that of the rural districts, were oUiged to repress tibem. The 
National Guards, who then had nothing aristooratical about 
them, since they comprehended everybody, marched forth to 
restore order ; they went to the succour of those casties which 
they detested. They often brought the peasants back to town 
as prisoners, but soon released thenu* 

* All thitu verj muck «nbroUed by histeriaiu, acootding to their pauiou. 
I have consulted old men, especially my illuatrioTiB and veiierable fiiends 
MM. Stranger and de Lamennaii . 



208 DISTURBANCES — ^DANGEB OF FRANCE. 

I speak of the peasants domiciliated in the neighhourhood. 
As for the bands of lawless strollers, pillagers, and brigands, 
as they were called, the tribunals, and even the monicipalities, 
often treated them with extreme severity : a great number of 
them were put to death. Security was at length restored, and 
agriculture protected. If the depredations had continued, cul- 
tivation must have ceased, and France would have been starved 
to death the following year. 

A strange situation for an Assembly to be discussing, cal- 
culating, weighing syllables, at the summit of a world in 
flames. Danger on the right and on the left. To repress the 
disorder, they have, one would think, but one means : to 
restore the ancient order, which is but a worse disorder. 

It is commonly supposed that they were impatient to lay 
hold of power ; that is true of certain of the members, but 
false, very false, with respect to the great majority. The 
character of that Assembly, considered in the mass, its origin- 
ality, like that of the period, was a singular faith in the power 
of ideas. It firmly believed that truth, once found, and written 
in the formula of laws, was invincible. It would require but 
two months (such was the calculation, however, of very serious 
men), in two months the constitution was made ; it would, by 
its omnipotent virtue, overawe authority and the people : the 
Revolution was then completed, and the world was to bloom 
again < 

Meanwhile, the position of affairs was truly singular ; 
Authority was in one place destroyed, in another very strong ; 
organised on such a point, in complete dissolution on another, 
feeble for general and regular action, though formidable still 
to corruption, intrigue, and perhaps to violence. The accounts 
of those latter years, which appeared later, sufficiently show 
what resources were possessed by the court, and how they 
employed them, — how they tampered with the press, the news- 
papers, and even with the Assembly. Emigration was begin- 
ning, and with it an appeal to foreigners, — ^to the enemy, — a 
persevering system of treason and calumny against France. 

The Assembly felt it was sitting upon a volcano. For the 
general safety, it was obliged to descend from the heights 
where it was making laws, and take a nearer view of what 
was passing on the earth. A stupendous descent ! Solon, 



ATTEMPTS MADE BY THE COURT. 209 

Lycurgus, or Moses, debased to the miserable cares of public 
surveillancef forced to watch oyer spies, and become an in- 
spector of police ! 

The first hint was given by Dorset's letters to Count d'Artois, 
by his still more alarming explanations, and the notice of the 
conspiracy of Brest, so long concealed by the court. On the 
27th of July, Duport proposed to create a committee of inquiry, 
composed of four persons. He uttered these ominous words : 
" Allow me to refrain from entering into any discussion. Plots 
are forming. There must not be any question of sending 
before the tribunals. We must acquire horrible and indispen- 
sable information.*' 

The number four reminded them too much of the three 
inquisitors of State. It was therefore raised to twelye. 

The spirit of the Assembly, in spite of its necessities, was 
by no means one of police and inquisition. A very serious dis- 
cussion took place as to whether the secrecy of letters was to bo 
violated, whether they ought to open that suspected corre- 
spondence, addressed to a prince who, by his precipitate flight, 
declared himself an enemy. Gouy d'Arcy and Robespierre 
wished them to be opened. But the Assembly, on the opinion 
of Chapelier, Mirabeau, and even of Duport, who had just de- 
manded a sort of State inquisition, magnanimously declared 
the secrecy of letters inviolable, refused to open them, and 
caused them to be restored. 

This decision restored courage to the partisans of the court. 
They made three bold attempts. On Sieyes being proposed for 
president, they opposed to him the eminent legist of Rouen, 
Thouret, a man much esteemed, and very agreeable to the 
Assembly. His merit in their estimation was his having 
voted, on the 17th of June, against the title of National 
Assembly f that simple formula of Sieyes which contained the 
Revolution. To bring into opposition those two men, or 
rather those two systems, in the question of the presidency, 
was putting the Revolution on its trial, and attempting to 
see whether it could not be made to retrograde to the 16 th 
of June. 

The second attempt was to prevent the trial of Besenval. 
Tliat general of the queen against Paris had been arrested 
in his flight. To judge and condemn him was to condemn 

p 



210 THE COTJRT WISHES TO PSEYENT THE TRIAL OF BESEKYAL 

also the orders according to which he had acted. Necker, in 
returning, had seen him on his journey, and giren him hopes. 
It was not difficult to obtain from his kind heart the promise 
of a solemn step to be taken with the city of Paris.* To 
obtain a general anmestj, in the joy of his return, end the 
Rerolution, restore tranquillity, and appear as after the deluge, 
the rainbow in the heavens, was most charming to the yanity 
of Necker. 

He went to the H6tel-de-yilie, and obtained eyetything of 
those who happened to be there, — electors, representatiyes of 
districts, simple citizens, a mixed, confused multitude, without 
any legal character. The joy of the people was extreme, both 
in the hall and in the public square. He showed himself at 
the window, with his wife on his right, and his daughter on 
his left, both weeping and kissing his hands. His daughter, 
Madame de Stael, fainted with delight.t 

That done, nothing was done. The districts of Paris justly 
protested ; this clemency filched from an Assembly lost in 
emotion, granted in the name of Paris by a crowd without 
authority, a national question, settled at once by a single town, 
-—by a few of its inhabitants, — and that at the moment the 
National Assembly was creating a committee of inquiry and 
preparing a tribunal, — ^this was unprecedented and audacious. 
In spite of Lally and Mounier, who defended the amnesty, 
Mirabean, Bamaye, and Robespierre obtained a decision for a 
trial. The court were again defeated ; howeyer, they had one 
great consolation, worthy of their usual wisdom : they had 
compromised Necker, and destroyed the popularity of the only 
man who had any chance of saying them. 

The court failed in the same way in the aflfair of the Pre- 
sidency. Thouret, alarmed at the exasperation of the people, 
and the menaces of Paris, retired. 

A third and far more serious attempt of the royalist party 
was made by Malouet ; this was one of the strangest and most 
dangerous trials that the Reyolution had met with in her 
perillous route, where her enemies were eyery day laying 
stumbling-blocks, and digging pits at eyery step. 

* He says ezprewlj that lie wu spealdnf in the Bsme of the king. See las 
■peech, SitL de la JEUvohOum, par deux amit de la Ubertly ii., p. 285. 
t Stael, Oon9iderati4m8, Ist part, ch. xziii. Bee also Necker, t. vi., ix. 



AND GET POSSESSION OF PUBLIC GHARITISS. 211 

The reader may remember the day, when, before the Orders 
had yet united, the clergy had gone hypocritically to show the 
Third Estate the black bread which the people had to eat, and 
to engage them, in the name of charity, to lay aside useless 
disputes, in order to undertake iriih. them the welfare of the 
poor. This is precisely what was done by Malouet, in other 
respects an honourable man, but a blind partisan of a royalty 
then all but destroyed. 

He proposed to organise a vastjEwor-rAle, bureaus for relief and 
work, the first funds of which should be furnished by the esta- 
blishments of charity, the rest by a general tax on all, and by a 
loan — a noble and honourable proposal, countenanced at such 
a moment by pressing necessily, but giving the royalist party 
a formidable political initiatire. It placed in the hands of the 
king a three-fold fund, the last portion of which, the loan, was 
unlimited ; it made him the leader of the poor, perhaps the 
general of the beggars against the Assembly. It found him 
dethroned, and placed him upon a throne, far more absolute, 
more solid, by making him king of famine, reigning by what 
is most imperious, food and bread. 

What became of liberty ? 

For the thing to create less alarm, and appear a mere trifle, 
Malouet lowered the number of the poor to four hundred thou- 
sand, — an amount eyidently false. 

If he did not succeed, he nevertheless derived a great advan- 
tage, that of giving his party, the king's, a fine colouring in 
the eyes of the people, — the glory of charity. The majority, 
which would be too much compromised by refusing, was about 
compulsorily to follow and obey, and to place that grand popular 
machine in the hands of the king. 

Malouet proposed, lastly, to consult the Chambers of Com- 
merce and the manufacturing towns, in order to aid the work- 
men, " to augment work and wages.** 

A sort of opposition bidding was about to be established be- 
tween the two parties. The question was to obtain or to bring 
back the people. The proposal of gitfing to the indigent could 
only be met by one to authorise workmen to pay taxes no 
fo«^«r,— one, at least, to authorise country labourers no longer 
to pay the most odious of taxes, the feudal tributes. 

Those rights were in great jeopardy. In orier to destroy 

f2 



212 OFFER TO ABANDON THE FEUDAL RIGHT. 

them the more effectually and annihilate the acts bj which 
thej were consecrated, they bnmed even the castles. The 
large proprietors, who were sitting in the Assembly, were full 
of uneauness. A property so detested and so dangerous, 
which compromised all the rest of their fortune, began to appear 
to them a burden. To sare those rights, it was necessary 
either to sacrifice a part, or to defend them by force of arms, 
rally all the friends, clients, and domestics they might possess, 
and begin a terrible war against the whole people. 

Except an inconsiderable number of old men who had served 
in the Seven Years* War, and young men who had taken a 
part in that of America, our nobles had made no other cam- 
paigns than garrison evolutions. They were, however, indi- 
vidually brave in private quarreb. The petty nobles of Ven- 
due and Brittany, till then so unknown, suddenly stood forth 
and showed themselves heroic. Many nobles and emigrants 
distinguished themselves also in the great wars of the empire. 
Perhaps, if they had acted in concert and rallied togedier, 
they might for some time have arrested the Revolution. It 
found them dispersed, isolated, and weak in their loneliness. 
Another cause of their weakness, very honourable for them, 
was, that many of them were in heart against themselves, — 
against the old feudal tyranny, and that they were at the same 
time its heirs and its enemies ; educated in the generous ideas 
of the philosophy of the time, they applauded that marvellous 
resuscitation of mankind, and offered up prayers for it, even 
though it cost their own ruin. 

The richest seigneur in feudal properties, after the king, was 
the Duke d*Aiguillon.* He possessed royal prerogatives in 
two provinces of the South : aU of odious origin, and which 
his grand-uncle Richelieu had conferred upon himself. His 
father, the colleague of Terray, minister of bankruptcy, had 
been despised even* more than he was detested. The young 
Duke d' Aiguillon felt the more keenly the necessity of making 
himself popular ; he was, with Duport and Chapelier, one of the 
leaders of the Breton Club, There he made the generous and 
political proposition of giviug a portion to the fire in that great 
conflagration, to throw down a part of the building in order to 

* Alex.de Lameth^ Histoirt de VAnemhlee ConttUuanUf i., p. 96. 



NiaHT OF THE FOURTH OF AUGUST. 213 

save the rest ; he wished^ not to sacrifice the feudal rights 
(many nobles had no other fortune), but to offer to the peasant 
to purchase his exemption at a moderate prke. 

Viscount de Noailles was not at the club, but he got scent 
of the proposal, and filched away the honour of being the 
first proposer. A younger son, and possessing no feudal rights, 
he was still more generous than the Duke d*AiguiQon. He 
proposed not only to permit a redemption from rights, but to 
abolish without redemption seigneurial statute-labour (corv^es) 
and other personal bondage. 

This was considered as an attack, a threat, — nothing more. 
About two hundred deputies applauded the proposition. They 
had just read a projected decree in which the Assembly 
reminded people of the duty of respecting properties, of pay- 
ing rent, &o. 

The Duke d'Aiguillon produced a veiy different effect. He 
said that in voting, on the preceding eyening, rigorous mea- 
sures against those who attacked the castles, a scruple had 
arisen in his mind, and he had asked himself whether those 
men were really guilty. And he continued to declaim warmly, 
violently, against feudal tyranny, that is to say, against 
himself. 

That 4th of August, at eight in the evening, was a solemn 
hour in which feudality, after a reign of a thousand years, 
abdicates, abjures, and condemns itself. 

Feudality has spoken. It is now the turn of the people. 
M. Le Guen de Kerengal, a Bas-Breton, in the costume of his 
country, an unknown deputy, who never spoke either before or 
after, ascends the tribune, and reads some twenty lines of an 
accusing, menacing character. He reproached the Assembly 
with singular energy and authority for not having prevented 
the burning . of the castles, by breaking, said he, the cruel 
arms they contain, — those iniquitous acts which debase man 
to the brute, which yoke man and beast to the plough, which 
outrage decency. '' Let us be just ; let them bring to us those 
titles, monuments of the barbarity of our fathers. Who among 
us would not make an expiatory pile to bum those infamous 
parchments ? You have not a moment to lose ; a delay of one 
day occasions new conflagrations ; the downfall of empires is 
announced with far less uproar. Would you give laws only to 



214 CLASS FBIYIISOSS ABAMDOIHSD. 

France in Ruins ? " This made a deep impression. Another 
BreUm did but weaken it by calling to mind serefal strange, 
cruel, incredible rights : the right that the lord of the manor 
had had to cut open the beUies of two of his vassals on return- 
ing from hunting, and of thrusting his feet into their bleeding 
bodies! 

A proYineial nobleman, M. de Foucault, making an attack 
on the great lords who had begun this lamentable discnssion, 
demanded that, before anything else, the great should sacrifice 
their pensions and salaries, — the prodigious donations they 
drew from the king, doubly ruining the people, both by ihe 
money they extorted, and by the neglect into which the pro- 
vince fell, all the rich following their example, deserting their 
lands, and crowding about the court MM. de Quiche and 
de Montemart believed the attack to be personal, and replied 
sharply that the persons alluded to would sacrifice everything. 

Enthusiasm gained ground. M. de Beauhamais proposed 
that penalties should henceforth be the same for all, nobles 
and plebeians, and employments open to all. One asked for 
gratuitous justice ; another, for the abolition of seigneurial 
justice, the inferior agents of which were the scourge of the 
rural districts. 

M. de Custine said that the conditions of redemption pro- 
posed by the Duke d'Aiguillon were difficult, that those 
difficulties ought to be removed, and succour granted to the 
peasant. 

M. de la Kochefoucault, extending the benevolence of France 
to the human race, demanded an amelioration for negro slavery. 

Never did the French character shine forth more charmingly 
in its benevolence, vivacity, and generous enthusiasm. These 
men who had required so much time and study to discuss the 
Declaration of Rights, coimting and weighing every syllable, 
having now an appeal made to their disinterestedness, replied 
unhesitatingly ; they trod money under foot, and those rights of 
nobility which they loved more than money. A grand ex- 
ample which the expiring nobility bequeathed to our citizen 
aristocracy ! 

Amid the general enthusiasm and emotion, there was also a 
proud carelessness, the vivacity of a noble gamester who takes 
delight in flinging down his gold. All those sacrifices were 



CLASS FBIYILEGES ABAKDONEQ. 215 

made by licli and poor, with equal good humour, sometimes 
with archness (like Foucault's motion), and liyelj sallies. 

** And what have I to offer ? '* said Count de Virieu. " At 
least the sparrow of Catullus." He proposed the destruction 
of the destroying pigeons, of the feudal dove-cot. 

The young Montmorency demanded that all those prayers 
should be immediately converted into laws. Lepelletier de 
Saint-Fargeau desired that the people should immediately 
enjoy those benefits. Himself immensely rich, he wished that 
the rich, the nobles, the exempt from taxes, should assess 
themselves for this purpose. 

Chapelier, the president, on being pressed to put the question 
to the vote, archly observed that none of Messieurs the clergy 
having yet been able to obtain a hearing, he should have to 
reproach himself with having shut them out from the tribune.* 

The Bishop of Nancy then expressed, in the name of the 
ecclesiastical lords, a wish that the price of redemption from 
feudal rights should not accrue to the present possessor, but be 
invested as funds useful to the benefice itself. t 

This was economy and husbandry rather than generosity. 
The Bishop of Chartres, a sensible man, who spoke next, 
found a way of being generous at the expense of the nobility. 
He sacrificed the game rights (droits de chasse), very important 
for the nobles, but of little value for the clergy. 

The nobles did not shrink ; they demanded the consumma- 
tion of this renunciation. Several were reluctant. The Duke du 
Chatelet said, smiling at his neighbours : '< The bishop deprives 
us of hunting ; 1 will take away his tithes." And he pro- 
posed that tithes in kind should be converted into pecuniary 
dues redeemable at pleasure. 

The clergy allowed those dangerous words to fall without 
observation, and followed their usual tactics of putting forward 
the nobility ; the archbishop of Aix spoke forcibly against 

* Omitted in the Mcnitewr and the ffistaire ParUmentavre. See the 
Histoire des deux Amis de la Libert^, ii., p. 321. 

f Arranged and disfigured in the MonUeur and the historians who ^sh to 
conceal the egotism of the clergy. The Proces-^ferbal says only : He adhered, 
m his own name and in the name of several memhers of the clergy, to this 
gyitem of redeeming the feudal rights, hy suhmitting (hy the incumbents) to 
the lodging and use of the funds arising from them. — Archives du JRoycmmC, 
ProcitHverhavadeVAssemhUe Nationale. 4^ott^, '89. B. 2. 



216 NIOHT OF THE FOUBTH OF AUOUST. 

feadoltty, demanding that in future every kind of feudal con- 
vention should be prohibited. 

'* I wish I had land/' 8ud the Bishop of Uzes, '* I ahonld 
dehght in giving it into the hands of the labourers. Bat we 
are only depositaries." 

The Bishop of Nimes and Montpellier gave nothing, but 
demanded that the artisans and labourers should be exempt 
from charges and taxation. 

The poorer ecclesiastics were alone generous* Some eur^s 
declared that their conscience did not allow them to have more 
than one benefice. Others said : ** We offer our fees.'* Du- 
port objected that the deficiency must then be made up to 
them. The Assembly was affected, and refused to accept the 
widow's mite. 

Emotion and enthusiasm had gradually increased to an ex- 
traordinary degree. Nothing was heard in the Assembly but 
applause, congratulations, and expressions of mutual benevo- 
lence. Foreigners, present at that meeting, were struck with 
astonishment ; then, for the first time, they beheld France, 
and all the goodness of her heart. What ages of struggles 
had not effected in their coimtries, she had just done in a few 
hours by disinterestedness and sacrifice. Money and pride 
trodden under foot, together with the old hereditary tyranny, 
antiquity, tradition itself, — ^the monstrous feudal oak, felled by 
one blow, — that accursed tree, whose branches covered the 
whole eai*th with a deadly shade, whilst its innumerable roots 
shot forth into the obscurest regions, probing and absorbing life, 
preventing it from rising to the light of day. 

Everything seemed finished. But a scene no less grand was 
then beginning. 

After the privileges of classes, came those of provinces. 
Such as were called state provinces {pays (Vital), which had 
privileges of their own, divers advantages for liberties and 
taxation, were ashamed of their egotism ; they wanted to be 
France, in spite of what it might cost their personal interest 
and their old fond reminiscences. 

As early as 1788, Dauphin6 had magnanimously offered to 
surrender its privileges, and advised the other provinces to do 
the same. It renewed that offer. The most obstinate, the 
Bretons, though bound by their mandates, and tied down by 



PRIVILEGES OF PROVINCES ABANDONED. 217 

the ancient treaties of their province with France, nevertheless 
manifested the desire of uniting. Provence said the same, 
next Bm'gundj and Bresse, Normandy, Poitou, Auvergne, and 
Artois. Lorraine, in affecting language, said that it would 
not regret the domination of its adored sovereigns who were 
the fathers of the people, if it had the happiness of uniting 
with its brethren, and of entering with them aJl together into the 
maternal mansion of France, — ^into that vast and glorious family. 

Next came the turn of the cities. Their deputies came in 
crowds to lay their privileges upon the altar of their native land. 

The officers of justice were unable to pierce the crowd sur< 
rounding the tribune, to bring their ti'ibute. A member of the 
Parliament of Paris imitated their example, renouncing the 
hereditary succession of offices, — ^transmissible nobility. 

The archbishop of Paris demanded that they should re- 
member God on that great day, and sing a Te Deum. 

** But the king, gentlemen," said LaUy, ** the king who has 
convoked us after the long lapse of two centuries, shall he not 
have his reward ? Let us proclaim him the restorer of French 
liberty!" 

The night was far advanced : it was two o'clock. That night 
dispelled for ever the long and painful dream of the thousand years 
of the middle ages. The approaching dawn was that of liberty ! 

Since that marvellous night, no more classes, ^but French- 
men ; no more provinces, but one France ! 

God save France ! 



CHAPTER V. 

THE CLERGY AND THE PEOPLE. 

Prophetic Speeches of Fauchet. — Powerless Efforts for Reconciliation. — ^Immi- 
nent Ruin of the Ancient Church. — The Church had abandoned the 
People. — Buzot claims the Estates of the Clergy for the Nation, 
August 6th. — Suppression of Tithes, August 11th, — Religious Liberty 
acknowledged. — League of the Clergy, the Nobility, and the Court. — 
Paris abandoned to itself. — No Public Authority, few Acts of Yiolence. — 
Patriotic Donations. — Devotion and Sacrifice. — (August, 1789.) 

The resurrection of the people who at length burst their 
sepulchre^ feudality itself rolling away the stone by which it 



218 FBOPHBTKC 8FEBCHE8 OV FAVCHBT. 

had kept ihem immiired, the woik of ages in one mgiit, such 
WBA the first miracle — the divine and aathentic miraele— of 
this new Gospel! 

Hoir applicable here are those wiwds pronoimeed bj Fnndiet 
OTor the skeletons foond in the Bastille! "Tjranny had 
sealed them within the walls of those dungeons winch slie 
b^eved to be etenuill j impenetrable to the light. Tke da§ 
of rendatian is come ! The bones have arisen at the Toiee 
of French libertj ; they depose against centories of opp ro B Bio n 
and death, prophesying the regeneration of hunan nature, and 
the life of nations ! *'* 

Noble langoage of a tme prc^het. Let us cherish it in o«r 
hearts, as the treasure of hope. Tes, they will rise again ! 
The resurrection begun on the ruins of the Bastille, eontinned 
through the night of the 4th of August, will display in the 
light of social life those crowds still languishing in the shadows 
of death. Day dawned in '89 ; next, tibe mom arose shrouded 
in storms ; then, a dark, total eclipse. The sun will yet alune 
out. " Solem quis dicere falsum audeat ?** 

It was two hours after midnight when the Assembly con- 
cluded its important work, and separated. In the morning 
(August 5th), Fauchet was making, at Paris, his funeral oration 
over the citizens killed before the Bastille. Those martyrs of 
liberty had just gained, that very night, in the destruction of 
the great feudal Bastille, their palm, and the price of their 
blood. 

Fauchet there found once more words worthy of eternal 
remembrance : " How those false interpreters of divine oracles 
have injured the world ! They have consecrated despotism^ 
and made God the accomplice of tyrants. What says the 
Gospel ? ' You will have to appear before kings ; they wiU 
order you to act unrighteously, and you shall resist them till 
death.* False doctors triumph, because it is written : CHve 
unto Ccssar the 1hing» that are Ccesar^s, But must they also 
give unto Csesar what is not Cesar's ? Now liberty is not 
Cadsar's ; it belongs to human nature.** 

* Printed at tlie end of Dutsanlx^s (Ewvre dea Sept Joun. He says ad- 
mirably on another occasion : ** We have reached the middle of time. Tyranta 
are ripe.** See his three ipeeches on liberty, spoken at Saint-Jacques, Sainte> 
Margoerite, and Notre-Dame. 



UIPOTBNT EFFOBTS FOR BECOITCILIATIOK. 219 

Those eloquent words were BtiU more so in ihe month of him 
-who, on the 14th of July, had shown himself doubly heroic by 
courage and humanity. Twice had he attempted, at the peril 
of his life, to saye the Htob of others, and stop the efiiision of 
blood. A true Christian and true citizen, he had wished to 
save all, both men and doctrines. His blind charity defended at 
the same time ideas hostile to one another, and contradictory 
dogmas. He united the two Gospels in one bond of lore, with- 
out any attention to the difference of their principles, or to th^ 
opposite characters. Spm-ned and excluded by the priests, he 
looked upon what had caused his persecution as something, for 
that very reason, that he ought to respect and cherish. Who 
has not fallen into the very same error ? Who has not cherished 
the hope of saving the past by hastening the future ? Who 
would not have wished to quicken the spirit without killing the 
old form ? — ^to rekindle the flame without molesting the dead 
ashes ? Vain endeavour ! In vain would we withhold our 
breath. It expands in the air, and flies to the four quarters of 
the world. 

Who was then able to see all that ? Fauchet was mistaken, 
and so were many others. They endeavoured to believe the 
struggle ended, and peace restored ; they wondered to And that 
the Revolution had been already in the Gospel. The heart of 
every one who heard those glorious words leaped with joy. The 
impression was so strong, the emotion so poignant, that they 
crowned the apostle of liberty with a civic wreath. The people 
and the armed population, the conquerors of the Bastille and the 
citizen guard, with drums beating in front, led him back to the 
Hotel-de-Yille ; a herald carried a crown before him. 

Was this the last triumph of the priest, or the first of the 
citizen ? Will those two characters, here confounded, be able 
to blend together ? The tattered raiment, glorified by the 
balls of the Bastille, allow us here to perceive the new man ; in 
vain would he extend that robe in order to cover the past. 

A new creed is advancing towards us, and two others are de- 
parting (how can it be helped ?) — ^the Church and Royalty. 

Of the three branches of the antique oak, — Feudality, 
Royalty, Church, — the first fell on the 4th of August ; the two 
others totter to and fro ; I hear a loud wind in tibe branches ; 
they struggle^ and resist strongly ; their leaves are scattered 



220 DOflNENT BUIK OF THE ANCIENT CHUBCH. 

on the ground ; nothing can withstand that storm. Let what 
is doomed perish ! 

No regret, no useless tears ! Gracious God ! how long bad that 
which imagines it is now dying, heen sterile, dead and useless ! 

What hears an orerwhelming testimony against the Churcli 
in '89, is the state of utter neglect in which she had left the 
people. For two thousand years she alone had the duty of 
instructing them ; and how had she performed it ? What was 
the end and aim of the pious foundations in the middle ages ? 
What duties did they impose on the clergy ? The salyation of 
souls, their religious improrement, the softening of manners, the 
humanising of the people. They were your disciples, and 
given to you alone. Masters, what have you taught them ? 

Eyer since the twelfth century, you have continued to speak 
to them a language no longer theirs, and the form of worship 
has ceased to he a mode of instructiug them. The deficiency 
was supplied hy preaching ; hut gradually it hecame silent, or 
spoke for tho rich alone. You haye neglected the poor, dis- 
dained the coarse moh. Coarse ? Yes, through you. Through 
you, two people exist : the upper, civilised and refined to 
excess ; the lower, rude and savage, much further remoyed from 
the other than in the heginning. It was your duty to fill up 
the interval, to he ever raising the lowly, and of the two to make 
one people. Now the crisis has come ; and I see no cultiyation 
acquired, no softening of manners among the classes of which 
you made yourselves the masters ; what they possess, they have 
naturally, from the instinct of Nature, from the sap that she 
implants within us. The good is innate ; and to whom must I 
attribute the evil, the anarchy, hut to those who were aaswer- 
able for their souls, and yet abandoned them ? 

In '89, what are your famous monasteries, your antique 
schools? The abode of idleness and silence. Grass grows 
there, and the spider spins her web. And your pulpits ? Mute. 
And your books ? Empty. 

The eighteenth century passes away, an age of attacks, in 
which, from time to time, your adversaries summon you in yain 
to speak and to act, if you be still alive. 

One thing alone might be urged in your defence ; many of 
you believe it, though not one will avow it. It is, that, 
for a long time past, doctrine was exhausted, that you no 



THE CHURCH HAD ABANDONED THE PEOPLE. 221 

longer said anytliing to the people, having nothing to say, that 
you had lived your ages, an age of teaching, — an age of dis- 
putation — that everything passes and^ changes; the heavens 
themselves will pass away. Powerfully attached to outward 
forms, unahle to separate the spirit from them, not daring to 
aid the phoenix to die to live again, you remained dumh and in- 
active in the sanctuary, occupying the place of the priest. But 
the priest was no longer there. 

Depart from the temple. You were there for the people, to 
give them light. Go, your lamp is extinct. They who huilt 
those churches, and lent them to you, now demand them. Who 
were they? The France of those times; restore them to the 
France of to-day. 

To-day (August, '89,) France takes hack the tithes, and 
to-morrow (Novemher 2nd), she will take hack the estates. 
By what right? A great jurisconsult has said: "By the 
right of disherison.** The dead church has no heirs. To 
whom does her patrimony revert? To her author, to that 
PATRIA, whence the new church shall rise. 

On the 6th of August, when the Assembly had been long 
discussing a loan proposed by Necker, and which, as he con- 
fessed, would not suffice for two months, a man who till then 
had seldom spoken, suddenly ascended the tribune ; this time 
he .said but these words : '* The ecclesiastical estates belong to 
the nation," 

Loud murmurs. The man who had so frankly stated 
the position of things was Buzot, one of the leaders of the 
future Gironde party: his youthful, austere, fervent, yet melan- 
choly countenance,* was one of those which bear impressed 
upon their brow the promise of a short destiny. 

The attempted loan failed, was again proposed, and at length 
carried. It had been difficult to get it voted, and it was more 
difficult to get it completed. To whom were the public going 
to lend ? To the ancien regime or the Revolution ? Nobody 
yet knew. A thing more sure, and clear to every mind, was 
the uselessness of the clergy, their perfect unworthiness, and 
the incontestable right that the nation had to the ecclesiastical 
estates. Everybody was acquainted with the morals of the pre- 

* Sec a ddcription of him in the Mimoires of Madame Roland, t. ii. 



222 SUPPRESSION OF TITHBS. 

lates and the ignorance of the inferior clergy. The curSs pes- 
sessed some ▼irtues, a few instincts of resistance, bat no infOT- 
mation ; wherever they raled they irere an obstacle to eveiy 
improrement of the people, and caused them to retrograde. To 
quote but one example, Poitou, cinlised in the sixteenth cen- 
tury, became barbarous under their influence; thej were pie- 
paring for us the civil war of Yend^. 

The nobility saw this as plainly as the people ; in their 
resolutions they demand a more useful employment of such 
and such church estates. The kings also had plainly seen it ; 
several times they had made partial reforms, the reform of the 
Templars, that of the Lasarists, and that of the Jesuits. There 
remained something better to be done. 

It was a member of the nobility, the Marquis de Laeoste, 
who, on the 8th of August, was the first to propose in precise 
formula: 1st. The ecclesiastical estates belong to the nation. 
2ndly. Tithes are suppressed (no mention of redeeming them). 
Srdly. The titularies are pensioned. 4ihly. The salaries of 
the bishops and curates shall be determined by the provincial 
Assemblies. 

Another noble, Alexandre de Lameth, supported the proposi- 
tion by lengthened reflections on the matter and the right of 
foundations, a right so well examined already by Turgot as 
early as 1750, in the Encydop^die. " Society," said Lameth, 
"may always suppress every noxious institution." He con- 
cluded by giving the ecclesiastical estates in pledge to the 
creditors of the State. 

All this was attacked by Gr^goire and Lanjuinais. The 
Jansenists, though persecuted by the clergy, did not the less 
defend them. 

This is most remarkable, as it shows that privilege is very 
tenacious, even more so than the tunic of Nessus, and could 
not be torn off without tearing away the flesh ! The greatest 
minds in the Assembly, Sieyes and Mirabeau, absent on the 
night of the 4th of August, deplored its results. Sieyes was a 
priest, and Mirabeau a noble. Mirabeau would have wished to 
defend the nobility and the king, unhesitatingly sacrificing the 
clergy. Sieyes defended the clergy sacrificed by the nobility.* 

* He attempts to jiutify this, in his NoHoe on his life, but does not sacceed. 



SUFFSESSION OF TITHES. 223 

He said that tithes were a real property. How so ? By 
their having been at first a voluntary gift, a valid donation. 
To which they were able to reply in the terms of law, that 
a donation is revocable for cause of ingraUtudej for the 
forgetting or neglecting the end for which it was given ; that 
end was the instruction of the people, so long abandoned by 
the clergy. 

Sieyes urged adroitly that, in every case, tithes could not 
benefit the present possessors, who had purchased with the 
knowledge, prevision, and deduction of the tithes. This would 
be, said he, to make them a present of an income of seventy 
millions (of francs). The tithes were worth more than a 
hundred and thirty. To give them to the proprietors, was an 
eminently political measure, engaging for ever the cultivator, the 
firmest element of the people, in the cause of the Revolution. 

That onerous, odious impost, variable according to the pro- 
vinces, which often amounted to one-third of the harvest ! which 
caused war between the priest and the labourer, which obliged 
the former, in harvest-time, to make a contemptible investiga- 
tion, was nevertheless defended by the clergy, for three whole 
days, with obstinate violence. " What ! " exclaimed a cure, 
** when you invited us to come and join you, in the name of the 
Crod of peace ! was it to cut our throats ! " So tithes were then 
their very life, — what they held most precious. On the third 
day, seeing everybody against them, they made the sacrifice. 
Some fifteen or twenty cures renounced, throwing themselves 
on the generosity of the nation. The great prelates, the Arch- 
bishop of Paris, and Cardinal De Larochefoucauld, followed 
that example, and renounced, in the name of the clergy. Tithes 
were abolished without redemption j*^ (kejuture, but maintained 
for the present, till provision had been made for the support of 
the pastors (August 11th). 

The resistance of the clergy coidd not be availing. They had 
ahnost the whole Assembly against them. Mirabeau spoke 
three times ; he was more than usually bold, haughty, and often 
ironical, yet using respectful language. He knew well the 
assent he must meet with both in the Assembly and among the 
people. The grand theses of the eighteenth century were re- 
reproduced, as things consented to, admitted beforehand, and 
incontestable. Voltaire returned there^ a terrible, rapid con- 



224 RELIGIOUS LIBERTY ACKNOWLEDGED. 

queror. Religious liberty was consecrated, in the Declaration 
of Rights, and not tolerance, a ridiculous term, which supposes 
a right to tyranny. That of predominant religion, predominant 
worship, which the clergy demanded, was treated as it deserved. 
The great orator, in this the organ both of the century and of 
France, put this word under the ban of every legislation. '* If 
you write it," said he, " have also a predominant philosophy, 
and predominant systems. Nothing ought to be predominant 
but right and justice.'* 

Those who know by history, by the study of the middle ages, 
the prodigious tenacity of the clergy in defending their least 
interest, may easily judge what efforts they would now make to 
save their possessions, and their most precious possession^ their 
cherished intolerance. 

One thing gave them courage ; which is, that the provincial 
nobility, the Parliament people, all the ancien re^me, had sided 
¥rith them in their common resistance to the resolutions of the 
4th of August. More than one who, on that night, proposed 
or supported them, was beginning to repent. 

That such resolutions should have been taken by their repre- 
sentatives, — ^by nobles, was more than the privileged classes 
could comprehend. They remained confounded, beside them^ 
selves with astonishment. The peasants who had commenced 
by violence, now continued by the authority of the law. It 
was the law that was levelling, throwing down the barriers, 
breaking the seigueurial boundary, defacing escutcheons, and 
opening the chase throughout France to people in arms. All 
armed, all sportsmen, and all nobles ! And this very law 
which seemed to ennoble the people and disennoble the nobility, 
had been voted by tho nobles themselves ! 

If privilege was perishing, the privileged classes, the nobles 
and priests, preferred to perish also ; they had for a long time 
become identified and incorporated within equality and intoler- 
ance. Rather die a hundi;ed times than cease to be unjust ! 
They could accept nothing of the Revolution, neither its pxun- 
ciple, written in its Declaration of Rights, nor the application 
of that principle in its great social charter of the 4th of Au- 
gust. However irresolute the king might be, his religious 
scruples caused him to be on their side, and guaranteed his 
obstinacy. He would, perhaps, have consented to a diminution 



LjBAGVE: OF THE CLERGY, ETC. 225 

of the regal power; bat tithes — ^that sacred property — and 
then the jurisdiction of the clergy, their tight of ascertaining 
secret transgressions y disayowed by the Assembly, and the 
liberty of religious opinions proclaimed, that timorous prince 
could not admit. 

They might be sure that Louis XYI. would, of his own 
accord, and without needing any outward impulse, reject, or at 
least attempt to elude, the Declaration of Rights^ and the de- 
crees of the 4th of August. 

But between that and his being made to act and fight, the 
distance was still great. He abhorred bloodshed. It might be 
possible to place him in such a position as to oblige him to 
make war ; but to obtain it directly, or to get from him reso- 
lution or order, was what nobody could ever think of. 

The queen had no assistance to expect from her brother 
Joseph, too much occupied about his Belgium. From Austria 
she received nothing but counsels, those of the ambassador, 
M. Mercy d'Argenteau. The troops were not sure. What 
she possessed, was a very great number of officers, of the navy 
and others, and Swiss and German regiments. For her prin- 
cipal forces, she had an excellent select army of from twenty- 
fiye to thirty thousand troops in Metz and its enyirons, under 
M. de Bouille, a devoted, resolute officer, who had given proofs 
of great vigour. He had kept those troops in severe discipline, 
inculcatmg in them aversion and contempt for citizens and the 
mob. 

The queen's opinion had ever been to depart, to throw 
themselves into M. de Bouill^'s camp, and begin a civil war. 

Being unable to prevail upon the king, what remained but 
to wait, to wear out Necker, to compromise him ; to wear out 
Bailly and Lafayette, to allow disorder and anarchy to continue ; 
to see whether the people, whom they supposed to act by the 
instigation of others, would not grow tired of their leaders 
who left them to die of himger. The excess of their miseries 
must at length calm, wear out, and dispirit them. They expected 
from day to day, to see them ask for the restoration of the 
anmen rigime, the good old time, and entreat the king to 
resume his absolute authority. 

** Tou had bread, when under the king : now that you have 
twelve hundred kings, go and ask them for some ! ' These 

Q 



226 FARIS ABAHDONBB TO ITffiEKF. 

wordsy attributed to a miniBter of those days,* wvpc^ wketiier 
uttered or not, the opinion of the court. 

Thia polioy was but too well aided by the sad state of Paris. 
It ia a terrible but certain £ftot, that, in that city of eight huor- 
dred thousand souls, there was no public authority for ^eqpaee 
of three months, from July to October. 

No municipal pamer: — That primitivetelonientary authority 
of societiea w«8 as- it wei» dissolTed. The sixty districts used 
to discuss but did nothing. Their' representatiYes at tiie 
H6telHie>yille were just as inaetive*. Oady, ikej impeded the 
»ayoF, prerented BaiUy from acting. The latter, a ■tndioos 
man, recently an astronomy and acadonieian, quite unprspaied 
for his new oharaeter, always remained closeted infhe ^uraeiw «ta» 
atdsistanceSt.ruieBL&j, and never knowing whether he eooid p?o- 
lision Paris. 

No police : — It was in the pow^tesa heads of Ba^. l%e 
lieutenant of police had giY&k in his resignatioii, and mm not 
v^laced. 

NojuMiioe : — The old criminal jnatice was suddoafy faoBd to 
be so eontrary to ideas and manners, tasd appeared ao baibai o «B » 
that M. de Lafayette demanded its immediate- xefonno^ The 
judgea were obliged to change their oldcuatoma anddsnly, leani 
BOW forms, and follow a more humane but also amore-dilatoiy 
mode of procedmre. The prisons became fiifl, and crowded to 
excess ; what was hencefordi ^ most to be feared^ mm to be 
left there and forgotten. 

No more corporation authorities: — The deans, ladies; Ike., 
and the regulations of trades, were paralysed and aiiaulied by 
the simple effect of ihe 4th. of August. The most jealouff of 
the trades, thoae the acceaa to* which had till ihen beeitdiffieQlt ; 
thebutehers, whose shambles were a sort of fii^ ; the printerst 
and l^e peruke- makers, multiplied exceedingly; Printing, it 
is true, was increasing to an immense extent. The peruke- 
makers, on the contrary, beheld. at the same time their number 
imr^BBing, and dieir ciistomers disappearing. AU the rich 
were, leaving Paris. A journal, affirms that in three months 
sixty thousand paai^orts were signed at the Bi6tel-de-yille.t 

* Sea the pacpdaL but curious article Samt^Priest, in the BiogTfxphie 
MichtMid, evidently written from infonnation given by his fiunily* 
t Jt^luHona de Paris, t. ii., No. 9, p. 8. 



VO PUBLIC AUTHORITT. 227 

Yast crowds of peruk^nakers, tailors^ and Bhoemak»», used 
to assemble at the Louvre and in the Champs Blys^es. The 
National Guard would go and disperse them, somelinies roi^gfalj 
and unceremoniouslj. They used to address complaints futd 
demands to the town impossible to be granted^ — ^to maintain the 
old regulations, or else* make new ones, to fix the prioe of daily 
wages, &c. The servants^ left out of place bj the departuro 
of their masters, wanted to haye all the Sayoyards sent back to 
their country. 

What will always astonish those who are acquainted with the 
history of other rerolutions is, lJi»t in this miserable and 
famished state of Paris, denuded of all authority, thcpe were on 
the whole but yery few serious act» of violence. One word-, one 
reasonable observodon, occamonally a jest, was sufficient to 
check them. On the* first days oidy, subsequent tot^e 14tli of 
July, there were instances of violence committed. The people, 
full of the idea that they w^*e betrayed, sought for t^eor 
enemies haphazard, and were near making some cniel mis- 
takes. M. de Lafayette interposed several times at the critical 
moment, and was attended to : he saved several persons.* 

When I think of the times that fallowed, of our own tnnev so^ 
listless and interested, I cannot help wondering that extreme 
misery did not in the least dispirit this- people, nor drew from 
them one regret for thdr ancient slavery. They could sufier 
and fast. The grand deed achieved in so- short a time, the 
oath at the Jeu^e-Patmie, the taking of t^ Bas^e, the night 
ef the 4th of August, had exalted ^eir courage^ and inspired 
everybody with a new idea of human dignity. Necker, who had 
departed on the 1 1th of July, and returned three weeks after, 
lio longer recognised the same people. Dnssaulz, who had 
passed sixty years underthe aneien regime, can find old France 
nowhere. Everything is changed, says he, deportment, cos- 

* Oa thoia ooouiong,. M. de Lsfiiyette wm traly admirable. He found la 
his heart, in his love for order and justice, words and happj sayings ahove his 
nature, which was, we must say, rather ordinary. Just as he was endeavouring 
to save Ahh^ Cordier, whom the people mistook for another, a friend 'sH^ con*- 
ducting Lafayette's yeimg son to the Hotel-de- Ville. He seized the oppoitlinity, 
and turning towarde the oivwd : " Grentlsmni^"' said be, ** I have the bonpjor 
to present you my son." The crowd, lost in svxprise and euMtion, stopped 
short. La&yette*8 friends led the abb^ into the Hdtel and he was saved. See 
his Mimoires, ii., p. 264. 

<i2 



228. FEW ACTS OF YIOLENCE. 

tume, the appearance of the streets, and the signs. The con- 
vents are full of soldiers ; and stalls are turned into guard- 
houses. Ererjwhere are young men performing military exer- 
cises ; the children try to imitate them, and follow them, step- 
ping to time. Men of fourscore are mounting guard with their 
gr^at-grandchildren : '* Who would have helieyed," say they 
to me, " that we should he so happy as to die free men ? " 

A thing little noticed is, that in spite of certain acts of 
violence of the people, their sensihility had increased ; they no 
longer heheld with sariff /roid those atrocious punishments 
which imder the old government had heen a spectacle for 
them. At Versailles, a man was going t« be broken on the 
wheel as a parricide ; he had raised a knife against a woman, 
and his father throwing himself between them, had been killed 
by the blow. The people thought the pimishment still more 
barbarous than the act, prevented the execution, and overthrew 
the scaffold. 

The heart of man had expanded by the youthful warmth of 
our Revolution. It beat quicker, was more impassioned than 
ever, more violent, and more generous. Every meeting of the 
Assembly presented the touching, interesting spectacle of 
patriotic donations which people brought in crowds. The 
National Assembly was obliged to become banker and receiver ; 
there they came for everything, and sent everything, petitiims, 
donations, and complaints. Its narrow enclosure was, as it 
were, the mansion of France. The poor especially would give. 
Kow, it was a young man who sent his savings,- six hundred 
franes, painfully amassed. Then, again, poor artisans' wives, 
who brought whatever they had, — ^their jewels and ornaments 
that they had received at their marriage. A husbandman 
came to declare that he gave a certain quantity of com. A 
schoolboy offered a purse collected and sent to him by his 
parents, his New-year *s gift perhaps, his little reward. Dona- 
tions of children and women, generosity of the poor, the widow's 
mite, so small, and yet so great before their native land ! — 
before God ! 

Amid the commotion of ambition and dissension, and the 
moral sufferings imder which it laboured, the Assembly was 
affected and transported beyond itself by this magnanimity of 
the people. When M. Necker came to expose the misery and 



PATRIOTIC DONATIONS. 229 

destitution of France, and to solicit, in order to live at least 
two months longer, a loan of thirty millions, several deputies 
proposed that he should be guaranteed bj their estates, — by 
those of the members of the Assembly. M. de Foucault, like 
a true nobleman, made the first proposition, and offered to 
pledge six hundred thousand francs, which constituted his whole 
fbrtime. 

A sacrifice far greater than any sacrifice of money, is that 
which all, both rich and poor, made for the pubHc welfare, — 
that of their time, their constant thoughts, and all their 
activity. The municipalities then forming, the departmental 
administrations which were soon organized, absorbed the citizen 
entirely, and without exception. Several of them had their 
beds carried into the offices, and worked day and night.* 

To the fatigue add also the danger. The suffering crowds 
were ever distrustful; they blamed and threatened. The 
treachery of the old administration caused the new one to be 
treated with suspicion. It was at the peril of their lives that 
those new magistrates worked for the salvation of France. 

But the poor ! Who can tell the sacrifices of the poor ? 
At night, the poor man mounted guard ; in the morning, 
at four or five o clock, he took his turn {a la qtietce) at the 
baker's door ; and late, very late, he got his bread. The day 
was partly lost, and die workshop shut. Why do I say work- 
shop ? They were almost all closed. Why do I say the baker ? 
Bread was wanting, and still more often the money to buy 
bread. Sorrowful and fasting, the unfortunate being wandered 
about, crawled along the streets, preferring to be abroad to 
hearing at home ihe complaints and sobs of his children. 
Thus the man who had but his time and his hands wherewith 
to gain his living and feed his family, devoted them in prefer- 
ence to the grand business of public welfare. It caused him 
to forget his own. 

noble, generous nation ! Why must we be so imperfectly 
acquainted with that heroic period ? The terrible, violent, 
heart-rending deeds which followed, have caused a world of 
sacrifices wluch characterised the outset of the Revolution to 

* As did the administraton of Finist^re. See, for ^^hat relates to this truly 
admirable activity, Duchatellier's Jlfvolution en Bretagne, jpaasim. 



230 DETOnOiT AND SACKDICE. 

be forgotten. A idtenomewm'SMxre graad Atn any p ctBtfwJ 
erent then appeared in the world ; that power of man^ by 
whieh maa is Qod— the power of eacrifioe had aagme nl qd. 



CHAPTER VI. 

TKE YETQ. 

Difficulty of procuring Ppovisiona. — The ui^gent State of Things. — ^^Can flie 
King check ererytbxng P— Long DiBcnsnon on the Veto. — 49ecret Projects 
of die Courts — ^Is there to he imw Chamher or twoP — ^The KnylMi 
Sdio(d. — ^The Aiiemhlj required to be diasolTed and renewed* — It nas 
heterogeneous, discordant, and powerless. — ^Discordaut Principles of Mixa- 
beau. — His Impotency. (August-September, 1789). 

The situation was growing worse and worse. iFrance, betnmeen 
two systems, the old and the iiew,ioBflBd about without adrane- 
ing ; and she was starving. 

Paris, we must say, was liring at the meicy of ohanee. Its 
sabsistenee, ever nnoertain, depended on some arriTal or oiher, 
on a eonroy from Beauoe or a boat from Oorbeil. The city, at 
immense sacrifices, was lowering the price of bread ; the •con- 
sequence was, that the population of the whole enrirons, f«r 
more than ten leagues round, came to procure prorisions at 
Paris. The question was therefore to ieed a Tast comitiy. 
The bakers found it adyantageons to sell at once to the pea- 
Bant, and afterwards, when the Parisians found their shofiB 
esmptjj they laid the blame on the adminiatration for not pro- 
Tuioning Paris. The uncertainty of the marrow, and vmm 
alarms, further augmented the number of difficulties ; every- 
body resenred, etoved up, and concealed provisions. The 
administration, put to its last Besouroes, sent in every direction, 
and bought up by fair means or by force. Occasionally, loads 
of fioTu: on the road were seised and detained on their passage 
by the neighbouring localities whose wants were pressing. 
Versailles and Paris shared toge&er ; but Yersailles kept, bo 
it was said, the ifinest part, and made a superior bread. TIub 
was a great cause of jealousy. One day, when the people of 
Yersa^es had been so imprudent as to turn aside for them- 
selves a supply intended for the Parisians, Bailly, the honest 



• DIFFICULTY .OF PJKOGUBING FBOYIfflOKS. 231 

andreqyectful Bailly, wrote to M. Neoker, that if the flour was 
not restored, thirty thousand men would go and fetch it on the 
morrow. Fear made him bold. His head was in danger if 
provisicmB failed. It often happened that at midnight he had 
but the half .of the flour necessary for the morning market.* 

Tihe tproyisioning of Paris was a kind of war. The national 
guard was sent to protect such an arrival, or to secure certain 
purchases ; purchases were made by force of arms. Being 
inoommoded in their trade, the farmers would not thrash any 
loqger^ neither would the millers grind any more. The spe- 
culators were afraid. A pamphlet by Camille Desmoulins 
designated and threatened the brothers Leleu, who had the 
monopoly of the royal mills at CorbeiL Another, who passed 
for iiie principal agent of a company of monopolists, killed 
himself, or was killed, in a forest near Paris. His death 
brought about his immense frightful bankruptcy, of more than- 
flfty millions of francs. It is not unlikely, that the court, 
who had large sums lodged in his hands, suddenly drew them 
to pay a multitude of officers who were invited to Versailles, 
and perhaps to be carried off to Metz : without money they 
could not begin the civil war. This was already war against 
Paris, and the yery worst perhaps, from their keeping the town 
in such a state of peace. No work, — and famine ! 

''I used to see,'* says Bailly, ''good tradespeople, mercers 
and goldsmiths, who prayed to be admitted among the beggars 
employed at Montmartre in digging the ground. Judge what 
Isuflered.^' He did not suffer enough. We see him, even 
in his Memoires, too much taken up with petty vanities — ques- 
tions of precedence, to know by what honorary forms the speech 
for the consecration of the flags should begin, &c. 

Neither did the National Assembly suffer enough from the 
sufferings of the people. Otherwise it would not have pro- 
longed the eternal debate of its political scdastique. It would 
have understood that it ought to hasten on the movement of 
reforms, remove every obstacle, and abridge that mortal transi- 
tion where France, remained between the old order and the 
new. Everybody saw the question, yet the Assembly saw it 
not. Though endowed with generaUy good intentions and vast 

^Mimoires de Bailly y passim. 



232 THE URGENT STATE OF THINGS. 

information, it seemed to have but little perception of the real 
state of things. Impeded in its progress bj the opposition of 
its royalist and aristocratic members, it was still more so bj 
those habits of the bar or of the Academy, which its most 
illustrious members, men of letters or advocates, still preserved. 

It was necessary to insist and obtain at once, at any [nice, 
without wasting time in talking, the sanction of the decrees of 
the 4th of August, and to bury the feudal world ; it was neces- 
sary to deduce from those general decrees political laws, and 
those administrative laws which should determine the applica- 
tion of the former ; that is to say, to organise, to arm the 
Revolution, to give it form and power, and make it a living 
being. As such it became less dangerous than by b^g left 
floating, overflowing, vague, and terrible, like an element,'^— 
like a flood, or a conflagration. 

It was especially necessary to use dispatch. It was a 
thunderbolt for Fans to learn that the Assembly was occupied 
only with the inquiry whether it would recognise in ihe King 
the absolute right of preventing (absolute veto), or the right of 
adjourning, of suspending for two years, four years, or six 
years. For such pressing, mortal evils, this prospect was 
despair itself, a condemnation without appeal. Four years, six 
years, good God I for people who knew not whetiier they 
should live till the morrow. 

Far from progressing, the Assembly was evidently receding. 
It made two retrograde and sadly significant choices. It 
appointed for president La "Luzerne, the bishop of Langres, a 
partisan of the veto, and next Mounier, once more a partisan 
of the veto. 

The warmth with which the people espoused this question 
has been treated with derision. Several, so it was stated, 
believed that the veto was a person, or a tax.* There is 
nothing laughable in this but the sneerers themselves. Yes, 
the veto was equal to a tax, if it prevented reforms and a dimi- 
nution of the taxes. Yes, the veto was eminently personid ; a 
man had but to say, / forbid^ without any reason ; it was 
quite enough. 

M. de Seze thought to plead skilfully for this cause, by 

* See Ferrieres, Molleville Beaulieu, &c 



LONG DISCUSSION ON THE VETO. 233 

saying that the question was not about a person, but a perma- 
nent wUlf more steady than any Assembly. 

Permanent ? According to the influence of courtiers, con- 
fessors, mistresses, passions, and interests. Supposing it per- 
manent, that will may be very personal and very oppressive, if, 
whilst everything is changing about it, it neither change nor 
improve. How will it be if one same policy, one self-sam^ 
interest, pass on with generation and tradition throughout a 
whole dynasty ? 

The resolutions (cahiers) written under very different circum- 
stances granted to the King the sanction and the refusal of 
sanction. France had trusted to the kingly power against the 
privileged classes. But were those resolutions to be followed 
now that same power was their auxiliary ? They might as 
well restore the Bastille. 

The sheet-anchor left with the privileged classes was the 
royal veto. They hugged and embraced the King in their 
shipwreck, wishing him to share their fate, and be saved or 
drowned with them. 

The Assembly discussed the question as if it had been a 
mere struggle of systems. Paris perceived in it less a question 
than a crisis, the grand crisis and the total cause of the Revo- 
lution, which it was necessary to save or destroy : To he or not 
to he, nothing less. 

And Paris alone was right. The revelations of history, and 
the confessions of the court party, authorise us now in this 
decision. The 14th of July had wrought no change ; the true 
minister was Breteuil, the Queen's confidant. Necker was 
there only for show. The Queen was ever looking forward to 
flight and civil war ; her heart was at Metz, in Bouill6's camp. 
Bouille's sword was the only veto that pleased her. 

The Assembly might have been supposed not to have per- 
ceived there was a Revdintion. ' Most of the speeches would 
have served just as well for another century or any other 
people. One alone will live, that of M. Sieyes, who rejected 
the veto. He stated perfectly well that the real remedy for 
the reciprocal encroachments of the powers, was not thus to 
constitute the executive power an arbiter and a judge, but to 
make an appeal to the constituent power which is in the 
people. An Assembly may be mistaken ; but how many more 



234 OKE CHiaOiBE OR TWO. 



chsnoeB kas not ihe ineFooable defomtmrj of an IrarediUuy 
power of being mistaken, wi t ting ly or imwittiiig^, of Jofiowing 
some dynaadc or family inteveat ? 

He defined fte veto m aimple teUPMh-cackti flnng liy eoe 
indiyidnal against the general will. 

One aensiUe thing waa asid by another deputy, wliiidi is, 
that if the Assembly were divided into two Ohunbere, eaM!h 
having a meto, there would be little fear of an albase of -die 
legidlatiye power ; consequently, it was not necessaiy to 'oppose 
to it a new bamer, by giving the veto to the King. 

There were five hundred votes for a single Ohamber ; and 
the dividing into two Chambers could obtain only one humdied. 
The multitude of nobles who had no chance of entering the 
upper iOhamber, took good care not to creatte for the grand 
loids a peerage in the English fashion. 

The argnments of thoae Who had the Af^omania, "which 
were tiien presented with ability by Lally, Mounier, d&c., amd 
Bubseqnently obstinately reprodnoed by Madame de Stael, Ben- 
jamin Constant, and so many others, had been annihilatted 
beforehand by Sie^s, in a chapter of his book on the Tkird 
Ettate {Tien jSiat). This is truly admirable. That aoeom- 
phehed logician, by the «dle power of his nrind, not hasvii^ 
seen England, and but little acquainted with her history, ^lad 
already found those results which we obtain from a minute 
Btndy 'of her past and present history!^ He saw perfectly 
well thai ihot fiamons balance of the ihree powers, wdiich, i£ 
real, would prevent any progress whatsoever, is apureoomedy, 
a- mystification, for the profit of one of the powers (aristooivtie 
in Enghmd, monarchical in France). England has ever been, 
is, and will bean aristocracy. 1%e art of that aristocracy, what 
has perpetuated its power, is not its giving a share to the peotpie, 
but in finding an extenior field for their activity, to open issues 
for them li it is thus it has spVead England all over 4he globe. 

* Her 'past, in my "History of France," wherein I meet ydih her eveiy 
moment ; her pffeseitt, in the fine work of Leon ¥^ucher. 'That book 'has 
ghren the Bnglith ichool a .blow from which it wiU.necver leco^rar. (See espe- 
dally towards :the f«nd of the second volume). The Enf^ish thomaelvoB 
(Bentham, Bulwer, Senior, &c.) agree to-day that their famous balance of the 
three powers is only a theiiie for schoolboys. 

*t* finglnd would have died, had she not found, from century to century. 



THE ASaBMBLT BBOTOmD TO BE BENEWED. 235 

Ab for the ii>eto, Neoker's opinion which be addressed to the 
Assemhly, that moreover on which it had decided of its own 
accord, was to grant the veto to the King, — »the suspensive 
Mfo ; the right of adjonming as far as the second legislature 
which should follow the one proposing lAie law. 

That Assemhty was ripe for dissolution. Created hefore 
the great Revolution which had just taken place, it was pro* 
foundly heterogeneous and ooofused, lihe the chaos of .the 
aneien regime, whence it sprang. In spite of the name of 
National Assembly, with which it had been baptized bj Sieyes, 
it remained feudal, and was nothing else but tiie ancient 
States-General. Ages had passed over it, £rom the 5th of 
May to the 31st of August. Elected in the 'antique form, and 
according to barbarous law, it Tepresented some two or three 
hundred thousand nobles or priests just as much as the nation. 
By uniting them to itself, the Third Estate had grown weak 
and feeble. At every instant, even without being even aware 
of it, it was compromising with them. It adopted scarcely any 
measures but such as were prejudicial, illegitimate, power- 
less, and dangerous. The 'privileged classes, who were 
manoeuvring outside wibh the court to undo the Bevolution, 
obstructed it still more certainly in the very bosom of the 
Assembly. 

That Assembly, full as it was of talent and sdenee, was 
nevertheless monstrous, through the irremediable disoordance 
of its elements. What production, or what generation can be 
expected from a monster ? 

Such was the language of common sense and reason. The 
moderate who ought, one would think, to have been more 
keen*sighted and less daszled, had no perception of anything. 
Strange enough, passion took a better view ; it perceived that 
everything was danger and obstacle in this twofold situation, 
and strove to get clear of it. But as passion and violence it 
inspired infinite distrust, and met with immense difficulties ; it 
became still more violent in order to surmount them, and that 
very energy created new obstacles. 

an exterior divenion for her interior evil (aristocrBtic injuitioe) : in the six- 
teenth and MTenteenth, North America and the epoliation of Spain ; in the 
eighteentii, the spoliation of Fnuiee and the conquest of India; in the nine- 
teenth, a new colonial extension, and an immense manufacturing development. 



236 DI8C0BDAKT PRINCIPLES OF IdRABEAU. 

The monster of the time, I mean the discord of the two 
principles, their impotencj for creating anything vital, must, 
to be well perceiyed, be seen in one man. That iinitj of 
person, that loftj combination of faculties which is called 
geniuid, is of no nse, if, in that man — ^that genius — ^ideas are 
warring together, if principles and doctrines carry on a furious 
struggle in his bosom. 

I know not a more melancholy spectacle for human nature 
than that now presented by Mirabeau. At Versailles he speaks 
for the absolute veto, but in such obscure terms that nobody 
distinctly understands whether he be for or against it. At 
Paris his friends maintain, on the same day, at the Palais 
Royal, that he has opposed the veto. He inspired so much 
personal attachment in the young men about him, that they 
did not hesitate to lie boldly in order to save him. ** I loved 
him like a mistress,*' said Camille Desmoulins. It is well 
known that one of Mirabeau's secretaries tried to commit 
suicide at his death. 

Those liars, exaggerating, as it often happens, falsehood to 
obtain the more credit, affirmed that on leaving the Assembly 
he had been waited for, followed, and wounded, having been 
stabbed with a sword ! All the Palais Royal exclaimed that a 
guard of two hundred men must be voted to guard poor 
Mirabeau ! 

In that strange speech^ he had maintained the old sophism, 
that the royal sanction was a guarantee of liberty ; that the 
Eling was a sort of tribune of the people ; their representatiye— 
an irrevocable, irresponsible representatiye— one who is never 
to be called to account ! 

He was sincerely a royalist, and, as such, made no scruple 
to receive later a pension to keep open house for tiie deputies. 
He used to say to himself that after all he did but defend his 
own opinion. One thing, we must confess, corrupted him 
more tiuin money, a thing which was the least to be suspected 
in that man so proud in his deportment and his language. 
What was it ? Fear ! 

* He had received it firom a dreamer named Cazeaux. He had not even 
read it. On reading it at the tribune, he found it so bad that he was bathed 
in a cold perspiration, and skipped half of it. — Etienne Dumont^s Sowfenin, 
p. 165. 



AGITATION OF THE VETO. 237 

Fear of the rising, growing Reyolution. He beheld that 
young giant then prevailing over him, and which subsequently 
carried him off like another man. And then he cast himself 
back upon what was called the old order — ^true anarchy and a 
real chaos. From that fruitless struggle he was saved by death. 



CHAPTER VII. 

THB PRESS. 



Agitation of Parii for the Question of tbe Veto, August 30th. — State of the 
Press. — Increase of Newspapers. — Tendencies of the Press. — It is still 
Royalist. — Loustalot, the Editor of the Rivolntiont des Parit. — His Pro- 
position on the 31st of August; Rejected at the Hdtel-de-Ville. — Con- 
spiracy of the Courty known to Ls&yette and everybody. — Growing Oppo- 
sition between the National Guards and the People. — Uncertain Conduct 
of the Assembly. — Volney proposes its Dissolution, September 18th. — 
Impotency of Necker^ the Assembly, the Court, and the Duke of Orleans. 
— Eyen the Press powerless. 

We hare just seen two things : the situation of affairs was 
intolerable, and the Assembly incapable of remedying it. 

Would a popular movement settle the difficidty? That 
could take place only on condition that it was truly a spon- 
taneous, vast, unanimous moyement of the people, like that of 
the 14ih of July. 

The fermentation was great, the agitation lively, but as yet 
partial. From the very first day that the question of the veto 
was put (Sunday, August 30), all Paris took alarm, for the 
absolute veto appeared as the annihilation of the sovereignty 
of the people. However, the Palais Royal alone stood for- 
ward. There it was decided that they should go to Versailles, 
to warn the Assembly that they perceived in its bosom a league 
for the vetOf that they knew the members, and that, unless 
they renounced, Paris would march against them. A few hun- 
dred men accordingly set forth at ten in the evening ; a pertina- 
cious violent man, the Marquis de Saint- Hururge, a favourite 
with the crowd on account of his herculean strength and sten- 
torian voice, had placed himself at their head. Having been 
imprisoned under the old government at the prayer of Us wife 



238 AGITATION ON TEEE 7XT0. 

(a pretty ooqnette wiio poBsessed some creiKt), Saint-Hamrge, 
ae may be conceived, wae already a fbrioiis- enemy* of tlie 
aneien regime, and an ardent champion of the Bevokition. 
On reaching the Champs-Elyseee, his band, akead^F greatij 
dinunished, met with some national guards- sent by LaA^tte, 
who prevented their further progress. 

' The Palais Royal dispatched, one a£ter the other, three <Hr 
four deputations to the city, to obtain leave to pass. They 
wanted to make the riot legal, and with the consent of the 
authority. It is superfluous to say that the latter did not 
consent. 

Meanwhile another attempt, far more serious* was preparing 
in the Palais Royal. The latter, whatever mi^^ ba its 
succeso^ would nscessarily have at leagst the. yaflral advan- 
tage of introdnoing the gnmd qnesticn of tlte imfiaHo^iumin^ 
sion among the whole people. There was, Ifien^ no Ttmgar 
any possibility of its being suddenly decided'* oc carried by 
surprise, at YenwilleB i Paris wa» observuig amliwatelMng the 
Assembly, both by the press and by ita own aaiMMiibiy — the 
great Parisian assembly, imited, though divided into its sixty 
districts. 

The author of the propomtion was a youBj^ jmBnuXai. 
Before relating it, we ought to give an idea of thermsrrement 
operating among the Press. 

This sudden awaking of a people, eallied all at once to a 
knowledge of their rights and to decide on tbefr* deftiny, had 
absorbed all tile aotirity of the time in joumaiifmii'. The most 
speculative minds had been hurried to the fiMd of f^prae^al. 
Every science, every branch of literature, stood stOi ; pofitical 
life was everytiiing. 

Every great day in *89 was accompanied with an eruption 
of newspapers : — 

1st. In May and June, at the opening of the States-Grenend, 
» mnltitade of tiiem spring forth. Mirabeau patronised the 
Courrier de Ptooence ; Gorsas, the Courrier de VenaiUss ; 
Brissot, the P6i&^te Francis ; Barriere, tiie JPotnl du 
J&wTy &c. Iec. 

2ndly. On the night before the 14iih of July, appeioed the 
most popular of all the newspapers, Les lUwlw^OM de Parisy 
edited by Loustalot. 



UJTGBBABV OF TBB FRlSSB; 239 

Srdly. On tbe ere of the 5ih and 6th; of October appeared 
the Ami du Peupie (Marat) and the AnnaXie^ PatrioUquea 
(Canra^ and Mereier). So(»i after, the Oownrier de B^ahanif 
by Camille Desmoulins, certainly the most witty of all ; next, 
<me of the moat violMii}, the Oraieur du F»ujple, by Fr^ron. 

The general character of that great movement, and which 
rendem it the more admirable, is, ^t, in spite of shades of 
opinion, there is almost unanimity. Except one conspicuous 
newspaper, the Press preeenta the appearance of one rast 
council, in. which everybody speaks in hLs turn-, and aU' being 
wigaged in a common aim^ avoid every kind of hostility. 

The Press, at that early age,, struggling againstr the central 
power, hae generally a tendency to strengthen tite local powers, 
and to exaggerate the rights of the commune against the State. 
If the language of aheac^mas might be here employed, we 
should say, iii&t at that period they all seem /ddSraUsts, 
Mirabeau is as mneh so as BrisBot or Lafayette. This goes so' 
lac aa to admit the independence of the provinces, if liberty 
become impossible for aU France* Mira^esn would be con- 
tented to be Count of Provence ; he says so in pkun- termv. 

Notwithstanding all this, the Press,, struggling against ther 
King, is generally royalist. .<^ At that time," says Camille 
Desmonlins at a later period, ^'tiiere were not ten of us 
republicans in France." We must not allow ouroehFcs to^ mis- 
take the meaning of certain bold expressions. In '88, the 
violent d'Epremesnil had said i ** We must urdHmr^onise 
France.'' But it was only to make the Pariiament king; 

MinJieaUt who was destined to complete- the sum of contra- 
dietione, caused Milton's violent little book against kings to be 
translated and printed in his name in '89, at the very moment 
when he was undertaking the • defisnce of royally. It was 
suppressed by his friends^ 

Two men were preadiing the Republic*: one of the most 
prolific writers of the period, the indefatigable Brissot, and the 
brilliant, eloquent, and bold-DeBmoulius. Mis book La France 
Hbre contidns a violently satirical brief histoiy of the monarchy. 
Therein he shows that principle of order and stability to have 
been, in practice, a perpetual disorder. Hereditary royalty, in 
order to redeem itself from so many inconveBiences which are 
evidently inherent, has one general reply to eveoything :. 



240 THE PBBS8 — ^LOUSTALOT. 

the muntenanoe of peace ; which does not prevent it firom 
haying, hy minoriticB and qnarreb of snccession, kept France 
in an almost perpetual state of war : — ^wars with the English, 
wars with Italy, wars about the succession in Spain, &c.* 

Robespierre has said ihat the Republic has crept in between 
the parties, without anybody having suspected it. It is more 
exact to say that royalty itself introduced it, and urged it t^on 
the minds of men. If men refuse to govern themselves, it is 
because royalty offers itself as a simplification which fiualitates, 
removes impediments, and ^penses with virtue and efforts. 
But how, if it become itself the obstacle ? It may be boldly 
aflirmed, that royalty taught the Republic, that it hurried France 
into it, when she d^tmsted it, and was far from it, eren in 
thought. 

To return, the first of the journalists of that day was neiUiw 
Mirabeau, Camille DesmouLms, Brissot, Condorcet, Mercier, 
Carra, Gorsas, Marat, nor Bair^. They all published news- 
papers, and some to a great extent. Mirabeau used to print 
ten thousand copies of his famous Oourrier de Profsence, But 
of the B(voluti4ms de Paris there were (of some numbers) as 
many as two hundred thoutand copies printed. This was the 
greateat publicity ever obtained. The editor's name did not 
appear. The printer signed : — ^Prudhomme. That name has 
become one of the best known in the world. The unknown 
editor was Loustalot. 

Loustalot, who died in 1792 at the age of twenty-nine, was a 
serious, honest, laborious young man. A writer <^ mediocritf , 
but grave, of an impassioned seriousness ; his real originality 
was his contrast with the frivolity of the journalists of the time. 
In his very violence we perceive an effort to be just. He was the 
writer prderred by the people. Nor was he unworthy of the 
preference. He gave, in the outbreak of the Revolution, morB 
than one proof of courageous moderation. When the French 
guards were delivered by the people, he said there was but one 
solution for the affair ; that the prisoners should betake them- 
selves to prison again, and that the electors and the National 

* Siamondi has shown, hj an exact calculation on a period of 500 Tears, how 
much longer and more frequent wars have heen in hereditary than in elective 
monarchies : this is the natural eflect of minorities, quaxrcls of succession, &c. 
Sismondi, Bttidm Mr tm CffrntHtuHom da Ptwpla libra, i., 21 4—221. 



loustalot's proposition. 241 

Assembly should petition the king to pardon them. When a 
mistake of the crowd had placed good Lasalle, the brave com- 
mandant of the city, in peril, Loustalot undertook his defence^ 
justified him, and restored him to favoiu*. In the affair of the 
servants who wanted the Savoyards to be driven away/ he 
showed himself firm and severe as well as judicious. A true 
journalist, he was the man of the day, and not of the morrow. 
When Camillo Desmoulins published his book, La France lihre, 
wherein he suppresses the king, Loustalot, whilst praising him*, 
finds him extravagant, and calls him a man of feverish 
imagination. Marat, then little known, had violently attacked 
Bailly in the Ami du Peupk^ both as a public character and as 
a man. Loustalot defended him. He considered journalism 
as a public function, a sort of magistracy. No tendency to 
abstractions. He lives wholly and entirely in the crowd, and 
feels their wants and sufferings ; he applies himself especially 
to the consideration of provisions, and to the grand question of 
the day, — ^bread. He proposes machines for grinding corn 
more expeditiously. He visits the unfortunate beings employed 
at work at Montmartre. And those miserable objects, whose 
extreme wretchedness had almost divested them of the human 
form, — ^that deplorable army of phantoms or skeletons, who 
inspire rather fear than pity, — woimd Loustalot to the heart, 
and he addresses them in words of affection and tenderest 
compassion. 

Paris could not remain in that position. It was necessary 
either to restore absolute royalty or foimd liberty. 

On Monday morning, August 31st, Loustalot, finding the 
minds of the multitude more calm than on the Sunday evening, 
harangued in the Palus Royal. He said the remedy was not 
to go to Versailles, and made a less violent yet a bolder propo- 
sition. It was to go to the city, obtain the convocation of the 
districts, and in those assemblies to put these questions: — 
1st. Does Paris believe that the king has the right of pre- 
venting ? 2ndly. Does Paris confirm or revoke its deputies ? 
3dly. If deputies be named, will ^ey have a special mandate 
to refuse the veto ? 4thly. If the former deputies be confirmed, 
cannot the Assembly be induced to adjourn the discussion ? 

The measure proposed, though eminently revolutionary and 
illegal (unconstitutional if there had been a constitution), never- 



242 PBOPOSITIOX BEJECnED AT THE HdlEL-DE-YILLE. 

theless was bo perfectly adapted to the neeesmtieB of the day, 
that it was, a few days later, reproduced, at least the prineipal 
part of it, in iha Assembly itseUf, by one of its most eminent 
members. 

Lonstalot -and the deputation of tim Palais Royal were rery 
badly Teoeiyed, their proposition rejected at the Hdtel<-de-Yi]le, 
and the next morning accused in the Assembly. A threatening 
letter, received by the president and signed Saint-Humrge (who, 
howeTer, maintained it was a forgery), completed the general 
irritation. They caused Saint-Humrge to be anrested, and ifae 
National Guard toc^ advantage of a momentary tumnh to ehnt 
np the OM de Foy. Meetings in the Palab Royal wese for- 
bidden and dispersed by the mmiicipal anthorit^. 

The piquant part of the affair is that the executor of these 
measures, M. de Lafiayette, was, at that time and always, a 
republican in heart. Throughout his life he dreamed of the 
republic and served royalty. A democratical royalty, or a 
royal democracy, appeared to him a necessary transition. To 
nndeceive him it required no lees then two experiments. 

The court trifled with Necker and the Assembly. It did 
not deceive Lafayette ; and yet he served h, and kept Paris in 
check. The horror of the former acts of violence of tiie 
people, and the bloodshed, made him recoil before idie idea of 
another 14th of July. But would the civil war whidi the court 
was preparing have cost less blood ? A serious and delicate 
question for the friend of humanity. 

He was acquainted with <everythiBg. On the 13ih of Sep- 
tember, whilst reoeiving old Admiral d'Estaing, the oom- 
mander of the NationiU Guards of VersaiDes, to dinner at his 
house, he told him news of Yorsailles of which he was igno- 
rant. That honest man, "wfao thought he was very deep in the 
confidence of the king and the queen, now learned that iHaaey^ 
had returned to the fatal prejeet >of taking the king to tteta, 
that is to say, of beginning a<di^il war ; that Breteuil'waB pre- 
paring everything in oonoept 4Hth (the ambsesador of AuBlria ; 
that they were bringing towards yerssdlleBtthe'mnsketesrSy^ttie 
^fVftdbnwm, nine f&onsMidxif the ikingk household, two thMb of 
whom ^ere nobhnaen ; that ilfaey wene to meifle 'on MantMgJB, 
where they would be joined by the Baron de Yionianl, a man 
of action. The hotter, who ind 'senred m «almaitt^ tihie "woars 



OONSPIRA.GT OF THE COURT. 243 

of tbe oeotury, recently in thst of America, had cast himself 
violently into the counter-reyolution party, perhaps out of 
jealousy for Lafayette, ^o seemed to be playing the first part 
in the Revolution. Eighteen regiments, and especially the 
Carahinieraf had not taken the oath. That was enough to 
block up all the roads to Paris, cut off its supplies, and famish 
it. They were no longer in want of money ; they had col- 
lected and .enforced it from all sides ; they made sure of having 
fifteen hundred thousand francs a month. The clergy would 
supply the remainder ; a steward of the Benediotius was 
bound, for himself alone, in the sum of one hundred thousand 
crowns** 

The old Admbal wrote to the queen on the Monday (14th) : 
** I have always slept well the night before a naval battle, but 
since this terrible revelation, I have not been able to close my 
eyes." On hearing it at M. de Lafayette's table, he shud- 
dered lest any mie of the servants should hear it: ''I 
remai4ed to him that one word from his mouth might become 
the signal of death." To which Lafayette, with his American 
coolness, replied : ^' That it would be advantageous for one to 
die for itdie salvation of all." The only head in peril would 
have been the queen's. 

The Spanish ambassador said as much to d'Estaing.; he 
knew it all from a considerable personage to whom they had 
proposed for his signature a list of association which the court 
caused to be circulated. 

Thus, this profound secret, this mystery, was spread through 
the saloons on the 13th, and about the streets from the 14th to 
the 16th. On the 16th, the grenadiers of the French Guards, 
now become a paad national guard, declared they would go to 
Versailles to resume their old duties, to guard the Chiteaa 
and the king. On the 22nd, the grand jSot was printed in 
the M^oUiiicns de Paris, and read by all France* 

M. de Lafayette, who believed himself strong, too strong^ 
according to his own expressions, wished on one hand to ched^: 
•the CfOnrt by making them afraid of Paris, and on the other 
hand, to check Paris, and repress agitation by his National 
(akiards. He used and abused their zeal, in quieting the rabble* 

* Three hundred thouBand francs, or 1^000/. atefliin<— C C. 

R 2 



244 COXSPIRACT KNOWN TO LAPATETTE AND EYEBTBODT. 

imposing silence on the Palais Royal, and preventing mobs ; 
he carried on a petty police warfare of annoyance against a 
crowd excited by the fears which he himself shared ; he knew 
of the plot, and yet he dispersed and arrested those who spoke 
of it He managed so well that he created the most fatal 
animosity between the National Guards and the people. The 
latter began to remark that the chiefs, the commanders, were 
nobles, rich men, people of consequence. The National Guards 
in general, reduced in number, proud of their uniform and their 
arms, new to them, appeared to the people a sort of aristocracy. 
Being citizens and merchants, they were great sufferers bj the 
riots, receiving nothing from their country estates, and gain- 
ing nothing ; they were every day called out, fatigued, and 
jaded ; every day, they wanted to bring matters to an end, and 
they testified their impatience by some act of brutality which 
set the crowd against them. Once, they drew their swcnrds 
against a mob of peruke-makers, and there was bloodshed ; 
on another occasion, they arrested some persons who had 
indulged in jokes about the National Guard. A ^1, having said 
she did not care for them, was taken and whipped. 

The people were exasperated to such a degree, that they 
brought against the National Guard the strangest accusation — 
that of favouring the Court, and being in the plot of Versailles. 

Lafayette was no hypocrite, but his position was equivocal. 
He prevented the grenadiers from going to Versailles to resume 
their duties as the king's guards, and gave warning to the 
minister, Saint-Priest (September 17th). His letter was turned 
to advantage. They showed it to the municipality of Ver- 
sailles, making them take an oath of secrecy, and inducing 
them to ask that the regiment of Flanders should be sent for. 
They soHcited the same step from a part of the National Guards 
of Versailles, but the minority refused. 

That regiment, strongly suspected, because it had hitherto 
refused to take the new oath, arrived with its cannon, anunu- 
nition, and baggage, and entered Versailles with much noise. 
At the same time, the Chiteau detained the body guards, who 
had concluded their service, in order to have double the num- 
ber. A crowd of officers of every grade were daily arriving 
en poste^ as the old nobility used to do on the eve of a battle, 
fearing to arrive too late. 



UNCERTAIN CONDUCT OF THE ASSEMBLT.. 245 

Paris was uneasy. The French Guards were indignant ; 
thej had been tried and tampered with without any other result 
than to put them on their guard. Bailly could not help speak- 
ing at the Hotel-de-Ville. A deputation was sent, headed by 
the good old Dussauiz, to conyey to the king the alarms of 
Paris. 

The conduct of the Assembly in the meantime was strange. 
Now it seemed to be asleep, and then it would suddenly start 
up ; one day violent, on the next moderate and timid. 

One morning, the 12th of September, it remembers the 
4th of August, and the grand social revolution it had voted. 
It was five weeks since the decrees had been given ; all France 
spoke of them with joy ; but the Assembly said not one word 
about them. On the 12th, whilst a decree was being proposed 
in which the judicial committee demanded that the laws should 
he put in force conformably to a decision of the 4:th of August, 
a deputy of Franche-Comt6 broke the ice and said : " Steps 
are being taken to prevent the promulgation of those decrees of 
the 4:th of August ; it is said they are not to appear. It is 
time they should be seen, furnished with the royal seal. The 
people are waiting." Those words were quickly taken up. 
The Assembly was roused. Malouet, the orator of the mode- 
rate party — of the constitutional royalists, — even he (singu- 
larly enough) supported the proposition, and others with 
them. In spite of the Abb6 Maury, it was decided that the 
decrees of the 4th of August should be presented for the 
king's sanction. 

This sudden movement, this aggressive disposition of even 
the moderates, inclines one to suppose that the most influential 
members were not ignorant of what Lafayette, the Spanish 
ambassador, and many others, were saying at Paris. 

The Assembly seemed on the morrow astonished at its 
vigour. Many thought that the Court would never let the 
king sanction the decrees of the 4th of August, and foresaw 
that his refusal woidd provoke a terrible movement — a second 
fit of the Revolution. Mirabeau, Chapelier, and others, main- 
tained that these decrees, not being properly laws, but prin- 
ciples of constitution, had no need of the royal sanction ; that 
the promulgation was sufficient. A bold, yet timid opinion : 
bold, in doing without the king ; timid, in dispensing with 



246 YOLNBT PROPOSES TO DISSOLTB THE ASBEMBLT. 

bis examining, fianctioning, or refiofling : no refnaal, no col- 
lision. Things would have been decided iptofax^^ aeeordiiig 
as either party was predominant in this or that proyineew 
Here, they would have applied the deciuons- of the 4tl& of 
August, as decreed by the Assembly ; there, they would ha?e 
eluded them, as not sanctioned by the king. 

On the 15th, the royal inyiqlability, hereditary right, was 
voted by acclamation, as if to dispose the king in. their 
favour. They nevertheless received from, him a dilatory, 
equivocal reply relatiye to the 4th of August. He sanctioned 
nothing, but discussed, blaming this, commending that, and 
admitting scarcely any article without some modification^ The 
whole bore the impress of Necker*s usual style, his tergiversa- 
tion, blunders, and half measures. The Court, that was pre- 
paring something very different, apparently expected to capti- 
vate public attention by this empty answer. The Assembly 
was in great agitation. Chapeher, Mirabeau, Kobespierre, 
Petion, and others usually less energetic, affirmed Ihat in 
demanding the sanction for these preliminary articles^ the 
Assembly expected only a puro and simple promulgation. 
Then, a great discussion, and an unexpected, but very sensible 
motion from Yolney : ** This Assembly is too mixed in inte- 
rests and passions. Let us determine the new conditions of 
election, and retire." Applause, but nothing more. Mirabeaa 
objects that the Assembly has sworn not to separate b^re 
having formed the constitution. 

On the 2l8t, the king being pressed to promulgate, laid 
aside all circumlocution ; the Court apparently believed itself 
stronger. He replied that promuigatian belonged only to laws 
invested with forms which procure their eotecution (he meant to 
say sanctioned) ; that he was going to order ^e pubUeaHan, 
and that he did not doubt but the laws which the Assembly 
would decree, would be such as he could sanction. 

On the 24th, Necker came to make his confession to the 
Assembly. The first loan, thirty millions, had giv^i but two. 
The second, eighty, had given but ten. The general of 
finance^ as Necker' s friends called him in their pamphlets, had 
been able to do nothing ; tho credit which he expected to 
control and restore had perished in spits of hinr. He eame-to 
appeal to the devotion of the nation. The only remody waa 



IMFOXENQY Off MEGKJUk A3SD THE. AaSEMBLY. 24Z 

tbat aho should enforce it herself, that ereryhecfy sheuld tax 
himaelf at a fourth of hts> income^.* 

Necker had now ended his part. After hailing tried everj 
reasonahle means, he trusted himself to the faith, the miraele, 
the vague hope that a people unable to pay less was about 
to pay more, and' that they would tax themselves with the 
monstrous impost of a quarter of their revenue. The chimerical 
financier brought forward ae the last word of his balanoe-sheet, 
as oaah, a Utopia which the good Abbe of Saint-Pierre would 
not have proposed. 

The impotent willingly believes in the impossible ; being 
incapacitated from acting himself, he imagines that chance, or 
some unluiown and unforeseen accident, will act for him. The 
Assembly, no less impotent than the minister, shared his ere« 
dulity. A wonderful speech &om Mirabeau overcame all their 
doubts, and transported them out of their senses. He showed 
them bankruptcy, a hideous bankruptcy opening its monstrous 
abyss beneath them, and ready to devour both themselves and 
France. They voted. If the measure had been serious, if 
money had come in, the effect would have been singular : 
Necker would have succeeded, in relieving those who were to 
drive Necker away, and the Assembly would have paid a war 
in order to dissolve the Assembly. Impossibility, contradic- 
tion, a perfect stand-still in every direction, was fundamentally 
the state of things for every man and every party. To sum 
up all in one word : nothing comes of nothing (ntd ne peut.) 

The Assembly can do nothing. Discordant in elements and 
principles, it was naturally incapable ; but it becomes still 
more so in presence of tumult, at the entirely novel noise of the 
press which drowns its voice. It would willingly ding to the 
royal power which it has demolished ; but its ruins are hostile : 
they would like to crush the Assembly. Thus Paris makes 
them afraid, and so does the Chateau. After the king's 
refusal, they dare no longer show their anger for fear of adding 
to ^e indignation of Pacis» l^xa&pt the responsibility of the 
ministers which they decree, they do nothing, at all consonant 
with the situation of afiaira ; the dividing of France into departr> 

* Neek«v ev«r ganei>oiu,.£Dr hie ovm part exoeadsd. Ae qnarter;. he tuaod 
himself at one hundred thousand francs (£4000.) 



248 EYEN THE PRESS POWEBLESS. 

ments, and the criminal law, are discussed in emptj space ; 
the hall is thinly attended ; scarcely do ax hundred members 
assemhle, and it is to give the presidency to Mounier» a personi- 
fication of immobility ; to him who expresses the best all the 
difficulties of acting, and the general paralysis. 

Can the Court do anything ? They think so at that mom^it. 
They see the nobility and clergy rallying around them. They 
perceiye the Duke of Orleans unsupported in the Assembly ;* 
they behold him, at Paris, spending much money, and gaining 
but little ground ; his popidarity is surpassed by Lafayette. 

All were ignorant of the situation, all overlooked the general 
force of things, and attributed erents to some person or other, 
ridiculously exaggerating individual power. According to its 
hatred or its love, passion believes miracles, monsters, heroes. 
The Court accuse Orleans or Lafayette of everything. Lafayette 
himself, though naturally firm and cool-headed, becomes imagi- 
native ; he is not far from believing likewise that all the dis- 
turbances are the work of the Palais Royal. A visionary 
appears on the press, the credulous, blind, furious Marat, who 
will vent accusations dictated at random by his dreams, desig- 
nating one to-day, and to-morrow another to death ; he begins 
by affirming that the whole famine is the work of one man ; that 
Necker buys up com on every side, in order that Paris may 
have none. 

Marat is only beginning, however ; as yet he has but little 
influence. He stands conspicuously apart from all the press. 
The press accuses, but vaguely ; it complains, and is angry, 
like ^e people, without too well knowing what ought to be 
done. It sees plainly in general that there wiU be " a second 
fit of the Revolution." But how? For what precise object ? 
It cannot exactly say. For the prescription of remedies, the 
press, — ^that young power, suddenly grown so great through the 
impotency of the others, — the press itself is powerless. 

It does but little during the interval previous to the 5th of 
October ; the Assembly does little, and the Hdtel-de-Ville little. 
And yet everybody plainly perceives that some grand deed is 
about to be achieved. Mirabeau, on receiving one day his 

* In regulating the succession, the Assembly spared its rival the King of 
Spain, declaring it brought no prejudice to the renunciations of the Bourbons 
of Spain to the crown of France. 



THE PEOPLE FIND K BEMEDY. 249 

bookseller of Versailles, sends away his three secretaries, shuts 
the door, and says to him : ** My dear Blaisot, you will see 
here soon some great calamity — ^bloodshed. From friendship, 
I wished to give you warning. But be not afraid ; there is no 
danger for honest men like you." 



CHAPTER VIII. 

THE PEOPLE 00 TO FETCH THE KING^ OCTOBER 5, 1789. 

The People alone find a Remedy : they go to fetch the King. — Egotistical Po- 
sition of the Kingi at Vertailles. — Louis XVI. was unable to act in any way. 
— The Queen is solicited to act — Orgy of the Body Guards, October 1st. 
— Insults offered to the National Cockade.— Irritation of Paris. — Misery 
and Sufferings of the Women. — Their courageous Compassion. — They 
invade the Hdtel-de>Ville, October 5th. — They march against Versailles. 
— The Assembly receives Warning. — M aillard and the Women before the 
Assembly. — Robespierre supports Maillard. — The Women before the 
King. — Indecision of the Court. 

On the 5th of October, eight or ten thousand women went to 
Versailles, followed by crowds of people. The National Guard 
forced M. de Lafayette to lead them there the same evening. 
On the 6th, they brought back the kmg, and obliged him to 
inhabit Paris. 

This grand movement is the most general, after the 14th of 
July, that occurs in the Revolution. The one of October was 
unanimous, almost as much so as the other ; at least in this 
sense, that they who took no part in it wished for its success, 
and all rejoiced that the king should be at Paris. 

Here we must not seek the action of parties. They acted, 
but did very little. 

The real, the certain cause, for the women and the most 
miserable part of the crowd, was nothing but hunger. Having 
dismounted a horseman at Versailles, they killed and ate his 
horse almost raw. 

For the majority of the men, both the people and the National 
Ouards, the cause of the movement was honour, the outrage of 
the Court against the Parisian cockade, adopted by all France 
as a symbol of the Revolution. 

Whether the men, however, would have marched against 



250 EGonsncA]; PoainoN of the kinos at yebsailles. 

Vonailles, if the women had not preceded liiem, is doabtloL 
Nobodj before them hed the idea of going to ieteh the king. 
The Palais Royal, on the 30th of Angust, d^Muted widi Saint- 
Hunuge» but it was to convey complaints and threats to the 
Assembly then discussing the veto. But here, Ihe people ckme 
are the first to propose ; alone, they depart to take the king, 
as alone they took the Bastille. What is most people in the 
people, I mean most instinctire and inspired, is assuredly the 
women. Their idea was thi»: *' Bread is wanting, let ns go 
and fetch the king ; they will take care, if he be with us, that 
bread be wanting no longer. Let us go and fetch the baker! '* 

A word of simple yet profound meaning ! The king ought 
to lire with the people, see their sufferings, suffer with them, 
and be of the same household with them. The ceremonies of 
marriage and those of the coronation used to coincide in several 
particulars ; the king espoused the people. If royalty is not 
tyranny, there must be marriage and community, and the 
couple must live, according to the low but energetic motto of 
the middle ages, " With one loaf and one pot."* 

Was not the egotistieal solitude in which the kings "were 
kept, with an artificial crowd of gilded beggars in order to make 
them forget the people, something strange and unnatural, and 
calculated to harden their hearts ? How can we be sur- 
prised if those kings became estranged, bard-hearted, and 
barbarous ? How could they, without their isolated retreat at 
Versailles, ever have attained that degree of insensibility? 
The very sight of it is immoral : a world made expressly for 
one man ! There only could a man forget the condition of 
humanity, and sign, like Louis XIV., the expulsion of amillicm 
of mtti ; or, like Louis XV., speculate on famine. 

The unanimity of Paris bad overthrown the Bastille. To 
conquer the king and the Assembly, it was necessaiy that it 
^ould find itself once more unanimous. The National Guard 
and the people were beginning to divide. In order to re-unite 
them, and make them concur for the same end, it required no 
less than a provocation from the Court. No political wisdom 
would have- brought about the event ; an act of folly was 
njaoeasary. 

* Ste my Ofigimti dm Droit : tymbohse^firwiiidmjundiqitm. 



LOUIS ZYI. UMABSB TO ACT DT AKT WAT. 251 

Tha^ was the real remedy^ the only means of getting iid> of 
^e intolerable position in which everybody seemed entangled. 
This folly would have been done by the queen's party long beforSy 
if it had not met with its clitef stumbling-block and difficulty in 
Louis XYI. Nobody could be more averse to a change of 
habits. To deprive him of his hunting, his workshcp, and hiiT 
early hour of retiring to rest ; to interrupt the regularity of his 
meflds and prayers ;. to put him on: horseback en eampa^ne, and 
make an active partisan of him, as we see Charles I., in the 
picture by Yandyck, was not easy. 13m own good sense- like- 
wise told him that he ran much risk in- declaring himself against 
tiie National Assembly. 

On the other hand, this same attaohment to his habits^ to 
the ideas of his education and childhood, made him against 
the Revolution even more than the diminution of the royal 
authority. He did not conceal his displeasure at the demo- 
lition of the Bastille.* The uniform of the National Guards 
worn by his own people ; his valets now become lieutenants — 
officers ; more than one musician of the chapel chanting mass 
in a captain's uniform ;. all that annoyed his sight : he caused 
his servants to be forbidden '' to appear in his presence in such 
an unseasonable costume, "t 

It was difficult to move the king, either one way or the 
other. In every deliberation, he was very fluctuating, but in 
his old habits, and in his rooted ideas, insuperably ohstinattt. 
Even the queen, whom he dearly loved, would have gained 
nothing by persuasion. Fear had still less influence upon him ; 
he knew he was the anointed of the Lord^ inviolable and sacred ; 
what could he fear ? 

Meanwhile, tiie queen was surrounded by a whirlwind of pas- 
sions, intrigues, and interested zeal ; prelates and lords, all that 
aristocracy who had so aspersed her character, and now were 
trying to effect a reconciliation, crowded her apartments, fer- 
vently conjuring her to save ihe monarchy. She alone, if they 
were to be believed, possessed genius and courage ; it was time 
that she, the daughter of Maria-Theresa, should show hers^* 
The queen d^ved conrage^ moreover, from two very different 
soAts of people ; on one hand, braflre and worthy. ehenndifirB of 



252 THE QUEEN IS 80UCITED TO ACT. 

Saint-Louis, officers or provincial noblemen, who offered her 
their swords ; on the other, projectors and schemers, who 
showed plans, undertook to execute them, and warranted suc- 
cess. Versailles was as if besieged by these Figaros of 
royalty. 

It was necessary to make a holy league, and for all honest 
people to rally round the queen. The king would then be car- 
ried away in the enthusiasm of their lore, and unable to resist 
any longer. The revolutionary party could make but one cam- 
paign ; once conquered, it would perish : on the contrary, the 
other party, comprising all the liu*ge proprietors, was able to 
suffice for several campaigns, and maintain the war for many 
years. For such arguments to be good, it was only necessary 
to suppose that the unanimity of the people would not affect 
the soldier, and that he would never remember that be also 
was the people. 

The spirit of jealousy then rising between the National 
Guard and the people doubtless emboldened the Court, and 
made them believe Paris to be powerless ; they risked a pre- 
mature manifestation which was destined to ruin them. Fresh 
body guards were arriving, for their three months' service ; 
these men, unacquainted with Paris or the Assembly, strangers 
to the new spirit, good provincial royalists, imbued with all 
their family prejudices, and paternal and maternal recom- 
mendations to serve the king, and the king alone. That body 
of guards, though some of its members were friends of liberty, 
had not taken the oath, and still wore the white cockade. By 
them, they attempted to entice away the officers of the regi- 
ment of Flanders, and those of a few other troops. In order 
to bring them all together, a grand dinner was given, to which 
were admitted a few officers selected from the National Guard 
of Versailles, whom they hoped to attach to their cause. 

We must know that the town in France which had the 
greatest detestation for the Court, was the one that saw most 
of it, namely, Versailles. Whoever was not a servant or an 
employ^ belonging to the Chateau was a revolutionist. The 
constant sight of all that pomp, of those splendid equipages, 
and those haughty, supercilious people, engendered envy and 
hatred. This disposition of the inhabitants had caused them 
to name one Lecointre, a linendraper, a firm patriot, but other- 



ORGY OF TUB BODY GUARD. 253 

ydse a spiteful, virulent man, ais lieutenant^dolonel of their 
National Guard. The invitation sent to a few of the officers 
was but little flattering to them, and a cause of great dissatis- 
faction to the others. 

A military repast might have been given in the Orangerie 
or anywhere else ; but the king (an unprecedented favour) 
granted the use of his magnificent theatre, in which no /^ 
had been given since the visit of the emperor Joseph II. 
Wines are lavished with royal prodigality. They drink the 
health of the king, the queen, and the dauj^in ; somebody, in a 
low, timid voice, proposed that of the nation ; but nobody would 
pay any attention. At the dessert, the grenadiers of the 
regiment of Flanders, the Swiss, and other soldiers are 
introduced. They all drink and admire, dazzled by the 
fantastical brilliancy of that singular fairy scene, where the 
boxes, lined with looking-glasses, reflect a blaze of light in 
every direction. 

The doors open^ Behold the king and the queen! The 
king has been prevailed on to visit them on his return from 
the chase. The queen walks round to every table, looking 
beautiful, and adorned with the child she bears in her arms. All 
those young men are delighted, transported out of their senses. 
The queen, we must confess, less majestic at other periods, 
had never discouraged those who devoted their hearts to her 
service ; she had not disdained to wear in her head-dress a 
plume from Lauzun's helmet.* There was even a tradition 
that the bold declaration of a private in the body guards had 
been listened to without anger ; and that, without any other 
punishment than a benevolent irony, the queen had obtained 
his promotion. 

So beautiful, and yet so unfortunate I As she was depart- 
ing with the king, the band played the affecting air : '^0 
Richard, my king, abandoned by the whole world ! " Every 
heart melted at that appeal. Several tore off their cockades, 
and took that of the queen, the black Austrian cockade, de- 
voting themselves to her service. At the very least, the tri- 
color cockade was turned inside out, so as to appear white. The 

* What does it aignify whether Laazun offered it, or she had asked for it ? 
See MAnotres de Campari^ and Lauzim (Revue r^trotpective), &c. 



254 INSULTS OFFEBSD TO THK KATI<»rAL COCKADE. 

nnffiic oontinued, ever more impaBBionod and ardent : it pfaiyod 
the Marche det £fulans, «nd Bounded the charge. Tfaegr aH 
leaped to their feet, looking ahont ier the ^lemj. No eneinj 
appeared ; for want of adyersaries they scaled the hoxes, rnshed 
oot, and reaehed the maihle conrfc. Peraeyal, aide-de-camp to 
d'Bstaing* scales the grand haloony, and makes himself master 
of the interior posts, shooting, ** They are onr prisonefs.** 
Se adonis himself with the white cockade. A grenadier of the 
regiment of Flanders likewise ascends, and Fersevid tore off 
and gwve him a decoration whi(^ he then wore. A dragoon 
wanted also to asoend, bnt being misleadj, he tombled dewn, 
fiid would haye killed himself in his deq>air. 

To complete the scene, another, half -dronk and half mad, 
goes shoirting about that he is a ejpf of the Duke of Orleans, 
and inflicts a sKght wound npon himself ; his oompanimiB were 
so disgusted that they kicked bim^almost to death. 

The frenzy of that mad orgy seemed to infect the whole 
court. The qneen, -on presenting flags to the Natiomd Gtiards 
of Versailles, «aid '< that she was still enchanted with it." On 
the 3rd of October, anoliher dinner; they grow more daring, 
iheir tongnes are nntied, and ^le counter-reyolntion afaowd 
itself bol ly ; seyeral of the National Guards withdrew in indig- 
nation. The costume of National Guard is no longer rec^red in 
tim palace. " You have no feeling,** said one officer to another, 
*'to wear such a dress.** In the long gallery, and in the 
apartments, the ladies no longer allow the tricolor cockade to 
circidate. With their handkerchiefs and ribands they make 
iMte cockades, and tie them themselyes. The damsels grow 
so \hM as to receiye the yows of these new cheyalierB, and 
allow them to kiss their hands. "Take this cockade," said 
ihey, '* and gnard it well ; it is the true one, and alone shall 
be triumphant/' How conld they refuse, from such loyefy 
hands, that symbol, that souvenir ? And yet it is ciyfl war and 
death : to-morrow, La Yend6e ! That fair and almost mfm- 
tine form, standing l^ the aunts of the king, will be Madame 
de Lescure and De la Roehejaqnelin. * 

The braye National G>n8drdB of Yersailles hadmuidi ado to 



« -Slw wn 4tenst ycfinillM. fiae tiie noyel, true in Ihif ptrBcnkr, wliich 
M. de Banmte fawvpuUidied in henaoao. 



IRRITATION OF PARIS. 255 

defend tbexmelyes. One of iih^r cvptains had been, willingly 
or uuwillinglj, decked out by -die ladies with an enormouB white 
cookade. His colonel, Lecointre, the linendraper, was fariouB. 
« Those oockadeB," said he, firmly, '* shall be ohanged, and 
within a week, or all is lost." He was right. Who could mis- 
take the (omnipolenee of the symbol ? The three colours were 
the 14th of Ju]y and the victory of Paris, the Revolution itself* 
Thereupon a chevalier of Saint-Louis runs after Lecointre, 
declaring himself the champion of the white cookade against all 
oomers. He follows, lies in wait for him, and insults him. 
This .passionate defender of the ancien regime was not, how- 
ever, a Montmorency, but simply the son-innlaw of the queen's 
flower^rl. 

Lecointre marches off to the Assembly, and requests, the 
military committee to require the oath from the body guard. 
Some 'old guards there present declared that it could never be 
tdytained. The committee did nothing, fearful of oooasioning 
some collision and bloodshed ; bat it was precisely this prudenoe 
that occasioned it. 

Paris felt keenly the insult offered to its cockade ; it was 
said to have been ignominiously torn to pieces and trodden 
under foot. On the very day of l^e second dinner (Saturday 
evening, the 3rd) Danton was Sundering art the club of the 
Cordeliers. On Sunday, there was a general onslaught on 
black or white cockades. Mobs of people and citizens, where 
ooats and jackets appeared mingled together, took place in the 
ettfis, before the doors of the cafis^ in the Palais Royal, at the 
Faubourg Saint- Antoine, at the ends of the bridges, and on the 
quays. Terrible rumours were in circulation about ihe ap- 
proBohing war ; on the league of the queen and the princes 
with the German princes ; on -die foreign uniforms, red and 
green, then seen in Paris ; on the supplies of flour from Oor- 
beil, which came now only every other day ; on the inevitably 
incraasing scarcity, and on the approaching severe winter. 
There is no time to be lost, said they ; if people want to pre- 
?«nt w«r and famine, the king must be brought here ; other- 
wise tiie Court will carry him <^. 

Nobody Mt all that more keenly '^arn the women. The 
funily, the houe^old, 'had Iten 4>ecome a Boene i)f extreme 
sufiering. A lady giive the alam on 4^e ••vaBisg of Sattuiday, 



256 SU^FERIKGS OF THE WOVEN. 

the 3rd. Seeing her hushand was not sufficiently listened to, 
she ran to the Cafg de Foj, there denounced the anti-national 
cockades, and exposed the public danger. On Monday a young 
girl took a drum into the markets, beat the^^^nt^^ and marched 
off all the women in the quarter. 

Such things are seen only in France ; our women are brare, 
and make others so. The country of Joan of Arc, Joan <^ 
Montfort, and Joan Hachette, can quote a hundred heroines. 
There was one at the Bastille, who afterwards departed for 
war, and was made captain in the artillery ; her husband was 
a soldier. On the 18di of July, when the king went to Paris, 
many of the women were armed. The women were in the 
van of our Rerolution. We must not be surprised ; ihey suf- 
fered more. 

Great miseries are ferocious ; they strike the weak rather 
than the strong ; they ill-treat childr^ and women rather than 
men. The latter come and go, boldly hunt about, set their 
wits to work, and at length find at least sufficient for the day. 
Women, poor women, live, for the most part, shut up, sitting, 
knitting or sewing ; they are not fit, on the day when eyery- 
thing is wanting, to seek their living. It is cruel to think 
that woman, the dependent being, who can live only in com- 
pany, is more often alone than man. He finds company every- 
where, and forms new connexions. But she is nothing without 
family. And yet her family overwhelms her ; aU the burden 
falls upon her. She remains in her cold, desolate, unfurnished 
lodging, with her children weeping, or sick and dying, who 
will weep no more. A thing little remarked, but which gives 
perhaps the greatest pang to the maternal heart, is, that the 
child is unjust. Accustomed to find in the mother a universal 
all-suffieient providence, he taxes her cruelly, unfeelingly, for 
whatever is wanting, is noisy and angry, adding to her grief a 
greater agony. 

Such is the mother. Let us take into account also many 
lonely girls, sad creatures, without any family or support, who, 
too ugly, or virtuous, have neither friend nor lover, know none 
of the joys of life. Should their little work be no longer able 
to support them, they know not how to make up the deficiency, 
but return to their garret and wait ; sometimes they are found 
dead, chance revealing the fact to a neighbour. 



THEIR COURAGEOUS C031PASSI0N. 257 

These unfortunate beings possess not eren enough energy to 
complain^ to make known their situation, and protest against 
their fate. Such as act and agitate in times of great distress, 
are the strong, the least exhausted by misery, poor rather thaa 
indigent. Generally, the intrepid ones, who iJien make them- 
selves conspicuous, are women of a noble heart, who suffer 
little for themselves, but much for others ; pity, inert and 
passive in men, who are more resigned to the sufferings of 
others, is in women a very active, violent sentiment, which 
occasionally becomes heroic, and impels them imperatively 
towards the boldest achievements. 

On the 5th of October, there was a multitude of unfortunate 
creatures who had eaten nothing for thirty hours.* That pain- 
ful sight affected everybody, yet nobody did anything for them; 
everybody contented themselves with deploring the hard neces- 
sity of the times. On Sunday evening (4th) a courageous 
woman, who could not behold this any longer, ran from the 
quarter Saint-Denis to the Palais Royal, forced her way through 
a noisy crowd of orators, and obtained a hearing. She was a 
woman of thirty-six years of age, well dressed and respectable, 
but powerful and intrepid. She wants them to go to Versailles, 
and she will march at their head. Some laugh at her ; sho 
boxes the ears of one of them for doing so. The next morning 
she departed among the foremost, sword in hand, took a cannon 
from the city, sat astride on it, and, with the match ready lit, 
rode off to Versailles. 

Among the failing trades which seemed to be perishing with 
the ancien rigime was that of carvers of wood. There used to 
be much work of that kind, both for the churches and apart- 
ments. Many women were sculptors. One of them, Made- 
leine Chabry, being quite out of work, had set up as a flower- 
girl (botiquetiere) in the quarter of the Palais Royal, under the 
name of Louison; she was a girl of seventeen, handsome and 
witty. One may boldly venture to state that it was not 
hunger that drove her to Versailles. She followed the gene- 
ral impulse, and the dictates of her good courageous heart. 

* See the depotitioni of the witnesses, JfomVeur, i., p. 568, col. 2. This is 
the principal source. Another, very important, abounding in details, and 
irhich everybody copies, without quoting it, is ih^Hiatoirt dc iletix Amis dc la 
ZdbcrUfUiu, 

S 



258 couBAaxoua gomfasbioh of the women. 

The women {doced her at their head and made heac their 
orator. 

There were many others who were not driven hj koBger: 
ahopwomen, portresses, girls of the town» compassionate and 
charitable, as they so often are. There was also a conaidarahle 
munber of market-women; the latter were strict Eoyalista^ but 
they wented so much the more to have the king at Pons. 
They had ah*eady been to see him, on some ocoasion or oOksr, 
some time helbra; they had spoken to^ him with much affeetion, 
with a laughable yet touching familiarity,, which showed a pw- 
fect sense of the situation of .affiura: " Poor man,'' said they, 
looking at the kiag, '' poor dear man, good papa !" Aad to 
the queen more seriously: " Madam, madam, take eompantiion, 
— letna be free with each other. Let us conceal netfaui^ hut 
say frankly what we have to say«" 

These market-women are not those who snfier nHich from 
misery : their trade consisting of the necessaries of li£B is 
subject to less variation. But they see wretchedness more 
than anybody, and feel it ; passing their lives in the public 
streets, they do not, like ua, escape the scenes of sufiSering. 
Nobody is more compassionate or kinder towards the wvetchedly 
poor. With their clownish forms and rude and violent lan- 
guage, they have often a noble heart oveiflowing vdth good 
nature. We have seen our women of Fieardy, poor fruit- 
women of the market of Amiens, save the father of four 
children, who was going to be guillotined. It. was at the time 
of the coronation (^ Charles X. ; they left their business and 
their feunilies, went off to Reims, made the king we^ with 
compasuon, obtained the pardon, and on their return, ma^Jring 
an abundant subscription unong themselves> sent away the 
father, with his wife and children, safe, and loaded with 
presents. 

On the 5th of October, at seven in the morning, they heard 
the beating of a dram, and could no longer resist. A little 
girl had tak^i a. drum from the goard-house, and was beatin^'^ 
the geTieyaU, It waa Mraday ; the marketa. were deaerted, 
and all marched forth. *• We will bring back," said they, 
^ Ike baker and the bakers wife. And wv rimfl have- the 
pleasure of hearings our Htile daring mother Mirabeau.** 

The market people march forth, and the Fauboui^ 



THET XNYAOE THE HdTEL-DE-TILLE. 259 

Anioins, cm tbe etker hand, was likewiie nunrcMng. On ihe road, 
the womfflL hmrj along with them all they happen to meet, direat- 
Miing audi aa are mnnUing that ^ey will cut thar hair off. First 
ihej go to tiie lidtel-de^Ville. There a hoker had jnat been 
brought who used to gire false weight of seyen oaaees in a two 
poaxid laa£. The lanp was lowered. Though ilie man was gadij 
on hia own eonfessioD, the National Guard coatriy«d to let him 
escape. Thej presented Idieir bayonets to the four or five hnadred 
women, already assembled. On the other side, at the bottom 
of the square, stood the cayalry of the National Chund. The 
women were by no means daunted. They eharged is&ntry 
and canralry wildi a eAiower of stones ; hut Ihe raldiers eoidd 
not malm up tiieir minds to fire oa tiiem. The women then 
forced open the H6tel-de-Ville, and entered all ihe offiees. 
Moay of them were well drsssed : ^ey had put on white 
gowns hr that grand day. They inquired enrionsly into the 
use of erery room;, and aitreated the representatiyes of ibe 
districts to gire a kind reception to the women they had fbreed 
to accompany them, seyeral of whom were eneemie, and ill, 
peihaps from fear. Qthersy ravenous and wild, shouted out 
Bread wni arvMl — that the men were cowards, — and they 
would show them what ooorage was. — That the people of the 
H6tel-de-Ville wa« only fit to be hanged, — ^that l^ey must 
bum iheir writings and wasto paper. And they were going to 
do so, and to bum tibe buildi^ perhaps. A man stopped them, 
— a man of gigantic stature, dressed in black, and whose 
serious comtenance seemed more sombre ^an his dress. At 
first they were going to kill him, thinking he belonged to the 
town, and calling him a traitor. He replied he was no traitor, 
but a bailiff by profession, and one of the conquerors of the 
Bastille. It was Stanislas M aillard. 

Early diat morning, he had done good seryice in the Faid>ourg 
Salnt-Antoine. The volunteers of the Bastille under the com- 
mand of Hullin, were drawn up on the square in arms. The 
workmen who were demoKsbing the fortress beltered they were 
sent agamst them. Maillard interposed and prsrented ^e 
eollision. At the H6tel-de-Ville, he was lucky enough to 
prevent its being burnt. The women eren promised they 
would not allow any men to enter : they had left armed sentinels 
at the grand entrance. At eleven o'eloeh, Ibo men attacked 

82 



260 . THEY lURCH TO VERSAILLES. 

the small door which opened under the arcade Saint-Jean. 
Armed with levers, hammers, hatchets, and pick-axes, they broke 
open the door, and forced the magazine of arms. Among them 
was a French guardsman, who had wanted in the morning to 
ring the tocsin, and had been caught in the act. He had, he 
said, escaped bj miracle ; the moderate party, as furious as the 
others, would have hung him had it not been for the women ; 
he showed his bare neck, which they had relie?ed from the 
rope. By way of retaliation, they took a man of the H6tel-de- 
Ville in order to hang him. It was the brave Abbe Lefebvre, 
who had distributed the gunpowder on the 14th of July. Some 
women, or men disguised as women, hung him accordingly to 
the little steeple ; one of them cut the rope, and he fell, idive 
and only stunned, into a room twenty-five feet below. 

Neither Bailly nor Lafayette had arrived. Maillard repaired 
to the aide-major-general and told him there was only one 
way of ending the business, which was that he, Maillard, 
should lead the women to Versailles. That journey will give 
time to collect the troops. He descends, beats the drum, and 
obtains a hearing. The austere tragical countenance of that 
tall man in black was very effective in La Grdye ; he appeared 
a prudent man, and likely to bring matters to a successful issue. 
The women, who were already departing with the cannon of 
the town, proclaimed him their captain. He put himself at 
their. head with eight or ten drums ; seven or eight thousand 
women followed, with a few hundred armed men, and a com- 
pany of the volunteers of the Bastille brought up the rear. 

On arriving at the Tuileries, Maillard wanted to follow the 
quay, but the women wished to pass triumphantly under the 
clock, through ^e palace and tha garden. Mullard, an ob- 
server of ceremony, told them to remember that it was the 
king's house and garden ; and that to pass through without 
permission was insulting the king.* He politely approached 
the Swiss guard, and told him that those ladies merely wished 
to pass through, without doing any mischief. The Swiss drew 
his sword and rushed upon Maillard, who drew hie. A portress 
gave a lucky stroke with a stick ; the Swiss fell, and a man 
held his bayonet to his breast. Maillard stopped him, coolly 

* D^iH)iUion de MaiUwrd^ MunUewr^ i., p. 572. 



THE ASSEMBLY BECEITES WARNING, 261 

disarmed them both, and carried off the bayonet and tfie 
swords. 

The morning was passing, and their hunger increased. At 
Chailloty Auteuil, and Sevres, it was very difficult to prerent 
the poor starving women from stealing food. Maillard would 
not allow it. At Sevres the troop was exhausted ; there, there 
was nothing to be had, not even for money ; every door was 
closed except one, that of a sick man who had remained ; 
Maillard contrived to buy of him a few pitchers of wine. Then, 
he choose out seven men, and charged them to bring before 
him the bakers of Sevres, with whatever they might have. 
There were eight loaves in all, thirty-two poimds of bread for 
eight thousand persons. They shared them among them and 
crawled further. Fatigue induced most of the women to lay 
aside their arms. Maillard, moreover, made them understand 
that as they wished to pay a visit to the king and the Assembly, 
and to move and affect them, it was not proper to arrive in 
«uch a warlike fashion. The cannon were placed in the rear, 
and in a manner concealed. The sage bailiff wished it to be 
an amener sans scandals, as they say in courts of law. At 
the entrance of Versailles, in order to hint their pacific 
intention, he gave a signal to the women to sing the air of 
Henri IV. 

The people of Versailles were delighted, and cried Vivent 
nos Parisiennes ! Foreigners among the spectators saw nothing 
but what was innocent in that crowd coming to ask the king 
for succour. The Genevese Dumont, a man unfriendly to the 
Revolution, who was dining at the palace Des Petites-JScuries, 
looking out of window, says himself: ''All that crowd only 
wanted bread." 

The Assembly had been that day full of stormy discussions. 
The king, being unwilling to sanction either the declaration of 
rights, or the decrees of the 4th of August, replied that con- 
stitutional laws could be judged only in their ensemble; that he 
acceded, however, in consideration of the alarming circum- 
stances, and on the express condition that the executive power 
would resume all its force. 

** If you accept the king^s letter," said Robespierre, there is 
no longer any constitution, nor any right to have one." Duport, 



262 MATLT.AWP ASD TBB 



S *Bd okier deputieB speakin tin saEmemamiBr. Fatkm 
mentionB and blames the orgy of the body guards. A dapulj, 
who iiad himself aenred amoaE^ them, demsndB, hft iheir 
honour, that the denraioiatioa be. stated iaa regnkr form, amd 
tiuMt the guilty pnties be proseovted. ** I will denoimoe,*' 
eried Mirabeaa, ''and I will sign, if the Assembly ^eoisre tfcat 
the person of the king » alone inyiolable. *' 9?his ws' dewgn at- 
ing the queen. The whole Assembly reeoiled from ike motion, 
w&ch was wididrawn. On sneh a day, it would hum prordked 
■ssassinatton. 

Mirabeaii himself was not free from mwasiness forliiB bftdc- 
sliding, and his speech on the veto. He appiwuxhed ti»e presi- 
dent, and said to Imn in an under tone : ^* Mourner, Paris is 
mardiing against us, — ^beliere me or not, forty thousaitd men 
are mardung against us. Feign illnesB, go to the palaee, and 
give them this notioe ; there is not a moment to be lost.'* ** Is 
Paris marching ?" said Mounier, drily (he thenght Micabeaa 
was one of the authors of the morement). ** Well ! so much 
the better ! we shall haye a republic the sooner." 

The Assembly decide that they will send to the kii^ to 
request the mere and simple acceptation of the Declaration of 
Bights. At three o'clock, Target announces that .a crowd had 
appeared before the doors on the Aventie de Paris* 

Everybody was acquainted with -die event, except the king. 
He had departed for the chase that morning as usual, and was 
htmting in the woods of Meudon. They sent afker him. 
Meanwhile, they beat the pinhole, the body guards mounted 
their horses on the Place d*Arm$s, and stood with thar hacks 
to the iron gates ; Ihe regiment of Flanders below, on their 
right, near the Avenue de Sceaux. M. d'Estaing,inihename 
of the municipality of Versailles, orders the troops to act in 
concert with the National Guard, and oppose the rioters. The 
municipality had carried their precaution so far as to authorize 
d'Eataing to fdlow the king, if he went far, on the nngular 
condition of hrir^ng him back to Versailles as soon as possible. 
D*£staing adhered to the latter order, went up to the Ghftteau, 
and left the National Guard of Versailles to manasre as it 
pleased. M. de Gouvemet, the second in command, likemse 
left his post, and plaoed himself among the body guards, pro- 



SBPOBB THE ABfflSUBI/T. 263 

finrriiig, in Baii» io be wf<^ people ivbo luow licyw to fi^t and 
«a^re. Lecointie, Uie lieuteiiflaitr<)olonel, remained alone to 
eomiimind. 

Meanwkile, MaQlard arrived at the National AwmsMj. AH 
the wenen wasted to enter. He bad the greatest trouble to 
prevail ^on ^m to send in only -fifteen of their nmaber. Thej 
placed ihemselTeB at the bar, having at fhetr head the French 
guardsman of whom we have spoken, a woman who carried a 
tambourine at the end of a pole, and the gigantic bailiff m the 
midst, in his tattered black coat, and sword in hand. 7he 
soldier began by perdj telling ^e Assembly that, on m> bread 
being iT>und at the baker's that morning, he had wanted to 
ring the tocsin ; that he had near been hanged, and owed his 
safety to the ladies who accompanied him. " We come," said 
he, " to demand bread, and the punishment of the body guard 
who have insulted the cockade. We are good patriots ; on our 
road we have torn down the black cockades, and I will have 
the pleasure of tearing one before the Assembly.'* 

To whioh the other gravely added : *' Everybody must cer- 
tainly wear the patriotic cockade." This was received with a 
few murmurs. 

'' And yet we are all brethren ! " cried the sinister apparition. 

Maillard alluded to what the municipal council of Paris had 
declared the day before : that the tricolor cockade, having been 
adopted as a symbol of/raternity, was the only one that ought 
to be worn by citizens. 

The women, being impatient, shouted together, '' Bread ! 
Bread ! " Maillard then began to speak of the horrible situa- 
tion of Pisris, of the supplies being intercepted by the other 
towns, or by the aristocrats. "They want," said he, "to 
starve us. A miller has received from somebody two hundred 
francs to induce him not to grind, with a promise that he should 
receive as much every week." The Assembly exclaimed, 
*'Name him." It was in the Assembly itself that €hr6goire 
had spoken of that current report ; and Maillard had heard of 
it on the road. 

" Name him ! " some of the women shouted at nmdom : 
" It is the Archbishop of Paris.*' 

At that moment, when the lives of many men seemed hang- 
ing by a thready Robespierre took a serious step. Alone^ he 



264 BOBXBPISBBE 8UFP0BTS HAHiLASD. 

stipported Maillard ; Baid that Abb^ Gr^goire had spoken <yf die 
fact, and would doubtless giye some infonnatiim.* 

Other members of the Assembly tried threats and caresses. 
A deputy of the clergy, an ahhS, or a preUte, offered his hand 
to one of the women to kiss. She flew into a pasaon, and s^d, 
" I was not made to kiss a dog's paw.'* Another depntj, a 
military man, and wearing the cross of Saint-Louis, hearing 
Maillard say that the clergy were the grand obstacle to the con- 
stitution, exclaimed, in a pasuon, that he ought instantly to be 
punished as an example. Maillard, nothing daunted, replied 
that he inculpated no member of the Assembly; ^at the 
Assembly were doubtless ignorant of all ; and that he thought he 
was doing them a service in giving them this information. For 
the second time, Robespierre supported Maillard, and calmed 
the anger of the women. Those outside were growing impa- 
tient, fearing for the safety of their orator. A report was 
spreading among them that he had perished. He went out for 
a moment, and showed himself. 

Maillard, then resuming his speech, begged the Assembly to 
engage the National Guards to make atonement for the insult 
offered to the cockade. Some deputies gave him the lie. Mail- 
lard insisted in unceremonious language. Mounier, the pre- 
sident, reminded him of the respect due to the Assembly ; and 
added, foolishly, that they who wished to be citizens were per- 
fectly at liberty to be so. This gave an advantage to MailLuxl ; 
he replied : *' Everybody ought to be proud of the name of 
citizen ; and if, in that august assembly, there were anybody 
who considered it a dishonour, he ought to be exduded." The 
Assembly started with emotion, and applauded : " Yes," cried 
they, " we are all citizens ! " 

At that moment a tricolored cockade was brought in, sent by 
the bodyguard. The women shouted, "God save the king 
and the body guard ! " Maillard, who was not so easily satis- 
fied, insisted on the necessity of sending away the regiment of 
Flanders. 

Moimier, then hoping to be able to get rid of them, said that 
the Assembly had neglected nothing to obtain provisions, 

* All this has been disfigured and curtailed by tbe Momieur. Luckily, it 
gives later tbe depositions (at the end of the 1st volume). See also the J)eux 
Afniadela LibertSf Ferri^res, &c. &c. 



THE WOMEN BEFORE THE KING. 265 

neither had the king ; that they would try to find some new 
means, and that they might withdraw in peace. Maillard did 
not stir, saying, " No, that is not enough." 

A deputy then proposed to go and inform the king of the 
miserahle state of Paris. The Assemhly voted it, and the 
women, eagerly seizing that hope, threw their arms round the 
necks of the deputies, and embraced the president in spite of 
hier resistance. 

*' But where is our Mirabeau ? " said they, once more ; 
" we should like to see our Count de Mirabeau." 

Mounier, surrounded, kissed, and almost stifled, then moodily 
set out with the deputation and a crowd of women, who insisted 
on following him. ^' We were on foot,** says he, '' in the mud, 
and it was raining in torrents. We had- to pass through a 
ragged noisy multitude, anned in a fantastical manner. Body 
guards were patrolling and galloping about. Those guards on 
beholding Mounier and the deputies, with their strange coWe^d 
of honour, imagined they saw there the leaders of the insurrec- 
tion, and wanting to disperse that multitude, galloped through 
them." * The inviolable deputies escaped as they could, and ran 
for their lives through the mud. It is easy to conceive the rage 
of the people, who had imagined that, with them, they were 
sure of being respected ! 

Two women were wounded, and even by swords, according to 
some witnesses.t However, the people did nothing. From 
three till eight in the evening, they were patient and motionless, 
only shouting and hooting whenever they beheld the odious 
uniform of the body guard. A child threw stones. 

The king had been found ; he had returned from Meudon, 
without hurrying himself. Mounier, being at length recognised, 
was allowed to enter with twelve women. He spoke to the 
king of the misery of Paris, and to the ministers of the request 
of the Assembly, who were waiting for the pure and simple 
acceptation of the Declaration of Bights and other constitutional 
articles. 

Meanwhile the king listened to the women with much kind- 
ness. The young girl, Louison Chabry, had been charged to 

* See Mounier, at the end of the Expw4 jfMtifioaJtif, 
\ If the king forbade the troops to act, as people affirm, it was at a later 
period, and too late. 



266 jMSEcnBioir ov i^ ovobit. 

ipeakfiir the otiien ; but her emotkm was ae greet in pi 
of the king, that die ooukL only artkidete '' Braui ! " and Mi 
down in a swoon. The king, much a;^ted, ocdered her to be 
taken cave of ; and when, on departing, riie wanted to kiss his 
hand« he emhtvoed her l^e a father. 

She ran oat a Bx^aBst, and ahoiiting'' Vieeh Brif" The 
woMBB, who were waiting for her in the s^pure, were fuii<w » 
and began saying she had been bribed ; in vain did «i» tan 
her podcets inside out, to show that she had no money ; the 
women tied their gaiters round her neck to strangle her. She 
was torn ^m theaa, but not without mneh diffioohy. She was 
obliged to TOtom to the Chfttearai, and obttan from Ihe king • 
written order to send for eom, and remove every obstade for the 
proYiBioning of Paris. 

To the demands of the president, Ike king had co^y replied : 
^Betnm about nine o'clock." Monmer had nerertheleBB re> 
mained at the castle, at the door of the council, insistii^ on 
having «n answer, knocking every hour, till ten in the evening. 
But nothing was decidecl. 

The nunister of Parist, M. de Saint-Priest, had heard ^le 
news very late (which proves how indecisive and spontaneooa 
the departure for Versailles had been). He proposed that the 
queen should depart for Rambouillet, and that the king should 
remain, reaist, and fight if neeessaiy ; the departure of the 
queen alone would have quieted the people and rendered fight- 
ing unnecessary- M. Necker wanted the king to go to PiuriB, 
and trust himself to the people ; that is to si^, that he shoidd 
be sincere and frank, and accept the Revdulion. Louis XYI., 
witiioat coming to any resolution, dismnsed the council, in 
order to consult the queen. 

She was very willing to depart, but with him, and not to 
leave such an indecisive man to himself ; the name of the king 
was her weapon for beginning the civil war. Baint-Prieet 
heard, about seven o'clock, that Lafayette, ui^ged by the National 
Guard, was marching against Versailles. '* We must depart 
immediately," said he ; *< the king at the head of the troops will 
pass without any difficulty." But it was impossible io bring 
him to any decision. He believed (but very wrongly) that, if 
he departed, the Assembly would make the Buke of Orleans 
king. He was also adverse to flight ; he strode to and £ro. 



FXR8T BXiOOD 6HED, 267 

repeiKlbig irom time to time: " A king a fugitive'! a king a 
fbgrlive ! "* The queen, however, having ineiBted on depart- 
ing, the osderifaB givm fer iiie oamage»« It was too late. 



CHAPTER IX. 

THE KING BROUGHT BACK TO PARIS. 

Tlie £th of Qotober continusd. — Fint Blood shed. — The Women gum o^rer 
ihe Rc^meat of Flandens. — Fight between the Body Guaed and the 
National Guard of Venailles. — The King no longer able to escape. — 
Afiright of the Court. — The Women pass the Night in the Hall of the 
Aflsembly. — ^Lafayette forced to march against YerBailles. — 6th of October. 
— ^Tbe Ch&teau aaaailed. — Danger of the Queen. — The Body Guaxda 
■aved by the French £x-GuardB. — ^Hesitation of the AsBembly.—^Conduot 
of the Duke of Orleans. — The King led to Paiis. 

One of the Paris mifitia, whom a crowd of women had 
taken, in spite of himself, for their leader, and who excited hy 
the jonmej, had shown himself at Versailles more enthusiastic 
than all the others, ventured to pass • hehind the hody guard 
there : seeing the iron gate shut, he hegan insulting the sen- 
tinel stationed within, and menacing him with his hajonet. A 
lieutenant of the guard arid two others drew their swords, 
and galloped after him. The man ran for his life, tried to 
reach a shed, hut tumbled over a tub, still shouting for assist- 
ance. The horseman had come up with him, just as the 
National Guard of VersaiHes could contain themselves no longer : 
one of them, a retail wine-merchant, stepped from the ranks, 
aimed, iBred, and stopped him short ; he had broken the arm 
that held the uplifted sabre. 

D'fistaing, the commander of this National Guard, was at 
the castle, still believing that he was to depart with the king. 
Lecointre, the lieutenant-colonel, remained on the spot demand- 
ing orders of the municipal council, who gave none. He was 
justly fearful lest that famisbed multitude should overrun the 
town and feed themsehres. He went to them, inquired what 
quantity of provisions was necessary, and entreated the council 

* See Necker, and his daughter, Madame de Sta^Ts ContidiratiofU. 



268 THE WOMEN QASJX OYEB THE BB6DIBNT OF FLANDERS. 

to gire them ; but could only obtun a little rice, which was 
noting for such a multitade. Then he caused a search, to he 
made m eyerj direction, and, by his laudable diligence, gaye 
some relief to the people. 

At the same time, he addressed himself to the regiment of 
Flanders, and asked the officers and soldiers whether they 
would fire. The latter were already under a far more powerful 
influence. Women had cast themselyes among them, entreat- 
ing them not to hurt the people. A woman then appeared among 
them, whom we shall often see agun, who seemed not to haye 
walked in the mire with the others, but had, doubtless, arriyed 
later, and who now threw herself at once among the soldiers. 
This was a handsome young lady. Mademoiselle Theroigne de 
M^ricourt, a natiye of Liege, Hyely and passionate, like so 
many of the women of Liege who effected the Reyolution of 
the fifteenth centuxy,* and fought yaliantly against Charles 
the Bold. Interesting, original, and strange, with her riding- 
habit and hat, and a sabre by her side, speaking and con- 
founding equally French and the patois of Liege, and yet 
eloquent. She was laughable, yet irresistible. Theroigne, 
impetuous, charming, and terrible, was insensible to eyery 
obstacle. She had had amours ; but then she felt but one 
passion, — one yiolent and mortal, which cost her more than 
life,t her loye for the Reyolution ; she followed it with enthu- 
siasm, neyer missed a meeting of the Assembly, frequented the 
clubs and the public places, held a club at her own house, and 
receiyed many deputies. She would haye no more loyers, and 
declared that she would haye none but the great metaphysician, 
the abstract, cold Abb6 Sieyes, oyer the enemy of women. 

Theroigne, haying addressed that regiment of Flanders, be- 
wildered, gained them oyer, and disarmed them so completely 
that they gaye away their cartridges like brothers to the 
National Guard of Versailles. 

D*£staing then sent word to the latter to withdraw. A 
few departed ;■ others replied that they would not go till the 
body guards had first moyed. The latter were then ordered to 
file off. It was eight o*clock, and the eyening was dark. The 

* See my ffistoire de Frtmce, t. vi. 

■f A tragical story, terribly disfigured by Beaulieu and all the royalists. I 
entreat the people of Liege to defend the honour of their heroine. 



THE KING NO LONGER ABLE TO ESCAPE. 269 

people followed, pressed upon the body guards, and hooted 
after them. The guards force their way sword m hand. Some 
who were behind, being more molested than the rest, fired their 
pistols: three of the National Guard were hit, one in the 
face ; the two others receired the bidlets in their clothes. 
Their comrades fire also by way of answer; and the body 
guard reply with their musquetoons. 

Other National Guards entered the court-yard, surrounded 
d'Estaing, and demanded ammunition. He was himself asto- 
nished at their enthusiasm and the boldness they displayed 
amid the troops : '* True martyrs of enthusiasm," said he sub- 
sequently to the queen.* 

A lieutenant of Versailles declared to the guard of the artil- 
lery, that if he did not give him some gunpowder, he would 
blow his brains out. He gaye him a barrel which was opened 
on the spot ; and they loaded some cannon which they pointed 
opposite the balustrade, so as to take in flank the troops which 
still covered the castle, and the body guards who were return- 
ing to the square. 

The people of Versailles had shown the same firmness on 
the other side of the Chateau. Five carriages drew up to the 
iron gates in order to depart ; they said it was the queen, who 
was going to Trianon. The Swiss opened, but the guards 
shut. " It would be dangerous for her Majesty," said the 
commandant, ''to leave the Chateau." The carriages were 
escorted back. There was no longer any chance of escape. 
The king was a prisoner. 

The same commandant saved one of the body guard whom 
the crowd wanted to tear to pieces, for having fired on the 
people. He managed so well that they left the man ; they 
were satisfied with tearing the horse to pieces ; and they began 
roasting him on the Place D^Armes ; but the crowd were too 
hungry to wait, and devoured it almost raw. 

It was a rainy night. The crowd took shelter where they 
could ; some burst open the gates of the great stables (grandes 
ecuries), where the regiment of Flanders was stationed, and 
mixed pell-mell with the soldiers. Others, about four thousand 
in number, had remained in the Assembly. The men were 

* See one of liis letters at the end of vol. iii. of Jkux Amis de la Libertc, 



270 APBUOHT OF THB COQBT* 

qiuet enough, hoi the women wwe impfttient at thai state ci 
inaetion : they taikad, aheaied, and miide- an uproar- Maillard 
alone ooald ke^ them qaiet» and he nuuuiged to do so aefy hj 
hanngtting the AaMmbly* 

What eonftribnted te incense the erowd, was l^t die bod j 
goavda eame to- the- dragoonai who were at the doors ci tiie 
Assembly, to ask whether thej woold assist them, in aeiEmg' the 
oamian that BMnaeed. the OhAtean. The people wnro abant to 
niah upon them, when ibm ioigaaim ennbnred to lab tiicon 



▲t ei^ o*cleek, there was another aMempt. Th^ hxonght 
a letter from the king, in which, wilkaat spankiag ef the 
Dedaniiion of ftighta, he pcomised in irague tnsan to allow 
oom to oironlate fi*eelj. It ia prohahla tiiat, at that moment, 
ihe idea of flight was predominant at ^e Ghateao. Withont 
^fing anj answer to Moimier,. who still remained at the door ef 
the council, they sent this latter to engage the attention: of liie 
impellent csowd* 

A singular apparition had added to the affright of the Court. 
A young man entera, ill«4reflsed, like one of the mob, and quite 
aghast.* Everybody was astonished ; it was the yoang Dc&e 
of &ididiea who, in that disguise, had mingled with the crowd, 
a fresh swarm of people who had marched from Paris ; he had 
1^ them half way on the road in order to give warning to the 
royal fEunily ; he had heard horrible langoage^ atrocioaa tibreats, 
which made his hair stand on end. In saying this, he wns ao 
livid, that everybody turned pale. 

The king's heart was beginning to ^ail him ; he peraeiyed 
that the queen was in peril. Howeyer agonising it was to his 
conscience to consecrate the legidatiye work of philosophy, 
at ten o'clock in l^e evening he signed, the Declaration of 
Bights. 

Mounier was at last able to depart. He hastened to re- 
sume his place aa president before the anriTal of that v«Bt army 
from Paris, whose projects were not yet known. He re-entered 
the hall ; but there was no longer any Assembly ; it had broken 
np : the crowd, ever growing more chnnorous and exacting, had 
demanded that the pdcea of bread and meat dbould belowtwed. 

• StriO, C(mMircaion$y 2Bd put, di. zi. ' 



THE WQMBK IK TSE HALk 271 

Hoomer found in. his place, ia tke president's ehairy a tall fina 
vell-beha^ed woman,, holding the bell in lier hand, and who. 
l^ the chair with reluctance. He gpive <urderft that they were 
to try to collect the deputies again ; meanwhile, he announoed 
to the people that the king had just accepted the constitutional 
articles. The women crowding about him, then entreated him 
to give them copies of them ;. others said : '* But, M. Presi* 
dent, will this be very adyantageous ? Will this give braad to 
the poor people of Paris V* Others exclaimed : *' We are Yery 
hui^iy. We have eaten nothing to-day." Mounier ordered 
bread to be fetched from the bakers'. Provisionathea cama in 
oni all sides* They all began eating in the hall with muck 
elamour. 

The women, whilst eating, chatted with Mounier ; '' Bat» 
deaf President, why did you defend that yiJlanoua veto ? Mind 
the lanteme I " Mounier repHed firmly, that they were not 
able to judges — tha^i they were mistaken ; that, for his part, he 
would rather expose his life than betray his conscience. Tins 
reply pleased them very much, and from that moment they 
showed him great respect and friendship.* 

Mirabeau alone would have been able to obtain a hearing, 
and silence the uproar. He did not care to do so. He waa 
certainly uneasy. According to several witnesses, he had 
walked about in the evening among the people, with a lai^e 
sabre, saying to those he met, " Children, we are for you." 
Afterwards, he had gone to bed. Dumont, the Geneveae, went 
in queat of him, and brought him back to the Assembly. As 
soon as he arrived, he called out, in his- voice of thunder, 
" I should like to know how people have the assurance to come 
and trouble our meeting. M» President, make them respect 
the Assembly ! '* The women shouted '' Bravo ! " They 
became more quiet. In order to kill time, they resumed the 
discusuon on the criminal laws* 

'Twas in a gallery (says Dumont) where a fish-woman was. 
acting aa commander-inrchief, and Erecting about a hundred 
wnmeskf e^cially girls, who» at a signal from her, shouted or 
remained silent. She was calling the depotiea familiarly by 
their names, or else would inqiuire, *' Who- is that speaking 



272 LAFAYETTE AT TBRSAILLEB. 

yonder ? Make that chatterbox hold his prating ! That is 
not the question ! The thing is to haye bread ! Let them 
rather hear our darling little Mirabeau ! " Then all the womea 
would shout, " Our darling mother Mirabeau ! " But he 
would not speak.* 

Lafayette, who had left Paris between fiye and six in tlic 
eyening, did not arriye till after twelye. We must now go back, 
and foUow him from noon to midnight. 

About eleyen, being informed that the Hdtel-de-ViUe was 
inyaded, he repaired thither, found the crowd disperse^* and 
began dictating a despatch for the king. La Greye was fiill of 
the paid and unpaid National Guards, who were muttering from 
rank to rank that they ought to march to Versailles. Many 
French ex-guards, especially, regretted haying lost their ancient 
priyilege of guarding the king, and wanted to recoyer it. Some 
of them went to the Hdtel-de-Yille, and knocked at the bureau, 
where Lafayette was dictating. A handsome young grenadier, 
who spoke admirably, said to him firmly : 

" My General, the people are without bread ; misery is 
extreme. The committee of subsistence either deceiyesyou, or 
are themselyes deceiyed. This state of things cannot last ; 
there is but one remedy : let us go to Versailles. They say 
the king is a fool ; we will place the crown on the head of his 
son ; a council of regency shall be named, and eyerything will 
go on better." 

Lafayette was yery firm and obstinate, but the crowd was 
still more so. He belieyed yery properly in his influence oyer 
the people ; he was, howeyer, able to see that he had oyer* 
rated it. In yain did he harangue the people ; in yain did he 
remain seyeral hours in the Giiye on his white horse, some- 
times speaking, sometimes imposing silence with a gesture, or 
else, by way of having somethmg to do, patting his horse with 
his hand. The difficulty was growing more urgent ; it was no 
longer his Natioual Guards who pressed him, but bodies from the 
Faubourgs Saint- Antoine and Saint-Marceau, — men who would 
listen to nothing. They spoke to the general by eloquent 
signs, preparing the lamp for him, and taking aim at him. 
Then he got down from his horse, and wanted to re-enter the 

• Etienne Damont| Sowvtmin, p. 181. 



LAFAYETTE AT YEBSAILLES, 273 

Hdtd-de-Ville ; but his grenadiers barred the passage : *' Mijf^ 
Ueu! general," said they, " you shall, stop with us ; you would 
not abandon us ! " 

Luckily, a letter is brought down from the Hotel-de-ViUe ; 
thcf^y authorise the general to depart, ^' seeing it is impossible 
to refuse.** '' Let us march," said he, though he did so with 
regret. The order was receiyed with shouts of joy. 

Of the thirty thousand men of the National Guard, fifteen 
thousand marched forth. Add to this number a few thousands 
of the people* The insult offered to the national cockade was 
a noble motive for the expedition. Everybody applauded them 
on their passage* An elegantly-dressed assemblage on the ter- 
race by the water-side looked on and applauded. At Passy, 
where the Duke of Orleans had hired a house, Madame de 
Genlis was at her post, shouting, and waving her handkerchief, 
doing all she could to be seen. The bad weather caused them 
to march rather slowly. Many of the National Guards, so 
eager before, now began to cool. This was not like the fine 
weather on the 14th of July. They were drenched with a cold 
October rain. Some of them stopped on the road ; others 
grumbled, and walked on. << It is disagreeable," said the rich 
tradesmen, '' for people who go to their country-houses in fine 
weather only in coaches, to march four leagues in the rain." 
Others said, " We will not do all this drudgery for nothing." 
And they then laid all the blame on the queen, uttering mad 
threats, and appearing very malignant. The Chateau had been 
expecting them in the greatest anxiety. They thought that 
Leiayette only pretended that he was forced, but that really he 
availed himself vnllingly of the opportunity. They wanted to 
see whether, at eleven o'clock, the crowd being then dispersed, 
the carriages could pass through the Dragon gates. The 
National Guard of Versailles was on the watch and blocked 
the passage. 

The queen, however, would not depart alone. She rightly 
judged that there was no safe refuge for her, if she separated 
from the king. About two hundred noblemen, several of whom 
were deputies, offered themselves to defend her, and asked her 
for an order to take horses from her stables. She authorised^ 
them, in case, she said, the king should be in danger. 

Leiiayette, before entering Versailles, made his tro(^s renew 

T 



274 LAFAYETTE At VSESAILLES. 

their oaih of fidelity to the law and the king, fie sent him 
notice of his arriyal, and the king replied : '* that he would see 
him with pleasure, and that he had just accepted his Declaration 
of Rights." 

Lafayette entered the Chateau alone, to the great astonish- 
ment of the guards and eyeryhody else. In the oeU-de-boetif, 
one of the courtiers was so foolish as to say : *' There goes 
Cromwell." To which Lafayette replied very aptly, " Sir, 
Cromwell would not have entered alone." 

<' He appeared very calm," says Madame De Stael (who was 
present); '< nobody ever saw him otherwise; his modesty suffered 
from the importance of his position." The stronger he ap- 
peared, the more respectful was his behaviour. The outrage, 
moreover, to which he had been subjected, made him. more of a 
Royalist than ever. 

The king intrusted to the National Guard the outer posts of 
the castle ; the body guards preserved those within. Even the 
outside was not entirely intrusted to Lafayette. On one of his 
patrols wishing to pass into the park, the entrance was refused. 
The park was occupied by body guards and other troops ; till 
two in the morning* they awaited the king, in case he should at 
last resolve to fly. At two o'clock only, having been pacified 
by Lafayette, they told them they might go to RambouiUet. 

The Assembly had broken up at tluree o'clock. The people 
had dispersed, and retired to rest, as they could, in the churches 
and elsewhere. Maillard and many of the women, among 
whom was Louison Chabry, had departed for Paris, shortly after 
the arrival of Lafayette, carrying with ihem the decrees on com 
and the Declaration of Rights. 

Lafayette had much trouble to find lod^ng for his National 
Guards ; wet, and worn out, they were trying to dry themselves 
and to get food. At last, believing everything quiet, he also 
went to the H6tel de Noailles, and slept, as a man sleeps after 
twenty hours' fatigue and agitation. 

Many people did not sleep : especially those who having 
come from Paris in the evening, had not undergone the fatigue 
pf the preceding day. The first expedition, in which the women 

* Till that hour, they still thought of doing so, if we may helievd the testi- 
mony of M. de la Tour-du-Pin. — Mhnoiret de Lafayette, li. 



THE CHATEAU STORMED. 275 

were predominant, being very spontaneous, natural as it were^ 
and urged by necessity, bad not cost any bloodshed. Mailiard 
bad bad tbe glory of maintaining some sort of order in tbat 
disorderly crowd. Tbe natural crescendo ever observable in sucb 
insurrections, scarcely left room to bope tbat tbe second expedi- 
tion would pass off as quietly. True, it bad been formed before 
tbe eyes of tbe National Guard, and as if in concert witb it. 
Nevertbeless tbere were men tbere wbo were determined to act 
witbout tbem ; many were furious fanatics, wbo would bave 
liked to kill tbe queen ;* otbers wbo pretended to be so, and 
seemed to be tbe most violent, were simply a class of men ever 
superabundant wben tbe police is weak, namely, thieves. Tbe 
latter calculated tbe chances of breaking into tbe Chateau. They 
had not found much in tbe Bastille worth taking. But, what a 
delightful prospect was opened for pillage in tbe wonderful 
palace of Versailles, where tbe riches of France had been 
amassed for more than a century ! 

At five in the morning, before daylight, a large crowd was 
already prowling about the gates, armed with pikes, spits, and 
scythes. They had no guns. Seeing some body guards as 
sentinels at tbe gates, they forced the National Guards to fire 
on tbem ; the latter obeyed, taking care to fire too high. 

la that crowd, wandering or standing round fires tbat had 
been made in the square, was a little hump-backed lawyer, 
Verri^res, mounted on a large horse ; be was considered very 
violent ; they bad been waiting for him ever since tbe preced- 
ing evening, saying they would do nothing without him. Le- 
cointre was likewise there, going to and fro haranguing the 
crowd. Tbe people of Versailles were perhaps more inveterate 
than the Parisians, having been long enraged against tbe court 
and the body guards ; they bad lost an opportunity, tbe night 
before, of falling on tbem, which they regretted, and wanted 
now to pay them what they owed tbem. Among tbem were 
several locksmiths and blajcksmiths, (of the manufactory of 

* I do not 806 in the Ami du pewpU how Marat can be accused of having 
been the first to suggest sanguinary violence, ' What is certai n is he was very 
restless : ** M. Marat flies to Versailles, returns like lightning and makes alone 
as much noise as the four trumpets of the Day of Judgment, shouting : ' 
death ! arise ! * ^ — Camille Desmoulins, EAoltUions de France et de Bra- 
bcmtf iii., p. d59» 

t2 



276 TBE CHATEAU STORMED. 

arms ?) rough men, who strike hard, and who, nioreoTer, erer 
thirsty at the forge, are also hard drinkers. 

About six o*clock, this crowd, composed of Parisians and 
people of Versailles, scale or force the gates, and advance into 
the courts with fear and hesitation. The first who was killed, 
if we believe the Royalists, died from a fall, having slipped in 
the marble court. According to another and a more likely 
version, he was shot dead by tiie body guard. 

Some took to the left, toward the queen's apartment, others 
to the right, toward the chapel stairs, nearer the king's 
apartment. On the left, a Parisian running unarmed, among 
the foremost, met one of the body guard, who stabbed bim 
with a knife. The guardsman was killed. On the right, 
the foremost was a militia-man of the guard of YersaiUes, a 
diminutive locksmith, with sunken eyes, almost bald, and his 
hands chapped by the heat of the forge.* This man and 
another, without answering the guard, who had come down 
a few steps and was speaking to him on the stairs, strore 
•to pull him down by his belt, and hand him over to the 
crowd rushing behind. The guards pulled him towards 
them ; but two of them were killed. They all fled along the 
grand gaUery, as far as the oeil^-bcsuf, between the apart* 
ments of the king and the queen. Other guards were alieady 
there. 

The most fiirious attack had been made in the direction of 
the queen's apartment. The sister of her /emme^-chanibre 
Madame de Campan, having half opened the door, saw a 
guardsman covered with blood, trying to stop the forio^ 
rabble. She quickly bolted that door and the next, put a petti- 
coat on the queen, and tried to lead her to the king. An awfiil 
moment I The door was bolted on the other side ! They knock 
again and again. The king was not within; he had gone round 
by another passage to reach the queen. At that moment a 
pistol was fired, and then a gun, close to th^n. *< My fiiendfif 
my dear friends," cried the queen, bursting into tears, " w^^ 
me and my children.** They brought her the dauphin. ^ At 
length the door was opened, and she rushed into the kings 
apartment. 

* Deposition of Miomandre, one of the body guards. — MomttUTf i., p* ^^' 



THE BODY OUABD SAYEJ). 277 

The crowd was knocking louder and* louder to enter the oeii- 
de-b(mf. The guards barricaded the place, piling up benches, 
stools, and other pieces of furniture; the lower panel was burst 
in. They expected nothing but death ; but suddenly the uproar 
ceased, and a kind clear Toice exclaimed : '* Open!'' As they 
did not obey, the same voice repeated: <' Come, open to us, 
body guard; we have not forgotten that you men saved us 
French Guards at Fontenoy." 

It was indeed the French Guards, now become National 
Guards, with the brave and generous Hoche, then a simple 
sergeant-major — it was the people, who had come to save the 
nobility. They opened, threw themselves into one another's 
arms, and wept. 

At that moment, the king, believing the passage forced, 
and mistaking his saviours for his assassins, opened his door 
himself, by an impulse of courageous hmnanity, saying to those 
without : ** Do not hurt my guards." 

The danger was past, and the crowd dispersed ; the tibieves 
alone were unwilling to be inactive. Wholly engaged in their 
own business, they were pillaging and moving away the furni- 
ture. The grenadiers turned that rabble out of the castle. 

A scene of horror was passing in the court. A man with 
a long beard was chopping with a hatchet to cut off the heads 
of two dead bodies, — ihe guards killed on the stairs. That 
wretch, whom some took for a famous brigand of the souths 
was merely a modele who used to sit at the Academy of Paint- 
ing ; for that day, 'he had put on the picturesque costume of 
an antique slave, which astonished everybody, and added to 
their fear.* 

' * His name mu Nicolas. According to bis Uadlord, the man had neret 
given any proof of violence or ill-nature. Children used to take that terrible 
man by the beard. He was in fact a vain half-silly person who fancied he was 
doing something grand, audacious, and original, and perhaps wanted to realize 
the bloody scenes he had beheld in pictures or at the theatre. When he had 
committed the horrible deed, and everybody had recoiled from him, he sudt 
denly felt the dreariness of that strange solitude, and sought, under different 
pretexts, to get into the conversation, asking a servant for a pinch of snuff, and 
a Swiss of the castle for some wine, which he paid for, boasting, and trying to 
encourage and comfbrt himself. — See the depositions in the MowUeur, The 
heads were carried to Paris on pikes ; one by a child. According to some, 
they departed the same morning ; others say, a little before the king, and, 



278 THE aUEEN BEFORE THE PEOPLE. 

Lafayette, awakened but too late, then arriyed on horseback. 
He saw one of the body guards whom they had taken and 
dragged near the body of one of those killed by the guards, 
in order to kill him by way of retaliation. " I hare given my 
word to the king,'' cried Lafayette, *' to save his men. Cause 
my word to be respected." The man was sared ; not so 
Lafayette. A furious fellow cried out: *' Kill hhn!" He 
gave orders to have him arrested, and the obedient crowd 
dragged him accordingly towards the general, dashing his head 
against the payement. 

He then entered the castle. Madame Adelaide, the king's 
aunt, went up to him and embraced him : *' It is you," cried 
she, " who have saved us." He ran to the king's cabinet. 
Who would believe that etiquette still subsisted ? A grand 
officer stopped him for a moment, and thex^ allowed him to 
pass: ''Sir," said he seriously, '* the king grants you les 
grandes entries,** 

The king showed himself at the balcony, and was welcomed 
with the unanimous shout of '* God save the King ! Viv^ le 
Boir* 

** The King at Paris !" was the second shout, which was 
taken up by the people, and repeated by the whole army. 

The queen was standing near a window with her daughter 
beside her, and the dauphin before her. The child, playing 
with his sisters hair, cried: *' Mamma, I am hungry !" 
hard reaction of necessity ! Hunger passes from the people 
to the king ! Providence ! Providence ! Pardon ! This 
one is but a child ! 

At that moment several voices raised a fonnidable shout : 
" The queen ! " The people wanted to see her in the balcony. 
She hesitated : " What ! " said she, " all alone? " '« Madam, 
be not afraid," said Lafayette. She went, but not alone, 
holding an admirable safeguard, — in one hand her daughter, in 
the other her son* The court of marble was terrible, in awful 
commotion, like the sea in its fury ; the National Guards, 
lining every side, could not answer for the centre ; there were 

consequently, in presence of Lafayette, "which is not likely. The body guard 
had killed five men of the crowd or National Guards of Versailles, and the latter 
^Yen body guards. 



HESITATION OF THE ASSEMBLY. 279 

fire-arms, and men blind with rage. Lafayette's conduct was 
admirable ; for that trembling woman, he risked his popularity, 
his destiny, his very life ; he appeared with her on the balcony, 
and kissed her hand.* 

The crowd felt all that ; the emotion was unanimous. They 
saw there the woman and the mother, nothing more. " Oh ! 
how beautiful she is I What ! is that the queen ? How she 
fondles her children ! " Noble people ! may God bless you for 
your clemency and forgetfulness ! 

The king was trembling with fear, when the queen went to 
the balcony • The step having succeeded : " My guards," said 
he to Lafayette, ** could you not also do something for them ? " 
** Give me one*" Lafayette led him to the balcony, told him 
to take the oath, and show the national cockade in his hat. 
The guard kissed it, and the people shouted : " Vivent lea 
gardes-dvrcorps ! " The grenadiers, for more safety, took the 
caps of the guards, and gave them theirs, so that, by this 
mixture of costume, the people could no longer fire on the 
guards without running the risk of killing them. 

The king was very reluctant to quit Versailles. To leave 
the royal residence was in his estimation the same thing as to 
abandon royalty. A few days before, he had rejected the 
entreaties of Malouet and other deputies, who in order to be 
further from Paris, had begged him to transfer the Assembly 
to Compiegne. And now, he must leave Versailles to go to 
Paris, — ^pass through that terrible crowd. What would befall 
the queen ? He shuddered to think. 

The king sent to entreat the Assembly to meet at the 
Chateau. Once there, the Assembly and the king being 
together, and supported by Lafayette, some of the deputies 
■were to beseech the king not to go to Paris. That request 

• By far the most curious deposition is that of the woman La Varenne, — 
the valiant portress of whom we have spoken. Therein we may perceive how 
a legend begins. This woman was an eye-witness, — had a hand in the busi- 
ness ; she received a wound in paving one of the body guard ; and she sees 
and hears whatever is uppermost in her mind ; she adds it honestly : ** The 
queen appeared in the balcony ; M. de Lafayette said : * The queen has been 
deceived. She promitei to love her people, to be attached to them, as Jesus 
Christ is to his Church.* And as a token of approval, the queen, shedding 
teaiB, twice raised her hand. The king asked pardon for his guards," &c. 



280 MOVEMENT UNFORESEEN. 

was to have been represented to the people as the wish of the 
Assembly. All that great commotion would sabeide ; fati^e, 
lassitude, and hunger would graduaUj disperse the people ; 
the J would depart of their own accord. 

The Assembly, which was then forming, appeared vrayering 
and undecided. 

Nobody had any fixed resolution or determination. That 
popular movement had taken all by surprise. The most keen* 
sighted had expected nothing of this. Mirabeau had not fore- 
seen it, neither had Sidyes. The latter said pettishly, when 
he received the first tidmgs of it : "I cannot understand it ; it 
^ going all wrong." 

I thmk he meant to say : " contrary to the Revdiutian." 
Sidyes, at that time, was still a revolutionist, and perhaps rather 
favourably inclined towards the branch of Orleans. For the 
king to quit Versailles/his old court, and lire at Paris among 
the people, was, doubtless, a fine chance for Louis XVI. to 
become popular again. If the queen (killed, or in exile) had 
not followed him, the Parisians would, very probably, have felt 
an affection for the king. They had, at idl times, entertained 
a predilection for that fat, good-tempered man, whose very 
corpulency gave him an air of pious paternal good-nature, quite 
to the taste of the crowd. We have already seen that the 
market-women used to call him a good papa : that was the 
very idea of the people. 

This removal to Paris, which so much frightened the king, 
frightened, in a contrary manner, such as wanted to strengthen 
and continue the Revolution, and, still more, those who, for 
patriotic or personal views, would have liked to make the Duke 
of Orleans lieutenant-general (or something better.) 

The very worst thing that could have happened for the latter, 
who was foolishly accused of wishing to kill the queen, was, 
that the queen should have been killed, and that the king, freed 
from that living cause of unpopularity, should return to Paris, 
and fall into the hands of such men as Bailly or Lafayette. 

The Duke of Orleans was perfectly innocent of the move- 
ment of the 5th of October. He could neither help it, nor 
take advantage of it. On the 5th and the following night, he 
went restlessly from place to place. Depositions prove that 
he was seen everywhere between Paris and Versailles, but 



CONDUCT OB THE DUKB OF ORLEANS. 281 

thai lie did nothings* Between eight and nine in the morning 
of the 6th^ so soon after the massacre, that the oourt of the 
castle was still stained with blood, he wwb and showed himself 
to the people, with an enormous cockade in his hat, laughing, 
and flourishing a switch in his hand. 

To return to the Assembly. There were not forty members 
who repaired to the casde. Most of ihem were already in the 
entrance hall, and rather undecided how to act. The crowds of 
pecsiHiB who thronged l^e tribunes increased their indecision. 
At the first word said about sitting at the Chateau, they began 
Yoeifesating. Mirabeau then arose, and, according to his custom 
of disguising his obedience to Ihe people in haughty language, 
said, '' that the liberty of the Assembly would be compromised 
if they deliberated in the palace of kings ; that it did not become 
their dignity to quit their usual place of meeting ; and that a 
deputation was sufficient." Young Bamaye supported the 
motion. Mounier, the president, opposed it, but in yain. 

At length, they heard that the king had consented to depart 
for Paris; the Assembly, on Mirabeau*s proposition, yoted, 
that, for their present session, they are inseparable from 
the king. 

The day was adyancing. It was not far from one o'clock. 
They must depart, and quit Versailles. Farewell to ancient 
monarchy ! 

A hundred deputies surround the king ; a whole army, — 
a whole people. He departs from the piJace of Louis XIY., 
neyer to return. 

The whole multitude begins to moye : they march off towards 
Paris, some before the king, and some behind. Men and wo- 
men, all go as tfaey can, on foot or on horseback, in coaches 
and car^, on oandages of cannon, or whateyer they could find. 
They had the good fortune to meet with a large eonyoy of 
£our, — a blessing for the famished town. The women carried 
large loayes on pikes, others, branches of poplar, already tinted 

* All that lie appears to have done, was to authorise the purveyor of the 
Assembly, on the evening of the 5th, to furnish provisions to the people who 
were in the hall. There is nothing to show that he acted, to any extent, from 
the 15th of July to the 5th of October, except in an awkward and weak attempt 
which Danton made in his favour with Lafayette. — See the Mimoiret of the 
latter. 



282 . THE KINO CONDUCTED TO FABIS. 

by autumn. They were all yery merry, and amiable in their 
own fashion, except a few jokes addressed to the queen. 
'< We are bringing back/' cried they, ** the baker, his wife, 
and the little shop-boy." They all thought they could neyer 
starve, as long as they had the king with them. They were 
all still royalists, and full of joy at being able at length to put 
their ^ood papa in good keeping : he was not very clever ; he 
had broken his word ; it was his wife's fault ; but, once in 
Paris, good women would not be wanting, who would give him 
better advice. 

The whole spectacle was at once gay, melancholy, joyous, 
and gloomy. They were full of hope, but the sky was over- 
cast, and tbe weather unfortunately did not favour the holiday. 
The rain fell in torrents ; they marched but slowly, and in 
muddy roads. Now and then, several fired off guns, by way of 
rejoicing, or to discharge their arms. 

The royal carriage, surrounded by an escort, and with 
Lafayette at the door, moved like a hearse. The queen felt 
uneasy. Was it sure she should arrive ? She asked Lafayette 
what he thought, and he inquired of Moreau de Mery, who, 
having presided at the H6tel-de-yille on the famous days of 
the taking of the Bastille, was well acquainted with the matter. 
He replied in these significant words : ''I doubt whether the 
queen could arrive alone at the Tuileries ; but, once at the 
Hotel-de-ViUe, she will be able to return." 

Behold the king at Paris, in the place where he ought 
to be, in the very heart of France. Let us hope he will he 
worthy of it. 

The Revolution of the 6th of October, necessary, natural, 
and justifiable, if any ever was ; entirely spontaneous, unfore- 
seen, and truly pt^ular ; belongs especially to the wfimen, as 
that of the 14th of July does to the men. The men took the 
Bastille, and the women took the king. 

On the 1st of October, everything was marred by the ladies 
of Versailles ; on the 6th, all was repaired by the women of 
Paris. 



■ .< 



• V 




