Shamanism in Siberia and European Russia (V. M. Mikhailowski, 1895)
========================================
The first English-language survey paper to define 'shamanism' for Western anthropology (Journal of the Anthropological Institute, 1895), translated by Oliver Wardrop. Public domain. Source: Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/sim_royal-anthropological-institute-of-great-britain-ireland_january-30-1894-january-29-1895_24).

Shamanism in Siberia and European Russia, being the second 
part of “ Shamanstvo,” by Professor V. M. Mikartovsku, of 
Moscow, Vice-President of the Ethnographical Section of the 
Imperial Society of Natural History, Anthropology, and 
Ethnography.’ Translated by OLiver Warprop (Part I). 


Shamanism in Russia at the present day.—Hitherto the word 
shamanism has been used in a narrow and strictly defined sense, 
geographically and ethnographically. The term has been applied 
especially to certain phenomena in the life and philosophy of our 
foreign fellow-subjects, in particular the inhabitants of Siberia, 
und therefore, when we enter upon a wider consideration of the 
question, and consider shamanism as a phenomenon characteristic 
of many peoples, scattered throughout many parts of the world, 
we must begin by examining it in the region where it was first 
observed and studied, i.e., among the Asiatic and European tribes 
of Russia. Since it is our intention to regard this phenomenon 
from the point of view of universal ethnography, we shall not 
give an exhaustive account of all the facts collected by Russian 
enquirers, but shall limit our investigations to those data sufficient 


2 Professor Mikhailovskii’s essay forms the twelfth Vol. of the Proceedings 
of the Ethnographical Section, and was published in 1892. 





eee 




















Anthropological Miscellanea and New Books. 63 


to furnish materials for a characterisation of shamanism in 
Russia in order to compare it with similar institutions in other 
lands. 

Shamanism among the Siberian peoples is at the present time 
in a moribund condition; it must die out with those beliefs among 
which alone such phenomena can arise and flourish. Buddhism 
on the one hand, and Mohammedanism on the other, not to mention 
Christianity, are rapidly destroying the old ideas of the tribes 
among whom the shamans performed. Especially has the more 
ancient ,Black Faith suffered from the Yellow Faith preached by 
the lamas. But the shamans, with their dark mysterious rites, 
have made a good struggle for life, and are still frequently found 
among the n: ative Christians and Mohammedans. The mullahs 
and lamas have even been obliged to become shamans to a great 
extent. Many Siberian tribes who are nominally Christians 
believe in the shamans, and have recourse tothem. The Yakuts, 
for instance, when called upon by the government to give informa- 
tion about their customary law, in the third decade of the present 
century, insisted on excluding shamanism from the question of 
any particular profession of religion. They said, ‘‘ Shamanism is 
not the faith or religion of the Yakuts, but an independent set of 
actions which take place in certain definite cases.” And they 
endeavour to explain and justify the attachment of Christian 
Yakuts to their shamans.’ 

The names applied to Shamans by the various Siberian tribes.— 
Shamans, though of a degenerate type, are to be met with through- 
out the whole of Siberia, and they are known by various names. 
The word shaman is only found among the Tunguses, Buryats, 
and Yakuts.* It is only among the Tunguses that this is the 
native name; the Buryats, like the Mongols, also call their shamans 
bd, and the female shamans édégén or utygan.> Among the Yakuts, 
a shaman is called oyun, a female shaman udagan.* The Altaians 
use the term Kam, and call the shaman’s dealings with spirits 
kamlanie, i.e., kam-ing. The Samoyeds called their shamans tadibei.® 
Despite the different names, the performances of the shamans are 
the same among all these peoples, though all acknowledge that the 
modern shamans are less powerful than the ancient. 

The first Shamans and their origin—There are some curious tales 
about the first shamans and the origin of shamanism. Mr. 
Shashkov has copied down among the Buryats of Balagan a long 
legend about the cause of the deterioration of the shamans. The 
first shaman, Khara-Gyrgen, had unlimited power, and God, 
desiring to prove him, took the soul of a certain rich maiden, and 
she fell ill. The shaman flew through the sky on his tambourine, 
seeking the soul, and saw it in a bottle on God's table. To keep 
the soul from flying out, God corked up the bottle with one of the 


! Samokvasov : “Sbornik obychnago prava sibirskikh inorodtsev,’’ 218-219. 
? Shashkov, 80. 

% Agapitov ‘and Khangalov, 41. Potanin, iv, 61. 
* Pripuzov, 64. 5 Radloff : ‘‘ Aus Sibirien,” ii, 16. 











64 Anthropological Miscellanea and New Books. 


fingers of his right hand. The cunning shaman changed himself 
into a yellow spider, and bit God on the right cheek, so that, 
irritated by the pain, he clapped his right hand to his face, and let 
the soul out of the bottle. Enraged at this, God limited Khara- 
Gyrgeu’s power, and thenceforth shamans have been getting worse 
and worse.’ The legend which we summarize is interesting for 
the glimpse it gives of the coarse ideas of an earlier period, under- 
lying the modern mask of monotheism. The god referred to is 
but one of the spirits of the animistic epoch. The Buryats also 
have the following story about the appearance of shamans among 
men :—In the beginning there were only the good spirits (tengri) 
of the west, and the evil spirits of the east. The western tengris 
created men, who were at first happy, but afterwards, through the 
wickedness of the evil spirits, they began to fall sick and die. 
Then the good tengris decided to give a shaman to mankind, to aid 
in the struggle with the evil spirits, so they made the eagle a 
shaman. Men did not put faith in a mere bird, and, besides, they 
did not understand its language; the eagle therefore prayed the 
western tengris either to allow the post of shaman to be given to a 
Buryat, or to bestow human speech upon the eagle. By the will of 
the good spirits, the first shaman became the offspring of the eagle 
and a Buryat woman.? The Yakut tradition is that the first 
shaman was of extraordinary strength, and would not acknowledge 
the chief god of the Yakuts, for which reason the wrathful deity 
burned him up. All the body of this shaman consisted of crawling 
reptiles. One frog escaped from the fire, and from it issued the 
shaman demons, who still supply the Yakuts with famous shamans, 
male and female. The Tunguses of the Turnkhan region, though 
the miraculous element is not wanting in their story, have a less 
fantastic acconnt of the first shaman. According to their version, 
the first shaman was formed in consequence of his particular fitness 
for this occupation, and by the aid of the devil. This shaman flew 
up the chimney of the yurta (hut) and came back accompanied by 
swans. The stories about ancient shamans, and the supernatural 
appearance of persons destined to enter into immediate intercourse 
with spirits and gods, arose, on the one hand, from the desire of the 
shamans to give a special sanction to their proceedings; on the 
other hand, they are due to the peculiar character of their doings, 
which produced an exceedingly powerful impression on the minds 
and imaginations of uncivilised people. 

Forms of “‘ kamlanie” and exorcism among the Tunguses—Among 
the various performances of the shamans, the most characteristic 
of all is that which is now generally called kamlanie. The presence 
of a shaman at a festival, as priest and sacrificer, is but of secondary 
importance, and is not of the essence of shamanism. Scenes of 
kam-ing among the various foreign peoples in Russia have been 


Shaskkov, 81. 

Agapitov and Khangalov, 41-42. 
Pripuzov, 64. 

Tretyakov: “ Turukhanskii krai,” 210-211. 


- ow wore 











Anthropological Miscellanea and New Books. 65 


described in detail by ancient and modern travellers, especially 
Gmelin and Pallas. In Argunsk, Gmelin saw the juggling, as ho 
calls it, of a certain Tungus shaman. The kamlanie took place at 
night, in the open air, by a fire. The spectators sat round the fire ; 
the shaman stripped, and then put on his shaman costume of leather, 
hung with pieces of iron; on each of his shoulders was a toothed 
iron horn. But this particular shaman had as yet received no 
tambourine from the demons, of which there are a vast number ; 
each shaman has its own demons, and he that has most is considered 
the cleverest. The kamlanie consisted of running round in the 
circle, and singing, in which he was supported by two assistants. 
Another Tungus shaman, seen by Gmelin, had a tambourine; he 
made a speech in a drawling chant, and the Tunguses present 
chimed in. The language of the shaman’s utterances was unknown ; 
he then cried out in the voices of various animals, and drove back 
spirits. The spirits did not say anything to him, but tormented 
him a great deal.’ 

Among the Yakuts—The description ef kamlanie by a Yakut 
oyun is especially remarkable; this oyun seems to have made a 
great impression on Gmelin. The ceremony took place in a birch- 
bark yurtw, in front of which a fire was burning. When it was 
dark, a shaman, with long black hair, undressed in the yurta, and 
put on a coat hung with iron; he left on his breeches, but changed 
his stockings for others which were embroidered, and are only 
worn by shamans during the kamlanie. He took his tambourine, 
sat down with his face to the south-west, and began to beat the 
tambourine and cry out. The spectators did not join in chorus. 
He sat thus for a while, grimacing, shouting, and beating the 
tambourine. Gmelin’s companions told him that the man was 
summoning the spirits. Suddenly the shaman leaped to his feet, 
the beating on the tambourine became faster, the shouts louder, 
his black hair was flying while he rushed about the yurta. At last 
the shaman was overcome, and fell fainting. Then two chiefs 
seized him, for if the exorcist falls on the ground while he is 
delirious, misfortunes will happen to the whole people. After- 
wards, while a third chief was holding over his head a flint, and 
sharpening a knife onit, the shaman looked round for a moment, 
and again became delirious; whilst in this state, he often stopped, 
fixedly looked upwards, and grasped at the air with his hand. 
Then followed his prophecies, and when all was over, and the 
shaman had doffed his dress, he declared that he remembered 
nothing.* Klark describes the kamlanie of a Yakut shaman in 
terse but impressive language, and declares that the sound of} 
the tambourine, the convulsive antics of the shaman, his fierce 
screams, his wild stare in the dim light, all strike terror into the 
hearts of semi-savage people, and powerfully affect their nerves. 


1 Gmelin, ii, 44-46, 193-195. 
3 Gmelin, ii, 351-356. 

a Klark : “ Vilyuisk i ego okrug. Zapiski Sibirskago otdyela,” 1864, kn. vii, 
VOL. XXIV. F 








ia ce 





66 Anthropological Misecllanea and New Books. 


In the “ Syevernyi Arkhiv ” for 1822, there is a description of the 
healing of a sick person by a Yakut shaman. There we find him 
playing another part; that of the leech, driving away evil spirits 
which possess the sick and cause illness. His performance con- 
sisted of two parts; first of all he did not put on his dress, but 
took a piece of tinder in his hand, twisted into tufts some hairs 
from a horse’s mane, then embraced the patient, and thus took 
into himself the demons that caused the illness, found out what 
village they came from, and designated a sacrifice. When the 
animal destined for sacrifice was brought, the second part of the 
ceremony began; the shaman put on his professional costume, went 
up to the beast, and conveyed into it the demon that had entered 
him from the sick man. ‘his process had a terrifying effect upon 
the animal ; it seemed to be paralyzed. After the beast was killed, 
the head and flesh were eaten, and the skin and bones were hung 
on a tree.’ 

Among the Sumoyeds of Tomsk.—In Western Siberia also, among 
the Tomsk Samoyeds, the shaman alone has access to the dark 
world of spirits; according to Castren, he performs his functions 
in a place specially prepared. He sits down in the middle of the 
room, on a bench or trunk, in which there must be nothing of a 
dangerous nature, neither knife, nor bullet, nor needle ; behind the 
shaman, and beside him, are ranged the numerous spectators ; but 
nobody must sit in front of him. The shaman’s face is turned to 
the door, and he affects to see and hear nothing. In his right hand 
he holds a stick, smooth on one side, and on the other, covered with 
mysterious signs and figures; in his left hand are two arrows with 
the points upwards ; on the point of each a little bell is fixed. The 
raiment of the conjurer has no distinctive character ; he generally 
dons the clothes of the enquirer or patient. The kamlanie begins 
with a song, summoning the spirits, and during this the shaman 
beats with the stick on the arrows, and the bells ring out the 
measure, while the audience sit devoutly silent. As soon as the 
spirits begin to appear, the shaman stands up and begins to dance, 
accompanying the dance with very difficult and ingenious move- 
ments of the body. Meanwhile the song and the sound of the bells 
goon without pause. The subject of the song is a conversation 
with the spirits, and it is sung with varying degrees of excitement. 
When the singing has become exceptionally enthusiastic, the 
spectators also join in it. After the shaman has learned from the 
spirits all he wants to know, he declares the will of the gods. 
When he is consulted about the future, he divines by means of the 
stick, which he throws down; if the side marked with signs is 
downwards, this foretells misfortune, if it is uppermost, good 
fortune. To convince their fellows of the reality of their inter- 
course with spirits, the shamans have recourse to the following 
plan: the ghost-seer sits down in the middle of a dry reindeer 
skin which is stretched on the floor, and has his hands and feet 
tied ; then the shutters are closed and the shaman: summons the 


1 “Syevernyi Arkhiv,” 1822, 274-277. 























Anthropological Miscellanea and New Books. 67 


spirits subject to him. In the various corners of the dark yurta, 
and even outside, different voices are heard, there is a sound of 
scratching and drumming in time on the dry skin, bears growl, 
snakes hiss, squirrels jump. When the noise ceases, the unbound 
shaman goes out of the yuwrta, and the audience are convinced that 
the whole performance has been the work of spirits. Farther to 
the north, the Samoyed shamans, to prove their mysterious power, 
ask to be shot in the head." 

Among the Ostyaks.—As early as the days of Peter the Great, 
Novitskii, in his description of the Ostyaks, near akin to the 
Samoyeds, portrayed picturesquely the manner in which an Ostyak 
shaman conjured. When the natives wish to make enquiries about 
matters affecting their daily wants, fishing, hunting, or the like, 
they lead the wonder-worker into a dark hut, and there bind him 
firmly; they themselves sit down and play on reed pipes; the 
captive shouts out necromantic words, invoking his ally, Satan. 
The performance always takes place by night, and, after some 
hours of invocation, a stormy and noisy spirit enters the hut. 
Then the spectators flee, and leave the wizard alone with the spirit. 
The spirit takes him, raises him up and lets him down again, and 
torments him in all kinds of ways. Some hours later, the demon 
makes his revelation to the shaman, and then leaves him; the 
shaman communicates the message to the enquirers.” Tretyakov 
has given the substance of some of the sacred songs of the shamans 
among the Ostyaks and Yurak-Samoyeds. An Ostyak shaman 
sings that he is raising himself to heaven by means of a rope let 
down to him; he pushes aside the stars that block his way. In 
the sky, the shaman floats in a boat, and then sails down a stream 
to the earth, with such rapidity that the air blows through him. 
Afterwards, with the aid of winged devils, he descends below the 
earth, and asks the dark spirit ‘“‘ Ama,” or the shaman’s mother, 
foracloak. (At this moment the bystanders throw a cloak over 
his shoulders.) Finally the shaman informs each of those who are 
present that his happiness is secured, and tells the patient that the 
devil is cast out. Among the Tazovsky Ostyaks and Yuraks, the 
shaman sings of his journeyings, and tells how he flies amid 
blossoming wild roses, and rises to the sky, where he sees on the 
tundra seven larches; there his grandsire formerly made his 
tambourine. Then the shaman enters an iron hut and falls asleep, 
surrounded by purple clouds. He comes down to earth on a river, 
and then adoring the heavenly deity the sun, the moon, the trees, 
the beast of earth—the ruler of the world, he prays for long life, 
happiness, &c.3 

Among the Chukchis and Koryaks.—Passing to the extreme side 
of Siberia, on the Pacific coast, we find, among the tribes there, 
similar phenomena. Among the Chukchis, according to Litke, the 


: Castren : “ Reiseberichte und Briefe,’ 1845-1849, 172-174. 
* “ Kratkoe opisanie o narodye ostyatskom,” Grigoriya Novitskago, 1715g. 
Izd. L. Maikov, 1884, 48-49. 
* Tretyakov, 217-218. 
F 2 














68 Anthropological Miscellanea and New Books. 


shaman, in his kamlanie, began by retiring behind a curtain, then 
were heard groans, and gentle tappings, with a thin whalebone, on 
the tambourine; opening the curtain, he was seen swaying from 
side to side, the shouts and drumming became louder, he threw off 
his coat, and stripped himself to the waist. The performance 
eoncluded with jugglery. First of all, the shaman took a smooth 
stone, gave it to Litke to hold, then took it between his hands, 
rubbed one palm on the other, and the stone disappeared; it was 
found in a swelling near the elbow, and was cut out. The last 
trick of the shaman, before retreating behind the curtain, was to 
cut his tongue with a knife until blood flowed.'. The Koryak 
shamans, according to Krasheninnikov, had no special dress, and 
were only remarkable as healers of the sick and performers of 
tricks, e.g., they thrust a knife into the stomach. In healing 
diseases they designated the kind of animal which ought to be 
sacrificed. In their kamlanie the tambourine played an important 
part.’ 

Among the Kamchadals—Among the Kamchadals there were no 
special shamans, but their place was taken by women; these were 
chiefly old, and they cured diseases by whispered charms. Their 
chief form of shamanism consisted of two old women sitting in the 
corner and ceaselessly whispering. One of them tied round her 
leg a garland of nettles ornamented with red wool, and shook her 
leg about. If the leg rose easily this was a good omen, but if it 
rose with difficulty misfortune would happen. But the kamlante 
did not terminate with this. The female shaman summoned the 
devils with the words, ‘‘ gut! gut!” and gnashed her teeth, and 
when the devils appeared she met them with laughter and cries of 
“hoi! hoi!” Half an hour afterwards the devils departed, and 
when this happened the witch cried “ ishki,” 7.e.,no. Her assistants 
were all the time whispering and telling her not to be afraid, and 
to notice everything and not forget the response. Some, adds 
Krasheninnikov, say that in time of thunder and lightning the 
bilyukai, spirit, comes to the women shamans and enables them to 
give responses.* Although Krasheninnikov, in his account of 
shamanism among the Kamchadals, declares that this tribe 
consider all women, especially old ones, capable of kamlanie, yet 
from the facts he gives we arrive at the conclusion that it is only 
certain women, exceptionally gifted, who can call up spirits, and 
become united with them. 

Among the Gilyaks——The Gilyaks carefully conceal all informa- 
tion about their shamans, and it is therefore very interesting to find 
that a merchant named Ivanov has given a detailed account of 
them, published in the “ Sibirskii Vyestnik ” for 1866. Mr. Ivanov 
lived on the Amur river from 1855, managed a Gilyak school, and 
had close relations with the Gilyaks of the Amur and of Sakhalin 
Island. A shaman, ont of friendship, allowed him to be present at 


1 Erman: “ Archiv,” 1843, 459. 
2 Krasheninnikoyv, ii, 158-159, 
3 Krasheninnikoy, ii, 81-82. 








Anthropological Miscellanea and New Books. 69 


a kamlanie. At ten o’clock Mr. Ivanov reached the yurta. ‘ As 
soon as I entered,” says he, ‘‘he began to put on his shaman 
costume, hung with heavy iron rattles, took in his hand a tam- 
bourine covered with fish skin, and beat upon it with a hair-brnsh. 
On his head he had long wood shavings, and to the sound of the 
tambourine he began dancing about the yurta, and shouting in a 
wild voice, endeavouring to show the spectators that he possessed 
that inspiration which is the mark of his profession. Among his 
various gymnastic feats and tricks, he took in his right hand a 
knife and in his left hand an axe, and going over to the door, where 
there was no light, placed the knife against his stomach and struck 
with the axe on the handle of the knife until the blade of the knife 
had penetrated his entrails, then turning to the spectators he showed 
them that the blade had entered his stomach. All the bystanders 
went up to him tosee; one of them took hold of the handle and 
pulled it away from the blade ; the latter, according to the shaman, 
was left in his stomach, and thence he afterwards produced it.” 
Mr. Ivanov afterwards detected the shaman’s trick, and exposed 
him.! 

Among the Mongols—Shamanism was especially developed near 
Baikal Lake and in the Altai Mountains. In these classic lands of 
the Black Faith, capable enquirers like Yadrintsev, Potanin, and 
Radloff have laboured. There, in the south of Siberia, we find not 
only examples of the productions of the shamanist mind excited by 
an inflamed imagination, but whole mystery plays in which the 
conjurers up of spirits are the actors, plays distinguished by a 
strong dramatic element. Among the ancient Mongols, as early as 
the time of Chingis Khan and his immediate successors, the shamans 
were at the height of their power; they were priests, leeches, and 
prophets. As priests they need not occupy us at present. For 
healing purposes, the ancient Mongol] shamans employed the methods 
which are still used in Siberia. When the exorcist of the spirits 
guilty of causing the illness could not fall into a state of delirium, 
the spectators tried to excite him by clapping of hands, shouts and 
songs; this custom is called togokha by the Mongols. As sooth- 
sayers, they either foretold the future, or divined according to the 
flight of arrows, or by the shoulder-blade ; they burned the shoulder- 
blade of a sheep, and made responses to enquirers according to the 
cracks caused by the fire.’ 


Among the Buryats—Among the Alarsk Buryats, the shaman, 


when called in to heal a sick person, makes a diagnosis, ¢.e., he 
enquires into the cause of the illness, and decides what has 
happened to the patient’s soul, whether it has lost itself, or has been 
stolen away and is languishing in the prison of the gloomy Erlik, 
ruler of the underground world. A preliminary kamlanie decides 
this question. If the soul is near at hand, the shaman, by methods 
known to him alone, replaces it in the body, if the soulis faraway, 
he seeks it in every part of the world; in the deep woods, on the 


1 “ Sibirskii Vyestnik,”’ 1866, No. 18. 
2 Banzarov, 114-115. 














70 Anthropological Miscellanea and New Books. 


steppes, at the bottom of the sea, and when he has found it, restores 
it to the body. The soul frequently escapes from its pursuer ; it 
runs to a place where sheep have walked, so that the shaman 
cannot discover its traces, which are mixed with the footprints of 
the sheep, or it flees to the south-western spirits, where it is safe 
from the wiles of the shaman. If the soul is not to be found any- 
where within the limits of our world, the shaman must seek it in 
the realm of Erlik, and perform the toilsome and expensive journey 
to the underground world, where heavy sacrifices have to be made, 
at the cost of the patient. Sometimes the shaman informs the 
patient that Krlik demands another soul in exchange for his, and 
asks who is his nearest friend. If the sick Buryat is not of a 
magnanimous disposition, the shaman, with his consent, ensnares the 
soul of his friend when the latter is asleep. The soul turns into a 
lark; the shaman in his kamlanie takes the form of a hawk, 
catches the soul, and hands it over to Erlik, who frees the soul of 
the sick man. The friend of the Buryat, who recovers, falls ill and 
dies. But Erlik has only given a certain respite ; the patient’s life 
is prolonged for three, seven, or nine years.' The famous Berlin 
ethnographer Bastian describes the kamlanie of a Buryat shaman, 
at which he was present. An oldshaman, in the company of three 
of his pupils, who assisted him, by night, in a yurta half lighted up 
by a fire, flung himself about, stamping wildly, and, while per- 
forming his dance round, summoned the spirits in a monotonous 
chant with a rhythmic cadence. When the shaman reached his 
pupils they fell down prostrate before him, and he touched their 
heads with two wands which he waved during his performance. 
Bastian’s guide asked a question about a box that had been lost on 
the road. One of the pupils carefully laid a shovel on the coals, 
and filled it with thin splinters of wood, keeping up the fire so that 
the whole surface of the shovel would be on fire at the same time; 
then he reverently carried over the shovel full of flaming chips to 
his master, who spat on it several times and eagerly noticed the 
crackling of the burning wood, at the same time groaning and 
twitching convulsively. Unfortunately the response was indefinite 
and obscure. Mr. Pozdnyeev gives, among his specimens of the 
popular literature of the Mongol tribes, an interesting wizard song 
of a Buryat shaman. It was sung, apparently, before a Buryat set 
out for the chase, and reminds him of his duties towards the 
Russian Government. 
“ Tree of the western rock 
Spread in thy youth, 
Taking a blue colour, 
Bloom with blue blossoms.”’ 
** Father heaven, O take! 
Thou must make a ramrod, 
Thou must kill the roebuck’s mate, 
Thou musi pay tribute to the Tsar, 
Thou must do carting for the Kazaks.’ 


1 Potanin, iv, 86-87. 
* Bastian : “‘ Geographische und ethnologische Bilder,” i, 404-406. 

















Anthropological Miscellanca and New Books, Tt 


“ Tree of the southern rock 
Spread out from thy root ; 
Taking a blue colour, 
Bloom with blue blossoms.” 


“Father heaven, O take!” &c. 


“ Tree of the northern rock 
Spread out from thy branches, 
Taking a blue colour 
Bloom with blue blossoms.” 
** Father heaven, O take!” &c.) 


Mr. Pozdnyeev has copied from Castren’s Buryat grammar 

L another specimen of a shamanist prayer. It differs from the fore- 
going in that it was uttered at public worship (kerek) and was not 
called forth by a private accidental demand. It begins by refer- 
ring to various gods giving authority to the shaman’s invocation. 
Then it goes on as follows: 


** At this was present (here the name of a spirit invoked is given). 
? “ At the invocation bylp (a certain spirit). 
‘* We invoke long life, 
We invoke long prosperity, 
We invoke a skin a chetvert thick, 
We invoke life strong as iron, 
We invoke the effectiveness of sacrifice, 
Entrance into a happy fate, 
We invoke the driving away of infection, 
The healing of sickness, 
We invoke wealth in flocks, 
We invoke a numerous progeny.” 
“* Make ready at once! ’* 





Among the Altaians.—In various corners of the Altai Mountains, 
among the Turkish tribes, Teleuts, Altaians and Chernev Tatars, 
the kams, or shamans, tenaciously preserve all the traditions and 
ceremonies connected with their calling. Mr. Potanin was fortunate 
enough to observe several cases of kamlanie. A very curious instance 
was that of a young shaman named Enchu, who lived in an ant on 
the river Talda, six versts from Angudai. His kamlanie cousisted 
of four parts: 1. Before the fire, sitting with the face towards it; 
2. Standing with the back to the fire ; 3. A pause, during which the 
kam, leaning on the side of his tambourine, narrated all that the 
spirits had said or done; 4. Finally, he kam’d with his back to the 
fire, in front of the place where the tambourine always hangs, and 
undressed himself. Enchu said he did not remember what had 
happened to him while he was dancing with his back to the fire. 
At that time he madly twisted his body without moving his feet ; 
he squatted down, writhed and straightened himself out again, as if 
imitating the movements of a snake. Owing to the rapid move- 
ment of the upper part of his body, the twisted handkerchiefs sewed 
on his dress spread ont and whirled in the air, forming exquisite 
wavelike lines. Meanwhile he beat the tambourine in various ways, 


1 Pozdnyecey, i, 289, * Pozdnyeev, i, 280. 











72 Anthropological Miscellanea and New Books. 


and produced the most varied sounds. Sometimes Enchu held the 
tambourine upside down, holding it horizontally, and struck it 
violently from underneath. Potanin’s Angudai guides explained 
that the shaman was collecting spirits in the tambourine. When 
the kam sat with his back to the fire he was much quieter; some- 
times he interrupted his beating of the tambourine, conversed with 
somebody, laughed, thus indicating that he was in the company of 
the spirits. At one time Enchu sang slowly and pleasantly, while 
producing on the tambourine sounds similar to the trampling of 
horses’ feet; the spectators explained that the shaman was riding 
with his guards. 

On the Elegesha, Potanin was present at the kamlanie of an old 
female shaman in the aul of Uryankhai. The wurta (or hut) was 
very close. Theshamanka’s husband helped in the preliminary part 
of the ceremony: he gave her dress to her, dried the tambourine 
before the fire, threw juniper branches into the fire, &c. The dis- 
tinctive features of this performance, as compared with Enchu’s, were 
deliriam and spasms; throwing away her tambourine, sie began to 
drag herself towards those who were sitting in the yurta, showing 
her teeth, and stretching out her fingers to make them look like the 
claws of a beast; then she fell with a crash on the ground, and her 
head almost struck the hearthstone. As she lay on the floor she 
twisted herself about, and tried to gnaw with her teeth the hot 
stones around the hearth. Her husband held up her head, and 
muttered: ‘‘ Stinkard!” According to the Altaians, the procedure 
varies among the different kams.' 

A shaman’s journey to Erlik’s realm.—But Erlik, the malicious 
ruler of the underground realm, always plays an important part, 
and Mr. Potanir has written down, from Father Chivalkov’s account, 
a story giving a full and dramatic description of a kam’s journey to 
Erlik’s abode. The shaman begins his travels from the place where he 
is performing. He describes his entry. The road runs southward. 
The kam passes through the neighbouring districts, climbs over the 
Altai, and describes, in passing, the Chinese land with its red sand ; 
then he rides over a yellow steppe across which a magpie cannot 
fly. ‘‘With songs we shall traverse it!” cries the kam to his 
followers, and drawls out asong; the young braves mount with him, 
and accompany him in song. After the yellow steppe comes a wan- 
coloured steppe, over which no raven has ever flown, and the kam 
again incites his followers to make merry with song. Beyond 
these two weary steppes is the iron mountain, Temir Shaikha, 
whose summit reaches heaven; the kam tells his followers that 
concord is necessary for this dangerous ascent. Then the kam 
describes the difficult ascent of the mountain, pretends to climb, 
and when the top is reached breathes heavily. On the mountain he 
sees the bones of kams who have failed to reach the summit for 
want of power. “On the mountains men’s bones lie heaped up in 
rows ; the mountains are piebald with the bones of horses.”” Then, 
Jeaving the mountains behind, he rides up toa hole which leads 


1 Potanin, iv, 60-62. 





































Anthropological Miscellanea and New Books. 73 


into the underground world, “ the jaws of the earth.” On entering 
he finds a sea, over which is stretched a hair. To give a visible 
representation of his passage over this dangerous bridge, the shaman 
totters from side to side, and seems sometimes to be on the point 
of falling. At the bottom of the sea he views the bones of many 
fallen shamans, for a sinful soul cannot cross the hair bridge. 
When he reaches the other shore, the kam meets several sinners 
suffering punishments corresponding to their guilt, e.g., an eaves- 
dropper is fixed with his ear against a pillar. Finally the shaman 
rides up to Erlik’s abode ; he is met by dogs; at first the porter will 
not let the kam pass, but he is at Jength appeased with presents. 
Before the ceremony beyins, pots of home-brewed beer, boiled beef, 
and skunk skins are prepared for this purpose. After receiving the 
gifts, the porter lets the traveller into the yurta of Erlik. Here- 
upon the fam goes up to the door of the yurta in which the perform- 
ance is taking place, and affects to believe that he is approaching 
Erlik, who is sitting at the other end of the yurta; he bows, and 
puts his tambourine against his forehead, saying, ‘‘ Mergu! mergu!”’ 
and then tells whence and why he has come. Then the kam cries 
out; this means that Erlik has noticed him, and has cried out 
from anger at his coming. The alarmed kam runs back to the 
door, and then again approaches Erlik’s throne. He repeats this 
manceuvre three times, and then Erlik says, ‘‘ Those that have 
feathers fly not hither, those that have bones walk not hither; 
thou black, ill-smelling beetle, whence comest thou?” The sage 
shaman explains who he is, and treats the lord of hell to wine; in 
doing this, he pretends to take wine from the pots, fills his tam- 
bourine, and presents it to Erlik-Khan. Then he represents the 
Khan drinking the wine, and hiccoughs in his stead. After slak- 
ing the Khan’s thirst, he offers him an ox, which has been previously 
killed, and the use of a collection of furs and clothes taken from 
the chests and hung on a rope; touching these things with his 
hand, the sorcerer hands them over to the khan, and says, “ May 
this tolu of varied shapes, which cannot be lifted by a horse, be for 
clothes on thy neck and body.” But these things are left with the 
master cf the house. As each thing is handed over, the tambourine 
is tapped. Erlik becomes drunk, and the kam mocks the drunken 
god. The propitious deity now gives his blessing to the suppliant, 
promises to multiply cattle, and even reveals what mare will bring 
forth acolt, and how it will be marked. The kam joyfully returns 
homeward, not on a horse, as before, but riding on a goose, and he 
walks about the yurta on tiptoe, as if he were flying. He imitates 
the cry of a goose. The kamlanie comes to an end, the shaman 
sits down, somebody takes the tambourine out of his hands, and 
beats on it thrice. The kam goes on beating his palm or his breast 
with his drum-stick, until it is taken away from him. After this 
the kam rubs his eyes as if he were awaking. He is asked, “ What 
sort of ride had you? How did you get on?” And hereplies, “J 
have had a successful journey! I was well received ! 


1 Potanin, iv, 64-68. 















v4 Anthropological Miscellanea and New Booi:s. 


Ceremonies and Songs of an Altaian Kam while Sacrificing to Bai- 
Yulgen.—The activity of the kam as a sacrificer, a conjurer up of 
spirits, and a soothsayer, is manifested most brilliantly in the 
ceremonies attending a great sacrifice to the celestial deity, Bai- 
Yulgen, who dwells on the golden mountain in the sixteenth heaven. 
All the songs and invocations were written down in the fifth decade 
of the present century, at the Altai mission, and were published by 
the priest Verbitskii. Mr. Radloff made a translation, and gave a 
full account of this festival, which is kept from time to time by 
every family. The festival takes place in the evenings of two or 
three days. On the first evening begins the preparation for the 
sacrifice. The kam selects a spot in a birch thicket in a little 
meadow, and there he places a new and ornamented yurta. In the 
yurta they put a young birch with the foliage on it; the lower 
branches are lopped off close to the trunk; on one of the topmost 
branches a flag is hung. At the bottom of the tree they cut on the 
trunk, with an axe, nine steps (tapty). Round the yurta a penfold 
is made, as if for cattle; opposite the door of the yurta is the 
entrance of the courtyard, and by the entrance is a birch stick with 
a noose of horse-hair. Then they choose a horse agreeable to the 
deity, and the kam has it held by a special person chosen from 
among those present, and called Bash-tutkan kiski, i.c., holder of the 
head. The shaman takes a birch twig and waves it over the 
horse’s back, thus driving the soul of the sacrificed animal to 
Yulgen, at the same time the Bash-tutkan’s sonl accompanies it. 
The assembling of spirits in the tambourine takes place with great 
solemnity ; the kam summons each spirit separately, and with a 
groan replies, “ Here am I also, kam!” at the same time 
moving the tambourine as if taking the spirit into it. When he 
has assembled these assistants, the kam goes outside the yuria, sits 
down or a scarecrow in the form of a goose, and moving both arms 
‘apidly like wings, he slowly sings in a loud voice : 
* Below the white sky, 

Above the white cloud, 

Below the blue sky, 


Above the blue cloud, 
Mount, O bird, to the sky!” 


To all the speeches of the shaman the goose replies by quacking 
“Ungai gak gak, ungai gak, kaigai gak gak, kaigai gak.” The 
shaman himself, of course, does this imitation of the goose’s voice. 
On his feathered steed the kam pursues the soul, pura, of the 
sacrificed horse, and neighs like a horse; finally, with the aid of 
the spectators, he drives it to the penfold, to the birch stick with 
the noose which represents the guardian of the animal’s soul. The 
kam neighs, kicks, and makes a noise as if the noose were catching 
him by ‘the threat, pulls, and sometimes throws down his tam- 
bourine as a sign that the horse has freed itself and run away. 
Finally, having recaptured the pura, be fumigates it with juniper 
and discards the goose. Then the animal destined ‘for sacrifice is 
brought, the kam blesses it, and, with the aid of some of the 

















Anthropological Miscellanea and New Books. 75 


bystanders, kills it ina most cruel manner. The bones and skin 
become the sacrifice, and the flesh is eaten up, with various 
ceremonies, the kam receiving the choicest portion. 

The most important part of the performance takes place on the 
second day, after sunset; it is then that the kam must display all 
his power and all his dramatic art. A whole religious drama is 
performed, descriptive of the kam’s pilgrimage to Bai-Yulgen in 
heaven. A fire burns in the yurta, the shaman feeds the lords of 
the tambourine, 7.c., the spirits, personifying the shamanistic power 
of his family, with the meat of the offering, and then sings : 

* Accept this, O Kaira Khan! 
Master of the tambourine with six bosses, 
Come to me amid the tinkling! 
If I ery ‘ Chokk!’ bow thyself ! 
If I cry ‘Mé!’ accept this!” 
With a similar invocation he addresses the master of the fire, 
representing the power of the family of the owner of the yurta, the 
organiser of the festival. Raising a cup, the kam with his lips makes 
a noise as if invisible guests had assembled and were drinking, and 
he cuts up the meat into morsels and gives them to the spectators, 
who greedily gulp them down, as representatives of the unseen 
spirits. Fumigating with juniper nine garments, hung on a rope 
and decked with ribbons, which the master of the house offers to 
Yulgen, the kam sings : 
“ Gifts which no horse can carry, 
Alas! Alis! Alas! 
Which no man can lift, 
Alas! Alas! Alas! 
Garments with threefold collars, 
Turn them over three times and look at them, 
Let them be a cover for the racer, 
Aldis! Alds! Alas! 
Prince Yulgen full of gladness! 
Alas! Alias! Alas!” 
When the kam has donned his shaman’s dress, and carefully 
fumigated his tambourine, he sits down on a bench, and, striking 
his tambourine, summons many spirits, primary and secondary ; 
on behalf of each he answers “ Here am I, kan!” Towards the 
end of this invocation the shaman addresses himself to Merkyut, 
the bird of heaven : 
** Celestial birds, the five Merkyuts! 
You with mighty brazen claws, 
The claw of the moon is of copper, 
And the beak of the moon is of ice; 
Mighty is the fiapping of the broad wings, 
The long tail is like a fan, 
The left wing hides the moon, 
The right wing hides the sun ; 
Thou, mother of nine eagles, 
Without straying thou fliest over Yaik, 
Thou art not wearied over Edil. 
Come to me with song! 
Sporting, approach my right eye! 
Sit on my right shoulder!” 


















76 Anthropological Miscellanea and New Books. 


The shaman imitates the cry of this bird, and says: ‘ Kagak, kak 
kak! kam, here Iam!” He then bows down his shoulders, as if 
crushed by the weight of a huge bird. As the number of the 
spirits assembled increases, the kam beats more loudly on the tam- 
bourine, which becomes so heavy that he staggers under it. After 
having collected such powerful protectors and helpers, the shaman 
walks several times round the birch placed in the yurta, then 
kneels in front of the door, and asks the porter spirit to grant him 
a guide. A favourable answer being given, he noisily comes out 
into the middle of the yurta, and sharply beats his tambourine ; the 
upper part of his body is shaken with convulsive movements, and 
an unintelligible muttering is heard. Then, with a peculiar 
motion of his drum-stick, the shaman pretends to scrape from the 
back of the master of the house all that is unclean, and thus 
liberates the soul, which, according to the belief of the Altaians, is 
in the back, from the influence of the wicked Erlik. Then he 
embraces the host, the hostess, their children and kinsfolk, in such 
a way that the tambourine touches the breast of each, while the 
drum-stick is held behind their backs. The shaman thus, with the 
aid of all the spirits collected in the tambourine, purifies them 
from all ills and misfortunes that the hostile spirit could bring 
upon them. After this purification, the people return to their 
places, and the shaman drives all the potential misfortunes out of 
doors. Then he puts his tambourine close to the host’s ear, and 
with blows on this sacred instrument drives into him the spirit and 
power of his forefathers, thus preparing him to receive and under- 
stand the succeeding prophecies of the shaman. Indicating in 
pantomime that he is investing the host, hostess and all the members 
of the family with breast-plates and hats, the kam passes into a 
state of ecstasy ; he jumps, knocks against those who are present, 
and suddenly places himself on the first step cut out of the birch 
trunk, at the same time raising the tambourine, thumping it with 
all his might, and shouting ‘‘ gok, gok!” All the shaman’s move- 
ments indicate that he is rising to the sky. In a joyous ecstasy he 
runs round the fire and the birch, imitating the sound of thunder, 
and then with convulsions he runs up to a bench covered with 
a horse-cloth. This represents the soul of the pura, the sacrificial 
horse ; the kam mounts it and cries: 





“T have mounted one step, 

Aikhai! aikhai! 

I have attained one zone. 
Shagarbata! 

I have climbed to the top of the tapty (the birch ateps), 
Shagarbata! 

I have risen to the full moon. 
Shagarbata ! ” 


The shaman passes through one zone of heaven after another, and 
orders the Bash-tutkan to hurry. In the third zone, the pura is 
tired ont, and, to relieve it, the kam calls the goose, which he 
mounts. But this temporary relief is of no avail; the shaman, on 

















Anthropological Miscellanea and New Bookis. 77 


behalf of the Bash-tutkan, makes a long speech in a tearful tone, 
telling of his exhaustion, and that of his steed. In the third space 
of heaven there is a halt, and the shaman tells the audience of all 
he has seen and heard in that zone; here it is that information is 
given about approaching changes in the weather, impending 
sickness and epidemics, misfortunes that are to befall neighbours, 
sacrifices to be offered by the district. In foretelling rainy weather, 
for instance, the kam sings: 


“ Kare Shurlu with six staves, 
Drips on the low ground, 
Nothing with hoofs can protect itself, 
Nothing with claws can uphold itself.” 


The kam may also make similar prophecies in other regions of the 
sky, at his discretion. After the Bash-tutkan is rested, the journey 
is continued; before each heaven, the shaman mounts on the next 
step of the birch tree. To give variety to the performance, various 
episodes are introduced: first the karakush, a black bird in the 
service of the kam, is treated to a pipe of tobacco, then the karakush 
chases the cuckoo; during this, the shaman cvo-cooes, and imitates 
the report of the karakush’s gun; in the third place, he waters the 
pura horse, and imitates the sound of a horse drinking. In the 
sixth sphere of heaven takes place the last episodical scene, and 
this has a comic tinge. The shaman sends his servant Kuruldak 
to track and catch a hare that has hidden itself. For a time the 
chase is unsuccessful, new personages are introduced, and one of 
them, Kereldei, mocks Kuruldak, who, however, at last succeeds in 
catching the hare. The fifth heaven is particularly interesting, 
for there the kam carries on a Jong conversation with the mighty 
Yayuchi (supreme creator), who reveals to him many secrets of the 
future. Some of tkese things the shaman communicates aloud, 
others he mutters rapidly. 

In the sixth heaven he bends before the moon, who dwells there, 
and in the seventh, before the sun. In a similar manner the kam 
makes his way to the eighth, ninth heaven, &c. The more powerful 
the kam is, the higher he mounts in the celestial regions; there 
are some, but few, who can soar to the tenth, eleventh, twelfth, 
and even higher. When he has reached the summit of his power, 
the kam stops, drops his tambourine, and, gently beating with his 
drum-stick, invokes Yulgen in a humble prayer: 


‘¢ Lord to whom three ladders lead, 
Bai-Yulgen, owner of three flocks, 
The blue slope which has appeared, 
The blue sky which shows itself, 
The blue cloud which whirls along. 
Inaccessible blue sky, 
Inaccessible white sky, 
Place a year’s journey distant from water, 
Father Yulgen thrice exalted, 
Whom the edge of the moon’s axe shuns, 
Who uses the hoof of the horse. 
Thou, Yulgen, hast created all men, 








Anthropological Miscellanea and New Books. 


Who are stirring round about us, 

Thou, Yulgen, hast endowed us with all cattle, 

Let us not fall into sorrow! 

Grant that we may resist the evil one! 

Do not show us Kermes (the evil spirit that attends man) 
Give us not over into his hands! 

Thou who the starry sky 

Thousands and thousands of times hast turned, 
Condemn not my sins! ” 


From Yulgen the shaman learns whether the sacrifice is accepted 
or not, and receives the most authentic information concerning the 
weather, and the character of the coming harvest; he also finds 
out what sacrifices are expected by the deity. Onsuch an occasion 
the shaman designates the neighbour who is bound to furnish a 
sacrifice, and even describes the colour and appearance of the 
animal; Mr. Radloff remarks that the kam is not wholly dis- 
interested in these cases. After his conversation with Yulgen, the 
ecstasy of the shaman reaches its highest point, and he falls down 
completely exhausted. Then the Bash-tutkan goes up to him, and 
takes the tambourine and drum-stick out of his hands. The shaman 
is quite motionless and silent. After a short time, during which 
quiet reigns in the yurta, the shaman seems to awake, rubs his 
eyes, stretches himself, wrings out the perspiration from his shirt, 
and salutes all those present as if after a long absence. 

Sometimes the festival ends with this great ceremony, but more 
frequently, especially among the wealthy, it lasts another day, 
which is spent in libations to the gods, and feasting, during which 
an enormous quantity of ‘wmys and other strong drink is con- 
sumed." 

The account, given above in an abridged form, of the journeyings 
and spirit-raising of an Altai shaman, is taken from Mr. Radloff’s 
detailed description, and is the most exhaustive and complete 
picture we have of the fantasy of the Siberian shamanists, and is 
consequently of great value for the comparative ethnographical 
study of our subject. 

The tambourine and drum-stick.—The shaman, as mediator in 
dealings with the spirit world, must, during his functions, bear 
outward signs to distinguish him more or less from other 
people. The most important appurtenances of the profession are 
the tambourine and drum-stick, and the various parts of the 
shaman’s dress. The tambourine is met with amongst almost all 
the Siberian tribes who have shamans ; besides its power in calling 
up spirits, it has the miraculous power of carrying the shaman. 
Mr. Potanin dwells in detail on the shamans’ tambourines among 
the Altaians, and compares them with the tambourines of the other 
Siberian peoples. All the tambourines seen by Mr. Potanin were 
circular; but, according to Mr. Yadrintsev, all those used among 
the Chernev Tatars are oval. The tambourine consists of a hoop 
or rim, of a palm in breadth, with skin stretched over it on one 


1 Radloff: “ Aus Siberien,” ii, 20-50. 





Anthropological Miscellanea and New Books. 79 


side; on the concave side of the tambourine two vertical cross 
pieces of wood and one horizontal iron cross piece are fixed. The 
wooden cross piece is called by the Altaians bar, but other tribes 
give it other names. ‘The bar has the form of aspindle broadening 
at the upper end (the broad part is shaped like a human head), at 
the lower end it forms a fork, resembling legs.’ On the upper part, 
eyes, a nose, mouth and chin are marked. The iron cross-piece is 
called krish (bow-string) among the Altaians; itis an iron rod on whica 
are iron rattles, called kungru in Altaian; the number of these 
rattles is greater or less according to the rank of the kam. Their 
number corresponds with that of the chalus, or spirits, subject to 
the shaman. Besides the kungrus, there are small sword-shaped 
trinkets fixed on the inner side of the tambourine, to the right and 
left of the head of the bar. On the outside of the hoop or rim are 
bosses about the size of a bean, and sometimes smaller. On the 
bow-string, under the beard of the bar, are fastened bands of narrow 
cloth, and these are called yalama. On the skin of the tambourine, 
sometimes on both sides, sometimes on the inner side only, are 
drawings in red paint. According to Mr. Yadrintsev’s description, 
the tambourines of the Chernev and Kumandinsk Tatars differ from 
those of the Altaians ; the vertical cross-piece has no representation 
of a human face, and is only a plain piece of wood. On the outer 
side of the tambourine of the Chernev Tatars there are drawings of 
animals and trees. A horizontal line separates it into two unequal 
parts ; the upper part is the larger, and on it is figured a bow, the 
ends of which rest on the horizontal belt. Within the bow are 
two trees, and on each of them sits a karagush bird; to tine left of 
the trees are two circles, one light, the sun, the other dark, the 
moon. Under the horizontal stripe are frogs, a lizard, and a snake ; 
on the cross stripe and the bow are stars.” A certain kam gave 
Mr. Klements some curious explanations of the pictures on a tam- 
bourine. 
(A) Lower part of the tambourine. 

(1) Bai-lazyn (painted in white), literally “the rich birch.” 
This is the name given to the birches at which the yearly 
sacrifices take place. 

(2) Ulug-bai-kazyn (in white paint). Two trees that grow in 
Ilkhan’s kingdom. 

(3 and 4) Ak-baga (white frog), Kara-baga (black frog), 
servants of Ilkhan. 

(6) Chzhity-us, certain spirits with seven nests and seven 
feathers. 

(6) Chzhity-kyz (seven maidens), who let loose seven diseases 
against man. 

(7) Ulgere; he is invoked in case of diseases of the teeth and 
ears. 

(8) Ot-imeze, signifying “ mother of fire.” 


Figs. b and ¢ on p. 18, vol. ii of Radloff’s “ Aus Siberien.” 
Potanin, iv, 42-43. 


1 
: 








Anthropological Miscellanea and New Books. 


(B) Upper part of the tambourine. 


(1) Solban-ir (translated by the kam as “ dawn’’). 

(2) Kyun, the sun. 

(3) Ike-karagus, two black birds; they fly on errands from the 
shaman to the devils. 

(4) Aba-tyus (bear’s tyus, whatever that may mean). 

(5) Sugyznym-karagat, the horses of Ilkhan. 

(6) Kyzyl-kikh-khan. He is invoked when men set out for the 
chase. 


The remaining figures, painted with white colour, are the beasts 
chased by kyzyl-kikh-khan. 

These pictorial representations on the tambonrines have a peculiar 
interest for us; they are intimately connected with shamanist 
beliefs, and would throw light on the mysteries of shamanist 
necromancy, but, like all pictorial signs, these drawings need to be 
explained by persons intimately acquainted with the ideas and 
facts to which they refer. We have as yet but few materials of 
this kind, and must restrict ourselves to the vaguest conclusions, 
e.q., that the terrestrial and underground worlds are portrayed on 
the tambourine, separated by a horizontal band. Mr. Potanin 
notes such a division in the Ostyak tambourine of which he gives 
a drawing in his book.? If we were in possession of more of these 
pictorial materials, and texts like that published by O. Verbitskii, 
light might be thrown on this important question, but so far, all 
explanations have been rather of the nature of guess-work. 
Among the Buryats, the tambourine has been almost supplanted by 
the bell, and Mr. Khangalov only saw a tambourine in the hands of 
one shaman, who was an inexperienced beginner. If we may judge 
from this specimen, the Buryat tambourine has the dimensions and 
shape of a sieve; horse-skin is stretched upon it, and fastened 
behind with small straps; there were no drawings on it, either 
inside or outside, but the surface was bespattered with some white 
substance. According to Khangalov, the tambourine among the 
Buryats has‘a symbolic meaning; it represents the horse which 
can convey the shaman whither he will. ‘The Yakuts make their 
tambourines of a Tengthened circular form, and cover them with 
cowhide. On the inner side are two iron cross-pieces, arranged 
crosswise, and forminga handle. The tambourine is hung with 
little bells and rattles; it serves the Yakut, like the Buryat 
shaman, as a horse on which he rides to the spirit realm.* 

But it is not all shamans who attain the high honour of having 
a tambourine; frequently a long time passes during which the 
spirits will not allow this magic instrument to be made. Gmelin, 
for instance, says that many Buryat shamans are not permitted by 








1 Klements: “ Nyeskolko obraztsov bubnov minusinskikh inorodtsev. Zap. 
Vos. Sib. Otd. I. G. O. P.,” v, 2, 26. 

2 Potanin, iv, 680. 

% Agapitov and Khangalov, 4 t. 

4 Pripuzov, 65. 








Anthropological Wiscellanea and New Books. 81 


the demons to have a tambourine, and during their kamlanie use 
two long sticks, striking them crosswise against each other.’ 
Perhaps it is to this cause that we must attribute the fact that 
Mr. Khangalov saw no tambourines among the Buryat shamans, 
excepting in one instance. With the decline of shamanism, the 
number of persons able to make this sacred instrument, duly 
observing all the unknown ceremonies necessary, becomes smaller ; 
the process of kamlanie is simplified, and the will of the spirits is 
made the excuse. As regards the mallet with which the tam- 
bourine is beaten, it is sufficient to observe that this instrument is 
encased in skin of some sort, so that the sound may not be too 
sharp. Among the Altaians, for instance, the mallet is covered with 
the skin of a wild goat or a hare.” Among certain tribes, e.g., 
Buryats, Soiots, Kumandintses, Yakuts, they use for divining and 
for summoning spirits, a peculiar musical instrument giving out a 
feeble, jarring sound.’ Despite all these, the tambourine continues 
to occupy the first place among shamanist instruments. 

Shamanist dress and horse-sticks—The shamans put on a special 
dress only when they are engaged with the spirits; in private life 
they are not distinguished from other people by any outward 
signs. Shashkov considers the following list to comprise all those 
articles of dress which are common to all the Siberian tribes: 1. 
An outer caftan ; some of them are made of cloth, others of beasts’ 
skins. They are hung with various rattles, rings, and representa- 
tions of mythical animals. 2. A mask; among the Samoyed 
tadibeis, its place is taken by a handkerchief with which the eyes 
are covered, so that the shaman may penetrate into the spirit- 
world by his inner sight. 3. A copper or iron breast-plate. 4.,A 
hat, one of the chief attributes of the shaman.* Gmelin describes 
the costume of a ‘Tunguz shaman, and points out that, in addition 
to the ordinary shaman’s dress, he also put on an apron hung 
with iron plates, bearing figures either sunk or in relief. His 
stockings were of leather, and trimmed with iron. He had no 
hat, for his old one had been burnt, and the deity will not 
give a new one. This shaman put on his dress over his 
shirt.6 The Yakut shamans adorn their fur coats with representa- 
tions of a san with holes in it, and a half moon, thus indicating the 
twilight that reigns in the spirit land. The coats are hung with 
monstrous beasts, fishes, and birds, as a sign that there are 
monsters in the spirit world. Behind hangs an iron chain, which, 
in the opinion of some, shows the strength and endurance of the 
shaman’s power, while others think it is the steering gear for the 
journey to the spirit land, The iron plates serve as a protection 
against the blows of malevolent spirits. The tufts sewed on the fur 
coat signify feathers. The travellers of the eighteenth century 


Gmelin, iii, 26. 2 Potanin, iv, 48. 


* Agapitov and Khangalov, 43. 4 Shashkov, 86. 

Gmelin, ii, 193. 

Pripuzov, 65. Mr. Pripuzov’s de-cription agrees in the main with that 
given by Mr. Shchukin in his “ Poyezdka v Yakutsk,” 1833, pp. 200-201. 

VOL. XXIV. G 


1 
3 
5 














82 Anthropological Miscellanea and New Books. 


paid great attention to the dress and accessories of the shamans. 
Pallas describes in detail the costume of a Buryat shamanka that 
he saw ; she was accompanied by her husband and two Buryats, each 
with a magic tambourine. She held in her hands two sticks, orna- 
mented at the upper end with arepresentation of a horse’s head, and 
hung with small bells. From her shoulders there hung down her 
back to the ground about thirty snakes made of black and 
white fur, sewed together in such a way that the snakes looked 
as if they were formed of black and white rings. One of the 
snakes was divided into three at the end, it is therefore called 
lyuga, and is considered to be an indispensable ornament of 
every Buryat shamanka. Her hat was covered by an iron 
helmet, from which rose horns with three antlers, like the horns 
of a deer.’ 

Gmelin visited the yurta of a much respected Buryat shamanka 
near Selenginsk. Her dress consisted of all the rags she could 
hang round her; most of the rags were more than a yard long and 
about 7 inches wide; almost every rag was adorned with em- 
broidered images, and hung with silk strings and tassels. A box 
which stood in the yvrta was full of clouts. flints and meteorites. 
All these things served for healing purposes; there was also a felt 
bag full of felt idols of various shapes.” The shaman’s costume, 
hanging in the yurta, was, she declared, incomplete. These scanty 
descriptions of former travellers must be compared with the 
scientific investigations of modern ethnographers. In the exhaus- 
tive work of MM. Agapitov and Khangalov there is a systematic 
account of an ancient costume of the Buryat shamans, which is 
hardly ever met with nowadays. 1. An indispensable part of a 
shaman’s belongings was a fur cloak or orgoi, white for a white 
shaman who dealt with good spirits, and blue for a black shaman, 
representative of evil spirits. The orgoi is made of silk or 
c tton stutf, and does not differ in cut from an ordinary fur cloak; 
on it are sewed metallic figures of horses, birds, &c. Some cups, 
representations of a certain animal, and an idol in a rhombic 
frame, which have been found, may, according to Agapitov and 
Khangalov, with plausibility be considered as belonging to the 
number of such adornments. 2. The hat among the shamans of 
the present day is of lynx skin, with a tuft of ribbons on the top; 
a peaked cap is even worn sometimes, but the tuft is indispensable. 
After a fifth ablution the shaman receives an iron hat*; it has the 
form ofa crown and consists of an iron hoop to which two half-hoops 
are fixed crosswise ; on the top of one of them is fastened a small iron 
plate, with the two ends turned up to lock like two horns. Where 
the half hoops join the horizontal hoop there are fastened, in three 
places, three kholbokho, t.e., conical pendants, and at the back of the 
hoop is a chain of four links united by small rings; on the end of the 
chain hang objects resembiing a spoon and an awl. 3. Horse- 


1 Pallas, iii, 181-182. 2 Gmelin, ii, 11-13. 
3 Fig. 3 in Pl. III, Agapitov and Khangaloyv. 











Anthropological Miscellanea and New Books. 83 


sticks are met with among all the Baikal Buryats ; among those of 
Balagansk they do not exist. The shaman has two horse-sticks ; 
they are made either of wood or iron.’ The iron sticks are acquired 
by the shaman, like the iron cap, only after the fifth ablution. 
The wooden sticks are prepared on the eve of the first dedication ; 
they are cut out of a growing birch; an endeavour is made to 
perform the excision in such a way that the birch will not wither. 
If the tree from which the stick is taken dies, it is considered an 
ill omen for the shaman. A birch is selected from among those 
that grow in the wood set apart for the burial of the shamans. 
The top of the stick is decorated with a horse’s head; at some dis- 
tance from the lower end a horse’s knee is cut out, and the bottom 
has the form of a hoof. Some bells are fastened to the horse- 
sticks, and one of them is larger than the others. These sacred 
sticks are adorned with hoilow kholboko cones, ribbons of four 
colours (blue, white, yellow, and red), skins of ermine, squirrel and 
skunk, and to make them still more like horses, small stirrups are 
hung on them. The iron sticks do not essentially differ from tu - 
wooden ones. The Olkhonsk Buryat shamans have also a siire, 
z.e., shrine. This is a box about 3 ft. 6 in. in length and 14 in. in 
height, to the top of the lid, having the form of a roof with a 
double slope. The box stands on legs about 28 in. high; it is 
decked with ribbons, bells and skins, and on one of the long sides 
are painted in red, or carved, representations of men, animals and 
other things.” Usually, at the end, on the right side, isa picture of 
the sun, and on the left, the moon. The sun has the form of a 
wheel, and in the middle of the moon is a human figure grasping a 
tree. The central part of the plank is occupied by three human 
figures ; one of them is a woman, the other two are men; these are 
the inferior deities to whom they offer libations of wine several 
times in the year. Ina line with these are drawn two quivers, a 
case for a bow, a bow and a sword, and under each human figure is 
a horse. In the shire are kept the horse-sticks, tambourine, and 
various sacrificial instruments. Nil, Archbishop of Yaroslavl, 
mentions two other objects: abagaldei, a monstrous mask of 
leather, wood or metal, with a huge beard painted on it, and ftoli,a 
metallic mirror with figures of twelve animals; it is worn on the 
beast or neck, and is sometimes sewed on to the shaman’s dress; at 
the preseut time these two objects are hardly ever used by Buryat 
shamans.® 

From Mr. Potanin’s investigations it would seem that the special 
dress of the kams has been better preserved among the Altaian 
tribes than among the otier Siberian peoples, and he gives some very 
curious information about this costume. The shaman’s dress con- 
‘sists of the skin of a wild goat or reindeer; the outside is almost 
covered with a multitude of twisted handkerchiefs of various sizes, 


1 Fig. 2 in Pl. IIT, Ayapitov and Khangalov. 
* Figs. 4and 5, Pl. I1I, Agapitov and Khangalov. 
3 Avapitov and Khangalov, 42-44. 











&4 Anthropological Miscellanea and New Books. 


which represent snakes ; they are embroidered with cloths of several 
colours, and sometimes with brocade. Some of the handkerchiefs 
are not sewed to the dress by the end, but in such a way that the 
upper end remains free, and looks like the head of a snake. On 
this are sometimes sewed imitations of eyes; on the thicker rolls, 
this end is slit, so that the snake’s jaws are open. The tails of the 
larger snakes are forked, and on each end hangs a tassel; some- 
times three snakes have a head in common. Besides these twisted 
handkerchiefs, narrow straps of reindeer skin are sewed on to the 
dress in bunches of nine. It is said that rich kams have a thousand 
and seventy snakes or twisted handkerchiefs. The small twisted 
handkerchiefs are called manyak by the Altaians; this name is also 
applied to the whole dress. Besides the twisted handkerchiefs and 
straps, 7.e., the manyaks, many other symbolic signs and rattles are 
fixed to the dress. Stirrup-shaped triangles of iron are often met 
with, on one of the corners of which iron trinkets are put, a small 
bow fitted with an arrow to frighten away evil spirits from the 
shaman during his kamlanie, and some khulbogos. On the back, 
two round copper plates are sewed ; sometimes two others are sewed 
on the breast. Skins of small animals, such as ermine, striped 
squirrel and flying squirrel, are also sewed on with the manyal:s. 
In the case of one kam, Mr. Potanin noticed four tobacco-pouches 
sewed on; these were feigned to be full of tobacco, though they 
were empty ; the kam gives away this tobacco to the spirits during 
his wanderings in their country. The collar is trimmed with a 
fringe of the feathers of the white owl or brown owl; one shaman 
had sewed to his collar seven small dolls, and on the head of each 
was a plume of brown owl’s feathers ; these dolls, the shaman said, 
were the celestial mai‘ens. In some dresses, the manyaks do not 
cover the whole dress from the collar to the waist, but a shred of 
cloth of some particular colour, e.g., red, is sewed on, and to it are 
fastened round copper plates, khulbogos, and frequently little Rus- 
sian bells; the wealthier kams have nine bells. The noise they 
make is asserted to be the voice of the seven maidens sewed to the 
collar, calling the spirit to come to them. 

The hat of an Altaian shaman is a square or four-cornered piece 
of young reindeer’s skin; the front is covered with cloth, or some 
other bright-coloured material. On one side are sewed two brass 
buttons, on the other are two button holes. Mr. Potanin saw a hat 
the upper edge of which was adorned with feathers from a golden 
eagle or brown owl, arranged in tufts; on the lower part was a 
fringe of cowrie shells hung onstrips of skin. This piece of skin is 
laid with its lower edge on the brow ; the sides are turned to the back 
of the head, and it is buttoned at the back, thus forming something 
like a European tall hat. Ifthe strip of skin is narrow and stiff, the 
upper part of it sticks straight up, and the plume gives the head- 
dress the appearance of a diadem. Some Teleut shamans make 
their hats of brown owl’s skin; the wings are left as ornaments, 
and sometimes the bird’s head is left on too. It is not all shamans 
who have the right to wear the manyak and the brown owl hat; 








Anthropological Miscellanea and New Books. 85 


during the ceremony of kamlanie the spirits reveal to their favourites 
that the time has come when they may prepare this professional 
dress. Among the Chernev Tatars, the shamans sometimes use a 
mask (kocho), made of birch bark and ornamented with squirrel 
tails to represent eyebrows aud moustache. Among the same 
people Mr. Yadrintsev remarked the use of two crutches; one of 
them was considered to be a staff, the other a horse, like the horse- 
sticks of the Buryat shamans.’ 

All the separate parts of the dress of Siberian shamans, and 
their other professional belongings, have a threefold significance, 
both separately and conjointly. The shamans, by the outward 
appearance of their costume, in consequence of its originality, 
endeavour to produce a strong impression on the spectators; the 
sound of the bells, metal trinkets, and rattles on the tambourine, and 
the sticks which are struck against each other, agitates the audience, 
and puts them into a peculiar state of mind. Finally, all the objects 
and ornaments belonging to the shaman have their definite mean- 
ing, sometimes even of a mystic character, intelligible only to 
shamanists, and closely connected with their philosophy. 

How the rank of shaman is attained.—It is not everyone who can 
become a shaman, and the position is bestowed, among the Siberian 
tribes, either by hereditary right or in consequence of a special pre- 
disposition manifesting itself ina boy or youth chosen by the spirits 
for their service. Among the Trans-Baikal Tunguses, he who 
wishes to become a shaman declares that such and such a dead 
shaman has appeared to him in a dream and ordered him to be his 
successor; in addition, everyone before becoming a shaman “shows 
himself to be crazy, stupefied and timorous.’”* According to the 
stories of the Tunguses of Turukhansk, the man who is destined to 
become a sorcerer sees in a dream the devil “khargi” performing 
shamanist rites. It is at this time that the Tungus learns the secrets 
of his craft.* 

The Yakut shamans and shamankas do not receive the magic 
talent by inheritance, although there is a tradition that if a 
necromancer arises in a family the dignity is not transferred ; they 
are preordained to serve the spirits whether they wish it or not. 
“ Emekhet,” the guardian spirit of the dead shaman, endeavours to 
enter into some one among the kinsfolk of the deceased. The 
person destined to shamanism begins by raging like a madman; 
suddenly he gabbles, falls into unconsciousness, runs about the 
woods, lives on the bark of trees, throws himself into fire and water, 
lays hold of weapons and injures himself, so that he has to be 
watched by his family; by these signs they know that he will be 
a shaman; they then summon an old shaman acquainted with the 
abodes of the aerial and subterranean spirits. He instructs his 
pupil in the various kinds of spirits, and the manner of summoning 
them. The consecration of a shaman among the Yakuts is accom- 


1 Potanin, iv, 49-54. 
? “ Sibirskii Vyestnik,” 1822, 39-40, 3 Tretyakov, 211. 











86 Anthropological Miscellanea and New Books. 


panied by certain ceremonies ; the old shaman leads his pupil on to 
a high hill or out into the open field, clothes him in shaman’s dress, 
invests him with tambourine and drum-stick, places on his right 
nine chaste youths and on his left nine chaste maidens, then dons 
his own dress, and, standing behind the new shaman, causes him 
to repeat certain words. First of all he demands that the candidate 
should renounce God and all that he holds dear, promising that he 
will consecrate his whole life to the demon who will fulfil his 
prayers. Then the old shaman tells where the various demons 
dwell, what diseases each causes, and how he may be appeased. 
Finally the new shaman kills the animal destined for sacrifice, his 
dress is sprinkled with the blood, and the flesh is eaten by the 
throng of spectators." Among the Siberian Samoyeds and Ostyaks 
the shamans succeed to the post by inheritance from father to son. 
On the death of a shaman, his son who desires to have power over 
the spirits makes of wood an image of the dead man’s hand, and 
by means of this symbol succeeds to his father’s power.2, Among 
the Ostyaks, the father himself selects his successor, not according 
to seniority but fitness, and conveys to the chosen one all his science ; 
the childless leave their profession to friends or pupils. Those 
destined to be shamans spend their youth in practices which 
irritate the nervous system and excite the imagination.* Tretyakov 
describes the ordination of shamans among the Samoyeds and 
Ostyaks of the Turukhan district. According to his account, the 
candidate stands with his face to the west, the old shaman prays 
the dark spirit to aid the novice, and expresses the hope that the 
latter will not be Jeft without an assistant spirit. Finally the 
instructor sings a sort of hymn to the spirit of darkness, and 
the new shaman has to repeat a prayer after him. The spirits 
try the beginner, they demand his wife, his son, and he ran- 
soms them with sacritices and promises to share the offerings with 
them.‘ 

In the southern part of Siberia, among the Buryats, anybody may 
become a shaman, but the profession is generally only followed by 
those who belong to a shamanist family and have had ancestors, 
paternal or maternal, engaged in that occupation. Besides these, 
there are shamans specially chosen by the gods themselves; if 
anyone is killed by lightning, this is looked upon as a direct 
expression of the will of the gods, who thus indicate that the 
family has been selected by them; the deceased is considered to be 
a shaman and is buried as such; his nearest kinsman has a righ to 
be a necromancer. Stones that fall from the sky may also give a 
Buryat shamanist power. It is said that a man once drank tarasun 
in which such a stone had been washed, and became a shaman in 
consequence. These fortuitous shamans are generally unfitted 
for this work, through lack of early training, and, owing to their 


' Pripuzov, 64-65. V.S——kii: “ Kak i vo chto vyeruyut Yakuty,” “ Sibir- 
skii Sbornik,”’ 1890, v. ii, 130. 
? Tretyakov, 211. * Belyavskii, 113-114. * Tretyakov, 210-211. 





Anthropological Miscellanea and New Books. 87 


ignorance, they are guided by old men, appointed for this purpose, 
who are experienced, and know the ceremonies and prayers. But 
usually the dead ancestors who were shamans choose ,from their 
living kinsfolk a boy who is to inherit their power. This child is 
marked by special signs: he is often thoughtful, fond of solitude, 
a seer of prophetic visions, subject occasionally to fits, during which 
he is unconscious. The Buryats believe that at such a time the 
boy’s soul is with the spirits, who are teaching ‘him, if he is to be 
a white shaman, with the western spirits, if he is to be a black 
shaman, among the eastern spirits. Dwelling in the palaces of the 
gods, the scul, under the guidance of the dead shamans, learns all 
the secrets of the shamanist craft; it remembers the names of the 
gods, their dwelling place, the forms used in their worship, and 
the names of the spirits subject to these great gods. After enduring 
trials, the soul returns to the body. Year by year the tendency of ° 
mind becomes more pronounced; the youth begins to have fits of 
ecstasy, dreams and swoons become more frequent ; he sees spirits, 
leads a restless life, wanders about from village to village and tries 
to kam. In solitude he carries on shamanist exercises with energy, 
somewhere in a forest or on a hill-side by a blazing fire. He 
invokes the gods in an unnatural voice, shamanizes, and frequently 
falls fainting. His friends follow him at a distance to see that no 
harm befalls him. 

As long as the future mediator between gods and men is pre- 
paring for bis new duties, his parents or kinsfolk appeal for help 
to a skilled shaman; they summon the gods and offer them sacrifices, 
praying that their kinsman may come safely through the ordeal. 
If the future shaman belongs toa poor family, the whole community 
helps to get animals for sacrifice and objects necessary for the rites. 
The preparatory period lasts sume years; its length depends on the 
abilities of the youth. Asa rule the candidate does not become a 
shaman before he is twenty years of age. Before entering upon 
his duties the candidate must go through a ceremony known as 
body-washing. One ablution does not suffice to give all the rights 
of the office; the operation must be repeated from three to nine 
times, but the majority are satisfied with one or two ; indeed, there 
are some who omit the ceremony altogether, dreading the vast 
responsibility it brings, for the gods deal exceptionally severely with 
those who have undergone consecration, and sternly punish with 
death any serious mistake. The first ceremony of consecration is 
preceded by what is called the water purification. For this purpose 
an experienced shaman is selected, called the father-shaman, and 
nine young men, called his sons, are appointed his assistants. The 
water for the ablution must be spring water; sometimes it is drawn 
from three springs. They set out for the water on the morning of 
the day when the ceremony is to take place; they take with them 
tarasun, and offer libations to the master and mistress spirits of the 
well. On the way back they tear up by the roots young birch 
trees, shoots sprouting from seeds, bind them up into brooms, and 
carry them to the yurta of the candidate. The water is warmed in 














88 Anthropological Miscellanea and New Books. 


a kettle on the hearth, and they throw into it juniper, wild thyme, 
and fir bark to purify it. Then they take a goat which is held in 
readiness, cut a little hair off its ears, a fragment from each hoof 
and horn, and throw all this into the kettle. After this, the goat 
is killed in such a way that drops of its blood run into the water, 
which is then ready for the ceremony. The goat’s flesh is given 
to the women, and they cook and eat it. The father-shaman first 
divines from the shoulder of a sheep, then he summons the shamanist 
predecessors of the candidate, and offers wine and farasun asa 
sacrifice ; after the sacrifice he dips the birch brooms in the water 
and beats the future soothsayer on the naked back ; the sons of the 
shaman do likewise, at the same time saying, ‘“‘ When a poor man 
calls thee, ask little of him in return, and take what is given. 
Have acare for the poor, help them, and pray the gods to protect 
them against evil spirits and their power. If arich man call thee, 
ride to him on a bullock, and do not ask much for thy services. If 
a rich man and a poor man both send for thee at the same time, 
go first to the poor and then to the rich.” The new shaman 
promises to observe these precepts, and repeats the words of a 
prayer uttered by the father-shaman. When the ablution is finished 
they make a libation of tarasun to the guardian spirits, and this 
concludes the ceremony. The water purification is frequently 
performed subsequently by tie shaman; it is compulsory once a 
year, but sometimes even monthly, at the new moon, and also on 
special occasions when the shaman feels himself defiled in any way, 
e.g., by contact_with unclean things; when the defilement is very 
einai tae es purification must be by blood. The shaman also 
purifies himself when any death takes place in the village. Some 
time after the ceremony of purification, the first dedication, called 
kherege-khulkhe, takes place, and large contributions are raised in 
the community to cover the expenses. A father-shaman and nine 
sons are again chosen, and the ceremony of dedication begins with 
a procession, on horseback, of the shaman, his guide, and the nine 
helpers, to their acquaintances, to collect offerings. In front of 
each yurta the riders stop, and cry out a summons to the inhabitants, 
who entertain them, and hang offerings in the form of kerchiefs and 
ribbons on a birch, which the candidate holds in his hands; they 
also give money sometimes. Then they purchase wooden cups, 
bells for the horse-sticks, and other objects, silk, wine, &c. On 
the eve of the ceremony they cut down in the forest the necessary 
quantity of thick birches. The young men cut the wood, under the 
direction of the old man. From a very strong and straight birch 
they carefully cut out two planks to make the horse-stic ks. They 
also hew down a fir tree. All this timber is taken from the wood 
where the inhabitants of the village are buried. To feed the spirit 
of the wood, they bring sheep’s flesh and ftarasun. At the same 
time they get ready the shaman’s outfit, and the father-shaman and 
his colleagues from other places shamanize, and invoke the pro- 
tecting gods. On the morning of the day on which the ceremony 
happens, the trees that have been brought in are put in the proper 





Anthropological Miscellanea and New Books. 89 


places. First of all they lay in the yurta a great thick birch with | 
its roots stuck in the right hand south-western corner, at the point | 
where the earthen floor lies bare round the hearth; the top of the 
tree is thrust out through the smoke hole. This birch symbolically 
indicates the porter god who allows the shaman ingress into heaven ; 
it is left there permanently, and serves as a distinctive mark of a 
shaman’s abode. At the consecration, the remaining birches are 
placed outside the hut, in the place where the ceremony will be 
performed, in a certain order, beginning from the east: 1. A birch 
under which they place, on a piece of white felt, farasun, &c. ; to 
the tree are fastened red and yellow ribbons if the shaman is a 
black shaman, white and blue ribbons if he is a white shaman, and 
all four colours if he is going to serve both good and evil spirits; 
2. A birch to which they attach a large bell, and the horse that is 
to be sacrificed ; 3. A birch tree, of sufficient size, which the new 
shaman must climb ; all these three birches are called sergé (pillars), 
and they are generally dug up by the roots; 4. Nine birches, in 
groups of three, bound round with a rope of white horse-hair, to 
which are fastened ribbons in a certain order, white, blue, red, 
yellow, and then the same colours again ; on these birches are hung 
nine beasts’ skins, and a tuyas of birch bark containing food; 5. 
Nine posts to which they fasten the animals for sacrifice; 6. Thick 
birches laid out in order; to these are afterwards tied the bones of 
the sacrifices, enveloped in straw. From the chief birch in the 
yurta to all the birches outside, two tapes are stretched, one red 
and one blue; this is a symbol of the shaman’s road to the spirit 
land. To the north of the row of birches are placed nine great 
kettles, in which the meat of the sacrifice is cooked. 

When all is ready, the newly consecrated shaman and the other 
participators in the ceremony deck themselves, and proceed to 
consecrate the shaman’s instruments ; it is then that the horse- 
sticks are endued with life; they turn into living horses. From 
early morning the shamans collected in the yurta have been 
shamanizing, summoning the gods, and sprinkling taraswn. After 
the ceremony of aspersion, the old shaman summons the protecting 
deities, and the young shaman repeats after him the words of a 
prayer, at the same time he occasionally climbs up the birch to the 
root of the yurta, and tere loudly calls upon the gods. When the 
time for issuing forth from the yurfa is come, four shamans take 
each a corner of the piece of felt, and sing and wail; at the 
entrance to the ywrta, on the street, they kindle a fire, and throw 
wild thyme on it. The fire serves to purify everything that is 
carried through it. During the time spent in the yurta, haman 
beings and inanimate objects undergo purification. The procession, 
in a certain order, goes to the place when the birch trees are 
arranged; in front walks the father-shaman; then comes the 
young shaman, followed by the nine sons, the kinsfolk and guests. 
The essential features of the consecration may be considered the 
following : 














90 Anthropological Miscellanea and New Books. 


(1) When the shaman anoints himself with the blood of the 
sacrificed kid, on the head, eyes and ears, 

(2) When he is carried on the felt carpet, and 

(3) When he climbs up the birch, and from the summit of the 
yurta calls upon the gods and his kinsmen, the dead 
shamans. 


The ceremony concludes with various sacrifices and popular 
games.’ It will be seen, from the above description, that the 
consecration of a shaman is expensive, and accompanied by 
sacrificial rites which produce on the beholders a iasting impression, 
and give dignity to the profession in the eyes of the Buryats. 

Among the tribes in the Altai, the ability to shamanize is inborn ; 
instruction only gives a knowledge of the chants, prayers and 
external rites. The future kam begins to realize his destiny at an 
early age; he is subject to sickness, and often falls into a frenzy. 
In vain do many of the elect struggle against this innate tendency, 
knowing that the life of a shaman is not an enviable one, but this 
restraint brings greater suffering upon them; even the distant 
sounds of a tambourine make them shiver. Those who have the 
shamanist sickness endure physical torments; they have cramps in 
the arms and legs, until they are sent to a kam to be educated. 
The tendency is hereditary ; a kam often has children predisposed 
to attacks of illness. If, in a family where there is no shaman, a 
boy or girl is subject to fits, the Altaians are persuaded that one 
of its ancestors was a shaman. A kam told Potanin that the 
shamanist passion was hereditary, like noble birth. Ifthe kam’s own 
son does not feel any inclination, some one of the nephews is sure 
to have the vocation. There are cases of men becoming shamans 
at their own wish, but these kams are much less powerful than 
those born to the profession.? 

Thus all the preliminary development of the shaman, from his 
childhood to the time when he is consecrated to the profession of 
kam or shaman, is of such a nature as to augment his innate 
tendencies, and make him an abnormal man, unlike his fellows. The 
ceremony of consecration has a similar character; the shaman 
assumes an exceptional position, takes vows upon himself, becomes 
the property of spirits who, though subject to his summons, have 
yet full power over him. 

Cases in which necromancers are applied to.—To these soothsayers, 
skilled in all the secrets of the world of gods and spirits, the 
superstitious shamanist tribesmen, imbued with the gloomy ideas 
consequent upon their coarse animistic philosophy, address them- 
selves in all the perplexities of life. All All misfortunes, diseases, and 
death itself, are attributed by shamanists to the influence of 
external, supernatural causes, to remove which every effort is made. 
Ttis not ' to be wondered at that on the occasion of the great festivals 
connected with the sacrifices the shaman plays the chief part; he 
is then not so much a priest, a guardian of the ritual, as a 


Agapitov and Khangalov, 44-52. 2 Potanin, iv, 56-57. 





Anthropological Miscellanea and New Books. 91 


necromancer acquainted with the sacrifices agreeable to the gods, 
and the means of appeasing them. This characteristic of the 
shamans is especially apparent from the custom existing among 
the Turukhan Samoyeds of organising an annual necromantic 
ceremony. At the beginning of winter, when the hunting season 
ends, diseases begin to prevail among the Samoyeds, and they 
decide in an assembly that it is time for the shamans to watch the 
road, for it will be bad if men begin to die. The shamans give 
their consent to the preparation of “a clean chywm “ (i.e., yurta or 
hut), and every Samoyed helps to make ready the materials ; they 
get poles, bring reindeer and black oxen for sacrifice; from the 
skins they make coverings for the chyum and clothes for the 
shamans. The chywm is built on the shore of a lake, and has the 
form of an elongated tent; on the top of it, at the southern end, 
they place, in an inclined position, a wooden statue representing a 
man or a reindeer. Qn the north side, the poles are fastened in 
such a way that they form something like a tail extended in the 
form of a fan; this tail is anointed with reindeer’s blood. Many 
traditions are connected with this hut, and it is the scene of various 
ceremonies, the most essential of which is the senior shaman’s 
entry into it. The young people busy themselves with games, 
songs, and dances, then they kill a reindeer, and the eldest ghost- 
seer drinks its blood, and shamanizes in the presence of the other 
assembled necromancers and the older men. The ceremony 
concludes by the shamans kissing one another’s hands.' 

Doings of the shamans among the Koryaks and Gilyaks.—The 
above description of the construction of a clean chyum among the 
tribes of the Turukhan region exhibits a full view of the social 
duties of the shamans, and clearly indicates the great importance 
of these guardians of the Black Faith. Although in many cases 
the shamans act as priests, and_take part in popular and family 
Festivals, prayers — sacrifices, their chief importance is based 
on the performance of duties which distinguish them sharply 
from ordinary priests. The essential attributes of thesé gloomy } 
mediators between men and the dark hostile powers of the spirit| 
world will become apparent on reviewing the most important cases | 
in which the chief tribes of Siberia have recourse to shamans. The} 
Koryaks, according to Krasheninnikov, look upon shamans as| 
leeches, who by beating their tambourines drive away diseases, and 
declare what sacrifices must be offered to the spirits in order to 
cure the patient. Sometimes they order a dog to be slain, some- 
times the laying of twigs, and other similar trifles, outside the yurta. 
The Gilyak shamans, also, busy themselves chiefly with healing the 
sick, by means of invocations, tambourine playing and whirling 
round; at times they cause the sufferer to leap through the fire, 
but they do not despise drugs prepared from plants, with the 
healing properties of which they are well acquainted. Besides 
their medical duties, the Gilyak shamans foretell the future, bring 


1 Tretyakov, 220-222. 





SS ee ee 











eee eee 


92 Anthropological Miscellanea and New Books. 


down rain, and do other things connected with their secret 
science.' Though at the present time, according to our mission- 
aries, paganism among the Gilyaks and Golds is beginning to yield 
to Christianity, nevertheless, christened as well as pagan natives 
are still unable to give up the use of shamans and their fantastic 
rites. Twenty-five years ago, shamanist ceremonies were in 
universal use among them, and no one could do without the 
shaman. Ata birth or a death, when a Gold or Gilyak set out on 
his winter hunting expedition or when he went fishing, the shaman 
was in every case indispensable.’ 

Shaman leeches among the Daurs and Manchzhurs.— Among the 
Manchzhurs and Daurs, on the banks of the Amur River, notwith- 
standing the extreme poverty of the people, their attachment to 
the shamans, as doctors, is remarkable. Although the Russian 
doctors charge nothing for attendance, and supply drugs almost 
free, the natives, in all diseases except fever, apply to the shamans, 
although their services cost a great deal. These native prac- 
titioners live at the cost of the family until the patient has 
recovered, and insist upon the sacrifice of a pig worth from twenty 
to twenty-five roubles. The shamans cure all diseases except fever. 
Each kamlunie lasts, with interruptions, from eight o’clock in the 
evening until dawn. During the intervals the shaman fortifies 
himself with tea and tobacco. At the end, there is a feast of the 
animals sacrificed. During the kamlanie itself, in order to nerve 
the shaman in his struggle with the demons, they give him 
khanshin.2® 

Healing of diseases among the Yakuts.—In recent times, much inter- 
esting information has been collected concerning the Yakut sha- 
mans. In a long article on the beliefs of the Yakuts, a writer in 
the*‘ Sibirskii Sbornik,” calling himself V.S—skii, describes in detail 
the shamanism existing among the natives. The shaman prescribes 
for all diseases, but especially Yakut maladies. The following 
diseases are looked upon as Yakut: obscure nervous complaints, 
such as hysteria, madness, convulsions, St. Vitus’s dance, also 
barrenness, puerperal fever and other diseases of women, diseases 
of the internal organs, all kinds of abscesses, wounds, headaches, 
inflammation of the eyes, rheumatic fever, typhoid, inflammation of 
the lungs and larynx. There are some diseases that the shamans 
refuse to treat, e.g., diarrhoea, scarlatina, small pox, measles, 
syphilis, scrofula, and leprosy. They are especially afraid of small 
pox, and will not shamanise in a house where it has been. All 
diseases proceed from evil spirits who have settled in human beings, 
and their treatment is intended to drive out or win over the un- 
welcome guests. The simplest method is that of healing by fire. 
In the Kolymsk district, a lad had an injured finger, which was 
painfal, and occasionally broke out into an abscess. It was decided 
that the wicked spirit Hr had taken possession of the finger. 


Krasheninnikov, ii, 58-59. Deniker, 294, 306. 
“ Pribavlenie k Irkutskim Eparkhialnym Vyedomostyam,” 1887, 267. 
‘** Vostochnoe Obozrenie,” 1890, 20, 9; 32, €. 





Anthropological Miscellanea and New Books. 93 


Desiring to drive it thence, the patient took burning coal and blew 
it round the abscess. When the burnt flesh burst with a crackling 
sound, the patient, with a smile of satisfaction, remarked to the 
spectators, “Did you see him jump out?” Other domestic 
remedies to relieve suffering are the clanging of iron, loud cries, &e. 
When simple treatment of this kind is of noavail, the Yakuts apply 
to the shaman; he acts as intercessor for the unfortunate, and 
mediator between men and spirits when they come into collision. 
The obligations he takes upon himself are not light, the struggle he 
enters upon isa dangerous one. The author of the article describes 
that part of the shamanist ritual which is invariable. The shaman 
called in to visit a patient takes the post of honour, in the corner 
opposite the fire on the right hand wall, when one is looking towards 
the chimney hole and the door, Stretching himself out on his white 
mare’s skin, the leech lies waiting for night, and the hour when he 
may begin his sorcery. All this time he is treated with deference, 
and supplied with food and drink. At length, when the sun has 
set, and the hut begins to be dark, hasty preparations are made: 
they chop wood, make faggots, and cook an exceptionally abundant 
and choice supper. Gradually the neighbours arrive, and take their 
places on the benches along the walls, the men on the right side, 
the women on the left. Conversation is carried on in a very sober 
manner, the movements of the visitors are slow and gentle. When 
all are at supper, the shaman sits up on the edge of his pallet, 
slowly unplaits his hair, in the meantime muttering something, 
and occasionally giving various orders Sometimes he nervously 
hiccoughs, artificially, and then his whole body trembles ina strange 
way. The sorcerer’s eyes do not look about; they are either cast 
down or fixed motionless on one point, generally on the fire. The 
fire gradually becomes dull, thick darkness fills the hut, the door 
is shut, and there is almost complete silence. The shaman slowly 
takes off his shirt aud puts on his wizard’s coat, then, taking a 
lighted tobacco pipe, he smokes for a long time, and swallows the 
smoke. The hiccoughs become louder, the trembling more alarm- 
ing. When the shaman has finished smoking, his face is pale, his 
head has fallen far forward, and his eyes are half shut. In the 
meantime, the white mare’s skin has been laid in the middle of the 
hut. The shaman takes a jar of cold water, drinks a few large 
gulps, and, with a slow sleepy motion, seeks on the bench the whip, 
twig ordraom-stick prepared for him. Then he goes out into the 
middle of the hut and, bending his right knee four times, makes a 
solemn bow to the four sides of the universe; at the same time he 
spurts water from his mouth, all round. A tuft of white horse 
hair is thrown into the fire, which is then put out. By the faint 
glimmer of the smouldering coals, one can still see in the darkness, 
for a short time, the motionless figure of the shaman sitting with 
downcast head, holding in front of his breast, like a shield, a large 
tambonrine. His face is turned to the south. All the people who 
are sitting on the benches hold their breath, and nothing is heard 
in the darkness save the indistinct muttering and hiccoughs of the 





94 Anthropological Miscellanea and New Books. 


wizard. At last these sounds also cease; for a moment complete 
silence reigns. Soon after, there is heard a single yawn, sharp and 
metallic in sound, and then, in some part of the dark hut, a falcon 
cries loudly and clearly, or a sea-mew utters a piteous wail. After 
another interval, the tambourine begins to make a slight rolling 
noise, like the buzzing of mosquitoes: the shaman has begun his 
music. At first it is tender, soft, vague, then nervous and irregular 
like the noise of an approaching storm; it becomes louder and 
more decided. Now and then it is broken by wild cries; ravens 
croak, grebes laugh, sea-mews wail, snipes whistle, falcons and 
eagles scream. The music becomes louder, the strokes on the tam- 
bourine become confused in one continuous rumble; the bells, 
rattles and small tabors sound ceaselessly. It is a deluge of sounds 
capable of driving away the wits of the audience. Suddenly 
everything stops; one or two powerful blows on the tambourine, 
and then it falls on the shaman’s lap. Silence at once reigns. 
This process is repeated, with slight variations, several times. 
When the shaman has worked up his audience to a sufficient 
pitch, the rhythm of the music is changed, and it is accompanied 
by broken phrases of song, gloomy in tone : 


a= 


nae 





ee 


(1) Powerful bull of the earth! . . Steed of the steppe ! 

(2) Iam the powerful bull . . . LIroar! 

(3) Ineigh . . . steed of the steppe! 

(4) Iam a man placed above all ! 

(5) Iam aman gifted above all! . . 

(6) I am a man created by the Jord powerful among the 
mighty! . . 

(7) Steed of the steppe, appear! . . Teach me! 

(8) Magic bull of the earth appear! . . Speak! 

(9) Mighty lord, command me! . . 

(10) May everyone with whom I go, hear with the ear! 
Let no one follow me to whom I say not—come ! 

(11) Henceforth, come no nearer than is allowed, let everyone 
look with a keen eye! . . Let him be quick to hear ! 
Have a care of yourselves! . . 

(12) Look to it well! . . Be all such, all together 
all, as many as there are of you! . 

(13) Thou on the left hand, lady with the staff, if it happen 
that I wander, or take not the right road, 1 pray thee 
direct me! . . Getready! .. 

(14) Show me my mistakes and show me the road, my mother ! 
Fly with a free flight! . . Clear my broad path! 

(15) Spirits of the sun, mothers of the sun, dwelling in the 
south, in the nine woody knolls, you who will envy 
Ipray youall . . . letthemstand . . . let your 
three shadows stand high! . . 

(16) In the east, on his mountain, is the lord my grandsire, 
mighty in strength, thick of neck—be with me ! 

(17) And thou greybeard, most worthy of wonder-workers (the 














Anthropological Miscellanea and New Books. 95 


fire) I’ pray thee: approve all my thoughts without ex- 
ception, grant all my wishes . . . hearken! . . 


Fulfil! . . All, all fulfil! . 


The ritual used by the Yakut shamans is always the same. 
There are two forms of it—one longer and one abridged. It is 
the latter that we have given. The remainder of the ceremony is 
an improvisation adapted to certain cases and certain persons. When 
the shaman, by his singing, has brought down upon himself his 
guardian spirit, he begins to skip and move about on his skin mat, 
thus beginning the second part of his dramatic performance. 
The fire has been made up again, andits bright gleam illumines the 
hut, which is now full of noise and movement. The wizard cease- 
lessly dances, sings and beats his tambourine; first turning to the 
south, then to the west and east, he madly jumps and contorts 
hiznself. The time and step of his dance somewhat resemble the 
Russian trepak, but it is faster, and lacking in boldness. Finally 
the shaman has learnt aJl he needs to know; he has discovered 
who caused the illness, and has assured himself of the support of 
the powerful spirits. Then begins the third part of the perfor- 
mance. Whirling, dancing, and beating the tambourine, the 
shaman approaches the patient. With fresh invocations he expels 
the cause of the disease, frightening it out, or sucking it out of 
the diseased place with his mouth. When the disease has been 
driven out, the shaman takes it into the middle of the hut, and, 
after many invocations, spits t out, drives it from the hut, kicks it 
away or blows it from the palm of his hand far up into the sky or 
under theearth. But it is not sufficient to drive out the disease: it 
is indispensable to appease the gods who have relieved the sufferer, 
and the shaman decides what sacrifice must be offered to the 
mighty spirits of heaven. At the termination of the ceremony, 
the shaman sits down again on his mare’s skin, and sings and 
plays, the spectators lift him and his mat back to the place of 
honour which he occupied at the beginning ! 

Divination and propitatory invocations of the Yakut oyuns.—Side 
by side with the healing of diseases is divination, with its various 
ceremonies. Gmelin refers to prophecy among the Yakuts, accom- 
panied by the following methods: the shaman takes a ring or a 
coin, and holds it in the midst of the palm of the enquirer, moving 
it about in various directions as if examining it, and then foretells 
the future.? In an article in the “ Sibirskii Sbornik,” we are told 
that the Yakut shamans accompany the foretelling of the future 
with dramatic performances like those used in healing the sick.’ 
These necromancers are called in in all cases when it is desired to 
win success or avert misfortune. Mr. Vitashevskii tells how a 


1 “Sibirskii-Sbornik.” “ Prilozhenie k Vostochnomu Obozreniyu,” 1890, v. ii. 
“ Kak i vo chto vyeruyut yakuty (Etnograficheskii nabrosok).” V.S kago, 
141-153. 

2 Gmelin, ii, 364-365. 

3 “ Sibirskii Sbornik,” 158. 








Cre eee er pte er tt thee 

















96 Anthropological Miscellanea and New Books. 


young Yakut, Siancha, on a visit to his father-in-law, who lived 
a verst and a half from the author, invited a shaman to offer a 
sacrifice, and invoke a blessing from the guardian spirit of hunts- 
men and fishermen. The Yakuts represent this spirit as a beast 
the size of a big year old calf, with hoofs like a cow, a dog’s head, 
small eyes, and long hanging ears. The performance at which Mr. 
Vitashevskii was present took place on the night of the 8-9th Feb- 
ruary, 1890. It was extremely dramatic, and the author of the 
article gives a careful and detailed account of it. In many points, 
Mr. Vitashevskii’s description is of great interest for comparative 
ethnography, and presents quite a unique phase of shamanist ritual. 
As a preliminary, an image of the spirit of hunting and fishing 
was made. It was simply a log of wood 3 in. thick and rather less 
than 28 in. long. On this log a rough drawing of a human face 
was made with a piece of coal. Besides this, the so-called “ pillow ” 
was made from a saddle, formed of two thick willows and twenty 
willow twigs. Both objects were taken to the door, and placed in 
such a way that the face of the image looked inwards. The perfor- 
mance began in the following way : “three young fellows stood with 
the shaman, each holding in his right hand three lighted faggots. 
The shoman fumigated with the smoke of his faggots the three 
young men who stood facing the fire. Then all four threw down 
their faggots at random, and the young men mixed with the crowd. 
The shaman sat down on a stool facing the door, and, holding an 
arrow in his right hand, pronounced the following words. First of 
all he addressed Baryllakh, the spirit of the chase. We only give 
the beginning of the address : 
* Baryllakh of my rich forest ; 

My lord grandsire, 

Now—then! 

Smile! . . .” &e. 

The shaman then, in the name of the spirit, asked the young 
Yakut, who was going to hunt, what he was called, and receiving 
the answer, “ They call me Sencha,” the shaman pronounced some 
untranslated Mongol words and went outside, saying that Baryllakh 
himself would knock directly. 

In a short time there was a knock outside, and by the open door 
entered the shaman, who was triumphantly met by the spectators. 
He acted the part of spirit of the chase, laughed, smirked, and, 
sitting down on the ground, to the right of the chimney, said, 
‘“* Give me my darling, my friend!” Then they gave the shaman the 
image of Baryllakh and the pillow which had been made from the 
saddle. He smelt both all over, and caressed them; then he 
ordered them to be placed against the post which is in the perednii 
ugol (place of honour) under the zkons. On the pillow they placed 
a cup of salamata (hasty pudding), and threw butter in the middle 
of the fire. In the morning, the master of the house where the 
performance took place ate up the salamuta. The image of Baryllakh, 
and the saddle pillow, were taken away into the woods. Thus 
ended the shamun’s sorcery. It is to be noted that the Yakuts 





Anthropological Miscellanea and New Books. 97 


represent Baryllakh as always giggling, and fond of laughter. 
When huntsmen have killed an elk, they go up to the beast laugh- 
ing, in order to win the favour of the spirit. 

Mr. Vitashevskii has given another detailed account of a 
shamanist ceremony, organised, to appease the spirits, by a con- 
verted Yakut who wished to ameliorate his disordered affairs. The 
same shaman, one Simen, officiated.’ In this, as in the preceding 
case, one can see, in a coarse form, the simple beginnings of those 
dramatic tendencies which among highly cultured peoples have 
reached such an extensive development, and have become one of 
the highest phases of literature. The shaman, in presence of his 
uncritical fellow-countrymen, gives the reins to his fancy, and 
tries by an original mise-en-scéne to make an impression on the 
visual faculty; he brings up spirits, mingles the comic with the 
tragic element, and, with an art surprising in a semi-savage, 
enchains the minds of his audience. Even the Russians who have 
inhabited the country for a long time are often attracted by these 
shamanist shows. 

Methods of healing among the Tunguses—Among the Tunguses, 
both pagan and Christian, the shaman, according to Shchukin, is 
not a priest, but a wizard who heals and divines.* For the cure of 
the sick they apply to shamans, who, by inspecting the blood and 
livers of slain birds or other animals, diagnose the disease. They 
declare the means by which the gods may be appeased. By 
direction of these necromancers new idols are made, and sacrifices 
are offered. The sacrifice takes place inside the yurta, in the 
evening. The shaman takes the patient’s head between his hands, 
sucks his brow, spits in his face, and fixedly looks at the affected 

art.’ 

And Ostyaks.—The Ostyaks, by command of the shaman, bring 
into the yurta of the sick person several reindeer ; to the leg of one 
deer they fasten one end ofa rope,the other end is held by the patient, 
and when the latter pulls the rope they kill the deer. The head 
and horns are laid on the floor, the flesh is eaten, and the sick man 
is anointed with the fat. In order to extract the devil, the Ostvak 
shaman takes hold of the diseased part with his teeth, and in a 
few minutes draws from his mouth a piece of the entrails of some 
beast, a small worm, or simply a hair. All these objects are con- 
sidered to be embodiments of a disease.® 

Leechcraft among the Kirghizes—The Kirghiz shaman, like his 
colleagues in other tribes, adopts various methods to represent in 
a dramatic form his struggle with the spirits that possess the sick. 
Sitting down opposite the patient, he plays on the balalaika (three- 
stringed guitar), cries, sings, grimaces, then he runs about the 


_| V. Vitashevskii: “ Materialy dlya izucheniya shamanstva u Yakutov, Zup. 
V. 8. O. R. G. O. po etnografii,” ii, v. 2', 37-48. 

* “ Poyezdka v Yakutsk.” Izd. N. Sheh., 91. 

* Chashkov, 99-100. 

* Shashkov, 98-99. 

° Tretyakov, 218. 

VOL. XXIV. 





























98 Anthropological Miscellanea and New Books. 


yurta and out into the open air, where he mounts the first horse 
he can find, and gallops about on the steppe, chasing the spirit 
that torments the sick man. On his return, the shaman beats the 
patient with a whip, bites him till the blood flows, waves a knife 
over him, spits in his eyes, hoping by such radical means to 
drive out the spirit. These performances are repeated for nine 
days.’ 

Among the Teleuts—On the shores of Lake Teletsk, Helmersen 
witnessed the healing of one of his Telent companions. The 
natives believed that evil spirits had entered his body, and were 
causing his pain and dismay. The kam Jenika undertook the cure. 
He began by tying some twigs together, put a red hot coal on the 
bundle, and waved it over the patient, meantime muttering some 
incoherent words. The sounds he made gradually became louder 
and more guttural, and finally broke into a wild song, accompanied 
by a swaying motion of the body. From time to time the chant 
was broken by loud deep sighs. The exorcism went on increasing 
in energy for a quarter of an hour; then Jenika placed the bundle 
of twigs by the sick man, sat down, and quietly smoked a pipe. 
The result of the treatment was that the patient was cured.* In 
the Altai Mountains, nightmare is attributed to the spirit Aza. 
To drive it away, a kam is summoned, who conjures in the yurta 
before a willow twig with five colours bound to it (7.e., rags or 
ribbons of five colours) .* 

And Vogul Manzes.—On the borders of Siberia and European 
Russia, among the Vogul Manzes, the medical functions of the 
shamans consist of invocation of the gods, whispered charms, and 
the use of certain therapeutics. In all cases they enquire of the 
gods the cause of the illness. The gods receive sacrifices of rein- 
deer, garments, and hides, then the patient drinks charmed water, 
vodka, and blood; he is anointed with blubber, reindeer fat, and 
still more frequently bear’s grease, he is fumigated with castoreum 
and the sediment of boiled larch or birch, and rubbed with a 
bear’s tooth. Frequently the same remedy is used for different 
diseases.* 

The duties and functions of Mongol and Buryat shamans.—The 
Buryats, by their social life and education, stand on a higher level 
than the other Siberian peoples. Among them, shamanism must 
have undergone a greater degree of elaboration, and, thanks to 
certain Buryat scholars, we are in a position to give a detailed 
account of Buryat shamanism, notwithstanding the fact that the 


Yellow Faith of the Buddbist lamas is rapidly ‘drivi ing out the old / 


Black Faith. 
Dorji Banzarov examines the duties of the Mongol shamans in! 
general, and the Buryat shamans in particular, under three heads: 


1 Shashkov, 99. 

? Helmersen: ‘“ Reise nach den Altai (Baehr u. Helmersen Beitriige)’’ B 
xiv, 71. 3 

3 Potanin, iv, 130. 

* Gondatti: ‘“ Slyedy yazycheskikh vyerovanii u Manzov,” 54, 


/ 





———— 











Anthropological Miscellanea and New Books. 99 


as priest, physician, and wizard, or diviner. As priest, the shaman, 
knowing the will of the gods, decides what they want from men, 
and he performs sacrifiges as an expert in ritual and prayers. 
Besides the ordinary general sacrifices, the shamans performed 
private sacrifices, of which, in Banzarov’s opinion, the following 
were the most important: 1. On beginning any enterprise; 2. For 
the healing of disease; 3. To prevent murrain, the attacks of 
wolves on cattle, and, in general, any pecuniary loss; 4. A libation 
to the sky, on the occasion of a thunderstorm, especially the first 
thunder in spring. As physician, the shaman has a definite method 
of expelling the spirit from the patient’s body, at the same time 
he performs tricks, and acts like a madman. The gift of prophecy 
makes him very powerful. He either prophesies simply, or by 
means of divination. Divination is by the shoulder bone, and by 
the flight of arrows." While agreeing with the learned Buryat in 
many points, we must take exception to his view of the part played 
by the shamans as priests, which in Banzarov’s classification of 
their duties occupies so prominent a place. More than once, we 
have pointed out that the priestly function of the shamans is of 
secondary importance, while the essence of shamanism is in sorcery, 
which is especially apparent in the curing of diseases and in 
divination. The majority of cases of sacrifice, of a so-called acci- 
dental character, mentioned by Mr. Banzarov, arise precisely from 
this fundamental source of shamanism. The Buryats chiefly apply 
to shamans and shamankas in two cases: when a member of a 
family falls sick, or when a horse is lost.” According to Mr. 
Sidorov, every shamanist ceremony due to disease or theft begins 
with divination by the shoulder bone of a sheep or a goat. The 
Buryats have a tradition about this shoulder bone. A written law 
was given by God to the chief tribal ancestor of the Buryats; on 
his way home to his own people he fell asleep under a haystack. 
A ewe came to the stack and ate up the law with the hay ; but the 
law became engraved on tlie ewe’s shoulder blade.* 

In the Alarsk department of the government of Irkutsk, accord- 
ing to the priest Eremyeev, there is a superstition which does not 
exist in other districts. If anyone’s child becomes dangerously ill, 
the Buryats of that region believe that the crown of his head is 
being sucked by Anokhoi, a small beast in the form of a mole or 
cat, with one eye in its brow. No one except the shaman can see 
this beast and free the sufferer from it. Shamans called in to 
visit patients, especially children, are called by the Buryats, Naizhis. 
If the patient recovers, he rewards the shaman, and calls him his 
naizhi. If anyone has sick children, or if his children die, any new 
born infants, or young sick children are visited by the shaman, 


' Banzarov: ‘ Chernaya vyera,” 107-115. 

“ “Mongoly Buryaty v Nerchinskom Okrugye Irkutskoi gubernii.”” Zh. M. 
Vn. D., 1843, ch. iii, 85. 

5 Sidorov : “Shaman i obryady shamanskoi vyery.” Irkutskiya Eparkh. Vyed., 
18739, 465. 
* “ Shamanstvo Irkutskikh Buryat.” Irk. Eparkh. Vyed., 1875g, 21, 300. 




















100 Anthropological Miscellanea and New Books. 


who, in order to preserve them from unclean spirits, makes a 
special amulet, called khakhyukhan. If the infant lives or recovers, 
as the case may be, the shaman is called naizhi, and rewarded for 
his trouble. If the child dies, the khakhyukhan is returned to the 
shaman, and the title of naizhi ceases to be applied to him. The 
duty of the naizhi is to protect the child, with the aid of the zayans, 
from evil spirits, and grant it his powerful protection. There are 
not naizhis in every family, and the Buryats only apply to such 
shamans in extreme cases. The naizhis are changed at the wish of 
the parents. It sometimes happens that one family has several 
guardian shamans. If the child grows up, he shows special respect 
to his naizhi.' 


( To be continued.) 


“ R


[Part II of the paper, continued from p. 100]


Shamanism in Siberia and European Russia—(continuwed). 


The ch ief rites and sacrifices performed by Buryat wizards.—Thanks 
to the labours of several local investigators, we are able to make a 
review of the chief rites and sacrifices performed by Buryat shamans, 
paying special attention to those ceremonies which are connected 
with the healing of the sick. First of all we must refer to the 
sasalga, i.e. sprinkling, and the kkhyryk. The sasalga takes place 
when the disease is not dangerous, and when there is no evil spirit 
in the patient ; it is performed in the yurta. At the time appointed 
by the shaman, after his arrival, a small fire is kindled on the hearth. 
The assembled Buryats all sit down round the fire, leaving the 
place of honour to the shaman and the patient. Wine (7.c., vodka), 
tea, sour-cream, and other delicacies are brought into the hut, and 
placed in smal] Chinese cups on a bench, covered with aclean cloth, 
near the front pillar of the yurta. On the bench they lay one or 
two silver coins. The shaman places himself facing the opening in 
ur-Coat or 


the ceiling of the yurta, turns up the left sleeve of his f 

dressing gown, and taking in his left hand a small whip with a 
theng, and a small copper bell, he begins with his right hand to 
sprinkle wine from a Chinese cup into the hole in the ceiling, mean- 
time ringing the bell, and asking the deity to send health to the sick 
man. After repeating this several times, the shaman lays down 
the whip and bell, sits by the fire, drinks wine, and gives some of it 
to the patient; then, having sipped some tea and sour-cream 
(smetana), he makes the patient drink these also. The ceremony 
concludes by one of the older men taking from the shaman wine, 
tea, and sour-cream, and giving them to the other Buryats; when 
the wine is all drunk, the ceremony of sprinkling is considered to 
be at an end, and all go home. 

Kkhyryk takes place when the illness is of a severe kind. As we 
have already said, the Buryats believe that evil spirits in their 
wrath send down disease. In order to cure it, it is necessary to 
know which evil spirit has done it, and why, also what sacrifice 
will appease the spirit. The shaman finds out all this by means 
of a burnt shoulder blade. For the kkhyryk, a bonfire is kindled in 
the open air, outside the yurta. If the sick man is able to walk, 
they take him out and seat him by the fire. They bring a sheep, 
some wine, brewed tea, &c. When all is ready, and a sufficient 
number of Buryats are assembled, the shaman comes ; he takes in 
his right hand a small wooden Chinese cup, ladles out some wine in 








A nthropological Miscellanea and New Books. 127 


it, and, turning to the fire, pronounces various exorcisms in the 
Buryat tongue. While uttering these he sways from side to side, 
now approaching the fire, now retreating from it. Frequently he 
takes himself by the head, and sprinkling wine, from the cup, in the 
tire, mentions the name of the patient. The longer the kkhyryk 
lasts, the greater becomes his inspiration ; the expression of his face 
changes, his limbs shake, his voice becomes wild and terrible, and 
is heard for a long way round. Finally he runs up to the fire, and, 
as if driving somebody out of it, shakes his head, and with a 
fearful inhuman shriek falis full length backwards, but the Buryats 
standing behind do not let him fall on the ground. When the 
shaman has partly recovered consciousness, he takes a little sour- 
cream and anoints the lamb. The Buryats kill the animal, cut it 
up, and cook it in a kettle. While it is being boiled, the shaman 
sits on the ground, drinks wine, and gives drink to the patient; the 
remainder is handed to some respectable old man, who treats the 
spectators to it. When the mutton is ready, the shaman throws a 
few pieces in the fire, eats of it himself, gives a piece to the patient, 
and the rest to the crowd. At the end of the feast, the bones of 
the sacrificed sheep are burnt, the shaman receives from the 
patient the skin and some money, and goes home.' 

Mr. Khangalov has collected descriptions of various shamanist 
rites and sacrifices of a more special character ; here we shall only 
refer to those connected with the healing of the sick. Among the 
Balagansk Buryats the Tarim ceremony has existed since ancient 
times. It is employed against internal diseases or fractures of any 
part of the body, but rarely for sores. There are but few shamans 
who can perform this ceremony, as boiling water is used in it, and 
an unskilful operator might scald both the patient and himseli. 
Tarim is of three kinds: Ukhan-tarim, Gal-tarim, and Ekhon-tarim, 
the last consisting of a union of the two others. ‘‘ When one 
witnesses an Eihon-tarim,” says Mr. Khangalov, “ one’s hair stands 
on end, and one’s flesh creeps. The danger of the patient and the 
shaman alike is so apparent that it seems as if they must both be 
scalded to death, but, somehow or other, the whole thing is safely 
accomplished.” An accident rarely happens, and then only in the 
vase of young and inexperienced shamans ; unless he is acquainted 
with the shaman, a Buryat will not consent to ukhan-tarim or ekikon- 
tarim. Dole, a ceremony performed by the Buryats when a man is 
seriously ill, is ordered by the shaman, and consists in offering for 
the soul of the patient some domestic animal. The shaman selects 
the sacrifice. If the zayanis satistied with the offering he liberates 
the soul, and the sick man recovers.” 

The religious ceremony of Khushulkha is performed over those 
who are suffering from cough or sores. The shaman sucks the 
diseased part until blood and matter issue; if the patient has a 
cough, he sucks the breast, and then spits. The treatment is 
continued until the shaman thinks the disease has all been extracted. 


' Sidorov: “Irk. Ep. Vyed.,” 18739, 466-468. 
? Khangalov: “ Novye materialy o shamanstvye u Buryat,” 97-114. 





128 Anthropological Miscellanea and New Books. 


There is also a process called Khunkhe-khurulkha. It is intimately 
connected with the belief of the Balagansk Buryats that a man’s 
soul may be frightened out of his body, and flee away. The soul 
wanders round the spot where it left the body. Small children are 
especially liable to have their souls frightened away, and the signs 
of this misfortune are believed to be at once evident. The child 
becomes ill, raves in its sleep, cries out, remains in bed, weeps, and 
becomes pale and sleepy. If many days are allowed to pass after 
the soul’s flight, it becomes wild and alien to the body, and flees 
far. Grown up people who have lost their souls do not notice the 
fact at first, and gradually become sick. The kinsfolk apply to the 
shaman, and learn that the patient has no soul in his body. Then 
they themselves try to bring back the soul. The patient makes a 
khurulkha, 7.e., he summons his soul. If no remedies suflice, the 
shaman is called in. After sprinkling and prayers, he organises a 
khunkhe-khurulkha. Ina pail he places an arrow and something 
the patient is fond of, e.g., beef, or salamat. After this they set 
out for the place where the soul separated from the body, and ask 
the soul to come and eat its favourite food and return to the body. 
When the soul enters the body, the man who had lost it feels a 
shiver down his back, and issure to weep; his soul weeps for joy at 
finding its body. Sometimes the soul is so stubborn that the cere- 
mony has to be repeated three times. 

Care for their cattle is one of the leading traits of the Buryat 
character, and if a householder notices that there is anything wrong 
with his stock, or if the shaman tells him that they have undergone 
some change, the religious ceremony of shurge-shukhe is performed 
over the animals. The shaman goes to the courtyard where all the 
cattle are enclosed, and takes with him a bundle of resinous faggots, 
and roasted flour. At the closed gates they perform the shurge- 
shulkhe, i.e., they bind to the door fragments of a tree which has been 
struck by lightning. Then they set fire to a faggot, open the door, 
and drive the cattle out of the yard. While the beasts are passing 
out, the shaman throws parched flour through the fire upon them. 
The flour takes fire and burns. When all the cattle have passed 
out, the remainder of the flour is thrown down inthe yard. At the 
end of the ceremony, the shaman, the people of the house, and other 
Buryats, go home.’ 

Organisation and classification of the shamanist profession.— 
Manifold are the ceremonies and sacrifices by the help of which 
the shamans of all the Siberian tribes endeavour to produce the 
desired effect on the world of mysterious, malevolent spirits sur- 
rounding and persecuting the alarmed imagination of the half savage 
natives. Upon the science of these gloomy wizards, and upon their 
good will, the life and well-being of everybody depend. The 
shamans play a prominent part in their tribes, and enjoy enormous 
influence. 

It is difficult to say whether the shamans of Siberia form an 
organised and peculiar class or not. From such data as we possess, 


1 Khangaloy : “ Novye materialy,” 135-138. 











Anthropological Miscellanea and New Boolis. 129 


it would seem rather that there is no such separate class of society 
forming a kind of ecclesiastical caste. Nor are there any hier- 
archical divisions, although there are differences in the positions of 
shamans, founded upon their power and their relations with spirits 
and gods of various kinds. The Yakut shamans are divided into 
three categories, according to their power. ‘The division into white 
and black, 7.e.,shamans dealing exclusively witb good or bad deities, 
does not exist among the Yakuts.' According to the power of their 
emekhets, the Yakut shamans are divided into lowest, middle and 
great. The “ lowest” are not properly speaking shamans at all, 
but various hysterical, half-witted, idiotic and in general eccentric 
people. They can explain dreams, tell fortunes, cure slight 
ailments, but they do not perform the great shamanist functions, 
hecause they have no guardian spirit. The “middle” shamans 
have magic power in a certain degree, according to the power of 
their emekhets. The “great” are distinguished by exceptional 
power ; the lord of darkness himself gives ear to their summons. 
‘here can only be four such shamans at any given time in all the 
Yakut land, one for each of the four original Yakut settlements. 
In each settlement there are particular families endowed with 
magic power. In such a family a great shaman appears from time 
to time. In the Namsk settlement, such a great shaman died 
recently ; he was an old man named Fedor, nicknamed ‘“ Mychylla,” 
of the Khatinarinsk community of the Arching family. The Yakuts 
used to tell that Mychylia in his youth was handsome, bat in his 
old age he was as ugly as his protector the devil. The Yakuts 
narrated wonderful stories about his power.” Gmelin mentions 
another distinction; he says that the older a Yakut shaman is, the 
greater is the number of names of gods that he knows, and conse- 
quently the greater is his power.” 

Besides shamans, the Yakuts have shamankas. According to 
Mr. Soloviev, the shamankas are inferior to the shamans; they are 
only called in when there is no male necromancer in the neighbour- 
hood. They are most frequently employed to foretell the future, 
or to find lost or stolen things. It is only in the cure of mental 
diseases that shamankas are preferred to their male colleagues.* 
But there are exceptions to this general rule. Gmelin saw among 
the Yakuts a shamanka, twenty years of age, who was much respected 
even by old shamans.° 

Among the Tunguses of the Trans-Baikal region, both men and 
women, married and single, may be shamans.° Gmelin met among 
the Tunguses a shamanka who was thought superior to male prac- 
titioners.’ Among the Samoyeds of the Turukhansk district, 
different shamans use different methods, and know various words 

' Pripuzov, 64. 
> S—kii: “ Kak ivo chto vyeruyut Yakuty.” “Sibirskii Sbornik,” 133-134. 
Gmelin, ii, 358. 

Soloviev, Th.: “ Ostatki yazychestva u Yakutov.” Sbornik gaz. Sibir, i, 414. 
5 Gmelin, ii, 493-496. 

Sibirskii Vyestnik, 18229, ch. 19, 39. 

‘ Gmelin, ii, $2-84. 


a» we 

















130 


for invocations ; women also shamanize among them.' Among the 
Ostyaks, so near akin to the Samoyeds, shamans and shams snkas 
are “equally irritable and impressionable.” The Buryats distinguish 
between shamans belonging to a family in which the gift is 
hereditary, and those who do not number among their kin any such 
favourite of the gods. The former may offer sacrifices without 
consecration, and may appease the spirits; those of the second sort 
would expose themselves to the vengeance of the spirits if they 


Anthropological Miscellanea and New Bool 





attempted to do this. There are also among them real shamans, 

e., those who are called to the service by the spirits, and spurious 
shamans, who assume the vocation without such supernatural 
sanction. But the chief division of the Buryat shamans is founded 
on this connection with good or evil spirits. The white shamans 
serve the former, the black shamans deal with the latter. There is 
a standing feud of a savage character between them. The Buryats 
tell how the whites and blacks fight, throwing axes at each other 
from a distance of a hundred versts and mere, The struggle 
generally ends with the death of one of the combatants ; the victor 
is he who has the most numerous and most famous shaman ancestors.” 
The white shaman, the servant of the good gods, the western tengris, 
the western ‘huts, is believed by the Buryats to be a good intercessor 
for mankind ; he performs ceremonies and utters invocations only 
to protecting deities who give wealth and happiness to men, he is 
therefore much honoured by the people. In the Balagansk depart- 
ment, in the second Olzoev family, there was a famous white shaman 
named Barlak. He wore a white silk garment, and rode a white 
horse, At the place where he was cremated there are still iron 
memorials of him on the trees, and his descendants 
there to their mighty ancestor. The black shaman, as tlie servant 
of wicked spirits, brings only evil, disease and death. Some of the 
black shamans can slay men by eating up their souls, or giving 
them to evil spirits. ‘They only offer sacrifice to the evil spirits— 
the eastern tengris, eastern khats, &e. Among the black shamans, 
the Obosoisk and Torsoisk are especially famous. The Buryats are 
not particularly fond of black shamans and shamankas, but are 
very much afraid of them, lest in their wrath they should do some 
harm, or killa man with the aid of evil spirits and their black 
shaman ancestors. Sometimes the hatred for these necromancers 
reaches such a pitch that a conspiracy is entered into to murder 
them. There was once a black shamanka in the village of Bazhir, 
in the department of Balagansk. Her neighbours wished to get 
rid of her, and hired two black shamans, who, with the aid of evil 
spirits and their shaman ancestors, were to eat up this hateful 
woman, They were promised forty head of cattle for their trouble. 
According to tradition, these two black shamans, Enkher and 
Birtakshin, could not get the better of the shamanka, and therefore 
applied for help to the black shaman Khagla. The three of them 


ffer sacrifices 


! Tretyakov, 213. 
? Velyavskii: “ Poyezdka k Ledovitomu moryu,” 114. 
’ Shashkov, 82. 




























Anthropological Miscellanea and New Books. 


with great difficulty at last succeeded in eating up the witch, and 
were rewarded with the forty head of cattle. The shamanka died, 
and her neighbours buried her in the following manner. The coffin 
was made of aspen, and the shamanka was put in it face downwards. 
Then a deep trench was dug, the coffin was lowered into it, the 
deceased was nailed to the ground with aspen stakes, aspens were 
squeezed down upon her, and then the grave was filled up with 
earth. The Buryats look upon the aspen tree as unclean, and for 
this reason the shamans do not use it as fuel, lest they be defiled. 
The aspen coffin signified that the shamanka had become unclean, 
her position, face downwards, and her impalement with aspen stakes 
prevented her from doing avy hurt to mankind.’ There are also 
among the Buryats a few shamans who serve both good and evil 
spirits.” 

Such are the chief classes of shamans among the various tribes 
inhabiting Siberia. The distinctions arise from the very essence of 
shamanism, but they have nowhere acquired a strictly defined form 
or developed into a hierarchical system. 

Position of the shamans among their own people. —These people, 
remarkable for their mysterious powers, are intimately connected 
with those features of native Siberian life, which comprise the most 
important interests of tribes in a low state of development. In the 
simple life of the races inhabiting the north of Asia, the shaman 
must play a prominent part. In fact, the shaman, with but few 
exceptions, occupies a position of special importance among his 
fellow countrymen. Only among the Chukchis, according to 
Litke, are shamans not respected, and their functions are limited 
to healing diseases and performing tricks.2 The Yakuts have 
implicit faith in their wizards,* whose mysterious performances, 
taking place amid the most disturbing surroundings, strike 
terror into those semi-savage people,’ and it is no wonder that 
they are afraid of shamans and shamankas.’ But fear pre- 
dominates over feelings of respect, and the Yakuts are convinced 
that their shamans, possessed by spirits, do not die by the will of 
the gods, and are unworthy of having the angel of death sent to 
them. They kill one another, by sending their demons for the 
purpose.’ 

The Tunguses, neighbours of the Yakuts, despite the extending 
influence of Christianity, now, as in the days of Wrangel,* exhibit 
great confidence in their shamans, and the latter are present at the 
burial of Christian Tunguses.° The Ostyaks show a very great 
deal of respect to their medicine-men and soothsayers.” In the 


' Khangalov : “ Novye materialy,” 85-86. 

* Agapitov i Khangalov, 46. 3 Erman, 1843, H. 3, 459. 

* Shcehukin : “ Yakuty, Zb. M. Vn. Dyel. 1854,” 7, 21. 

® Klark : “ Vilyuisk i ego okrug.” Zapiski Sib. Otd. I. R. G. O., 1864, kn. vii. 
139. 

5 Soloviev: “ Ontethi yazychestya u Yakutov.” Sbornik gaz. Sibir. 1876g, t.i, 
414-415. 7 Pripuzov, 65. 8 Wrangel, “ Reise,” ii, 27. 

9 Mordvinoy: “ Inorodtsy obitayushchie v Turukhanskom kraye.” V yestn. i 
R. G. O., 1860, No. 2, 36. 1 Velyavskii, 113. 











132 Anthropological Miscellanea and New Books. 


south of Siberia, the Buryats give honour to their shamans,’ the 
white shamans are universally esteemed and loved, the black 
shamans and shamankas are disliked but greatly feared.* But, 
according to some authorities, a medicine man loses his prestige 
in case of the death of a patient he has treated.® 

The respect and fear inspired by the shamans must necessarily 
express themselves in a purely external form: honours are paid to 
them, they fulfil the most important duties, and receive from their 
timorous fellow-countrymen great material advantages correspond- 
ing to the pretended benefits they bring. At Yakut festivals the 
shamans occupy the highest position ; on such an occasion, even a 
prince kneels before an oyun aud receives from his hand a cup of 
kumys.* In spite of this the Yakut shamans have no special 
privileges in everyday life, and are in no way distinguished from 
their fellows; they have a family, a yurta, cattle, they mow hay, 
and do other work.’ They make, by their professional functions, 
sums varying from one to five and twenty roubles. When they 
are unsuccessful they are deprived of their fee. Besides money, 
the oyun gets ashare of the sacrificed flesh, and takes it home with 
him.’ Gmelin says that one shaman was the zaisan (head man) of 
his kin.’ 

In the Turukhansk country, among the Samoyeds, the famous 
shaman Tynta was starosta of the local board, and shaman and 
princeling by inheritance. Adrianov met among the Altai Tatars 
kams who held the office of starosta, e.g., Stepan, on the river 
Kandom, Ivan, bashlyk of Shelkansk, on the river Lebed,’ and Hel- 
mersen, during his travels on Teletsk Lake, was accompanied by the 
zaisan of the Kergeisk canton, who had been a famous kam among 
the Teleuts.” Buryat shamans have a certain distinctive headdress 
and coiffure: among the Alarsk Buryats they wear a silk tuft on 
the hat; there is a tradition that shamans formerly wore plaits, 
these were replaced by queues, then they took to wearing the hair 
long on the crown of the head; at present their hair is of equal 
length all over." Thus in every part of Siberia the shamans have 
occupied an exceptional position, and have succeeded in acquiring 
considerable apparent influence, though it frequently happens that 
their vices and ignorance, or their lack of desire to profit by their 
advantages, have reduced some of them to an isolated, poverty- 
stricken condition; e.g., a certain Yakut oyun spent the last 
years of his life, after his wife’s death, in loneliness, abandoned by 
all, excepting a decrepit old witch dog.” 

Belief in the supernatural power of the shamans.—The Siberian 
necromancers themselves, on the one hand, in order to maintain 
1 Gmelin, ii, 183. * Khangalov : “Novye materialy,” 84-85. 

3 Khangalov: “ Predaniya i povyeriya Unginskikh Buryat,” 24. 

4 Gmelin, ii, 360-363, 505. ® Shchukin, “ Yakuty,’”’ 21. 

§ “ Poyezdka v Yakutsk,” Izd. N. Shch., 202. V.S——kii: “ Kak i vo chto 
vyeruyut Yakuty,” 130. 

‘ Gmelin, ii, 82. 8 Tretyakov, 113. 

® Adrianov: “ Puteshestvie na Altai i za Sayany,” 184, 205. 

10 Helmersen, 57. N Potanin, iv, 56. 27.8 kii, 134. 











nthropoloqical Miscellanea and Ne ook:s. do 
Anthropological Miscellanea and New Bool 133 


their influence, and their credulous fellow-countrymen, on the 
other hand, employ various means, and invent special beliefs, in 
order to surround the shamanist profession with a halo of mystery 
and sanctity, to attribute to its adepts supernatural power. 

The shamanist ceremonies of consecration and kamlanie, des- 
cribed above, sufficiently exalt these spirit-possessed necromancers ; 
various beliefs connected with the person of the shaman contribute 
to magnify their sway over the minds of the natives. The Yakuts 
are convinced that everyone of their oyuns, however weak and 


insignificant, has his emeklet, or guardian spirit, and his bestial: 


image, ie-kyla, sent down from above; this incarnation of the 
shaman in the form of a beast is carefully concealed from all. 
“Nobody can find my ‘e-kyla, it lies hidden far away in the stony 
mountains of Edzhigansk,” said the famous shaman Tyusypyut. 
Only once a year, when the last snows melt and the earth becomes 
black, do the ie-kylas appear among the dwellings of men. The 
incarnate souls of shamans in animal form are visible only to 
the eyes of shamans, but they wander everywhere, unseen by all 
others. The strong sweep along with noise and roaring, the weak 
steal about quietly and furtively. Often do they fight, and then 
the shaman, whose ie-kyla is beaten, falls ill or dies. Sometimes 
shamans of the first-class engage in a struggle, they lie locked in 
deadly embrace for months, and even years, powerless to overcome 
each other. The weakest and most cowardly shamans are those of 
the canine variety; they are wretched in comparison with those 
who have a wolf or a bear as their animal form: the dog gives his 
human double no peace, but gnaws his heart and tears his body. 
The most powerful wizards are those whose ie-kyla is a stallion, an 
elk, a black bear, an eagle or the huge bull boar. The last two 
are called “devil champions and warriors,” and confer great 
honour upon their possessors. 

The emekhet, or special spirit, generally a dead shaman, occasion- 
ally a secondary deity, always stays near the man it protects. It 
comes at his call, helps him, defends him, and gives him advice. 
‘“‘ A shaman sees and hears only by means of his emekhet,” declared 
the Yakut ayun Tyusypyut, “ I can see and hear over three settle- 
ments, but there are some who can see and hear much farther,” he 
added. The Tunguz shamans tell that they only get their power 
by union with demons. Besides the chief spirit, or devil, to use 
Gmelin’s terminology, the wizard has a host of secondary spirits in 
his service; he that has most is most powerful. In one finger 
of the highest devil there is more power than in a multitude of 
lesser spirits." 

Among the Yurats and Ostyaks, the medicine men treat their 
spirits without ceremony, and even buy and sell them. When the 
selker has received the price agreed upon, he plaits a few small 
braids of hair on his head, and appoints a time when the spirits ave 
to go to the purchaser. The proof of the fulfilment of the contract 
is that the spirits begin to torment their new possessor ; if they do 


1 Gmelin, ii, 45-46. 


Oe 





134 Anthropological Miscellanea and New Books. 


not, it is a sign that the shaman who has purchased them does 
not suit them.’ In the same region, that of Turukhinsk, the 
Samoyeds believe that every shaman has his assistant spirit in the 
form of a boar. This boar is somewhat like a reindeer, and its 
lord leads it by a magic belt, and gives it various orders. If the 
spirit finds the task impossible or dangerous it declines to execute 
it. On the death of the boar the shaman himself dies; hence the 
tale of the combat between hostile wizards, who first send their 
spirits to fight. When the shaman lacks confidence in the power 
of his familiar he himself goes to fight. The battles of wizards 
take place by night on high mountain ranges; during these cruel 
contests huge stones fly from the crags and roll into the abyss. 
Besides their spirits, -the Samoyed shamans also possess magic 
weapons with which they slay their enemies from a distance. It ig 
by the blow of such an arrow, shot by another shaman, that 
sudden fit of illness is explained.* 

Both among the Teleuts of the Altai and the Buryats, there are 
tales about the extraordinary power of kamsand shamans. The 
first kam was a woman. Bogdokhan, in order to test the reality 
of her power, commanded that an arrow should be shot at her; the 
woman was not killed, but went on kaming more energetically 
than ever. The Teleuts say that this woman had a child, from 
whom succeeding kams descended. The Buryats of the department 
of Alarsk have a tradition that the shaman Makhunai was so 
powerful that when he sat in a sledge it ran without horses. At 
one time the chief authority of Irkutsk summoned all the 
shamans, and ordered them to prove the truth of their faith. 
Makhunai said he was incombustible. He was placed with his 
tambourine on a stone, and buried under seventy cart-loads of 
straw, which were then set on fire. When the straw was burnt up 
the famous shaman emerged unhurt, shaking the ashes from him- 
self. Henceforth the authorities of Irkutsk have allowed the 
shamans to carry on their profession.* 

Funeral of a Buryat shaman.—The funerals of shamans, and 
their life in the other world, show clearly that these e - ct. person- 
ages, favoured by the gods, must not be classed with other mortals. 
The Buryat wizard foretells his own death, declares what disease 
he will die of, and why the gods have punished him thus. After 
his death, old men of the same village wash the corpse with water 
consecrated by the addition of juniper and thyme, then they put 
on a dressing gown, and over that a coat, sometimes both made of 
silk. Above the coat is placed the orgoz, a kind of dressing gown, 
blue for a black shaman and white fora white one. This sacred 
garment can only be made by men, women dare not touch it. By 
the corpse they lay the signs of his profession. All this time the 
nine “sons of the shaman,” young Buryats more than twenty-five 
years of age, selected from among those who are experienced and 
acquainted with the rites, sing a funeral song; in this song, which 
is improvised by the precentor, all the life of the deceased is 


1 Tretyakov, 223-224. 2 Tretyakov, 212. 3 Potanin, iv, 288-286./ 











Salen pe alae 


Anthropological Miscellanea and New Books. 135 


described, and his virtues are eulogized. The funeral is attended 
by other shamans, and by the dead man’s naizhis, ¢.e., spiritual 
children, whom,he has healed, and to whom he has given amulets. 
All the amulets are restored to the dead shaman. The nazzhis also 
bring various eatables for consumption at the funeral. 

The assembled shamans declare the will of the deceased as 
regards his place of burial, and point out the horse which must be 
prepared for him. During the three days that the corpse remains 
in the village it is fumigated with ledwm, thyme, and fir-bark, while 
the old men take it in turns to ring the bells on the horse-sticks 
and beat the tambourine. On the third day an entertainment is 
got ready, the eatables are packed in bags, and carried to the place 
where the shaman is cremated. 

The horse on which the corpse is carried is ornamented, and 
‘aparisoned with a four-cornered piece of blue or white cloth, 
according to the class the deceased belonged to. At the edges this 
cloth or orgot is hung with little bells. The horse-cloth is sewed 
by the same old men who make the funeral orgoi. 

After three days, the dead man is taken out of his yurta and placed 
upon the horse, an old man sitting behind the corpse; another old 
man leads the horse. Meantime the nine sons sing, while the old 
men and the shamans ring little bells and beat the tambourine. 
The procession moves solemnly along, with halts and various 
ceremonies. 

When the funeral train reaches the grove where the burial is to 
take place, the corpse is lifted from the horse and seated on a felt 
carpet, so that it be not defiled by contact with the ground. The 
“sons”? walk round the corpse singing. On the way, an arrow is 
shot in the direction of the house, and when the return takes place 
the arrow is picked up and hidden. On a pile of fir logs they lay 
the saddle-cloth, the horse’s orgoi, then the dead man with his 
bridle, his bow and quiver with eight arrows by his head, and his 
saddle under his head; the pile is then set on fire. The arrows 
are put there so that the dead shaman may defend himself against 
hostile men and evil spirits. 

On the neighbouring trees they hang the signs of the shaman’s 
profession, and various other objects. At the top of one tree they 
fix a copper teapot or ladle full of wine, on another a bottle of 
wine; the shamanist emblems are put in a special wooden box 
about a foot long, which is fastened by iron bands to the upper 
part of a tree. Skins of beasts are fastened to the nearest birches, 
either singly or in groups. After the trizna (funeral feast) and the 
sacrifice of the horse on which the corpse was carried, the mourners 
depart without looking round, for fear the shanian might carry off 
to the sky with him anyone who was guilty of curiosity. 

For three days the nine sons of the shaman stay in the yurta of 
the deceased, and chant funeral songs as they walk round the table, 
on which a candle is kept burning all the time. At the end of 
three days the naizhis, kinsfolk, and shamans of the same settlement 
again assemble, the naizhis bringing provisions. They ride to the 








136 Anthropological Miscellanea and New Books. 


burial place and collect the shaman’s bones, beginning with the 
skull, and put them in a blue or white bag, according to the 
character of the deceased’s functions. The bae containing the 
bones is deposited in a box-shaped hole hewn out in the trunk of a 
big fir, and the aperture is so skilfully closed up again that it is 
impossible to find the resting place of the shaman. This tree is 
called the shaman’s fir, and is looked upon as his dwelling place. 
Whoever cuts down such a fir will perish with all his household. 
During the ceremony they decide, by various signs, what sort of 
power the shaman will have, and the shamans present offer prayers 
to the gods and to the dead man, who is also honoured as a deity: 
the sons sing songs and make afeast; the remnants of the meat are 
burnt on camp fires. With this ceremony the funeral of the 
shaman ends. 

In districts inhabited by Buryats in a treeless region, especially 
on hills, there are often isolated clumps of trees visible from afar. 
These shamanist groves, the burial places of their medicine men 
and soothsayers, are called by the people aikha, i.e., they are 
declared to be holy and inviolable; it is forbidden to cut down a 
tree of them. Any violation of the sacredness of the place is 
severely punished by the dead shamans, and sometimes brings 
death on the guilty person. Every tribe, and sometimes even an 
ulus (or village settlement) has its shamanist grove.’ 

Worship of bokholdois——The cult of dead shamans and shamankas 
occupies an important place in Buryat beliefs. The dead magicians 
become bokholdois, sacrifices are offered to them, they are prayed 
to for protection against the clutches of other bokholdois to whose 
attacks men are exposed. Bokholdois differ in power according to 
the tribe or utkha they belong to. The dead shaman bokholdvi 
protects his own tribesmen and faithfully remembers his kin.’ 

Shamanist tricks—The travellers of the eighteenth century, 
Gmelin, Pallas, &c., paid particular attention to those performances 
of the shamans which are of the nature of conjuring tricks, and 
serve as a manifest proof of the delirious state into which a man 
passes when he is possessed by a deity. In these tricks it is 
difficult to distinguish abnormal physiological conditions and 
self-delusion from conscious simulation and charlatanry. 

According to Krasheninnikov, ‘the Koryak shamans thrust 
knives into their stomachs, and drink their own blood, but these 
tricks are badly done and are evident impostures. Gmelin also 
declares that when he asked an old Tungus shaman to perform one 
of his usual tricks, the shaman refused to pierce himself with a 
dart in the presence of the sceptical German, and acknowledged 
the fraud.’ The severe examination conducted by this traveller 
frightened a young Yakut witch who enjoyed universal credit, and 
forced her to reveal the tricks she used in: pretending to wound 


Agapitov i Khangalov, 53-55. 
Batarov: “ Buryatskiya povyeriya o bokholdoyakh i Anakhayakh.” Zap. V. 
S. 0. I. R. G. O. po etnografii, ii, vyp. 2, 10. 

* Krasheninnikov, ii, 158-159. 


1 





Anthropological Miscellanea and New Books. 137 


herself with a knife; she even slightly wounded herself in reality." 
Shchukin describes the primitive means employed by the Yakut 
magicians to convince their uncritical fellow-countrymen of their 
power. They use a piece of gut filled with blood, and cut it with 
a knife so that the blood flows out; they put on the stomach several 
layers of birch bark, and then walk about with a knife thrust into 
this up to the handle? The ordinary Yakut shamans swallow 
sticks, eat hot coals and glass, spit out of their mouths a piece of 
money which has disappeared from their hands in the sight of the 
spectators; but some of these spirit-possessed people are said, by 
the Yakuts, to do still more wonderful things. A good shaman 
will stab himself in three places: the crown of ihe head, the liver, 
and the stomach. Sometimes the end of the blade passes through 
and is seen at the back, and then the “sun,” 7.e., the iron circle that 
hangs on the wizard’s back, disappears, and is spat out with the 
knife. Some shamans cut off their heads, laid them on the shelf, 
and danced about the yurta without them. Of one powerful shaman 
it is said that he had a struggle with a Russian wizard. The 
Russian, during a kamlanie performed by the soothsayer Dzherakhin, 
cast a charm on his antagonist to prevent him getting up from his 
seat on the ground. Dzherakhin traced a circle round himself with 
his drum-stick, and, raising himself from the ground, with the 
circle, began to leap and kick; his foot struck his Russian enemy 
so violently that it threw him up against the ceiling. It was only 
at the earnest entreaties of the defeated Russian that the Yakut 
wizard let him go. The anonymous author from whom we have 
borrowed the above facts says that, in his experience, though the 
Yakuts marvel at such tricks and are glad to see them, yet they do 
not attach much importance to them; a true shaman is recognised 
by very different signs. Thus in the Kolymsk district an old 
shamanka who could do no tricks was much esteemed, while a 
clever young wizard who could perform the most complicated 
shamanist miracles was of. no repute.2 The Samoyeds of Tomsk, 
in addition to the ordinary trick of a shaman allowing himself to 
be shot in the head with a bullet, a performance which sometimes 
leads to loss of life, take part in mysterious magic performances, 
reminding one of spiritist séances. The wizard orders the spec- 
tators to bind him, hand and foot, and close the shutters ; he then 
summons his familiar spirits. In the dark yurta all sorts of voices 
and sounds are heard. When the noise is at an end, the door of the 
hut opens, and the shaman enters from the yard, with his feet 
free.‘ 

In a certain Buryat song, the belief that a man in a state of 
ecstasy, and endowed with miraculous power, can without injury 
endure torture ard wounds, is expressed very cleirly. In former 
times, in Irkutsk, they used to catch young people whose bodies 
had therapeutic virtue. A Buryat was caught and crucified, and 


1 Gmelin, ii, 493-496. 2 “ Povezdka v Yakutsk,”’ 202. 
sl Ae kii. “ Kak i vo chto vyeruyut Yakuty,” 134-145. 

* Castren, 297-298. 

VOL. XXIV. 1 








138 Anthropological Miscellanea and New Books. 


pieces of his flesh were cut off with razors and clasp knives for 
medicinal purposes. The lacerated Buryat felt no pain, and sang.’ 
The Buryat shamans wash in fire, walk over a fire bare-footed,’ 
and, during a ceremony at the healing of a sick person, perform 
the following dangerous trick : a red hot ploughshare and axe are 
taken out of the fire, the medicine man stands with one foot on 
the hearthstone, and with the other foot rubs the red hot 
instruments, and then applies this foot several times to the diseased 
part.* 

Belief of the shamans in their vocation.—There is no doubt that 
many of the tricks of the shamans may be classed with those of our 
conjurers, but all their performances cannot be thus explained. 
The fact that the wizards make use of purely external means, 
closely connected with various artifices intended to deceive the 
spectators, does not exclude the possibility of a profound conviction 
on the part of the shamans that they are chosen for the service of 
the spirits, have intercourse with them, and possess a mysterious 
power over the forces of nature. Of course. the belief in their 
mission must be weakened as foreign influences become more 
predominant in Siberia. We have already seen how the natives 
themselves acknowledge that the shamans of former years were 
stronger, and shamanism naturally deteriorates every year, and 
some of its representatives become mere charlatans. 

The famous Yakut shaman, 'Tyusypyut, 7.e., he who fell from 
the sky, at the age of twenty became very ill; he began to see and 
hear things hidden from other men. For nine years he concealed 
his gift from all, and strove against the tendency, fearing that he 
would not be believed, and would be laughed at. Tyusypyut went 
so far as to endanger his life by this self-restraint, and only got 
relief when he began to kam, and now he falls sick if he allows 
much time to pass without shamanizing. This Yakut ayun is 
passionately devoted to his profession, and has often suffered on 
this account; his dress and tambourine were burnt, his hair was 
cropped, he was forced to go to church and make the usual pros- 
trations; he was made to fast. ‘* This is not a trifle to us; our 
lords (the spirits) are angry with us every time, and it fares ill 
with us afterwards, but we cannot give it up, we cannot help 
shamanizing !” was the complaint made toa Russian enquirer. An 
old blind Yakut, who had formerly been a shaman, affirmed that 
when he became convinced of the sinfulness of kamlanie, and gave 
up the profession, the spirits were angry, and destroyed his sight. 
In the village of Bayagantaisk there lives a much esteemed young 
ayun; the Yakuts say that when he shamanizes “ bis eyes jump 
out on to his forehead.”” He is well off, cares nothing for the profits 
of shamanism, and took an oath to give it up, but every time he 
met with a “ difficult case” he broke his vow.* 


} Zatoplyaev : “ Nyekotoryya povyeriya Alarskikh Buryat.” Zap. V.S.O. 1. R. 
ae. CO. v3 3. 2 Gmelin, iii, 72. 

* Kh-ngaiov: “ Novye materialy o shamanstvye u Buryat,” 111. 

* V. S——kii, 128-129. 





Anthropological Miscellanea and New Books. 139 


Tretyakov describes the physical and mental condition of a 
soothsayer among the Tunguses of the Turukhansk country. 
“Gifted with a sensitive nature, he had an ardent imagination, a 
strong belief in the spirits and in his mysterious intercourse with 
them; his philosophy was of an exclusive character. Yielding 
himself up to the creations of his imagination, he became unquiet, 
timorous, especially at night, when his head was filled with various 
dreams. As the day appointed for his kamlanie approached, he lost 
his sleep, fell into fits of absence of mind, and looked at one object 
for hours at atime. Pale, languid, with sharp, piercing eyes, the 
man produced a strange impression. Nowadays there are few true 
shamans.” The Teleut kums are profoundly convinced that their 
power has been granted from on high. Gmelin says that the devil 
torments them at night to such an extent that they jump up in 
their sleep and cry out.2 The Altaian kam Tumchugat narrated 
that the devil was wont to appear to him during the kumlanie m 
the form of a dark cloud like a ball. While this cloud was present 
he was unconscious of everything, and said things he knew nothing 
about. When a missionary advised him to make the sign of the 
cross he replied, “ If I vrossed myself the devil would choke me.’” 
The Buryat shamans have such a belief in the curative power of 
their ceremonies that when they are ill they call in their colleagues 
aud have a kamlanie performed over themselves, libations of tarusun 
offered to various gods, &c.* 

Sufficient examples have been given in support of the view that the 
rise of so complex a phenomenon as shamanism cannot be explained 
by mere trickery. It is only a profound belief in their vocation 
that could have created a conviction of the miraculous power of the 
shamaus, and endowed them with that enormous influence which 
they enjoyed and still enjoy among the Siberian tribes. 

Remains of shamanism in European liussia.—The tribes of 
European Russia have naturally been unable to preserve in all their 
completeness and purity their former heathen beliefs, and it is only 
from the surviving fragments of old religious opinions that we can 
form any conclusiuns as to the character and signification cf almost 
extinct deities, worships, and performers of heathen rites. From 
the nature of the materials at our disposal, it is impossible to give 
a full account of shamanism among those tribes; we are therefore 
obliged to group our facts under the head of the various nation- 
alities rather than attempt an exhaustive general inquiry. 

Samoyed tadibeis— lwo nationalities, inhabiting the extreme 
north of Europe, near the polar regions, the Samoyeds and the 
Lopars, occupy the must prominent position among European 
shamanists. ‘The Samoyed shamans, called tad‘bevs, are mediators 
between mankind and the Tudebizi, spirits to whom Num has 
entrusted terrestrial affairs.’ 

Johnson’s account of a kamlanie.—Richard Johnson, one of the 
companions of Stephen Borrow, Chancellor’s assistant, who 

1 Tretyakov, 209-210. * Gmelin, i, 278, 285. 3 Potanin, iv, 76. 

* Agapitov i Khangulov, 53. ® Islavin: “ Samoyedy,” Lug. 

L 2 











140 Anthrepological Miscellanea and New Bookis. 


made an independent journey in 1556 to the month of the Obi, 
yave such a detailed and picturesque account of the kumlunie of a 
Samoyed tadibei, seen by him at the mouth of the Pechora, that we 
think it indispensable to quote this story by an English traveller 
of the days of Ivan the Terrible. The Samoyeds, subjects of the 
Russian Emperor, when they intend to migrate to another place, 
offer a special sacrifice, the eldest of them acting as_ priest. 
A wizard, wearing a peculiar headdress, with his face covered, beat 
with a stick on a great tambourine and sang with wild cries, the 
Samoyeds present responding louvly. This went on until the priest 
became apparently delirious. Finally, he fell on his back, and lay 
there like a corpse. Johnson asked why he lay there, and was told 
that the deity was then telling the wizard what the Samoyeds were 
to do, and whither they were to turn their steps. Then the 
audience cried out thrice “‘ Ogu!” and the priest rose and continued 
bis chant; in the meantime five reindeers were killed, by his orders, 
and then the shaman began to do tricks. He stabbed himself with 
a sword, leaving no wound, he made the sword red hot and thrust 
it through his body so that the point protruded at the back, and 
Johnson was able to feel it with his tinger. Then the Samoyeds 
boiled water in a kettle, set up in the chywm (hut) a rectangular seat 
on which they placed the priest, sitting cross-legged, like a tailor, 
and took the kettle of boiling water over to him. After these pre- 
liminaries, the wizard firmly tied round his neck a rope of reindeer 
skin four feet long, and gave the ends of it to two men who stood 
at the sides of the seat. When they had covered the shaman with 
a long garment, the Samoyeds who held the ends of the rope began 
to pull it in opposite directions, and the English traveller heard the 
noise of some objects falling into the boiling water; the audience: 
told Jchnson that these were the head, shoulder and left hand of 
the wizard, which had been severed by the rope, but they would 
not allow him to examine these objects, saying that whoever saw 
what was hidden from human eyes must die. Soon the shouts and 
songs of the natives began alresh, and the Englishman twice saw 
somebody's finger thrust through the garment that covered the 
shaman ; the Samoyeds said that this was not the wizard’s finger, 
for he was already dead, but some unknown animal. Johnson 
could not find any hole in the garment, though he examined it 
carefully. The performance concluded with the appearance of the 
wizard, quite unhurt, who went over to the fire and informed the 
Englishman that nobody could find out the secrets revealed by the 
deity during his fit of unconsciousness.’ 

Conjuring by a Samoyed shaman.-—This ancient description, given 
by an eye-witness, may be compared with Castren’s account of a 
shaman’s intercourse with a tadebtzi. A Samoyed is seeking a lost 
reindeer, and the wizard enters into communication with a spirit. 
He begins as follows: 


' Adelung: ‘“ Obozryenie puteshestvennikor po Rossii,”’ i, 135, 136. 
_? Certaine notes unperfectly written by Richard Johnson, “ Hakluyt’s Collec- 
tion.” A new ed., 1809, vol. i, 317-318. 





Anthropological Miscellanea and New Books. 


** Come, come, 
Spirits of magic, 
If ye come not, 

I shall go to you. 
Awake, awake, 
Spirits of magic, 
Iam come to you, 
Arise from sleep.” 


To this the tadebizi replies : 


“*Say for what 
Business thou hastenest hither ; 
Why dost thou come 
To disturb our rest ? ” 


Then the tadibei explains his request : 


“ There came to me 
Not long ago a nenetz (Samoyed) ; 
This man 
Persecutes me ; 
His reindeer has run away, 
For this cause 
Behold [ am come to you.” 


A simple, artless melody, somewhat monotonous in sound, appeals 
to the hearts of the unsophisticated Samoyeds, and helps to make 
them receive submissively the mysterious decisions communicated 
to them by the expounder of the will of those spirits that stand 
between mankind and the supreme deity, Num. 

Dress and implements of the tadibeis—During his performances, 
the Samoyed wizard dons a special dress, and makes use of certain 
magic instruments. The penzer, or tambourine of reindeer skin, is 
always indispensable. ‘The tadibei makes his own tambourine, 
according to certain rules; he kills a perfectly healthy young male 
reindeer, prepares its skin in such a way that no veins are leit, and 
dries it over the fire. During all these processes the shaman’s inka 
(i.e., wife), as an unclean thing, must keep out of the way.’ The 
penzer is adorned with copper rings and tin plates ; it is round, and 
is made of various sizes. ‘lhe biggest tambourine that Castren saw 
was a cubit and a quarter in diameter and an eighth of a cubit in 
height. On it is stretched a thin transparent reindeer skin. The 
mighty sounds of the magic tambourine penetrate into the dark 
world of spirits, and cause them to submit to the shaman’s will. The 
tadibei’s dress consists of a shirt made of chamois leather, and called 
samburtsiya. It is decked with a border of redcloth. All the seams 
are covered with red cloth, and on the shoulders there are things 
like shoulder-straps of the same material. The eyes and face are 
masked with a rag, because the tadibei must enter the spirit world 
by his inward vision and not with his bodily eyes. 

The shaman’s head is not covered; only a band of red cloth is 
twisted round the nape of the neck, and another round the top of the 

1 Castren: “ Reiseerinnerungen,” 193-194. 
? Islavin: ‘‘ Samoyedy,” 112-113. 














142 Anthropological Miscellanea and New Bool. 


head. These bands serve to hold up the rag over the face. An 
iron plate is put on the breast.'. In some places the tadibeis wear 
a hat with a visor, and deck their chamois shirts with rattles, 
pieces of cloth of various colours, &c., making great use of the 
number seven? 

Origin of Samoyed shamans, and their consecration.—It is not 
every one who can become a tadibei, generally the post is here- 
ditary, but even in this case the wizard must be chosen by the 
spirits. In youth he is marked out by the ‘adebtsis, and is sent to 
learn his art under an experienced shaman.°* 

But the study of the methods of the magic art does not seem to 
be of much importance, and Castren could not find a single Samoyed 
able to say in what the instruction of these tadibei tutors consisted. 
One Samoyed told the Finnish scholar that on reaching the age of 
fifteen he was sent to study under a wizard, because there had been 
may famous shamans among his kin. Two tadibeis tied up the 
pupil’s eyes with a handkerchief, gave him a tambourine, and told 
him to beat it with a drum-stick. At the same time one wizard 
clapped the novice on the nape of the neck, while the other clapped 
him on the back. In a short time the young man’s eyes were 
flooded with light, and he saw a multitude of tadebtsis dancing on 
his arms and legs. We ought to add that the tad/beis had first 
excited their disciple’s imagination by various wonderful stories 
about the Samoyed spirit world.* 

Various phases of the tudibets’ professional life-—The Samoyeds 
use their wizards chiefly as surgeons and diviners. If, for instance, 
a credulous inhabitant of the tundra has lost a reindeer, he applies 
to the wizard, who sends his subject spirit to follow the missing 
beast. ‘‘ Lie not, for if thou liest it will be bad for me,” says the 
Samoyed soothsayer, “ my comrades will laugh at me; tell what 
thou hast seen, concealing nothing, be it good or ill.” The tadebtsi 
mentions the place where he has seen the reindeer, and the shaman 
sets out with the owners for that place. But it often turns ont 
that the reindeer has already run away, or that another tadibei, 
with the help of his familiar spirit, has blotted out the footprints. 
Before beginning the kamlanie, the wizard enquires carefully into 
the circumstances under which the reindeer was lost, when and 
where this happened, whether the Samoyed does not suspect some- 
body of having stolen it, &e. Gradually a definite opinion is formed, 
and when the tadibei fills into the ecstatic fit, it seems to him that 
the tadebtsi expresses this opinion and enables him to solve the 
question. A profound knowledge of the simple life of their 
neighbours, the habit of solving obscure questions by a logic of 
their own, peculiar talents—all these make it possible for a clear 
headed man to divine, and to satisfy the demands of the crednlous 
savages, 

Castren describes in detail the medical processes of the tadibeis. 
When a Samoyed falls sick, however dangerous the disease may be, 

1 Castren, 192-193. 2 Tslavin, 113. 

3 Castren, 191. Islavin, 109-110. 4 Castren, 191-192. 





Anthropological Miscellanea and New Books. 143 


nothing is done till the dawn of the next day. During the whole 
night the shaman takes council with his spirits. If the patient 
feels a little better in the morning, the wizard may take his tam- 
bourine and begin, but if he is no better, it is necessary to wait 
till the seventh dawn. If by this time no improvement is manifest, 
the tadibet pronounces the patient to be incurable, and does not 
even try to cure him. When the symptoms are more favourable, 
the wizard asks the sick man whether he does not know of anybody 
who might have sent him the disease. A long enquiry takes place, 
to find out if the patient has fought or quarrelled with anybody, and 
it is only when the operator has discovered the cause of the illness, 
asking the tadebtsi, if the patient cannot communicate anything, 
that the tadzbei decides to begin his treatment. When the infirmity 
has been sent by the supreme deity, the Samoyed shaman refuses 
to oppose the divine will, he only combats diseases proceeding from 
wicked men. He then asks his familiar spirit to help him. The 
person guilty of the sufferings of the Samoyed who has called in a 
tadibei, himself falls ill. In a song quoted by Castren, the shaman 
first sends a tadehtsi for help to Num. ‘Do not abandon the 
sufferer,” says he tothe spirit, “‘ go up to the deity and ask his aid.” 
The tadebtsi does as he is told, but comes back with the answer 
that Num will not promise his help. Then the tadibet asks the 
spirit himself to give his assistance, but the spirit replies, ‘‘ How 
can I help? I am lower than Num, I cannot give any relief.” The 
sorcerer continues to ask the tadebtsi to go up again, and persuade 
Num to grant salvation. The spirit demands that the gorcerer 
himself shouid make the journey. The tadibei refuses. “I cannot 
attain to the abode of Num, it is too far for me; if I could approach 
him myself, I would do it without applying to thee. Since I 
cannot approach Num, go thou tohim.” ‘The tadebtsi agrees, and 
says, “I shall go for thy sake, but the deity continually scolds me, 
and says he will give no promise, &c.’" In order to test their 
ability to heal the sick, the tadibeis, in addition to a verbal examina- 
tion, undergo various physical tortures. These latter tests are 
described in exactly the same way by Richard Johnson and Islavin. 
If the tadibei comes through this ordeal safe and sound, it is taken 
as a sign that he is possessed by the supreme power, and then his 
success as a doctor is indubitable.* 

The Samoyeds are of opinion that internal diseases are frequently 
produced by the presence of a worm in the belly. In order to find 
the spot where the cause of the illness lies hidden, they poke about 
the budy with a sharp pointed knife until they find the diseased 
place. Then the shaman applies his lips and pretends to call the 
worm, sucks it out, and, taking it from his mouth, shows it to the 
patient.’ Lepekhin says that the tadibeis take out an external 
disease with their teeth, while an internal disease, “ like a worm 
having movement,” is taken out with the hands, after cutting the 
body with a knife.‘ 

1 Castren, 194-198. 2 Tslavin, 110. 

3 Islavin, 111. * Lepekhin, iv, 266. 





























144 Anthropological Miscellanea and New Books. 


Apparently the Samoyed shamans are not divided into black and 
white, as among the Buryats; their familiar spirits are not classed 
as good and evil, but, according to circumstances, they do some- 
times good and sometimes ill.'| The belief in the shamans and their 
miraculous power is boundless among the Samoyeds, and their 
influence is very great. They are as a rule the most intelligent 
and cunning of the whole race. Both men and women may be 
tadibeis.” 

Belief of the tadibeis in their own power.—As regards the belief of 
the Samoyed shamans in their own power, the opinions of eye- 
witnesses of their magic differ. Thus, Mr. Maksimov is convinced 
that in every case the tadibei is a cheat, who cleverly abuses the 
simplicity of his countrymen, and hoaxes them mere ly to get vodka. 
During a kamlanie in presence of the Russian traveller, the sovth- 
sayer was slightly in his cups, and Mr. Maksimoy saw in his facea 
roguish smile and a treacherous twitching of the lefteye. Castren 
affirms that the tadibet thoroughly believes in the miraculous origin 
of the soothsayings proceeding from the mouth of a tadebtsi, 
created by his own fancy. <A proof of the honesty of the tadibeis 
was their quiet religious tone, and, the complete unanimity of all 
those with whom Castren spoke. He says that the tadibeis very 
often acknowledged that they cannot call their tadebtsi, or, that 
when the spirit answers the summons they cannot get a satisfactory 
response. This happens even when the /adibei would be at no loss 
to invent some sort of answer. I. I. Maksimov and Castren, 
notwithstanding their apparent disagreement, are both quite right. 
If the tadibeis were merely cheats, then, in those times when the 
Samoyed race was subject to no foreign religions influences, we 
must suppose that the wizards did not share the religious beliefs of 
their fellow-countrymen, but, in the midst of savages sunk in super- 
stition, were a sort of rationalists, alien to the religious philosophy 
of the other Samoyeds. Such an explanation cannot be held to be 
scientific, and Castren correctly analyses their mental condition of 
the tadibeis, when he represents them as deceiving themselves as 
well as others. When the Samoyed race came into contact with 
more cultured peoples, professing Christianity, their former, coarse, 
naive faith was naturally shaken ; shamanism degenerated, and the 
modern tadibeis, being men gifted with relatively stronger mental 
powers, gradually approached the type of cunning cheats described 
by Mr. Maksimov. 

Shamanism among the Lopars.—The Lopars of the present day 
have hardly preserved any of their former heathen beliefs. 
Shamanism among them can only be studied in books ; in writers 
of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries we find many interesting 
facts relating to the religious ideas of the Norwegian and Swedish 
Lopars. Concerning the Russian Lopars we have but few 
historical data, and we are therefore obliged to study Lopar 
shamanism in foreign sources, especially Scandinavian ; still there 
are a few skamanist survivals among our Lopars. Johann Scheffer, 

1 Lepekhin, iv, 262. 2 Maksimov, 501-505. 3 Ibid, 





Anthropological Miscellanea and New Books. 145 


a German savant of the seventeenth century, published, in 1764, a 
Latin work on Lapland and its inhabitants. This book contains 
rich material collected from the writings of Scandinavian travellers, 
referring especially to the ethnography of the Swedish Lopars. 
The chief authority for the Norwegian Lopars is the Danish jurist 
Henrik Jessen, whose book on the heathen religion of the Nor- 
wegian Finns and Laplanders was printed in ]767. Klemm, in his 
“ Culturgeschichte,” has reproduced all the essential part of 
Jessen’s work. 

Kamlanie of the Lopar noids—The Lopar shamans, noaaids or 
noids, were so famous that Lapland was looked upon in olden 
times as the school of witchcraft. The neighbouring people sent 
their children to the Laplanders to learn magic." Nowadays, noids 
only exist among the Russian Lopars; they are feeble descendants 
of the former magicians, mere wizards who have, however, pre- 
served the ancient shamans’ name.” 

The Lapland wonder-worker prepared himself for kamlanie by 
fasting one day; in cases of exceptional importance several 
shamans assembled in one tent. Sometimes the ceremony was 
repeated, especially when they wished to know to what deity 
sacrifice must be offered. If sacrifice was of no avail, a journey 
had to be undertaken to the land of shadows (yabme aimo). For 
such an expedition a famous noid was selected, possessed of the 
Lest magic instruments. In the holy place the shaman asked a 
yabmeka, or dead kinsman, to protect the reindeer. But the chief 
object of the journey was to conjure the gods, dwelling in yabme 
aimo, that they should postpone their summons, to the kingdom of 
shades, of a sick man lying on his death-bed, and allow him to 
remain some time longer among the living. When the journey 
was about to begin, the noid assembled as many men and women 
as possible, and taking his tambourine, began to beat it with all 
his might, meanwhile singing, accompanied by all who were 
present. The noise, and his wild movements, put the wizard into a 
delirium. Resting the tambourine on his knees, he leaped with 
extraordinary agility and rapidity, making the strangest motions, 
till he fell down insensible, like a dying man. He lay thus for an 
hour, till another noid, who had made the same journey, roused 
him. The noids unanimously affirmed that the snake Saiva Guelle, 
frightened by their cries, appeared before them, and carried them 
on its back to yabme-aimo. In case the spirits would not fulfil the 
demands of the shaman, he entered into a dangerous struggle with 
them.* Regnard, a French traveller of the seventeenth century, 
thus describes a noid’s kamlanie: “The magician’s eyes rolled, his 
tace changed in colour, his beard became disordered. He beat his 
tambourine with such fcrce that it seemed ready to break. 
Finally he fell rigid as a stick. All the Lopars present took great 


1 Sckefferus : “ Lapponia,” 120-121. 

? N. Kharuzin: “ O Noidakh u drevnikh i sovremennykh Loparei.’’ Etnogy. 
Obozr., kn. i, 63. 

* Klemm: ‘ Culturgeschichte,” iii, 85, 76-77. 




















146 Anthropological Miscellanea and New Book:s. 


care that nobody approached the diviner when he was in this con- 
dition ; even flies were driven away and not allowed to settle on him 
. . . « The Lopar lay like a corpse for a quarter of an hour, 
and then he gradually came to himself, and began to look at us 
with a wandering gaze. After looking at us all, he turned to me, 
and said that his spirit could not obey him, because [ was a stronger 
magician than he, and my spirit was stronger than his.” Another 
traveller, the Italian Acerbi, who visited Lapland at the end of 
the eighteenth century, quotes a fragment of a song sung by the 
shaman and his male and female assistants. The shamanist songs 
had their words strictly defined, and to forget one word would lead 
to the death of the shaman. ‘Cursed wolf, go hence, and stay 
no longer in these woods! Get thee to the uttermost parts of the 
earth; if thou wilt not depart may the huntsman slay thee!” 
This song had the power of protecting a flock from wolves.’ 

The Lopar tambourine.—The tambourine, which was once among 
the chief instruments of the Lapland wizards, is now a great 
curiosity. According to Samuel Ren, the tambourine was 
generally used for four purposes: by its help they found out whav 
was going on in distant lands, it indicated the successful or unsuc- 
cessful issue of an enterprise or a human illness; it was also used 
to heal diseases; it taught the Lopars what sacrifices to offer and 
what kind of animal ought to be immolated to the gods.* The tam- 
bourine (Kannus, Kvobdas) was made of spruce, fir or birch wood. 
The tree from which the wood was taken must grow in a certain 
place; this showed that it was agreeable to the sun and the 
heavenly deities. There were two kinds of tambourine: one 
was a wooden hoop strengthened with two crossed beams and 
covered with skin, the other was an oval flat box hewn out 
of a piece of a tree trunk, and also covered with ieather. 
Klemm gives the external description of several tambourines 
in his collection. The most important feature of the Lopar 
tambourine is the drawing executed on it with red paint 
prepared from alder bark. The pictures vary according to the 
character of the owner of the instrument. Generally they repre- 
sent celestial deities, spirits, the sun, the stars, various animals, 
e.g., bears, wolves, otters, foxes, also lakes, forests, and men. On 
the tambourine sketched by Jessen, forty-five subjects were repre- 
sented. On an instrument preserved in the Royal Museum at 
Dresden, one sees, in the upper division, the chief celestial deity 
Radien Attsie and his only son Radien Kidde; to the left of these 
are the three persons of the Christian trinity, Father, Son, and 
Holy Ghost; in the middle is Baive, the sun, a ring girt with 
rays,in the midst of which is an indistinct human figure. The 
sun is connected by a stroke with a line which cuts off a special 
region, possibly Lapland. In this region is delineated a figure 
whose head is protected by two, apparently shamanist, instruments, 
as well as two fishes representing animal guardians ; the feet stand 

1 N. Kharuzin: “ O Noidakh,” 55-56. 
* Schefferus : “ Lapponia,” 133. 





Anthropological Miscellanea and New Books. 147 


on bars leading from the terrestrial to the upper world; the left 
foot is on a road, showing the shaman how he may penetrate 
thither; there are two fishes and two birds by the man, and on 
his left stands a wolf representing the dog of the evil spirit Rutn. 
The right foot of the noid points to a road leading to the three 
good spirits placed near Radien Attsie. This man united with 
Baive, the good spirits, and Rutu, in all probability was a symbol 
of a powerful noid, having intercourse with the spirit world. 
Besides the chief figures, many animals are to be seen on the 
widest part—foxes, a pig, a goat, an arrow aimed at a young seal, 
eight circles representing stars, perhaps the constellation of the 
little bear, and a lar ge double circle for the moon." 

With each tambourine there is an indicator and a hammer. 
The indicator consists of a large iron ring on which smaller rings 
hang. There are indicators made of copper, some of bone, and 
some plain metal rings. The hammer is made of reindeef horn. 
The Lopars treat their tambourines with the greatest respect, and 
wrap them up, with the indicator and hammer, in fur. No woman 
dares to touch a tambourine.” 

How men become noids.—The profession of notd was not open to 
all. When a young Laplander had an exceptional liking for this 
occupation, it meant that the ‘onto, or spirit, had called him to be 

shaman. The tonto appeared to its worshippers in lonely 
walks, after sleep or excessive drinking. The underground spirit 
instructed the adept, and when he was sufficiently skilled in the 
magic art the ceremony of consecration took place.* Jonn Tornei 
says, “If the devil find any man fit to serve him, he afflicts him 
with disease from childhood, so that there appear unto him divers 
shapes and visions; and he learns what pertains to his art.” * 

At the present day also, the power of necromancing among the 
Russian Lopars may come by nature, but it is generally inherited. 
When a wizard dies, he ‘ ‘ blesses woth witchcraft,” as the Lopars 
say, his son or daughter. 

In the parish of Notozersk there lives a Lopar woman — 
Afimya Egorovna, who was born in the parish of Pazryelsk; 
her is attributed the power of practising witchcraft. When ‘oo 
father lay dying he asked her, “ With what shall I bless thee, 
Afimyushka?” She was silent, Something fell down outside in the 
street ; the man started, began to rave and shamanize. When he 
came to himself she said, “ What frightened thee ? It was only 
something that fell in the street.”” He replied, “ With this alone 
do I bless thee—there is nothing else with which I can.” Hence- 
forth she began to be excitable, and knows a little about 
witchcraft.> 

Concerning the way in which the devils themselves select 
shamans, there is a tale current at Lake Paias. Not very long ago 
there lived on the shore of the lake a Lopar and his wife. They 
had three sons. The father and mother went out fishing on the 

' Klemm, iii, 90-95. 2 Klemm, iii, 98-99. 3 Klemn,, iii, 83. 

* Schefferus : ‘‘ Lapponia,” 122. 5 N. Kharuzin: “O Noidakh,” 63-€4. 














148 Anthropological Miscellanea and New Books. 


lake and left the children alone. In the absence of their parents, 
three handsome youths used to come every day to the children. 
When it was time for the parents to return, the youths went away, 
saying, ““When you grow up we shall all live together as 
inseparable comrades. But you must not tell your father and 
mother that we come to you, and what we say to you.” Once the 
youngest son, for some reason or other, told his parents what took 
place'in their absence. The parents were alarmed lest somebody 
should steal their children, and therefore moved to the other side 
of the lake. The youths never appeared again. But soon after- 
wards the three boysdied. Then the parents guessed that under the 
form of the three youths there had come devils, left after the death 
of some noid, and had wished to serve the boys, but since the 
parents had moved away the spirits had left them.’ These two 
stories are characteristic of the various ways in which shamans 
acquire their magic power. Some wizards gain it by belonging to 
a certain family, others by the choice of the spirits. But in every 
case, in older times. it was necessary that the noid should be fully 
developed physically and mentally, and a man more than fifty 
years of age, or who had lost his teeth, could not be a wizard and 
servant of the spirits.” 

One of the most sacred rites of the heathen Lopars was 
christening, lyaugo, i.e., bathing, as they called it. It was then 
that the Lopar child received his name. Women performed the 
ceremony. Every time the child fell ill, the christening was 
repeated and the name was changed. There were adult Lopars who 
had been christened three or four times. Every noid was solemnly 
subjected to this rite before he assumed his rank. The christening 
of the noids was called odde-nabma-tsiadtset. The consecration of 
shamans was not accompanied by any solemn ceremony; it was 
limited to an assembly of old noids. One of them sat down on the 
ground at the door of the tent, and interlaced his legs with the legs 
of the candidate. The former sang and beat his tambourine, and 
the spirits penetrated into the tent, through the legs of the noids, 
only visible to the newly consecrated shaman. When the other 
noids were convinced of the presence of the spirits, the newly 
consecrated man was declared to be a shaman, and with this the 
ceremony ended.* 

Divination.—We have already shown how the Lapland —— 
healed the sick, but their duties were not confined to this. A ver 
important part of their business was divination of every kind, “a 
the sending of misfortunes to men. For divination they took a 
tambourine, put on it the ring-indicator, called arpa, and, by the 
blows of the hammer on the tambourine, set the ring in motion. It 
passed from one finger to another, and thus indicated what it was 
desired to know.‘ 

During the ceremony the wizard knelt. If it was necessary to 
find out whether an enterprise, e.g., a hunting expedition, would be 

1 N. Kharuzin: “O Noidakh,” 72-73. 2 Klemm, iii, 85. 

3 Klemu, iii, 77-78, 84. * Schefferus, 130-131. 





Anthropological Miscellanea and New Bool:s. 149 


successful, several rings were placed on the tambourine; if the 
ring followed the course of the sun it was a good omen, if it went 
to the left it was unfavourable. They also found ont in this way 
what animals were to be killed, and the easiest road to a place.’ 

When choosing animals for sacrifice, the shaman beat. the 
tambourine, and all the men and women present sang, ‘“ What 
sayest thou, great holy god? Wilt thou take the sacrifice I 
have appointed for thee?” In the song they mentioned the hill 
on which they wished to offer the sacrifice. If the deity desired 
the sacrifice, the ring stopped motionless where he was delineated, 
if not, they addressed another, until the ring indicated a god who 
wanted a sacrifice.’ 

Sacred animais of the noids.— All the cures, and all the mysterious 
rites of the noids were performed with the aid of three kinds of 
animals, Saivo, dwelling in the realm of shadows. These were: 
the bird saivo-lodde, the fish or snake saivo-guelle or guarms, 
and the reindeer saivo-sarva. The appellation common to them 
all was vuoige. The birds were of different sizes—swallows, spar- 
rows, partridges, eagles, swans, &c. They were of every possible 
colour : some were black and some white, some black on the back, 
white underneath, others were reddish, tawny, green and variegated. 
Among these birds, the most remarkable were called vuornis lodde ; 
these were especially harmful to mankind. On their wonderful 
birds the noids were conveyed from place to place with great 
rapidity. The fishes and snakes were also of various sizes; the 
snakes were symbols of the power and art of the shamans their 
possessors. The snakes were often 9 feet long; they were used 
for doing harm to people. and for journeys in the heavenly regions. 
The reindeer was sent by the shaman to fight, on behalf of a sick 
man, with the reindeer belonging to the wizard who had sent the 
illness. The stronger the reindeer was, the stronger was its master 
the noid. 

The sending of diseases—The Laplanders portrayed in a vivid 
manner the method in which the mischief-making birds produced 
trouble among men and beasts. They flew to the noid, sat down 
by his side and shook out of their feathers a multitude of poisonous 
insects, like lice, called magic flies, gan. If these flies fell on men 
or beasts they brought sickness and other misfortunes. The noids 
carefully gathered up these insects, but never touched them with 
bare hands, and kept them in boxes, using them to do injury. It 
sometimes happened that the gans crawled out of the boxes; in 
this case the noids borrowed from one another these poisonous 
insects, and repaid the loan when the birds came back again. But 
the Lapland wizards did not often oblige one another in this way. 
Another engine was a magic mace. This was made in the form of 
an axe, and imbued with a powerful poison. The shaman had 
only to touch with it a man or beast to make them ill, and a disease 
thus caused could only be cured by the noid who caused it.’ 


1 Klemn, iii, 99. * Schefferus, 109-110. 
> Klemm, iii, 74-75, 84, 101. 














150 Anthropological Miscellanea and New Books. 


Classification of the noids, and belief in their power.—There was no 
division into exclusively good and bad shamans among the Lopars. 
Both men and women were allowed to enter the profession. But 
all noids were not equally respected, and their power varied. A 
clever shaman could by the help of his magic do easily what an 
inexperienced novice performed with difficulty. The spirits sent 
by the former produced more serious diseases, and he made larger 
profits by exercising his healing power.’ Modern xo/ds also are of 
different value. Whilst some Lopars are only ‘‘ slightly wizards,” 
others are famous over a large extent of country, and their services 
are asked for in distant parishes, for healing or divination.’ 

The profound belief of the Lopars in the miraculous power of 
their wizards is illustrated by various traditions, quoted by Mr. 
Kharuzin in his book on “The Noids among the ancient and 
modern Lopars.” Opposite a fishing bank lie the Ainov Islands, 
famous for their splendid cloudberries (muroshka). The Lopars of 
Pazryetsk tell a story about the origin of these islands, to the 
effect that there lived once, in the days before Christianity was 
introduced, in the parish of Pechengsk, three giant brothers whe 
were noids. They had but few reindeer, and they told their 
mother they would go to Norway, cut off a piece of land, and bring 
it away with reindeer and other wealth upon it. A long time after 
they had left home, their mother in a dream saw them returning. 
She ran out of the hut, and. hearing a noise, cried, ‘* See! my 
children are coming, they bring goods, oxen, young reindeer ; they 
spoke truth.” But strict silence is indispensable while the noids 
ure engaged in sorcery ; the violation of this rule was punished by 
the spirits: the woman, for crying out, was turned into stone, the 
whole parish turned into stone; the noids and the reindeer were 
drowned in trying to swim ashore, and the piece of stolen ground 
formed two islands.® 

Story about Riz—The noids are feared by the Lopars even after 
death. ‘There once lived in Notazar a noid named Riz. He did 
much good and muchill to men. At last he grew old and fell sick. 
All thought he wouid recover, but it was not so. Soon he died, yet 
men came to fear him more than when he was alive. A coffin they 
made, and laid him therein, but no man was found to bear him to 
the grave, fur he, being a wizard, might arise by the way and devour 
the other. His sons, even, dared not carry him to burial. At last, 
one of his own kind, amid to wit, agreed tor a reward to take away 
the body. He drove away with him in the evening, so that the 
funeral might happen next day. At first the reindeer went very 
well, but suddenly, at midnight, they took fright. The driver 
looked in front and to the sides, bat nobody could he see or hear. 
Then he looked back, and saw the corpse sitting behind him. 
Fear fell upon him, but, being himself a wizard, he cried out, 
‘ Since thou art dead, lie down!’ ‘The corpse lay down as it was 
bidden. Some time after, the reindeer again took fright. He 
looked beliind him and saw the yammii (corpse) sitting up again. 

1 Klemm, iii, 53, ? Kharuzin: “ O Noidakh,” 163. 3 Kharuzin, 66. 





Anthropological Miscellanea and New Books. 151 


He leaped out of the kerezhi (sledge), took from his girdle a knife, 
and said, ‘ Lie down or I shall cut thy throat.’ At sight of the 
knife the dead man’s teeth became iron, and the opus (driver) was 
sorry he had shown the knife. He should have shown a stick or 
log, and then the teeth would have become wooden. Yet the corpse 
once again lay down. The driver went on, but he knew now that 
if the dead man rose a third time he would be eaten, so he drove 
to a fir tree, jumped off the sledge, tied up the reindeer, and then 
climbed the tree as fast as he could. At last he reached the top, 
but just then the dead noid had risen and come out of the sledge. 
The corpse gnashed his glittering iron teeth, but his hands 
remained crossed on his breast; he came to the fir tree, walked 
round it several times and began to gnaw it. First he gnawed the 
branches, and this did not take long. Then he gnawed the trunk. 
He gnawed like a glutton, and large chips flew away from his 
sharp teeth. At last the fir tree began to shake. The driver 
saw that he was in a sad plight, and began to break off branches 
and throw them down. The corpse, seeing this, thought the 
tree was falling, and ceased to gnaw. Thus the driver 
several times interrupted the corpse’s work; this he did knowing 
that if he could but prevent the fir from falling before dawn he 
would be safe, for at dawn the corpse would lie down anddie. The 
corpse, however, guessed the trick at last, and went on gnawing 
without paying any heed to the falling branches. Then the driver 
began to crow like a cock, so that the dead man would take fright, 
thinking the morning was come. He crowed several times, but 
the corpse only looked towards the east, and, seeing no sign of dawn, 
went on gnawing. Sceing that his efforts were vain, the driver 
was afraid. He decided to go down quietly, so that the corpse 
might think he was yielding of his own free will. The corpse 
ceased to gnaw, and waited. The man crawled slowly down. At 
last the dawn appeared, and the driver cried out, ‘ Day dawns; 
get into thy coffin!’ The dead noid saw the dawn, was territied, 
went back to the sledge, and lay down in his coffin. The driver 
came down from the fir tree, shut up the coffin, harnessed the 
reindeer, and drove to the burial place. On his arrival he dug a 
grave, and let the coffin down into it sideways, so that the corpse 
should not rise; he knew that if the noid were buried on his back 
or face he would walk by night. He filled up the grave and hurried 
home. When he reached the village he told all that had happened, 
and the people feared greatly. For six or seven years few dared 
to pass the grave, and they that did, heard as it were the voice of 
one weeping and howling.”* 

Votyak shamans. The tuno.— Among the other tribes of European 
Russia we only find survivals of shamanism, and information about 
former times is scanty. Among the Votyaks, there is a complex 
spiritual hierarchy which includes the following: tuno or ustu tuno, 
wise, knowing wizard, pellyaskis, and vedin murt or ubir.2 ‘The tuno, 

1 Kharuzin: “ O Noidakh,” 73-75. 
2 Buch: “ Die Wotyiken,” 126-127. 





152 Anthropological Miscellanea and New Books. 


or fortune teller, plays a leading part in Votyak society. He heals 
diseases, finds things that are lost, gives advice about changes of 
residence, and other perplexing circumstances of life. Through him 
the gods communicate their dissatisfaction with individuals or whole 
villages. The tuno decides what sacrifice will appease the gods, and 
selects the priests agreeable to particular deities. The fortune-teller 
indicates the disrespectful behaviour which leads ancestors to take 
vengeance on their descendants ; he alone knows how to protect men 
from this vengeance. He can foretell the future, and experienced 
tunos can even struggle with the gods. Thus, in a certain village a 
tuno fought with Keremet, one of the most terrible of the gods. 
First of all the tuno was victorious, and made the god withdraw his 
demand for sacrifice. but afterwards they made peace; the Votyak 
sorcerer acknowledged Keremet’s power, and agreed that the 
villagers should offer sacrifice, but the value of the latter was 
reduced. 

The twnos find out the will of the gods directly from the latter by 
visiting their sanctuary, or falling into an ecstatic trance.’ Mr. 
Bogaevskii describes the kamlanie of a tuno on the appointment of 
new priests (sacrificers). The twno must live a long way from the 
village in question, and thus be an unprejudiced person entirely 
unconnected with the village needing priests. Immediately on his 
arrival, the twno is taken into the bath, and the people assemble in 
the room where the ceremony is to take place. When all is ready, 
a& musician appears, and begins to play on the gusli (psaltery). 
There is a special sacred melody for this rite, and the gusli is the 
only musical instrument allowed. On the table, which is covered 
with a white cloth, there are three loaves and bottles of kumys 
brought for the ceremony by every family. After the bath, the tuno 
is dressed in white raiment. As he enters the room, a white cloth is 
put on his head, a silver coin is dropped in a wooden cup full of 
kumys, and then the tuno begins his work. Former priests surround 
him, and gird him with a white cloth. After some conjuring, the 
tuno stands up and, to the sound of the gusli, begins to dance, 
holding in his hands a sword, and a riding whip the handle of which 
must be of tubylga, t.e., meadow-sweet, for the Votyaks believe that 
unclean spirits are afraid of this plant. Kirillo, a Votyak peasant 
of the village of Kurchum, told Mr. Bogaevskii that the dance takes 
place round a sword which is stuck in the ground in the middle of 
the hut. During the dance, the tuno becomes delirious, and cries 
out the names of the future priests. If the names mentioned are not 
correct, 7, if there are no such people in the village, the dance is 
renewed.” The delirium becomes so violent that several strong men 
have to ho'd the tuno while he is inspired. The words chanted by 
the wizard are an invitation to the deity to come down to him and 


1 Bogaevskii: ‘“ Ocherki religioznykh vozzrenii Votyakoy.” Etnogr. Obozr., 
iv, 123-124. 

2 Bogaevskii: “ Ocherk byta sarapulskikh Votyakov.” Sbornik materialov po 
etnogr. izd. pri Dashkovskom Etnogr. Muzeye., V. iii, 28-29. 





Anthropological Miscellanea and New Books. 153 


speak through his lips: ‘“ Come down and be gracious to us, Invu! 
We, Votyaks, assembled together pray to thee.” 

How the rank of tuno is attained.—The tuno’s art is handed on from 
father to son, and it is only specially gifted persons who can have 
intercourse with the gods without this inherited qualification. 
There are Votyak traditions showing how a wizard gains his super- 
natural knowledge. The spirit who instructs generally appears at 
night, in the form of a grey-haired old man in a long robe, and 
demands strict secrecy, under pain of various diseases. The science 
consists in the repetition of words from a certain book. Inthe story 
there are very ancient features mingled with others which are quite 
modern. Kylchin Inmar himself, the supreme god, instructs some 
‘unos. Inmar appears to the favoured person at night, in company 
with a wizard who has already been enlightened, leads out the pupil, 
to the sound of the gusli, either into the fields, or to a deep ravine, 
or to rivers of enormous breadth over which strings are stretched. 
In the field, the pupil of the mysteries sees seventy-seven firs, the 
needle-shaped leaves of which are being counted by many wizards. 
He that can count them all in an hour is allowed by Inmar to cast 
spells and ruin men. At the ravine, which is seventy-seven sazhens 
(suzhen = 7 feet) broad, the god gives to those who can fill the 
vavine with water from their mouths in one year power to do harm. 
To test his abilities, the future twno is made to dance on tight strings 
several times ; he that does not fall once will be the cleverest.2 In 
these Votyak tales it is probable that reminiscences have been pre- 
served of those visions which surrounded the shamanist adept 
during his solitary meditations, and his secret interviews with the 
tuno who instructed him in the magic art. 

Position of the shaman.—At first sight it is difficult to reconcile 
two statements by different ethnographers regarding the degree of 
respect shown by the Votyaks to their tunos. Buch says that the 
twno is generally some drunken rascal, or a poor, despised peasant, 
and therefore is not respected.’ Mr. Bekhterev, quoted in Mr. 
Bogaevskii’s article, affirms that, “to transgress the orders of the 
tuno is to transgress the sacred law, and the neglect cf his instrue- 
tions may bring the greatest misfortune and misery.” But there 
is no contradiction in these two statements ; it is only necessary to 
remember that the Votyak wizards are a decaying institution of 
that ancient heathenism which is breaking down under Russian 
influence. Besides this, it is necessary to distinguish the 
relations between the Votyaks and their wizards in everyday life 
trom those which exist during the kamlanie, when all present 
believe that the deity himself speaks through them, and reveals 
commands which cannot be neglected. At the present time, it is 
only a man who can be chief shaman. The power of the tunos is 


' Bogaevskii: “ Ocherki religioznykh predstavlenii Votyakov,” 124. 

> Bogaevskii: ‘“ Ocherki religioznykh predstavlenii Votyakoy,” 126-127. 
* Buch, 126. 

* Bogaevskii: ‘ Religioznyya predstavleniya,” 124. 

VOL. XXIV. M 








154 Anthropological Miscellanea and Ni w Books. 


not identical, it depends on their abilities, and the power of the 
god they serve.’ 

Pellyaskis and vedin—The shamanist functions among the 
Votyaks, as among some other peoples, are distributed. Besides 
the chief wizard, or tuno, there are inferior wizards called pellyaskis 
and vedin. Not only a man, but a woman, young or old, may be 
a pellyaskis; the pellyaskis heals diseases, finds lost property, but 
has not direct intercourse with the gods, and cannot do all that 
the tuno does. In pronouncing his magic utterances the wizard 
blows, and from this the nameis derived. The vedin is exclusively 
malicious and harmful; he receives his power from evil spirits. 
sends diseases, and can turn human beings into animals. This 
black shaman can metamorphose himself, flies in the air, and even 
attacks the sun, the god of health, who is at enmity with the 
spirits of sickness, he darkens the sun, and produces eclipses; but 
his triumph is short-lived; the sun always emerges victorious 
from the struggle.” 

To acquire and maintain influence over their fellow-countrymen, 
the Votyak funos employ various methods; their forms of divina- 
tion are especially interesting. A tuno named Grigorii told Mr 
Bogaevskii that in order to discover the cause of a disease he 
usually looked at silver; if the silver was tarnished, the illness 
was due to the evil eye; if a spell had been cast over the patient, 
two roads were visible on the silver. F. Miller mentions two 
methods of divination: the wizard takes forty-one beans, and by 
moving them about on a table finds out the place, day, hour, and 
beast for sacrifice to an offended deity. Sometimes the tunos 
place on the hand a little snuff, or pour wine on to it, mix it up 
with a shovel or a knife, look into it for some time, and then give 
their responses.* 

Votyak charms.—Mr. Bogaevskii copied down from a tuno several 
charms. We quote one against the evil eye (wrok), and another 
against the wilful sending of illness :-— 

1. “ Blue eyes. green eyes, black eyes, have cast the spell of the 
evil eye. Uvok (evileye)! ... If thou canst cause new leaves 
to grow on the tree that has fallen to the ground and rotted, 
then cast thy spell! There are seventy-seven birds; kiss all 
the children of all these birds, and then cast thy spell. There are 
seventy-seven ants’ nests; when thou hast kissed the children of 
all the ants, then cast thy spell. In heaven plays Kylchin-Inmar ; 
he plays with a golden ball in his hands; if thou canst throw this 
ball out of the hands of Kylchin-Inmar, then cast thy spell!” 
(Copied down from the Yushinsk tuno, Grigorii.) 

2. “If thou canst twine together seventy-seven mountain ashes 
growing through an ant’s nest, then only canst thou eat and drink 
this man. Until thoa unitest seventy-seven trees killed by light- 
ning, I shall not let thee eat and drink me. I shall not give 
myself to be eaten up by thee till thou pourest seventy-seven 

! Bogaevskii, ibid., 125, 127. 2 Buch, 127. 


* Boyaevskii: “ Religioznyya predstavleniya Votyakoy,” 125.
