The Jaw of the Piltdown Man (Gerrit S. Miller Jr., 1915)
========================================================
Miller's 1915 bombshell — the Smithsonian zoologist's demonstration that the Piltdown jaw was an ape's, the first great scientific challenge to the forgery. Public domain. Source: Internet Archive (smithsonianmisce651916smit) — Smithsonian Miscellaneous Collections, vol. 65, no. 12.


VOLUME 65, NUMBER 12


THE JAW OF THE PILTDOWN MAN


(With Five Piates)


BY
GERRIT S. MILLER, Jr.


(PUBLICATION 2376)


CITY OF WASHINGTON
PUBLISHED BY THE SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION
NOVEMBER 24, 1915


i


The Lord Baltimore (Press :


BALTIMORE, MD., U. S. A.


Ee avy OF EE Pil EDO@W N: MAN
By GERRIT S. MILLER, Jr.
(WitH Five PiatEs)


‘ About three years ago Mr. Charles Dawson found the right half
of an ape-like jaw in undisturbed material five feet below the level
of the surrounding country in a gravel pit at Piltdown, Sussex,
England. It lay in a depression at the bottom of the third and lowest
stratum of the deposit, a band eighteen inches thick consisting of
“dark brown ferruginous gravel, with subangular flints and tabular
ironstone, pliocene rolled fossils .... ‘ eoliths,’ and one worked flint”
(Dawson and Woodward, 1914, p. 83). This third layer is supposed
to be “in the main composed of pliocene drift, probably reconstructed
in the pleistocene epoch” (Dawson and Woodward, 1914, p. 85).
Within a yard of the same spot, and at precisely the same level, Dr.
A. Smith Woodward later dug out a small piece of a human occipital
bone. From this pit, and presumably from about the same part of
it, other fragments were secured. They represent about half of a
human braincase, a pair of human nasal bones, and a simian canine
tooth; also teeth of beaver, horse, hippopotamus, rhinoceros, and two
kinds of elephant. The human and simian remains were regarded
by their discoverers as parts of one individual. On the basis of this
assumption, though before the canine tooth and the nasal bones had
been found, Dr. Woodward established a genus Eoanthropus, char-
acterized by the combination in one skull of a human braincase and
a completely ape-like jaw (Dawson and Woodward, April 25, 1913,
p- 135).

Few recently discovered fossils have excited more interest than the
“Dawn Man of Piltdown,” and few have given rise to more discus-
sion (see bibliography at end of this paper). Deliberate malice could
hardly have been more successful than the hazards of deposition in so
breaking the fossils as to give free scope to individual judgment in
fitting the parts together. As a result no less than three restorations
of the braincase already exist (see Gregory, 1914, fig. 9), while the
canine tooth has been assigned to the right lower mandible and the -
left upper jaw. The estimates on the capacity of the braincase range
from 1,070 to 1,500 cubic centimeters. While there is no doubt that


SMITHSONIAN MISCELLANEOUS COLLECTIONS, VOL. 65, No. 12
I


2 SMITHSONIAN MISCELLANEOUS COLLECTIONS VOL. .65


the braincase, whatever its exact size, represents a member of the
family Hominide, there is wide difference of opinion as to the pos-
sibility of joining it with the mandible as parts of one skull. One
author regards “this association of human brain and simian features”
as precisely what he had anticipated (Smith, 1913, p. 131), while an-
other says that it seems to him “as inconsequent to refer the mandible
and the cranium to the same individual as it would be to articulate a
chimpanzee foot with an essentially human leg and thigh” (Waters-
ton, 1913, p. 319). I cannot find, however, that anyone has yet
definitely identified the jaw as that of a member of an existing simian
genus, or that any zoologist has attempted a detailed comparative
study of this part of “ Eoanthropus.’ Dr. Woodward, who regarded
the jaw as “ almost precisely that of an ape,’ compared the specimens
with young and adult chimpanzee only, while Dr. Gregory chose for
his simian standard a female orang. Neither appears to have exam-
ined any considerable series of jaws of great apes.

Dr. Ales Hrdlicka has submitted to me a set of casts of the Pilt-
down fossils, and has suggested that I compare the mandible with
the jaws of Pongide in the United States National*Museum. This
material includes the mandibles of 22 chimpanzees, 23 gorillas, and
about 75 orangs. I have also had access to the series of human
skulls in Dr. Hrdli¢ka’s custody. Study of these specimens, together
with the general collection of primates in the museum, shows that the
characters of the mandible and lower molars throughout the order
Anthropoidea are much more diagnostic of groups than has hitherto
been realized. It also convinces me that, on the basis of the evidence
furnished by the Piltdown fossils and by the characters of all the men,
apes, and monkeys now known, a single individual cannot be sr
posed to have carried this jaw and skull.


ANALYSIS OF THE PUBLISHED OPINIONS THAT THE JAW AND SKULL
WERE Parts OF ONE ANIMAL


The reasons that have been given for associating the jaw with the
skull as parts of one animal are of three kinds: distributional, geolog- -
ical, and anatomical. They may be briefly reviewed before the char-
acters of the fossil are taken up in detail.

The distributional evidence is negative. It is thus summarized by
Dr. Gregory (1914, p. 194):


The suggestion that while the braincase was human, the lower jaw belonged
to another creature, an ape, is not in harmony with what is already known
of the fauna and climate of Europe during pleistocene times. Thousands


NO. 12 JAW OF PILTDOWN MAN—MILLER 3


of mammalian remains of pleistocene age have been discovered in the
glacial and interglacial deposits of England and the Continent, but in this
highly varied fauna the anthropoid apes have always been conspicuously
absent, and there is no reliable evidence that any of the race ever lived in
England during the pleistocene epoch.


In this statement two facts are not given their due weight; first,
that the paleontological record is so fragmentary that unexpected
discoveries need cause no surprise, and second, that a tooth from
Taubach, Saxe-Weimar, described and figured by Nehring in 1895
as essentially similar to the first lower molar of a chimpanzee, had
already indicated the possible occurrence of the genus Pan in Europe
during the pleistocene age.

The geological evidence in favor of intimate association of the jaw
and braincase is merely that the bones were found close together,
at one level, and in a uniform condition of fossilization and water-
wearing. These circumstances would give additional reasons for
associating remains that presented no zoological difficulties ; but when
there is obvious incompatibility they do not furnish serious elements
of proof. Mr. Dawson’s remarks about the deposition of the other
mammalian remains found in the same gravel apply with equal force
to the skull and the jaw of “Eoanthropus”: the mere fact that they
lay near each other means little. He says (Dawson and Woodward,


HOMES Ova) be


The occurrence of certain pliocene specimens in a considerably rolled con-
dition, while the human remains bore little traces of rolling, suggested a
difference as to age, but not to the extent of excluding the possibility of
their being coeval. The rolled specimens might have entered the stream
farther up the river than the human remains, and thus might have drifted
into the hole, or pocket, in the river bed, where they were found, during the
same age but in different condition .... It must be admitted that any
attempt to fix any exact zoological date for specimens found in a gravel-
~bed is fraught with difficulties.


6


The anatomical reasons are (a) that the jaw “corresponds suffi-
ciently well in size to be referred to the same specimen [as the brain-
case] without any hesitation” (Dawson and Woodward, 1913, p.
129) ; (b) that the measurements are “on the whole nearer to those
obtained from early human jaws than to those of full-grown apes”
(Gregory, 1914, p. 195); (c) that the molars recall human rather
than simian teeth in their flattened, worn surfaces and their very thick
enamel; and (d) that the condyle, or what remains of it, is more like
the average human type than that of an ape. As to the relative size of
the jaw and braincase nothing very definite can be said except that


4 SMITHSONIAN MISCELLANEOUS COLLECTIONS VOL. 65


no proof is afforded. To Dr. Woodward the parts appeared to
present no discrepancies as to size; but to others who have examined
the casts the jaw seems to be too lightly built to correspond with the
massive cranial bones. A mandible as heavy as that of the pleisto-
cene Homo heidelbergensis would probably be in due proportion;
but the Piltdown jaw is even less robust than in well developed recent
men. As regards actual dimensions the table on page 20 shows the
wide divergence of the Piltdown jaw from both Homo sapiens and ,
H. heidelbergensis, and its essential agreement with that of recent
chimpanzees. Comparisons with Gorilla and Pongo are not neces-
sary. About the teeth Dr. Woodward went so far as to say: “such
a marked regular flattening has never been observed among apes,
though it is occasionally met with in lower types of men” (Dawson
and Woodward, 1913, p. 132). Yet I find that among nine chimpan-
zees with teeth at nearly the same stage of wear as in the type, the
smooth condition shown by the fossil is closely approached by one
individual and exactly matched by another (No. 84655, pl. 1, fig. 1,
from cast, and pl..2, fig. 1”, from actual specimen). While the thick-
ness of the enamel is usually greater in Homo than in Pan, individual
variation in both genera is sufficient to make this character, taken
by itself, of little diagnostic value. The cast and Dr. Woodward’s
figures indicate that the Piltdown teeth have enamel differing in no
essential feature from that of Pan No. 84655 (compare pl. 2, figs.
1” and 2”). As regards the mandible of the fossil it must be remem-
bered that the articular process is worn off to the level where it begins
to widen and thicken to form the base of the condyle. From the
characters of the part which remains Dr. Gregory reasoned that the
condyles were “more slender, less expanded transversely, and sup-
ported by more slender pillars of bone” than in the great apes,
features which would make the jaw “more like the average human
type” (1914, p. 195). This conclusion may be true when the only’
alternatives considered are Homo and Pongo, but it does not hold
good when the Piltdown jaw is compared with those of Homo and
Pan. The articular process near level of fracture shows more lateral
compression than I have been able to find in any specimen of Homo,
and there is no indication of the deep concavity beneath the inner two-
thirds of anterior edge of condyle which is a conspicuous feature of
this region in Homo as compared with all the great apes. While the
outer border of the fracture is unusually long relatively to the poste-
rior and inner borders of the same region as seen in most specimens
of Pan, the conditions in the Piltdown jaw would be almost exactly


NO. 12 JAW OF PILTDOWN MAN—MILLER 5


reproduced by similar mutilation of the articular process of No.
174699, an adult female chimpanzee from French Congo. The argu-
ments from anatomy, like those from geology and geography, are
thus seen to have little force.


MANDIBULAR CHARACTERS OF THE ANTHROPOIDEA


Before trying to decide how much importance should be assigned
to the peculiarities of the Piltdown jaw it is necessary to understand
the more conspicuous mandibular characters of the Anthro poidea.

In the Hominide* as in all other Anthropoidea the mandibular
halves become completely ossified at the symphysis soon after birth.
This character distinguishes members of the order from the recent
Lemuroidea, in all of which the halves remain distinct. Two main
peculiarities of the lower jaw and its toothrow separate the Hominide
from other Anthropoidea and especially from the great apes. The
two halves of the jaw together form a horseshoe-like arch (text
fig., 1 and 3, and pl. 3), so broadly rounded in front that the width
between the anterior molars is decidedly greater than the distance
from the first molar to the symphysion, and so widely open behind
that the distance between the condyles (outer borders) is conspicu-
ously greater than that from condylion to symphysion. In other
members of the order the arch is so narrow that the distance between
the anterior molars never exceeds that from first molar to the sym-
physion, and the distance between the condyles rarely if ever equals
that from condylion to symphysion (text fig., 2, and pl. 4). The
toothrow in the Hominide@ is narrowed and weakened in front of the
molars, the change taking place abruptly with posterior premolar.
Each premolar is single rooted, and the crown-area is less than half
that of the first molar. The canine never projects conspicuously
above the general level of the other tooth summits; its size, form and
function are essentially incisor-like. Among the great apes the
robust character of the toothrow is carried forward through the
large, double-rooted premolars to the strongly functional canine, the
point of which rises in males conspicuously above the general level
of the other teeth. Together with its anterior weakening the tooth-
row as a whole is characterized in the Hominide by a widely arched
form corresponding to that of the jaw. The inward curve on each


*Tncluding the various living species of Homo and the pleistocene H.
neanderthalensis King and H. heidelbergensis Schoetensack, but excluding, as
members of the family Pongide, the genera Pithecanthropus Dubois and
Sivapithecus Pilgrim.


6 SMITHSONIAN MISCELLANEOUS COLLECTIONS VOL. 65


side begins with the molars, while in the great apes it begins with
the premolars or canines. A line joining the middle of posterior
border of m, with the middle of anterior border of m,, will, if contin-
‘ued forward in front of incisors, converge rapidly with the sagittal
line similarly extended (text fig., 1 and 3, b). In the great apes
and in most of the monkeys except certain smaller South American
forms a line passing through middle of posterior border of m, and
middle of anterior border of m, is essentially parallel to the sagittal
line (text fig., 2, b). In the Hominide the inward curve of the tooth-
row normally begins with the first lower molar. The axis of this
tooth prolonged backward (text fig., 1 and 3, c) diverges rapidly
from a line parallel to the sagittal plane and crosses the posterior bor-
der of m, on outer side of middle; continued still further it passes
through the condyle. That of the second tooth similarly prolonged,
while diverging slightly from a line parallel to the sagittal plane,
passes considerably to inner side of condyle. In all living genera
of great apes and in the fossil Propliopithecus, Dryopithecus, and
Sivapithecus the axes of the two teeth (text fig., 2, b) lie in one
line essentially parallel to the sagittal line and passing further to inner
-side of condyle than is the case with the axis of m, in the Hominide.
The symphysial region in the Hominide seldom extends conspicu-
ously behind the level of the incisors, and never bears a marked con-

cavity on its posterior border for insertion of the lingual muscles;
in other primates it always extends conspicuously behind level of in-
cisors and it usually bears a marked concavity on its posterior border.
The mylohyal ridge is well developed in the Hominide, but is barely
indicated in monkeys and apes.

While sharing those general peculiarities which distinguish other
primates from the Hominide, the three* genera of living great apes
are readily separable from each other by the details of their mandibu-
lar structure. In Pan and Pongo the digastric muscle is inserted
along the lower border of the mandible, rarely extending forward


= the most recent complete work on the order, Elliot’s “ Review of the
Primates,” New York (1912), June, 1913, four genera are recognized: Pongo
Lacépéde for the orangs, Gorilla I. Geoffroy for the gorillas, Pseudogorilla
Elliot (1. c. vol. 3, p. 224) for an animal supposed to be the Gorilla mayema
of Alix and Bouvier, and Pan Oken for the chimpanzees. The genus
“ Pseudogorilla”’ was based on two specimens of true Goril/a, an immature
male with all the teeth in place but with the basal suture open and the tem-
poral ridges separate (I. c. pl. 32), and a mature female with the basal
suture closed and the temporal ridges joined (I. c. pl. 33). Three valid
genera are thus left in the group.


~~


JAW OF PILTDOWN MAN—MILLER


‘JuonbarjUl JOU a7 sare
-WOUY “I ‘ON UL se A][eMUassa o1e SUOT}IPUOD OI} S[eNpIAIpUl JUad0I AULUT UT SD WOIF I PUL Q FO DIUISIIAIP 9PIA MOYS OF P2peI]as
sem € ‘ON Sv painsy uowroeds oy], “@ WOIF JUOIOYIp JOU si I ‘cz *ON UT “UW JO stxe 2 Su JO JopsoOg JO11a}sod FO v[ppru YM WH Fo
Jopiog Jo19jUe JO Ipprur Sururof our g ‘oul [eWses VD “(eIOSuOPW ‘es1p ‘Egég4z ON) “ds omop] “€ pue + (UOOIOWIe Sy, UreyINos
‘gzzQZt ON) “ds ung ‘Z : (YORsudOYIS Jd9}fFe) Sisuasuaqjapiay OwoH ‘I : JO (azts [eanjeu Fyey ynoqe) sMmef 19M0T—DIY LXa],


Q D 9 2 v


ee eee ee ee ee es ee |


8 SMITHSONIAN MISCELLANEOUS COLLECTIONS VOL. 65


beyond the extreme posterior edge of the bone. This region of
attachment forms a thin, sharply-defined ledge beneath the pit in
which the other tongue-muscles are inserted. While the lower border
is essentially alike in the two genera the pit is deeper and narrower
in Pan than in Pongo and its upper border is usually well-defined
by an abrupt convexity in the posterior profile of the symphysis; the
hinder margin of this convexity lying at level of canine or anterior
premolar. In both genera the region of temporal muscle-insertion is
characterized by the presence of a distinct and narrow ridge curving
upward from behind the alveoli and extending to or above the middle
of the coronoid process. While they thus agree in certain characters
the two genera differ from each other in the form of the symphysis,
which, like the entire horizontal ramus, is deeper in Pongo than in
Pan. The base of the articular process in Pan is strengthened by
a conspicuous ridge extending obliquely downward on the inner side
of the mandible. In Pongo this ridge is barely indicated. Below the
ridge in Pan a distinct groove extends upward and backward from
the dental foramen; this is scarcely visible in Pongo. Turning to
Gorilla it is seen that the digastric muscle pushes conspicuously
forward under posterior border of mandible, so that the ledge beneath
the pit is broadly rounded off. The pit is small and ill-defined, and
the region which it occupies is carried so far backward by the very
gradually sloping symphysis that its upper margin lies at level of
posterior premolar. In the region of temporal muscle-insertion the
ridge extending upward toward the coronoid process is usually de-
flected forward below the base of the process. The dental foramen
and the region behind it are about as in Pongo. The strengthening
“ridge of articular process is more evident than in Pongo but less
defined than in Pan.

The lower molars in the living primates represent three main types
of structure, peculiar respectively to: (a) the American monkeys,
(b) the Hylobatide, great apes, and Hominide, and (c) the remain-
ing Old World forms. The first type (most clearly shown by
Alouatta) is essentially that of the more primitive lemur molars (as
in Propithecus) modified by partial or complete suppression of the
paraconid and by various degrees of flattening out of the original tri-
angles, with no addition of new elements. In the second type the
paraconid is absent (sometimes a faint trace in Gorilla) and there is
normally a well-developed talonid. The posterior half of the crown
is, as in the first type, basin-shaped ; and any transverse ridge which


+ Also in the extinct genera Dryopithecus and Sivapithecus.


NO. 12 JAW OF PILTDOWN MAN—MILLER 9


it may bear extends obliquely between hypoconid and talonid. In
the third and most specialized type the paraconid is absent, the talonid
is not well developed except in m,, and the posterior half of the
crown is not basin-shaped. The region occupied by the hollow in the
other types is here filled by the bases of the hypoconid and entoconid.
Usually the bases of these cusps join to form a high, squarely-
transverse ridge.

While the great apes and the Hominide agree in the fundamental
structure of their lower molars each genus shows obvious characters
of its own. In Gorilla the crowns are low and the cusps high, sub-
terete and more conspicuous than in any of the others. The cingulum
on anterior border of m, sometimes bears a nodule which may be the
last remnant of the paraconid, a character which I have found in this
genus only. The talonid of m, is very distinct, often larger than the
hypoconid and often connected with the hypoconid by a rudimentary
oblique transverse ridge. The cingulum at the postero-internal border
of crown occasionally bears a minute cusp, while sometimes it is com-
pletely transformed into a well-developed single or double cusp. The
secondary folding of the enamel is evident, but not sufficiently devel-
oped to obscure the plan of cusp-arrangement. A low supplemental
cusp is sometimes present between the protoconid and the hypoconid.
In Pan the depressions between the cusps are not so deep as in
Gorilla, so that the crowns appear to be less brachydont and the cusps
less terete and less conspicuous. The talonid in m, is less developed
than in m, or m,, not larger than the hypoconid. Cingulum of postero-
internal border often so thickened as to form a supplemental cusp.
The secondary folding of the enamel is more evident than in Gorilla;
it tends to obscure some of the details of the cusp-arrangement. In
Pongo the cusps take the form of ridge-like elevations at the extreme
border of the shallow depression which occupies most of the surface
of the crown. The talonid is well developed but is somewhat obscured
by the flattening common to all the cusps and by the extremely con-
spicuous and complicated secondary enamel folding which covers
almost the entire surface of the teeth except the summits of the main
cusps. In the Hominide the crowns are slightly less brachydont than
in any of the genera of great apes; and the cusps are less distinctly
outlined by intervening depressions. Viewed from above they are seen
to be less squarely truncate, so that each tooth comes less broadly in
contact with the one in front of it (compare pls. 3 and 4). This round-
ing off at the sides takes place in front at expense of both protoconid
and metaconid. There is a similar reduction at the posterior border,


16) SMITHSONIAN MISCELLANEOUS COLLECTIONS VOL. 65.


making the entire tooth shorter and more nearly circular in outline
than in any of the great apes. The posterior shortening occurs in the
region occupied by the talonid and the postero-internal cingulum.
The talonid is therefore less constantly present than in the great apes,
though it appears to occur normally in m, (where it is sometimes
divided into two cusps), often in m,, and less frequently in m, ; rarely
it is present in all three teeth. The postero-internal cingulum is
seldom a noticeable element. The secondary enamel folding though
present is less evident than in any of the great apes. In general the
lower molars of the Hominid@ may be described as like those of Pan
but with higher crowns, lower, broader, less sharply-marked-off -
cusps, less wrinkled enamel, and more rounded-off anterior and
posterior borders, the rounding-off behind practically eliminating the
postero-internal cingulum and decidedly reducing the talonid or
“fifth cusp” (compare pls. 3 and 4).

Two main facts are now evident : that among the living and recently
extinct great apes and Hominide (a) all the more important features
of each group remain constant in such widely separated forms as
Homo sapiens and H. heidelbergensis* on the one hand and Pongo,
Gorilla and Pan on the other, and (b) each known genus is sharply
differentiated from all the others by characters visible in the Pilt-
down jaw.


CoMPARISON OF THE PILTDOWN JAW AND TEETH WITH THOSE OF
OTHER MEMBERS OF THE ORDER


The Piltdown jaw (pl. 1, fig. 2, and pl. 2, fig. 2) admittedly differs
from every known mandible of living or extinct members of the
family Hominide. Although broken away a little to the right of the
symphysis, it has an abrupt anterior bend which is exactly that of a
great ape. The symphyseal region extends conspicuously behind the
level of the incisors. The region of the mylohyal ridge is smoothly
rounded. The two molars (pl. 2, fig. 2) show no indication of the
beginning of a curve in the toothrow. The main axis of the first tooth
is continued backward by that of the second in a line passing as far to
inner side of condyle as in the Pongide. In front of the first molar
the entire hinder border of the alveolus of pm, is plainly visible. It
shows that the missing tooth was fully as large as in the great apes


* Regarded as a distinct genus by at least two authors: Bonarelli, Revista
Ital. di Paleont., Perugia, vol. 15, p. 26, March 15, 1909 (Paleanthropus) ; and }
Ameghino, An. Mus. Nac. de Buénos Aires, vol. 19 (ser. 3, vol. 12), p. 195,
July 27, 1909 (Pseudhomo).


NO. 12 JAW OF PILTDOWN MAN—MILLER IEE


and that the toothrow did not become abruptly weakened at the point
where this conspicuous change takes place in all known Hominde.
The molars are distinctly less hypsodont * than in recent or pleistocene
Hominide. On the outer surface of each tooth there is a trace of a
deep sulcus extending downward between the protoconid and the
hypoconid nearly to the lower border of the enamel in a manner rarely
seen in Homo (compare pl. 3 with pl. 2, figs. 2” and 4) but constant in
Gorilla, Pan and Pongo. In each tooth there is a large talonid anda
postero-internal cingulum, better seen in the photograph (pl. 2, fig.
2”) than in the cast (pl. 2, fig. 2’). The anterior border of the crown
is squarely truncate; and the general outline of each tooth is unlike
that known in any recent or fossil man.

Though its general characters are the same as those of all the living
great apes, the Piltdown jaw is readily distinguishable from jaws of
Pongo and Gorilla. There is no trace of the deepening of the horizon-
tal portion of the mandible characteristic of Pongo, nor do the teeth
show any indication of ridge-like cusps and heavily wrinkled enamel.
Enough of the symphyseal region remains to prove that this did not
extend backward as in Gorilla; while the teeth differ at least as widely
from those of Gorilla as from those of Pongo. Comparison with the
mandible of Pan brings out no such discrepancies. On the contrary
there is agreement in all the features which distinguish Pan from the
two other genera: in depth of horizontal portion, in form of sym-
physis, in the ridges on inner side of ascending ramus, and in the
peculiarities of dental foramen and the groove behind it. On plates
1 and 2 the Piltdown jaw is compared with casts of the mandibles of
two African chimpanzees mutilated in as nearly as possible the same
manner. It will be seen that the main peculiarities of the fossil, apart
from the large teeth and robust horizontal shaft, lie within the limits
of variation shown by these two African specimens. In another
African specimen (No. 174710, pl. 5, fig. 2) the depth of shaft as
well as that of the ascending branch is essentially equal to that in the
fossil (see table of measurements, p. 20). Further details of vari-
ation in the mandible of recent chimpanzees are shown in plate 5. The
teeth resemble those of certain living chimpanzees in structure,
agreeing in all essential features with those of Pan No. 176226 from
southern Kameroon (compare pl. 2, figs. 2” and 4; allowances must be
made for the different degree of wear in the two sets of teeth, and for


1Tn the cast and in the photograph (Woodward, 1915, pl. 4) ; in the original
figure (Dawson and Woodward, 1913, pl. 20) the crowns are represented as
essentially human in height.


IZ SMITHSONIAN MISCELLANEOUS COLLECTIONS VOL. 65


the fact that the enamel is absent from the antero-internal corner of
m, in the recent specimen). Their size is greater in proportion to
that of the jaw than in any recent material that I have seen. From
modern African specimens of Pan the Piltdown jaw differs there-
fore in mere details of proportion and in the actual size of the
molar teeth.

The canine tooth found in the Piltdown gravel did not form part of
the remains on which the genus “ Eoanthropus” was based. Yet
its interest is so great that it deserves special attention. Of this
tooth Dr. Woodward says: it “ obviously belongs to the right side
of the mandible . . . . and its worn face shows that it worked with
the upper canine in true ape fashion” (1913: Nature, p. 110, Geol.
Mag., p. 432), while Dr. Gregory remarks: “ Its resemblances are on
the whole closer to the left upper canine.’ Boule (1915), however,
leaves the tooth in the lower jaw without comment. As “the enamel
on the inner face of the crown has been completely removed by
mastication”? (Dawson and Woodward, 1914, p. 87) and the worn
area is a wide, shallow concavity directly backward and inward, there
is no reason to doubt the correctness of the second view. Such
mechanical interrelation of the teeth as would produce a worn sur-
face of this kind on a lower canine is not only unknown among
primates, but I have been unable to find any mammal with the upper
and lower teeth so arranged that it could exist. .A concavity on the
inner aspect of the lower canine may be present, as in adult Propt-
thecus or in the milk tooth of Homo, but not as the result of gouging ~
out by an upper tooth. The fact that its concave surface is worn there-
fore removes all significance (Dawson and Woodward, 1914, p. 91;
Woodward, 1915, p. 23) from the superficial resemblance of the Pilt-
down tooth to the lower milk canine of man. In all the living great
apes the postero-internal surface of the lower canine is convex (see
pl. 4, and Woodward, 1915, fig. 8A as compared with fig. 8B).
The worn area normally appears first at the summit of the tooth, then
extends down the postero-internal limb of the convexity ; later it may
spread to the antero-internal surface, and in aged individuals may
reduce the tooth to a flattened stub. No matter how long a lower
canine may have been in use it never assumes the form seen in that
of “ Eoanthropus,’ nor does it lose all trace of the original convexity
of its inner portion. The upper canines, on the other hand, are nor-
mally worn away over exactly the same area as in the Piltdown tooth.
Among the living great apes, while there is much individual variation
in size and form, the canines are larger and higher-crowned in males


NO. 12 JAW OF PILTDOWN MAN—MILLER 3


than in females. Comparison of the Piltdown tooth with those of
males of all three genera and of females of Gorilla and Pongo show
numerous and striking discrepancies which need not be detailed here.
On comparison with the left upper canine of adult female Pan, how-
ever, no stich discrepancies are found. The cast of the tooth almost
fits the left alveolus of No. 174700, an adult female chimpanzee from
French Congo. Its greater size and straighter, more compressed
root prevent its taking a wholly natural position in the socket; but
when as nearly as possible in place it is in all important respects
symmetrical with the canine of the right side and with the cheek-
teeth of the left series. The only characters by which I am able to
distinguish it from the corresponding tooth of adult female recent
chimpanzees are the slightly greater size, the less backward-bent
extremity of root, and the greater area and deeper concavity of the
worn region on postero-internal aspect of crown. The distinction of
root from crown is not so well marked as in recent teeth, but this cir-
cumstance is probably due to the incomplete condition of the enamel
which Dr. Woodward (Dawson and Woodward, 1914, p. 87) has
described.


INCOMPATIBILITY OF THE PILTDOWN JAW AND SKULL


Discussion of the relationships of the man represented by the Pilt-
down braincase to the various living and extinct species of Homo
does not come within the scope of this paper. Certain characters of
the skull-fragments are, however, of special importance in connec-
tion with the supposed association of the jaw with those remains.

The occipital bone has been said to approach “a lower [than typ-
ically human] grade. . . . in the attachment for the neck”’ (Dawson
and Woodward, 1913, p. 132). On comparing it with a few dozen
recent human skulls taken at random from the series in the National
Museum I find that its peculiarities of form are so exactly matched
that none can be regarded as of more than individual importance.
The ‘relatively large extent and flatness of its smooth upper
squamous portion” (1. c. p. 128) is completely within the range of
variation in modern species of Homo. This feature, connected as it
is with the upright position of the body, and the consequent shrinking
of the area for attachment of the neck-muscles, is one of the family
characters of the Hominide. In the Pongide a very small smooth
area* is present in the young above the region of muscle-attachment,
but in the adult this area is always encroached on‘ and often obliterated


1More noticeable in Gorilla and Pan than in Pongo.
? More rapidly and completely in Gorilla and Pongo than in Pan.


I4 SMITHSONIAN MISCELLANEOUS COLLECTIONS VOL. 65


by the constantly increasing lambdoid crest. ‘The fact that the
squamous portion of the occipital bone is well developed in the fossil
therefore indicates wide divergence from the known great apes.
Another fancied resemblance to the Pongide is seen by Boule, who
remarks (1915, p. 59) that to him the lower curved line appears to lie
relatively nearer to the upper curved line than in recent Homo, its
position thus more as in H. neanderthalensis and still more as in the
chimpanzees. The distance between the two lines in the Piltdown
skullis 15.5 mm. In two adult skulls of American Indians, one from
Illinois (No. 243881) the other from North Dakota (No. 228876),
which happened to be lying side by side in one of the exhibition cases
it is respectively 14.5 mm. and 27 mm. Among adult chimpan-
zees I find extremes of 15.5 mm. (No. 174790) and 24.5 mm.
(Nos. 84655 and 176227). When a character varies so much in both
genera no conclusion can be based on the conditions found in any one
skull. Even if a conclusion regarding the lines Were justified it would
have little meaning in view of the strictly human features of all other
parts of the occipital bone.

Aside from the superior maxilla the parts of the skull most directly
related to the mandible are: (a) the point of actual contact, (b) the
region of origin of the masseter muscle, and (c) that of origin of the
temporal muscle. Of these three the first and last are well preserved
in the fossils. The glenoid region has been recognized as “ typically
human in every detail” (Dawson and Woodward, 1913, p. 128).
Comparison with many human skulls shows that it presents the char-
acteristically human features of narrow articulating surface and deep
fossa in a much more than usual degree of development. Unfor-
tunately the absence of the condyle makes it impossible to know
whether the corresponding surface of the Piltdown jaw had the broad
and slightly convex form seen in all three genera of living Pongide;
but the part immediately below the fracture shows, in the region
over the dental foramen, the highly developed strengthening ridge
characteristic of the genus Pan (see pl. 1). A slight indication of the
ridge is often present in Homo; but I have been unable to find a
specimen even among those in a set particularly selected to illustrate
the variations of human mandibles, in which the structure of this
region agrees with living chimpanzees and the Piltdown jaw. The
_ facts are that the Piltdown skull presents extreme human character-
istics in the glenoid region calling for correspondingly extreme human
conditions of narrow and strongly convex articular surface in the
mandible which hinged on it. But this entire mandible, from sym-


ia ss


NO, 12 JAW OF PILTDOWN MAN—MILLER 15


physis to base of condyle, is like that of a chimpanzee. Hence in
order to fit its articulating surface to that of the skull it would be
necessary to imagine an abrupt change of plan in the few millimeters
of condyle that have been lost.

Another incongruity is found when the area of origin of the tem-
poral muscle on the skull is compared with that of its insertion on the
mandible. Both regions have been carefully described and figured
(Dawson and Woodward, 1913, pp. 128, 131, pl. 18, fig. 3, pl. 20, figs.
2a, 2c). The anterior border of the muscle appears to have extended
upward on the frontal with somewhat unusual abruptness, an impres-
sion that may be heightened by the way in which the bone is broken.
The posterior border was not carried very far back on the parietal.
In general features the area of origin for the whole muscle is strictly
human, and its extent is considerably less than in many of the human
skulls with which I have compared it. In all three genera of Pongide
this area is much greater in proportion to the size of the animal, push-
ing its way in adult individuals gradually over the braincase to median
line, where the muscles of the two sides are often separated merely by


-a sagittal crest." The area of insertion of the muscle on the Piltdown


mandible has not only all the more important general characters
peculiar to this region in Pan; it has also the individual features
which in living members of that genus are connected with the greatest
extension of the area of origin of the muscle on the skull. Young
chimpanzees show a slight approximation to Homo in the form of the
area on which the temporal muscle is inserted. The ridge which
extends upward from the base of the coronoid process is broad and
low, giving this whole region the smoothly convex appearance usually
found in members of the family Hominide. With increasing age the
ridge becomes narrower and the region behind it changes from flat
to concave; finally the surface of the main ridge becomes marked by
secondary ridgelets which give extreme strength of attachment to the
muscle-fibers. This last stage of roughening on the mandible is asso-
ciated in chimpanzees with the closest approach of the upper end of
the muscle to the median line of the braincase and especially with the


formation of a sagittal crest. It is well-marked in the Piltdown jaw.


In order to associate this jaw with the braincase it would therefore be
necessary to assume the existence of an animal related to both Homo
and Pan but with a temporal muscle working on a different mechan-
ical scheme from either ; that is, moderate in size and strength at the


2 Most frequently developed in Gorilla, least frequently in Pan.


16 SMITHSONIAN MISCELLANEOUS COLLECTIONS VOL. 65


region of origin on the skull and excessively heavy at the mandibular
end. That such an animal may have lived cannot be denied ; but noth-
ing so contrary to the facts which are now known need be believed
without the evidence of a jaw found in place.

Two other features of the human skull, both connected with the
upright position of the body, and both represented by the Piltdown
fragments, have an important bearing on the question of the associa-
tion of the mandible with the braincase. One of these is the form of
the basicranial region, the other is that of the nasals. That human
skulls differ from those of other primates in the position of the
foramen magnum and the occipital condyles appears to have been first
clearly recognized by Daubenton, as long ago as 1764." The subject
has received attention from many subsequent authors.’ While some
individual variation in this respect is shown by recent man, and the
conditions may prove to be less pronounced in the Pleistocene Homo
neanderthalensis than in living members of the group, the family
Hominid@ is distinguished from all other mammals by the fact that
the occipital region is so produced behind the condyles, while at the
same time the anterior maxillary region (including front of lower jaw)
is so retracted, that the points of support on the erect upper portion
of the vertebral column stand essentially beneath the center of gravity
of the skull, thus balancing the head in its characteristic poise. Asa
result of the maxillary retraction the nasal floor is shortened anteriorly
and the nasal aperture is made to open directly forward instead of
forward and upward. The nasal bones roofing this modified aperture
are normally thrown into a prominence unknown in any monkey or
great ape. Whether the maxillary retraction came about primarily as
part of a general readjustment of the skull to its upright attitude or
through other agencies, the fact remains that this character is not yet
known among primates except as part of a set of changes, one result
of which is to bring the point of cranial support to the position where
it affords the most effective balance. In all primates other than the
Hominide the condyles lie behind the center of gravity and the head
is held in place on the oblique or horizontal anterior portion of the


*Mém. Acad. Roy. Sci., Paris (1764), pp. 568-577. 1767.

? See, for instance, Huxley, Man’s Place in Nature, p. 76, 1863; Owen Comp.
Anat. and Physiol. Vert., vol. 2, p. 554, 1866; Broca, Rev. d’Anthrop., Paris,
vol. 2, pp.. 193-234, 1873 (reprint in Mém. d’Anthrop., vol. 4, pp. 595-641,
1883) ; Papillault, Bull. Soc. Anthrop., Paris, ser. 4, vol. 9, pp. 336-385.

®See Boule, Ann. de Paléont., vol. 6, pp. 156-159, 1911 (Homme fossile
de la Chapelle-aux-Saints, pp. 48-51).


NO. 12 JAW OF PILTDOWN MAN—MILLER 17


vertebral column by strong muscles ;* the anterior maxillary region
is not retracted, and the nasal bones are flatly sunk into the interorbital
region and the upper border of the nasal orifice. In the Homimide
the peculiar position of the condyles is accompanied by special modifi-
cations in the floor of the braincase. The area between the foramen
magnum and the choanz is bowed upward, the mastoid process is
carried downward and forward until it almost encroaches on the
region lying below glenoid notch, and the tympanic plate and entire
petro-mastoid are distorted from their primitive form. The temporal
bone of “ Eoanthropus”’ (Dawson and Woodward, 1913, pl. 19, fig.
2) shows by its exact resemblance to the same bone in Homo that this
fundamental part of the skull was completely adjusted to the task of
supporting a human brain in the upright position. Belief that a
primate like the one to which this temporal bone belonged, and living
as recently as the late pliocene or early pleistocene, lacked that cor-
responding balance-adjustment in the maxillary region which is pres-
ent in all members of the Hominide actually known, cannot reason-
ably exist without the evidence of an entire specimen; yet such
absence of mechanical unity between the two parts of the skull must
be assumed in order to provide the specimen with a long, narrow
upper arch to fit the lower jaw* (compare pls. 3 and 4). Similarly, in
the absence of a specimen showing human nasal bones coexisting with
the protruding anterior maxillary region of the great apes, there is
every reason to suppose that the Piltdown jaw was not closely asso-
ciated with this pair of typical human nasals (Dawson and Wood-
ward, 1914, pl. 15, fig. 1) until the deposition of the remains near
each other in the old river-bottom. It is not improbable that ancient


1A peculiar instance of approach to a balanced condition of the head is
furnished by the South American monkeys of the genus Saimiri. Here the
back part of braincase protrudes so far that the condyles are made to be
nearer the middle of the skull than in any other monkey that I have examined.
There is no indication of a general readjustment of the skull, the base of
braincase together with the facial region remaining as in related genera.

2 As the cranial floor between the temporal bone and the median line is not
represented by the fragments it is perhaps not safe to assume that the dis-
tance from one glenoid to the other was as great as in recent Homo. Every
feature of the specimen makes it appear probable, however, that such was
actually the case. If this human widening existed, the articular surfaces of
the corresponding jaw, to accord with the conditions present in all other
known primates, should have been wide apart, the jaw should have been
strongly arched, and the lower toothrow should have begun to bend inward
behind the premolars. Neither the teeth nor the horizontal portion of the
Piltdown mandible present any such characters.


18 SMITHSONIAN MISCELLANEOUS COLLECTIONS VOL. 65


fossil forms will be found in which the characters of face, braincase,
jaws and teeth are so generalized as to represent a structure that could
have given rise to the distinguishing features of both Hominide and
Pongide. But nothing could be more contrary to the conditions
present in all living and fossil Anthropoidea now known than the
simultaneous occurrence in a pleistocene or recent genus of fully
developed fundamental characters elsewhere diagnostic of the two
groups.
SUMMARY


The Piltdown remains include parts of a braincase showing funda-
mental characters not hitherto known except in members of the genus
Homo, and a mandible, two lower molars, and an upper canine show-
ing equally diagnostic features hitherto unknown except in members
of the genus Pan. On the evidence furnished by these characters
the fossils must be supposed to represent: either a single individual
belonging to an otherwise unknown extinct genus (Eoanthropus),
or two individuals belonging to two now-existing families (Homu-
nide and Pongide). The fossils are so fragmentary that their
zoological meaning will probably remain a subject of controversy.
Yet the weight of the difficulties on the two sides is unequal.
In order to believe that all the fragments came from a single indi-
vidual it is necessary to assume the existence of a primate differing
from all other known members of the order by combining a brain-
case and nasal bones possessing the exact characters of a genus
belonging to one family, with a mandible, two lower molars, and an
upper canine possessing the exact characters of a genus belonging to
another. Thus must be associated in a single skull: (a) one type of
jaw with another type of glenoid region, (b) one type of temporal
muscle-origin with another type of temporal muscle-insertion, (c)
a high degree of basicranial adjustment to the upright position with
absence of that corresponding modification in the lower jaw called for
by all that is now actually known of the structure of the braincase and
mandible in primates, and (d) a protruding lower jaw with a form
of nasal bone not elsewhere known except in connection with .a_
retracted upper dental arch. In each instance the opposed char-
acters are sharply defined and easily recognizable in the fossils ; while
in no single feature is there any trace of the blending of the two types.
On the other hand the assumption that the skull‘and jaw belonged
respectively to a man and a chimpanzee carries with it only two diffi-
culties: (a) that of the deposition within a few feet of each other of
the remains of two animals whose bones are rarely found in gravel


NO. 12 JAW OF PILTDOWN MAN—MILLER 19


pits, and (b) that of the supposed absence of chimpanzees from the
European pleistocene faunas. Concerning the first nothing can be
said, except that those local conditions which caused the deposition
of one specimen near a given spot might be expected to act in about
the same way with another. The second is at least partly met by the
fact that a tooth described and figured as not certainly distinguishable
from the first lower molar of a chimpanzee has been found in the
pleistocene of Germany. Until the discovery of further material it
seems proper to treat the case as a purely zoological problem by
referring each set of fragments to the genus which its characters
demand.


Tue BritTisH PLEISTOCENE CHIMPANZEE


Accepting the conclusions (a) that each set of the Piltdown frag-
ments shall be treated according to the existing characters, and (b)
that the characters of the lower jaw are those of a member of the
genus Pan, it becomes necessary to distinguish the British pleistocene
chimpanzee from the living African species. No special fragment
was designated by Dr. Woodward as the type specimen of Foan-
thropus dawsoni. As the species was referred to the family Homuude
I now restrict the name to the human elements of the composite,
selecting as type the temporal bone (Quart. Journ. Geol. Soc. London,
vol. 69, pl. 19, fig. 2). For the chimpanzee represented by the mandi-
ble with its first and second molar teeth I propose the name:


PAN VETUS, sp. nov.
Gale ie ell: 2 ane, 2)


Diagnosis.—General characters of mandible and of first and second
lower molars as in living species of Pan from French Congo and
southern Kameroon, but horizontal ramus more robust and teeth
larger.

Measurements.—In the table (page 20) the measurements of the
type (from cast) are compared with those of seven mandibles of Pan
from French Congo and Kameroon, among which are represented the
maximum and minimum dimensions for the entire National Museum
series of adults. Only one of these individuals contrasts noticeably
with the type in the worn condition of the molar crowns. For con-
venience of further comparisons I have added the measurements of
Homo heidelbergensis (from cast) and of three specimens of modern
Homo, one extremely large, another medium in size and the third
rather small. ;


*£[UO VdvJINS poua}eY 94} UOleLapIsUOod OJUL Yoo oY A[JUeIeddy ‘“UIUI o-o1 Xo"e1 pus $6 X%S"11 : A[aATadSa4 1v SJUDUIAINSvoUN S,paeMpOOM “ICT |
i “WU § UBY} Sssay A[qeqoid 1011q *payeutysy y


VOL. 65


SMITHSONIAN MISCELLANEOUS COLLECTIONS


0'6x9'6 roa (oyrera Cont || Cofloke Moin ita (an Ih AS) Opes Wyte | Zev | 2 Of | z°9g |2°00
VOLK AW O7llKhcecl | Viol | Ser iy Oc Ie cy iV Se | Oro eosin 12 10450
JUNE CAL Toy AOobrae | ray tater totale I Mies | ytere | (ojoretse | toifogr | Coyes/4, rodeo
*(que001) "ds owloyy
Cal KO ol | DK eels ene TOCOINNO ec HeOcve lo Ome yalO | Ramtec COme (Oc iag)” cence (tela eka AT Venn ay
*(@ue00}sI0[d) sisuassaqjapi2ay Oul0pyT
Lor EE O78 1 |e OL Kaecl\ OOF Or ya \ecric sO Le ey Oz | OmlOm IO LV ROG tO Nap cir nec aes as SUD Te teatro
*(gue00}sIo[d) snjzaa upg
(a) tia y Aol |} Toto ops tole, | Fawtan | peel to) Kole | ye Moke || (ay'rdoj | Colerse | Tote) Poet fn WE ANIA Hi aiboib eich
2/08 OL | O-OKO0Ol 7° ie, | OFOl Vl WOnee i e Tcl VeLy iO: OY NO WRC NY (OO Ts sis) eens te) ee ac ee TELCO Ay
‘ssoy A[joulIsIq | Q'OIXKO'11 | V'OXO'IL | o'vE | gbr | SLI | Z ge | z-Zz | zig | O'ZS | 071g |g°Ser | P |POLHZ1\--*: OduoD Yous y
Sse] ALIUAYS |O ll <O'1L | OrOLXOOL | gee | o-rr | ect | yoe | oye) Vees iO TS | Or0g IZ SIT PiSezorn| os UOOIIWIeY *S
‘g10Wl A[(eINION | O'O1XQ‘'OI | Q°OXO'OI | g'ZE | O'EI | VOI | Q'OF | O'xZ | O-zQ | 9'OS | V'0g [EE | J jorZhZ1\"** * OSu0D Yyoua4s yy
‘gues OY} ynoqy De Oy ae Qg've.| z°St | gol | 2°42 | ale | bZy | O'4V | V'gZ \V'oz1 | & \660hZ1\°"** O8u0> Youerq
‘910 A[IYSIS | O'OIXO'11 | O'OXO'OI | o'Ze | g’€1 | O'ZI | z‘ok | g’Zz | gr | 18 | Q°ZZ |W L11 | & \6z2QZ1|"° ** * uooIAWIeY ‘Ss
‘ssay Ajjouijsiq | g°6Xz 11 | O'O1Xg‘Ol | o'z | O'zZI | g'g1 | g Lz | b'6z | O' 6h | O' MY | O'ZZ |Q'EII | & |10Zh21|"** * OBu0D YIuII 4
‘ssay A[WySIS | g:6xXo'r1 90X72 O01 | "Il | 9-01 | BVI | o-fe | a Ic | **-* | O'oOY | 0°99 |V Gor | & |Z0ZhZ1|" “- Osu0> Youery
*(yue001) “ds ung
9 9) a S) Ss) S) S) Ss) E35 ae :
fo | Ss | ta | #8 | #8 | BPS) Be [Bee | See |e) g
ge. | oe | Be | ge | Be | eee | a6 | oss | ate o
pe | ee | Be) Be | Be [bee | Fe | ae | aae ;
“‘snjaa Wg Pay oe os oo oe iehen aie cas oo.
sie divoaae tha ‘IB[OW puodas | “1B[OUL 4S11f re om ae, are Pad ote 3” a 88 < bees AU NEOOT
Jouonpuos usoy | 4° ¥#0%0 ESET AN ab reeled ips tal ee PR eli
Brat met |e eo ee | eel al | eral een
pies eee ia = woe | a 2 mo. | Bow
=] sas y=) 4) u=) ° ~?s 4 0 One
a es 8 5 5 mn gs 1 57 | Poe ;
5 aus fap ee PE a5 Glee oa
& | ee | 8 3 Be | ete |e See late cet


‘SINANANNSVAN AO ATAVL


NO. I2 JAW OF PILTDOWN MAN—MILLER Zi


Remarks.—Within the limits of the generic characters recent
chimpanzees, like other great apes, show many variations the nature
of which is imperfectly understood. Numerous species have been
described* but their cranial peculiarities, if such exist, are not yet
known. Among the skulls in the National Museum series I have
been unable to find satisfactory characters by which to distinguish
local forms.

Comparing the Piltdown mandible with those from Kameroon
and French Congo I have found no constant features other than those
already mentioned. That part of mandible in front of m, is, for
instance, shorter than in the two African jaws figured on plate 1;
but No. 174710 (pl. 5, fig. 2) from French Congo has this region fully
as short and nearly as deep as the type. In Pan vetus the thickened
area which extends downward on outer side of mandible in contin-
uation of the base of the coronoid process is more prominent than in
most African specimens. It contributes to the robustness of the jaw
in that region, and stands out noticeably beyond the level of the lower
edge when the mandible is viewed at a certain angle from above. In
African specimens this thickening is usually not sufficient to project
noticeably beyond the level of the angular margin, but in No. 176235
from southern Kameroon it does so almost as much as in Pan vetus.
The angle of the jaw is more evenly rounded off in Pan vetus than in
mast African chimpanzees that I have seen. These usually show a
slight concavity below the angular region and another, often the
more pronounced of the two, above it. In No. 174710 (pl. 5, fig. 2)
from French Congo a very slight wearing away of the edge of the
bone such as appears to have taken place in the Piltdown jaw would
exactly produce the outline of the type. The teeth appear to be more
diagnostic than the jaw, as I have been unable to find any African
specimen in which they equal those of Pan vetus in size.


+See Elliot, Rev. Primates, vol. 3, pp. 229-254, June, 1913, and Matschie,
Sitzungsber. Gesellsch. naturforsch. Freunde, Berlin, 1914, pp. 327-335, July,
IQI4.


22 SMITHSONIAN MISCELLANEOUS COLLECTIONS VOL. 65


BIBLIOGRAPHY
(Newspaper articles of a popular nature are not included )


Anonymous. A Palaeolithic Skull. .The Times, London, November 23, 1912,
p. 10.


Announcement that: Excavations in Sussex undertaken by an an-
thropological student have brought to light fragments of a human skull
detailed description of which will be presented at a meeting of the
Geological Society to be held on December 18.


Anonymous. Discovery of Human Skull (Early Pleistocene?) near Lewes.
Nature, vol. 90, p. 390. December 5, 1912.


A “note” announcing Mr. Dawson’s discovery of the Piltdown
remains.


Anonymous. A Palaeolithic Skull. The Times, London, December 19, 1912,


D. 4.
Principally an abstract of paper presented at meeting of Geological
Society, December 18. No name printed.


AnonyMous. Palaeolithic Man. Nature, vol. 90, p. 438. December 19, 1912.

Brief synopsis of history and characters of Piltdown man. No
name printed.

Anonymous. The Piltdown Skull. Nature, vol. 91, pp. 640-641. August
21, 1913.

Account of the discussion by members of the anatomical section,
International Congress of Medicine.

AntHony, R. Les restes humains fossiles de Piltdown (Sussex). Revue
Anthropologique, vol. 23, pp. 203-306. September, 1913.

Accepts the association of the skull with jaw: “Ce qui pourrait le
rendre vraisemblable c ‘est que, chez les jeunes Anthropoides nous voyons
précisément associée a une boite cranienne sensiblement sphérique une
machoire 4 menton fuyant,” p. 304. Regards the formation of a new
genus as not justified: “En raison de sa capacité cranienne toute
humaine il me semble cependant contre-indiqué de le séparer du genre
Homo. Le nom spécifique d’Homo dawsont me semble devoir. etre
préfére a celui d’ Eoanthropus dawsom ....” (p. 305).

Bouts, Marcettin. L’Homme fossile de la Chapelle-aux-Saints. Annales de


Paléontologie, vol. 6, pp. 111-172, 1911, vol. 7, pp. 21-56, 85-192, 1912, vol.


8, Pp. I-70. 1913.

Eoanthropus frequently mentioned, pp. 245-265, but at this time
known to the author from descriptions only. (See next title.)

Boute, Marcettin. La Paléontologie humaine en Angleterre. L’Anthro-
pologie, vol. 26, pp. 1-67, figs. 1-21. April, 1915.

Eoanthropus, pp. 39- -67. Accepts association of skull with jaw,
though recognizing that jaw is exactly that of a chimpanzee, and that
it would have been described as Troglodytes dawsoni if found alone
(p. 60). Admits that the presence of a pliocene anthropoid ape in
western Europe would be ‘nothing extraordinary (p. 62). Regards the
creation of a new genus as unnecessary. Criticizes Waterston’s view
that jaw did not belong with skull: “Cet argument, d’ordre purement
anatomique, n’est donc pas sans valeur. Mais il a le tort d’etre imprégné
d’un vieux parfum cuviérin et de reposer trop exclusivement sur les
données morphologiques tirées de l’Homme actuel. Or, les paléon-
tologistes savent combien la nature est fertile en combinaisons impreé-
vues; elle a pu associer d’autant plus facilement un condyle et une
fosse glénoide d’ Homme a une machoire de Singe que, mécaniquement
et physiologiquement, cette association ne parait pas absurde. II semble
que, dans l’évolution d’une téte osseuse, quand la face diminue, la man-
dibule diminue plus lentement, ne suivant en quelque sorte que de loin le
mouvement de retrait” (p. 62).


NO. 12 JAW OF PILTDOWN MAN—MILLER 23


Dawkins, Boyp. [Discussion of the Piltdown skull.] Abstr. Proc. Geol.
Soc. London, session 1912-13, pp. 23-24. December 28, 1912. (See also
Quart. Journ. Geol. Soc. London, vol. 69, pp. 148-149. March, 1913, issued
April 25, 1913.)

_ Accepts association of skull and jaw. Concludes that Eoanthropus
is “a missing link between man and the higher apes, appearing at that
stage of the evolution of the higher mammalia in which it may be
looked for—in the pleistocene age. The modern type of man had no
place in this age.”

Dawson, CHARLES, and Woopwarp, ARTHUR SMITH. On the discovery of
a palaeolithic human skull and mandible in a flint-bearing gravel over-
lying the Wealden (Hastings Beds) at Piltdown, Fletching (Sussex).
Abstr. Proc. Geol. Soc. London, session 1912-13, pp. 20-22. December
28, 1912.

Abstract of history and characters. Name not printed. “.... it


may be regarded as representing a hitherto unknown genus and species,
for which a new name is proposed.”


DAwson, CHARLES, and Woopwarp, ArTHUR SMITH. On the discovery of a
palaeolithic human skull and mandible in a flint-bearing gravel over-
lying the Wealden (Hastings Beds) at Piltdown, Fletching (Sussex).
Quart. Journ. Geol. Soc. London, vol. 69, pp. 117-124, pls. 15-21 (wash
drawings; for photographs see Woodward, 1915), figs. 1-10. March, 1913.
Read December 18, 1912; issued April 25, 1913.

Dawson, CHarRLES, and Woopwarp, ArtHuR SmitH. Supplementary note
on the discovery of a palaeolithic human skull and mandible at Piltdown
(Sussex). Abstr. Proc. Geol. Soc. London, session 1913-1914, pp. 28-209.
December 31, 1913.

“In shape, the canine resembles the milk canine of man and that of
the apes more closely than it agrees with the permanent canine of any
known ape. In accordance with a well-known palaeontological law,
it therefore approaches the canine of the hypothetical Tertiary An-
thropoids more nearly than any corresponding tooth hitherto found.”

Dawson, CHARLES, and Woopwarp, ARTHUR SMITH. Supplementary note
on the discovery of a palaeolithic human skull and mandible at Piltdown
(Sussex). Quart. Journ. Geol. Soc. London, vol. 70, pp. 82-93, pls. 14-15,
figs. 1-3. April 25, 1914.

“Tt results, therefore, from these comparisons that, among known
Upper Tertiary and Recent Anthropoids, the permanent lower canine of
Eoanthropus agrees more closely in shape with the milk-canine both
of man and of the apes than with the corresponding permanent tooth
in either of these groups. It is also obvious that the resemblance is
greater between EHoanthropus and Homo than between the former and
any known genus of apes. In other words, the permanent tooth of
the extinct Eoanthropus is almost identical in shape with the tem-
porary milk-tooth of the existing Homo. Hence it forms another illus-
tration of the well-known law in mammalian palaeontology, that the
permanent teeth of an ancestral race agree more closely in pattern with
the milk teeth than with the permanent teeth of its modified descend-
ants -~ (p; OL).

DuckwortH, Dr. [Discussion of the Piltdown skull]. Abstr. Proc. Geol.
Soc. London, session 1912-1913, p. 24. December 28, 1912. (See also
Quart. Journ. Geol. Soc. London, vol. 69, p. 149. March, 1913. Issued
April 25, 1913.)

“It was justifiable to associate the various fragments as parts of
one human skull, and the presence of so many simian characters in
one and the same specimen was a point of great significance.”


24 SMITHSONIAN MISCELLANEOUS COLLECTIONS VOL. 65


Exuiot, G. F. Scott. Prehistoric Man and His Story. London and Phila-
delphia, 1915, pp. I-XIV, 1-308, 64 illustr. and diagrams.


Piltdown woman, pp. 125-129. “ The jaw in some respects resembles
that of a young chimpanzee .. . . Though there are a few distinctively
ape-like characters, most of those points in which the skull differs
from modern man can be detected in one or another of the primitive
races. If so, she is the only representative known of one of the very
earliest strains of mankind, perhaps the very first known of the original
‘generalized world-ranging type’ from which all other varieties were
derived” (pp. 128-129).


Forestier, A. Periods of Prehistoric Man: Pleistocene Types, Weapons and
Tools. Illustrated London News, vol. 143, pp. 206-297. Numerous figures.
August 23, 1913.

Accepts Keith’s reconstruction of jaw.

GIUFFRIDA-RUGGERI, V. Dawson (Ch.) e Woodward (A. S.). On the dis-
covery of a palaeolithic skull and mandible in a flint-bearing gravel over-
lying the Wealden (Hastings Beds) at Piltdown, Fletching (Sussex).
Arch. Antrop. e Etnol., Firenze, vol. 43, pp. 184-186. 1013.

Review. Doubts the distinctness of the genus Eoanthropus from
Homo. “In ogni caso sin d’ora appare che |’ ‘Eoanthropus’ non é un
fossile ben chiaro, como nuovo genere, e che molto probabilmente
rientrera nei fossili gia noti: forse il Gibraltar é il pit vicino.”

Grecory, WittiAM Kine. The Dawn Man of Piltdown, England. Am. Mus.
Journal, vol. 14, pp. 189-200, figs. 1-11. May, 1914.

Accepts association of skull with jaw. Compare fig. 5 with text fig.
in present article.

Happon, A. C. Eoanthropus dawsoni. Science, n. s. vol. 37, pp. 91-92.
January 17, 1013.

HroiicKa, A. The most ancient skeletal remains of man. Ann. Rep. Smiths.
Inst., 1913, pp. 401-552, pls. 1-41, figs. I-12.

Eoanthropus, pp. 500-509. “It represents doubtless one of the most
interesting finds relating to man’s antiquity, though seemingly the last
word has not yet been said as to its date and especially as to the
physical characteristics of the being it stands for.”

Irvinc, A. Some recent work on later quarternary geology and anthropology,
with its bearing on the question of “ pre-boulder-clay man.” Journ.
Royal Anthrop. Inst. Gt. Brit. and Ireland, vol. 44, pp. 385-303. July-
December, 1914.

“The hominid Eoanthropus dawsoni (Piltdown) is undoubtedly of
pre-chalky boulder-clay age” (p. 393).

KeitH, A. [Discussion of the Piltdown skull.] Abstr. Proc. Geol. Soc.
London, session I912-13, p. 23. December 28, 1912. (See also Quart.
Journ. Geol. Soc. London, vol. 69, p. 148. March, 1913. Issued April
25, 1013.)

Accepts association of skull with jaw but considers that recon-
struction of jaw is made to be too much like chimpanzee.


Keita, A. Ape-man or Modern Man? The two Piltdown skull recon-
structions. Illustrated London News, vol. 143, p. 245, figs. 1-6. August
16, I913.

Jaw ‘reconstructed to hold a human dentition.

Keiro, A. Ape-man or Modern Man? The two Piltdown skull recon-
structions. The case for Professor Arthur Keith’s reconstruction. Illus-
trated London News, vol. 143, p. 282. August 23, 1913. 4 figures.

Reconstruction of jaw to resemble as nearly as possible that of Homo.


NO. 12 JAW OF PILTDOWN MAN—MILLER 25


KeirH, A. The Piltdown Skull and Brain Cast. Nature, vol. 92, pp. 197-1099,
figs. 1-3. October 16, 1913.


Keitu, Artur. The Piltdown Skull and Brain Cast. Nature, vol. 92, p. 292.
November 6, 10913.


Keira, ArrHur. The Piltdown Skull and Brain Cast. Nature, vol. 92, pp.
345-346. November 20, 1913.


KeitH, A. [Discussion of new reconstruction of skull of Eoanthropus.]
Abstr. Proc. Geol. Soc. London, session 1913-14, p. 30. December 31,
1913. (See also Quart. Journ. Geol. Soc. London, vol. 70, p. 98, April
25, 1914.)

Admits difficulties in associating jaw, skull and canine as parts of
one individual, but regards all as representing one species: “ Two other
difficulties he had encountered were (1) the presence of a pointed pro-
jecting canine in the jaw and an articular eminence at the glenoid fossa
of the skull; and (2) a much-worn canine tooth in a jaw in which the
third molar tooth—according to the published X-ray photograph of the
Piltdown mandible—was not completely erupted. (See Underwood,
December 31, 1913.) He agreed that all three parts—skull, jaw, and
canine tooth—must be assigned to Eoanthropus, but he was not con-
vinced that they could all belong to the same individual.”

KeitH, A. Problems relating to the teeth of the earlier forms of pre-
historic man. Proc. Roy. Soc. Medicine, vol. 6, Odont. sect., pp. 103-119,
figs. I-10. I9Q13.

Piltdown mandible, pp. 116-110.

KeirH, ArtHuR. The Significance of the Discovery at Piltdown. Bedrock,
vol. 2, pp. 435-453, figs. 1-3. January, 1914.

“There is one way out of this difficulty—that suggested by Sir E.
Ray Lankester and urged by Professor Waterston—namely, that the
mandible and skull are parts of different kinds of beings; the mandible
that of some unknown anthropoid, and the skull that of a primitive
form of man. When we seek to get out of our difficulty in this way
we raise others. The molar teeth in the Piltdown mandible are essen-
tially human in appearance; the texture of the mandible is similar to
that of the skull. The markings for the temporal muscle, which acts
on the jaw, are different to any ever seen in a human skull and indicate
that the mandible should be of a peculiar character—such as has been
found.”

Kerru, ArtHur. The reconstruction of fossil human skulls. Journ. Royal


Anthrop. Isnt. Gt. Brit. and Ireland, vol. 44, pp. 12-31, figs. 1-16. January-


June, 1914.
Describes process of reconstructing the Piltdown skull.
Kerro, Artuur. The Antiquity of Man. London and Philadelphia, 1915,
(preface dated July), pp. I-XX, 1-519, 189 figures and diagrams.
Piltdown skull, pp. 293-511; the most elaborate discussion yet pub-
lished. Account of mandible with special reference to simian features,
pp. 430-452 (drawings reproduced in figs. 165 and 167 should be com-
pared with photographs in present article). Account of teeth, pp. 453-
457. Conclusions: “ Thus in our scrutiny and reconstruction of the
Piltdown mandible, although we have come across many details of
structure which seem to suggest that it formed part of an anthropoid
rather than a human being, we have met with no feature which clearly
debars it from being placed with the skull .... our difficulties are
infinitely greater if we try to allocate the skull to a human being and
the mandible to an unknown kind of anthropoid (p. 453) .... Thus
in the manner in which it has become worn by use the Piltdown canine
differs from all known human and anthropoid [mandibular] teeth (p.


206 SMITHSONIAN MISCELLANEOUS COLLECTIONS VOL. 65


459). The molar teeth leave us in no doubt; they are human. If the
question is asked: What are the characters of these teeth which are so
essentially human? it must be confessed that a direct and explicit answer
is not easily returned .... However we may waver about the Pilt-
down mandible, the clear direct evidence of the molar teeth comes ever
to our aid” (pp. 469-470). Places Eoanthropus on a line distinct from
those leading to Homo heidelbergensis and H. neanderthalensis on the
one hand and to modern man on the other (p. 501). (See Pilgrim and
Sutcliffe.) “That we should discover such a race [human, with canine
teeth pointed, projecting, and shaped as in anthropoid apes], has been
an article of faith in the anthropologist’s creed ever since Darwin’s
time” (p. 459). Received too late for notice in body of text.


LANKESTER, Ray. [Discussion of the Piltdown skull.] Abstr. Proc. Geol.
Soc. London, session 1912-13, pp. 22-23. December 28, 1912. (See also
Quart. Journ. Geol. Soc. London, vol. 69, pp. 147-148. March, 1013.
Issued April 25, 1913.)

“He did not consider it certain that the lower jaw and the skull
belonged to the same individual.”

Maccurpy, G. G. Ancestor Hunting: the Significance of the Piltdown Skull.
Amer. Anthrop. n. s. vol. 15, pp. 248-256, April-June, 1913.

Morr, J. Rew. The Piltdown Skull. The Times, London, December 25, 1912,
p. 8.

“Tn my opinion, then, Mr. Dawson is to be congratulated on having


made the immensely important discovery of the remains of one of the
beings who made the eolithic flint implements.” (See Sutcliffe.)

Munro, Ropert. Prehistoric Britain (Home University of Modern Knowl-
edge), pp. I-VI, 1-256, figs. 1-24. 1913.

Eoanthropus, pp. 25, 52-55, 70-74, figs. 8-9. Accepts association of
skull with jaw. °

Neurinc, A. Ueber einen menschlichen Molar aus dem Diluvium von
Taubach bei Weimar. Zeitschr. fir Ethnologie, vol. 27, pp. 573-577, figs.
1-4. October, 1805.

The author regards this tooth as human, but is unable to compare
it with anything except the first lower molar of a chimpanzee. Accord-
ing to the figures it almost exactly resembles the corresponding tooth
of Pan vetus. Size not so great: 11.7 x 9.9 mm. In the actual speci-
men the similarity to m: of Pan is said to be still greater than in the
drawing.

Pircrim, Guy E. New Siwalik primates and their bearing on the evolution
of man and the Anthropoidea. Rec. Geol. Surv. India, vol. 45, pp. 1-74,
pls. 1-4, figs. 1-2.

Accepts association of skull with jaw and places Eoanthropus on line
leading to Homo neanderthalensis. (See Keith, 1915, and Sutcliffe. )

Puccioni, Netto. Appunti intorno al frammento mandibolare fossile di Pilt-
down (Sussex). Archivio per l’Antropologiae la Etnologia, vol. 43,


pp. 167-175: 10913.

Jaw and skull not from one individual. Jaw more like Neanderthal
man than like chimpanzee. “ Mi sembra pertanto indubitabile che la
mandibola in questione appartenga ad un tipo rozzo, a mio parere piu
simile al tipo di Neanderthal che non al Troglodites e mi sembra
altresi che non si possa considerare probabile che i caratteri grossolani
di questa mandibola si accompagnassero ai caratteri relativamente fini
(assenza dell arcate sopraorbitarie, fronte alta e dritta ecc.) dei fram-
menti cranici che le furono rinvenuti accanto: ond’é, che concordemente
a quanto pensano due eminenti scienziati inglesi (il Lankester e il
Waterston), io sono di opinione che la mandibola ed il cranio abbiano
probabilmente appartenuto a due individui distinti” (p. 175).


te et Se


NO. 12 JAW OF PILTDOWN MAN—MILLER 27


Puccroni, Netto. Morphologie du maxillaire inférieur. L’ Anthropologie,
vol. 25, pp. 291-321, figs. 1-3. 1914.


Reaffirms view that Piltdown mandible is less simian than Smith
Woodward makes it appear (p. 315).


Pycrart, W. P. The most ancient inhabitant of England: the newly-found
Sussex Man. Illustrated London News, vol. 141, p. 958. December 28,
1912.

Pycrart, W. P. Ape-Man or Modern Man? The two Piltdown skull
reconstructions. The case for Dr. A. Smith Woodward’s reconstruction.
Illustrated London News, vol. 143, p. 282. August 23, 1913. Four figures.

“But no one competent to express an opinion would accept this
interpretation [that skull is man and jaw ape].

Rosinson, Louis. The Story of the Chin. Knowledge n. s., vol. 10, pp. 410-
420. November, 1913. (Reprinted in Smithsonian Report for 1914, pp.
599-609, pls. 1-12, 1915.)


Piltdown jaw (symphyseal region) figured (pl. 7) but not mentioned
in the text. -


Scuwatsr, G. Kritische Besprechung von Boule’s Werk: “L’Homme fossile
de la Chapelle-aux-Saints.” Zeitschr. fur Morphologie und Anthro-
pologie, vol. 16, pp. 227-610. January 31, 1914.

Piltdown skull and jaw, pp. 603-4. Not willing to accept the suggestion
that skull and jaw did not belong to one individual, but considers the
facts too uncertain to form basis of positive opinion.

SHaAttock, S. G. Morbid thickening of the calvaria; and the reconstruction
of bone once abnormal; a pathological basis for the study of the thickening
observed in certain pleistocene crania. Seventeenth International Congress
of Medicine, London, 1913, sect. 3, pt. 2, pp. 3-46, pls. 1-4, text figs. 1-3.
1914.

Piltdown skull, pp. 42-46. “But to conclude. Without making any
dogmatic statement, certain details of the Piltdown calvaria suggest the
possibility of a pathological process having underlain the thickened con-
dition” (p. 46). Accepts association of skull with jaw, and regards the
third lower molar as unerupted (p. 43). See Underwood, December
31, 1913.

SmitH, G. Ertiot. Appendix [to paper by Dawson and Woodward]. Abstr.
Proc. Geol. Soc. London, session 1912-13, p. 22. December 28, 1912.

Abstract of paper mentioned under next title. The last paragraph
of abstract does not occur in full account. Te ige “Uns Zire me
grounds whatever for supposing that this simian jaw and human brain-
cast did not belong to one and the same individual, who was probably
a right-handed female.”

SmitrH, Grarron Ettiot. Preliminary report on the cranial cast [of the
Piltdown skull]. Quart. Journ. Geol. Soc. London, vol. 69, pp. 145-147.
March, 1913. Issued April 25, 1913.

Situ, G. Exxior. The Piltdown Skull. Nature, vol. 92, p. 131. October
2, 1913.

Accepts association of skull with jaw and adds: ‘The small and
archaic brain and thick skull are undoubtedly human in character, but
the mandible, in spite of the human molars it bears, is more simian
than human. So far from being an impossible combination of char-
acters, this association of brain and simian features is precisely what
I anticipated in my address to the British Association at Dundee
(Nature, September 26, 1912, p. 125), some months before I knew of
the existence of the Piltdown skull, when I argued that in the evolution
of man the development of the brain must have led the way. The


28 SMITHSONIAN MISCELLANEOUS COLLECTIONS VOL. 65


growth in intelligence and in the powers of discrimination no doubt
led to a definite cultivation of the aesthetic sense, which, operating
through sexual selection, brought about a gradual refinement of the
features.”

SmitH, G. Ettior. The Piltdown Skull and Brain Cast. Nature, vol. 92, pp.


267-268. October 30, I913.


SmitH, G. Ettior. The Piltdown Skull and Brain Cast. Nature, vol. 92, pp.
318-319. November 13, 1913.

Smiru, G. Errior. The controversies concerning the interpretation and
meaning of the remains of the dawn-man found near Piltdown. Nature,
vol. 92, pp. 468-469. December 18, 1913.

“ There is definite internal evidence that the jaw is not really an ape’s;
the teeth it bears are human...

Smitu, G. Erttior. On the exact determination of the median plane of the
Piltdown skull. Abstr. Proc. Geol. Soc. London, session 1913-14, p. 20,
December 31, 1913. (See also Quart. Journ. Geol. Soc. London, vol. 70,
Pp. 93-97, figs. 4-6, April 25, 1914.)

SmitH, G. Ettiotr. The controversies concerning the interpretation and mean-
ing of the remains of the dawn-man found near Piltdown. Mem. and
Proc. Manchester Lit. and Philos. Soc., vol. 58, pp. VII-IX. March 31,
IOI4.

“That the jaw and cranial fragments .... belonged to the same
creature there had never been any doubt on the part of those who have
seriously studied the matter” (p. VIII). The author believes that:
“When man was first evolved the pace of evolution must have been
phenomenally rapid.” He alludes to “the turmoil incident to the
inauguration of the Pleistocene Period.” (p. IX).

SmitH, G. Erutor. The Significance of the Discovery at Piltdown. Bedrock,
vol. 3, pp. 1-17. April, 1914.

A detailed criticism of Professor Keith’s views.

Sottas, W. J. Ancient Hunters and their Modern Representatives. Ed. 2,
London, 1915, pp. I-XIV, 1-501, 314 figs.

Piltdown man, pp. 49-56. “Some have regarded such a being as an
improbable monster and have suggested that the jaw may not have
belonged to the skull, but to a true ape. The chances against this are,
however, SO overwhelming that the conjecture may be dismissed as
unworthy of serious consideration. Nor on reflection need the com-
bination of characters presented by Eoanthropus occasion surprise. It
had, indeed, been long previously anticipated as an almost necessary
stage in the course of human development” (p. 54).

SutcuirFe, W. H. A criticism of some modern tendencies in prehistoric
anthropology. Mem. & Proc. Manchester Lit. and Philos. Soc., vol. 57,
no. 7, pp. I-25, pls. 1-2. June 24, 1914.

Skull and jaw “undoubtedly belonging to the same individual.”
Eoanthropus placed on line leading to Homo sapiens, pl. 1. (See Keith,
1915, and Pilgrim.) Eoliths produced by natural agencies. (Seé Moir.)

Tuacxer, A.G. The Significance of the Piltdown Discovery. Science Prog-
ress, vol. 8, pp. 275-200. October, 1913.

Accepts association of skull with jaw.

TyrELt, G. W. The Sussex Skull. Knowledge, vol. 36, p. 61, February, 1913.


Account of paper by Dawson and Woodward. Name Eoanthropus
not printed.


NO. 12 : JAW OF PILTDOWN MAN—MILLER 29


Unvberwoop, ArtHuR S. The Piltdown Skull. British Journal of Dental
Science, vol. 56, pp. 650-652, 3 plates (not numbered). October 1, 1913.
Accepts association of skull with jaw, but shows by means of radio-
graphs the exact similarity of the jaw to that of a chimpanzee. Does
not especially discuss the characters of the molars.


Unverwoop, A. S. [Discussion of “ Supplementary Note” on Piltdown skull.]
Abstr. Proc. Geol. Soc. London, session 1913-14, pp. 30-31. December
31, 1913. (See also Quart. Journ. Geol. Soc. London, vol. 70, p. 99. April

25, 1914.)
“The sockets of the third molar were not those of an erupting tooth,


the roots had been quite completed, and the tooth was in its final
position at death.” (See Keith, December 31, 1913.)


Vram, U. G. Le reconstruzioni dell’ Eoanthropus Dawsoni, Woodward.
Boll. Soc. Zool. Ital., Roma, ser. 3, vol. 2, pp. 195-198. 1913.


Accepts association of jaw with skull, but considers that a new

species should not have been based on such incomplete material.
Watxkuorr, Dr. Entstehung und Verlauf der phylogenetischen Umformung
der mensclichen Kiefer seit dem Tertiar und ihre Bedeutung ftir die
Pathologie der Zahne. Deutsche Monatsschr. ftir Zahnheilkunde, vol.

~ 31, PP. 947-979, figs. 1-9. December, 1913.
Piltdown jaw, pp. 971-979. Accepts association of skull and jaw.
Regards the jaw as a confirmation of his views on the origin of the chin.
e Das Kieferbruchsttick von Piltdown wird damit zu einem neuen, sehr
wichtigen Beweise ftir meine Theorie der Kinnbildung, nach welcher
eine Reduktion des gesammten Kiefers, insbesondere aber des Kiefer-
k6rpers in dorsaler Richtung stattfand mit Ausnahme der vorderen
Basalpartie, welche unter dem Einfluss der Muskeln steht, die bei der
artikulierten Sprache tatig sind” (p. 974).


WatersToN, Pror. [Discussion of the Piltdown skull.]} Abstr. Proc. Geol.
Soc. London, session 1912-13, p. 25. December 28, 1912. (See also Quart.
Journ. Geol. Soc. London, vol. 609, p. 150. March, 1913. Issued April
25, 1913.)

Very difficult to believe that the two specimens could have come from
the same individual.


Waterston, Davin. The Piltdown Mandible. Nature, vol. 92, p. 319, figs. 1-3.
November 13, 1913.


Compares with chimpanzee and concludes that . . it seems to
me to be as inconsequent to refer the mandible and the cranium to the
same individual as it would be to articulate a chimpanzee foot with
the bones of an essentially human thigh and leg.”


Woopwarp, A. SmitH. The Piltdown Skull. Brit. Med. Journ., vol. 2 for
1913, p. 762. September 20, 1913.


Abstract of lecture before the British Newneion at Birmingham on
September 16. Announcement of discovery of canine tooth (see also
next title). “As to the question whether the ape-like mandible belonged
to the skull, it could only be said that its molar teeth were typically
human, its muscle markings such as might be expected, and that it
was found in the gravel near the skull.” “The Piltdown man might

. well have been the direct ancestor of modern man, connecting
him with the undiscovered tertiary apes, whose rounded skulls must
have resembled those of the immature young of existing apes.”


“


30 SMITHSONIAN MISCELLANEOUS COLLECTIONS VOL. 65


Woopwarp, A. SmitH. The Piltdown Skull. Nature, vol. 92, pp. 110-111.
September 25, 1913.

Abstract of lecture before the British Association at Birmingham on
September 16. Announcement of discovery of canine tooth. “ This
tooth corresponds exactly in shape with the lower canine of an ape,
and its worn face shows that it worked upon the upper canine in the
true ape fashion.”


Woopwarp, A. SmitH. Note on the Piltdown Man (Eoanthropus dawsont).
Geol. Mag. n.s., dec. 5, vol. 10, pp. 433-434, pl. 15. October, 1913.


Woopwarp, A Smitu. A Guide to the Fossil Remains of Man in the British
Museum, pp. 1-33, pls. 1-4, figs. I-I2. IQI5.


Contains photographs of the Piltdown remains (pls. 1-4). These
should be compared with the wash drawings in Dawson and Woodward,
April 25, 1913, particularly as regards the teeth.


NO. I2 JAW OF PILTDOWN MAN—MILLER Syl


EXPLANATION OF PLATES
PLATE I
All figures about 34 natural size. Casts.

Fic. 1. Pansp. Africa: no exact locality. No. 84655, U. S. National Museum.
Fic. 2. Paw vetus, England: Piltdown.
Fic. 3. Pan sp. Africa: French Congo. No. 174700, U. S. National Museum.

The casts of the African specimens have been mutilated as nearly

as possible in the same manner as the fossil.


PLATE 2
All figures about 34 natural size. Casts, except nos. 1”, 2” and 4.
1. Pansp. Africa: no exact locality. No. 84655, U. S. National Museum.
Fic. 2. Pan vetus, England: Piltdown.
Fic. 3. Pan sp. Africa: French Congo. No. 174700, U. S. National Museum.
Fic. 4. Pan sp. Africa: southern Kameroon. No. 176226, U. S. National
Museum.
Fig. 2” is copied from the photograph published by Dr. Woodward
in the Guide to Fossil Remains of Man in the British Museum, pl. 4.
Note that enamel on lingual side of metaconid has flaked off from mi
in fig. 4.


Fic.


PLATE 3
Skull greatly reduced, mandible about 34 natural size.
Homo sp. Skull, North American Indian, No. 262540, U. S. National Museum ;
mandible, Mongolian, No. 278783, U. S. National Museum.
To show the association of cranial and mandibular characters normal
in the Hominide.
PLATE 4
Skull greatly reduced, mandible about 34 natural size.
Pan sp. African: southern Kameroon. No. 176226, U. S. National Museum.
To show the association of cranial and mandibular characters normal
in the Pongidae.
PLATE 5
All figures about 24 natural size. Nos. 1 and 3 from casts.
Mandible of four adult individuals of recent Pan to show individual
variation. Note particularly the symphysis, the sigmoid notch and the
angular region.
Fic. 1. Pan sp. Africa: no exact locality. No. 84655, U. S. National
Museum.
Fic. 2. Pansp. Africa: French Congo. No. 174710, U. S. National Museum.
Fic. 3. Pansp. Africa: French Congo. No. 174700, U. S. National Museum.
Fic. 4. Pan sp. Africa: southern Kameroon. No. 176244, U. S. National
Museum. (Coronoid process restored.)


SMITHSONIAN MISCELLANEOUS COLLECTIONS VOL. 65, NO. 12, PL. 1


1 and 8, PAN SP. AFRICA (RECENT), X 4
2, PAN VETUS. ENGLAND (PLEISTOCENE), x 7


The casts of the African specimens have been mutilated as nearly as possible in the same
manner as the fossil


SMITHSONIAN MISCELLANEOUS COLLECTIONS VOL. 65, NO. 12, PL. 2


1, 8, and 4, PAN SP. AFRICA (RECENT), x #
2, PAN VETUS. ENGLAND (PLEISTOCENE),  ?


The casts of the African specimens have been mutilated as nearly as possible in the same
manner as the fossil


SMITHSONIAN MISCELLANEOUS COLLECTIONS VOLE. 65, NO. 12, PE:


HOMO SP. (RECENT). SKULL GREATLY REDUCED, MANDIBLE X Be
To show the association of cranial and mandibular characters normal in the Hominide


SMITHSONIAN MISCELLANEOUS COLLECTIONS VOL. 65, NO. 12, PL.


PAN SP. (RECENT) SKULL GREATLY REDUCED, MANDIBLE x #
To show the association of cranial and mandibular characters normal in the Pongide


SMITHSONIAN MISCELLANEOUS COLLECTIONS VOL. 65, NO. 12, PL. 5


PAN SPP. (RECENT), 3
To show variations in form of mandible


SMITHSONIAN MISCELLANEOUS COLLECTIONS
