Principles of Political Economy, Vol. II
John Stuart Mill (1848)
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): John Stuart Mill's 'Principles of Political Economy with some of their Applications to Social Philosophy', Volume II (first edition; London: John W. Parker, 1848). Scan via Internet Archive. Library stamps trimmed from the front; runs complete through the volume. The publisher's advertisements at the back are trimmed. This 1848 edition is in the public domain.

========================================================================

SOME OF THEIR APPLICATIONS TO SOCIAL PHILOSOPHY.


BY


JOIN SMOG AIR WII,


IN TWO VOLUMES.


WO, Wit
LONDON:


JOHN W. PARKER, WEST STRAND,


M.DCCC,XLVIII,


a IIOL 1 VLISHSAINA


CONTENTS


THE SECOND VOLUME.


BOOK III.


EXCHANGE.—(Continued.)


Cuaprer VII. Of Money.


) 1) EuRPosEs|of a Circulating: Medium orrrc.cccercstscdrevescersecvscvesieetcs a
2. Gold and silver, why fitted for those purposes ..........c..cccceeeeeeeeee 5
3. Money a mere contrivance for facilitating exchanges, which

does not affect the laws Of Value ........cc.ccccccsceesssadeecescevenen sees 8


Cuarter VIII. Of the Value of Money, as dependent on
Demand and Supply.


§ 1. Value of Money, an ambigtious eXpression ...........cccseeeeeseseen eee 11
2. The value of money depends, ceteris paribus, on its quantity 12
3. — together with the rapidity of circulation «0.0.0.0... 17
4, Explanations and limitations of this principle ..............c.cc.cee 19


Cuaprer IX. Of the Value of Money, as dependent on Cost
of Production.


§ 1. The value of money, in a state of freedom, conforms to the


value of the bullion contaimed i it .........cccccsscsseceeseseeeeeeseoees 23

2. — which is determined by the cost of production 10.0.0... 26
3. This law, how related to the principle laid down in the pre-

28


COIN PKCNAP LOA ccs cca cores Soc tasyins sacnucea oak casnuase cess aa Ear orem Sores


Vi CONTENTS.


Cuarrer X. Ofa Double Standard, and Subsidiary Coins.


tne
UNIVERSITA pL toni.


Page
§ 1. Objections toa double standard ; ne FOR
} 2. The use of the two metals as money, how obtained withou
ti making both of them legal tender ..............ccccccsseecessseseeeeees 34
i:
Cuarter XI. Of Credit, as a Substitute for Money.
) § 1. Credit not a creation but a transfer of the means of
PROC UC tl On yeer eee ete rane hone ane Mel TS 36
2. In what manner it assists production ..........c.ccscessesseesreeseee eo 37
3. Function of credit in economizing the use of money .........---- 39
4. Bills of exchange 41
5. Promissory notes eC
i 6. Deposits and cheques a7
cD a . .
Cuaprer XII. Influence of Credit on Prices.
j § 1. The influence of bank notes, bills, and cheques, on price, 2
t
' part of the influence of Credit .....ccccccccccc.-....... 50
ji 2. Credit a purchasing power similar to money wen
3. Effects of great extensions and contractions of credit. Phe-
nomena of a commercial crisis analyzed sts seen Rates, 53
4. Bills a more powerful instrument for acting on prices than
book credits, and bank notes than LOS ee croncs aie econ ROOD 58
9d. — the distinction of little practical importance ............0. ee
6. Cheques an instrument for acting on prices, equally powerful
Nrathibanlc uoteswar ck me cterene ee eee ie eT mea 67
7. No generic distinction between bank notes and other forms of
ChedIU sah eect ner a Relene ae a ie or bcn tere Jace sees 69
Cuaprrer XIII. Of an Inconvertible Paper Currency.
72
79
3. Examination of the doctrine that an inconvertible currency is
safe if representing actual PEO PEN byw pee ee cinch me eerceansas 77


4,


— of the doctrine that an increase of the currency pro-
motes -industiy, (issue ee tk Sheba deetberes «5 > BIL


§


a


Za


§


CONTENTS. vil


Page
5. Depreciation of currency a tax on the community, and a
frandson\ Creditors wsrscce se cecescateseer teenerestees coe eee ane Canes 83
6. Examination of some pleas for committing this frand ............ 84
Cuaprer XIV. Of Excess of Supply.
1. Can there be an oversupply of commodities generally? .. 89
2. The supply of commodities in general, cannot exceed the
POW CrpOtgpurchase sere ccscwsrestecse sues ceavesconeesereecss sees s etsereanesseeaa- es 91
3. — never does exceed the inclination to consume 92
4, Origin and explanation of the notion of general oversupply... 94
Cuaprer XV. Of a Measure of Value.
1. A Measure of Exchange Value, in what sense possible ........ 98
OuAuMeasureloim Costiot EnOGUCLIONUT aetereersyaticerestectceereentnesrestsens 100


Cuaprer XVI. Of some Peculiar Cases of Value.


1. Values of commodities which have a joint cost of production 104

2. Values of the different kinds of agricultural produce................ 107
Cuarter XVII. Of International Trade.

1. Cost of Production not the regulator of international values.... 110


2. Interchange of commodities between distant places, deter-
mined by differences not in their absolute, but in their
comparative, cost Of PrOdUCtiON ......ceescscesecseeetesereeteneesereees 112

3. The direct benefits of commerce consist in increased efficiency
of the productive powers of the world

4, — not in a vent for exports, nor in the gains of merchants 115

5. Indirect benefits of commerce, economical and moral ; still

@ greater than the direct


Cuaprer XVIII. Of International Values.


1. The values of imported commodities depend on the terms of


sntermationall ImterCHAan ge c......cs..cecerecssncveoncseeerasesseensterevsntscanene 121
— which depend on the Equation of International Demand... 123


bo


3. Influence of cost of carriage on international values ............... 128


; CONTENTS.
C
4 Page
: fs 4, The law of values which holds between two countries, and two }
ae & commodities, holds of any greater number .... 129
tr 3 5. Effect of improvements in production, on international values 133 ¢
= 6. The cost to a country of its imports, on what circumstances
OPEN OM Ges tases oss ccpa esac artack Seve cee cen a cnssxuaeavenes Sisienseencesdavaced 138
4
|
Cuaprer XIX. Of Money, considered as an
; Imported Commodity.
§ 1. Money imported in two modes; as a commodity, and as a
ri MNedUIMYOLREX CHANG wre cee eee eect 141
+


2. As a commodity, it obeys the same laws of value as other im-
portedicommoditiess nee en eer. oe 142


3. Its value does not depend exclusively on its cost of pro-
duction at the mines


SS souscsenth anise tyueescancssmaqetseeicn wivaesesacshaeareoy 145
fy
. Cuaprer XX. Of the Foreign Exchanges.
' @
§ 1. Purposes for which money passes from country to country
Wy as a medium of exchange 147
2. Mode of adjusting international payments through the ex-
Changes WEG ENO WRG RE eee eth 147
3. Distinction between variations in the exchanges which are self-
adjusting, and those which can only be rectified through
Nua s sin rcar ae Wrath a) a 153


Cuaprer XXI. Of the Distribution of the Precious Metals
through the Commercial World.


§ 1. The substitution of money for barter makes no difference in


exports and imports, nor in the law of international values 156
2. The preceding theorem further illu


Strate tre: seer stnce es 160

3} The precious metals as money, are of the same value, arid dis-
tribute themselves according to the same law, with the
precious metals as a, commodity......... : . 164


4. International payments not of a commercial character....


CONTENTS. 1x


: Cuaprer XXII. Influence of Currency on the Exchanges
be’ and on Foreign Trade.


Page
§ 1. Variations in the exchange, which originate in the currency 168
2. Effect of a sudden increase of a metallic currency, or of the
sudden creation of bank notes or other substitutes formoney 169
3. Effect of the increase of an inconvertible paper currency. Real
GING | THUD G>=IIRWIVEE) co gcoccqbodussen poccdogu ec acaoNscoCC necSoncsSodcoodocNNen 174


o


CuarTer XXIII. Of the Rate of Interest.


§ 1. The rate of interest depends on the demand and supply of
aE) Sggcnconoccocsan cee con cou OOgOSEOREY a: de acts graipeenco ced ocebaueuocroncber cocaLecene 178
2. Circumstances which determine the permanent demand and


supply of loans 179
3. Circumstances which determine the fluctuations...............00 182
4, The rate of interest not really connected with the value of
money, but offen confounded With it..........cccccccecccescreceeeeeeenes 185
: 5. The rate of interest determines the price of land and of secu-
TUBLES gawenaavecs sveaseancs oacqsednconeectosteesennsrsanercace seasvaneegaceeseesckesstaraces 188


Cuapter XXIV. Of the Regulation of a Convertible
Paper Currency.


§ 1. Two contrary theories respecting the influence of bank issues 190


2. Examination of each 193
3. Reasons for thinking that the Currency Act of 1844 produces
a part of the beneficial effect intended by it .........cee 197
4, — but produces mischiefs more than equivalent ................. 201
5. Should the issue of bank notes be confined to a single estab-
JBYS}AVEREAN PP  cocacognnnncrisansbiocesorosctccbucncoocceacoRcnoes cerca rensbagcanSencoRACnA 214
6. Should the holders of notes be protected in any peculiar
manner against failure of payment ?.........c.cccceccsesesesessseseteeeess 216
CuapTeR XXV. Of the Competition of different
Countries in the same Market.
§ 1. Causes which enable one country to undersell another ... 219
2. Low wages one of those causes ..........00. PB ssobocerssntecooood roo 222


3.


_— when peculiar to certain branches of industry ..........


CONTENTS.


4, — but not when common OSB een eee Pecans dee LOE


5


Some anomalous cases of trading communities examined


Cuaprer XXVI. Of Distribution, as affected by


Hachange.


§ 1. Exchange and Money make no difference in the law of wages


§ 1. Introductory Remarks


Cuapter II.


§


Oh ain NE TE MPI — scacoscooo!ongo9ne.92u1 coanoagacogconoN coos coeEO SERRA KEE
SUS morsndthel awa faprotits mecense ecw. eee weererecne cee ee,


BOOK IY.


ERAN


Page
224
226
228


231
234
235


INFLUENCE OF THE PROGRESS OF SOCIETY ON
PRODUCTION AND DISTRIBUTION.


Cuarter I.


State of Wealth.


2. Tendency of the progress of society towards increased com-


cs


mand over the


increased capacity of co-operation


powers of nature; increased security; and


Population on Values and Prices.


all commodities


Tendency to a decline of the value and cost of production of


- — except the products of agriculture and mining, which have


a tendency to rise


- — that tendency from time to time counteracted by improve-


ments in production


. Effect of the progress of society in moderating fluctuations of


. &


value


xamination of the influence of speculators, and in particular


of corn dealers


General Characteristics of a Progressive


Influence of the Progress of Industry and


CONTENTS. Xl


Cuarter III. Influence of the Progress of Industry and
Population on Rents, Profits, and Wages.


Page
oe 1. First case; population increasing, capital stationary ................ 262
. Second case; capital increasing, population stationary 266

3. Third case; population and capital increasing equally, the
ants of productionvstationanys: punwrecs.euccenetes terrseterseeseste 267

4, Fourth case; the arts of production progressive, capital and
population stationary... ees 268
. Fifth case; all the three elements progressive ............:ccc000 275


CuartTer IV. Of the Tendency of Profits to a Minimum.


¥ 1. Doctrine of Adam Smith on the competition of capital ............ 280
2. Doctrine of Mr. Wakefield respecting the field of employment 282
3. What determines the minimum rate of profit... 284
4. In opulent countries, profits habitually near to the mini-

TUR VRID = ese ct care see cea Re CaaS SoU eT ale RES TRO TE ae calle aero 287
5, — prevented from reaching it by commercial revulsions........ 290
6: — by, improvements) im produc bom Sesser .c.ycceeceeeeceneteesecceeeeceseaee 292
7. — by the importation of cheap necessaries and instruments.... 294
85 ——nby the enn pratlonsotcapitelagec.seseicereccsteestysterereeeneeees 296


Cuapter V. Consequences of the Tendency of Profits
to a Minimum.


§ 1. Abstraction of capital not necessarily a national loss 299
2. In opulent countries, the extension of machinery not detri-
mental but beneficial to labourers 0.2.0... ..ccceeccccersscveen 302
Cuaprer VI. Of the Stationary State.
\ 1. Stationary state of wealth and population, dreaded and depre-
Cated| Dy WELCCTS ae gcse esteem tae teres SRR ES eto a 306


Oe ——abubo bans elie desire Clare eeeeneatee eee een un ean Ee 308


O9 SONTENTS.
X11 CONTE


Cuaprer VII. On the Probable Futurity of the Labouring
Classes.


| § 1. The theory of dependence and protection no longer applicable pe
aH to the condition of modern SOCiety 2... ise csccscsseeeeserse, 313

' 2. The future well-being of the labouring classes principally
dependent on their own mental cultivation........0..ccce. 318


3. Probable effects of improved intelligence in causing a better

adjustment of population— W ould be promoted by the social
Ind ependencerOfawOULEDW Matrramsectenkctetnen veeeney rar tesayereenerne re, 321

4. Tendency of society towards the disuse of the relation of
hiring and service .
. Examples of the association of the labourers in the profits of
industrial undertakings
rH 6. Probable future developement of this principle.


an


a BOOK V.


OF THE INFLUENCE OF GOVERNMENT.


Cuarter I. Of the Functions of Government in general.


§ 1. Necessary and optional functions of government distinguished 337
2. Multifarious character of the necessary functions of govern-
TEN ETICE Boas sen cong Soc Bsc ASeD a5 Sond SSE dOSsA Gao APR NEEE Renae MUaRoS Meee CHOU 338


Cuaprer Il. Of the General Principles of Taxation.


§ 1. Four fundamental rules of taxation 346

2. Grounds of the principle of Equality of Taxation 348
: 3. Should the same percentage be levied on all amounts of

i! income? 390
4, Should the same percentage be levied on perpetual and on

i berm ing bl erin cor cst ee teens eterna ee enna eaters 356
5, The increase of the rent of land from natural causes a fit

subjectof peculiartaxation ste Gee eee Silt tee 360
6. A land tax, in some cases, not taxation, but a rent charge in

favourioh thempublicnein rete ee eee rem er, 363

7. Taxes falling on capital, not necessarily objectionable ..........-. 364


i es


Cuapter VI.


§


CONTENTS.


Cuaprer Ill. Of Direct Taxes.


1. Direct taxes either on income or on expenditure

Due MAXeS ONWCN ere rs crac auc ce etostiary career cere stetegces Ud cee
3. — on profits

A —— ON WAC CS ir acssvscsssecesinea desis Wineunnciencneys
5; Amun com Olax. sive veciciscecnccesst estes amaee a eee ea eRe
GE AUETOUSC sD AKe reece acre tae tas ar toatl at eet ee adel ree eRe Lacs


Cuaptrer IV. Of Taxes on Commodities.


. A Tax on all Commodities would fall on profits..............0000.,
2. Taxes on particular commodities fall on the consumer
3. Peculiar effects of taxes on necessaries


4. — how modified by the tendency of profits to a minimum
5, ittects| of diseniminatin cadutiesiercescsete etre nerteet teste


6. Effects produced on international exchange by duties on
CE>.g SOD AES] EVOVGT. ON TONY OLOV ES cece ccc cchra orc ocoquousonced ceo Seococceereeenreoe cree


Cuartrer V. Of some other Taxes.


mH who =


Taxation.


1. Arguments for and against direct taxation ...........cccveccsee,
2. What forms of indirect taxation most eligible
3. Practical rules for indirect taxation


CuarTer VIL. Of a National Debt.


1, Is it goeaee to defray extraordinary public expenses by
NOAM I BE <a sce. don ag covesactanttante csalreves cetgegeaa aoe n reopen coke


2. Not aecentle to redeem a national aeth by a general contri-
bution.,


3. In what cases CoRR to maintain a cami revenue fon iite
redemption of debt


Xlil


399


Comparison between Direct and Indirect


a


X1V


CONTENTS.


44


TEAR


Cuapter VIII. Of the Ordinary Functions of Government
ent,


considered as to their Economical Effects.


§ 1. Effects of imperfect security of person and property
2, Effects of over-taxation
3. Effects of imperfection the system of the laws, and in ane

AU MAINISE LA OMIOL NUS UCC mecmeeccesvece ws tenectsre reese ee


Cuaprpr IX. The same subject continued


§ 1. Laws of Inberitamce seis cece yeecteeeeeeceeeenteees
2, Law and Custom of Primogeniture ...cccsecessccseecec
BAM DIINEANIS): a paaancreancatssastoadn maceansccoousoG. Feat Moreh Ate cake mare


. Law of compulsory equal division of inherita:
5. Laws of Partnership


. Partnerships en commandite .........
. Laws relating to IMs Olvecileyseee wee Seen rae ae


Om d> a
ae)
(2)
Sa
=)
o
it
n
=z
=
Dm
4
=:
in
3
=o
@
ov)
=
E
Ss
=
<4
Q
2
+
®
cz!
os
Qu
(DQ
S
i=]
5
Lo}
p
J=F
o)
a


Page
438
440)


Cuarrer X. Of Interferences of Government grounded on


Erroneous Theories.


§ 1. Doctrine of Protection to Native Indusiry..........
2. Usury Laws
3. Attempts to regulate the prices of commodities
4. Monopolies


5. Laws against Combination of Workmen
6. Restraints on opinion or on its publication


CuarrerR XJ. Of the Grounds and Limits of the Laisser-faire


or Non-interference Principle.


‘ 1. Governmental inter i isti i i
§ a gutenvention distinguished into authoritative
and unauthoritative


3 us chs sd! . i
2. Objections to government intervention—the compulsory


504


CONTENTS.


4, — increase of the occupations and responsibilities of goyern-


HEREIN, cocotnesiscce becognseooanoonescOHpUBAEENATOsOSHNGOS: Shc éngchounpbeooce odeaDeUt abodes
5. — superior efficiency of private agency, owing to stronger
INLSLESESM THEE WOE Kai evcuvsceccessscnstial cocceots ceteenececueres cueecee snare re se
6. — importance of cultivating habits of collective action in the
J8Y210) 0) (Ce Arca oeasor ce ecce Goa occur Nae DERE oR NCEHASTEO
We aisser-favre the oenenal rule: eeys-cccsetcetscoeseersedcesoss cere cecenentereees :


8. — but liable to large exceptions. Cases in which the con-
sumer is an incompetent judge of the commodity. Education
9. Case of persons exercising power over others. Protection of
children and young persons; of the lower animals. Case
OIE VAOUOGIN TNO) AENIOYEZOTIS) oo coccocoasccecancoscooeceeoccooeupearecuaceer eoSeceKy
1105 Casel of contractsnmeuperpetriitya seecsstsetesre ececestctiesresttceetette
J1. Cases of delegated management oo... csceeeeneeseeeeseeseeeneees
12, Cases in which public intervention may be necessary to give
effect to the wishes of the persons interested. Examples:
hours of labour; disposal of colonial lamds..............:.cccc0ee
13. Case of acts done for the benefit of others than the persons
Goncenmmeds HROoriaws rcs cece eevee ee essere ceo eee
WAGs COLOMIZA LION sactenea cy seven ent tat eeeseceranneceanscesengarnecsne scree ees
15. — Other miscellaneous examples  <............sccccccccssssseecserceeeceeses
16. Government intervention may be necessary in default of pri-
vate agency, in cases where private agency would be more
SULA Le Merraes rave ea ae ean te eae ce Nene ceecen gina, Cee enC NSS


XV


Page


309


523,
527
527


531
535


539
545


547


BO Okesnu:


EXCHANGE.


VOM Ln, B


BOOK III.


EXCHANGE,


(CONTINUED.)


CHAPTER VII.
OF MONEY.


§ 1. Havine proceeded thus far in ascertaining the
general laws of Value, without introducing the idea of Money
(except occasionally for illustration,) itis time that we should
now superadd that idea, and consider in what manner the
principles of the mutual interchange of commodities are
affected by the use of what is termed a Medium of Ex-
change.

In order to understand the manifold functions of a Cir-
culating Medium, there is no better way than to consider
what are the principal inconveniences which we should expe-
rience if we had not such a medium. The- first and most
obvious would be the want of a common measure for values
of different sorts. If a tailor had only coats, and wanted to
buy bread or a horse, it would be very troublesome to ascer=
tain how much bread he ought to obtain for a coat, or how
many coats he should give for a horse. The calculation must
be recommenced on different data, every time he bartered


B 2


4 BOOK Ill. CHAPTER VII. § l.


his coats for a different kind of article; and there could be
no current price, or regular quotations of value. Whereas
now each thing has a current price in money, and he gets
over all difficulties by reckoning his coat at A]. or 51., and a
four-pound loaf at 6d. or 7d. As it is much easier to com-
pare different lengths by expressing them in a common lan-
guage called feet and inches, so it is much easier to compare
values by means of a common language called pounds, shil-
lings, and pence. In no other way can values be arranged
one above another in a scale; in no other can a person Con-
veniently calculate the sum of his possessions; and it is
easier to ascertain and remember the relations of many things
to one thing, than their innumerable cross relations with one
another. This advantage of having a common language in
which values may be expressed, is, even by itself, so impor-
tant, that some such mode of expressing and computing
them would probably be used even if a pound or a shilling
did not express any real thing, but a mere unit of calcula-
tion. Itis said that there are African tribes in which this
somewhat artificial contrivance actually prevails. They cal-
culate the value of things in a sort of money of account,
called macutes. They say, one thing is worth ten macutes,
another fifteen, another twenty*. There is no real thing
called a macute: it is a conventional unit, for the more
convenient comparison of things with one another.

This advantage, however, forms but an inconsiderable
part of the economical benefits derived from the use of
money. The inconveniences of barter are so great, that
without some more commodious means of effecting exchanges,
the division of employments could hardly have been carried
to any considerable extent. A tailor, who had nothing but
coats, might starve before he could find any person having
bread to sell who wanted a coat: besides, he would not want
as much bread at a time as would be worth a coat, and the


\


* Montesquieu, Esprit des Lois, liv, xxii. ch. 8.


MONEY. 5


“


coat could not be divided. Every person, therefore, would
at all times hasten to dispose of his commodity in exchange
for anything which, though it might not be fitted to his own
immediate wants, was in great and general demand, and
easily divisible, so that he might be sure of being able to
purchase with it whatever was offered for sale. The primary
necessaries of life possess these properties in a high degree.
Bread is extremely divisible, and an object of universal
desire. Still, this is not the sort of thing required; for, of
food, unless in expectation of a scarcity, no one wishes to
possess more at once, than is wanted for immediate consump-
tion; so that a person is never sure of finding an immediate
purchaser for articles of food; and unless soon disposed of,
most of them perish. The thing which people would select
to keep by them for making purchases, must be one which,
besides being divisible, and generally desired, does not dete-
riorate by keeping. This reduces the choice to a small num-
ber of articles.


§ 2. By a tacit concurrence, almost all nations, at a very
early period, fixed upon certain metals, and especially gold
and silver, to serve this purpose. No other substances unite
the necessary qualities in so great a degree, with so many
subordinate advantages. Next to food and clothing, and in
some climates even before clothing, the strongest inclination
in a rude state of society is for personal ornament, and for
the kind of distinction which is obtained by rarity or costli-
ness in such ornaments. After the immediate necessities of
life were satisfied, every one was eager to accumulate as great
a store as possible of things at once costly and ornamental ;
which were chiefly gold, silver, and jewels. These were the
things which it most pleased every one to possess, and which
there was most certainty of finding others willing to receive
in exchange for any kind of produce. They were among the
most imperishable of all substances. They were also port-
able, and containing great value in small bulk, were easily


Ab


6 BOOK Ill. CHAPTER vil. § 2.


hid; a consideration of much importance in an age of inse-
curity. Jewels are inferior to gold and silver in the quality
of divisibility; and are of very various qualities, not to be
accurately discriminated without great trouble. Gold and
silver are eminently divisible, and when pure, always of the
same quality; and their purity may be ascertained and cer-
tified by a public authority. 4

Accordingly, though furs have been employed as money
in some countries, cattle in others, in Chinese Tartary cubes
of tea closely pressed together, the shells called cowries on
the coast of Western Africa, and in Abyssinia at this day
blocks of rock salt; though even of metals, the less costly
have sometimes been chosen, as iron in Lacedeemon from an
ascetic policy, copper in the early Roman republic from the
poverty of the people; gold and silver have been everywhere
preferred by nations which were able to obtain them, either
by industry, commerce, or conquest. To the qualities which
originally recommended them, another came to be added,
the importance of which only unfolded itself by degrees.
Of all commodities, they are among the least influenced by
any of the causes which produce fluctuations of value. No
commodity is quite free from such fluctuations. Gold and
silver have sustained, since the beginning of history, one
great permanent alteration of value, from the discovery of
the American mines; and some temporary variations, such as
that which, in the last great war, was produced by the absorp-
tion of the metals in hoards, and in the military chests of
the immense armies constantly in the field. In the present
age the opening of a new source of supply, so abundant
as the mimes of the Ural mountains and of Siberia, may be
the commencement of another period of decline, on the
limits of which it would be useless at present to speculate.
But on the whole, no commodities are so little exposed to
causes of variation. They are more constant than almost
any other things in their cost of production. And from
their durability, the total quantity in existence is at all times


MONEY. 7


so great in proportion to the annual supply, that the effect
on value even of a change in the cost of production is not
sudden: a very long time being required to diminish mate-
rially the quantity in existence, and even to increase it very
greatly being no rapid process. Gold and silver, therefore,
are more fit than any other commodity to be the subject of
engagements for receiving or payinga given quantity at some
distant period. If the engagement were made in corn, a
failure of crops might increase the burthen of the payment
in one year to fourfold what was intended, or an exuberant
harvest sink it in another to one-fourth. If stipulated in
cloth, some manufacturing invention might permanently re-
duce the payment to a tenth of its original value. Such
things have been known to occur even in the case of pay-
ments stipulated in gold and silver; but the great fall of
their value after the discovery of America, is the only authen-
ticated instance; and in this case the change was extremely
gradual, being spread over a period of many years.

When gold and silver had become virtually a medium of
exchange, by becoming the things for which people generally
sold and with which they generally bought whatever they
had to sell or to buy; the contrivance of coining obviously
suggested itself. By this process the metal was divided into
convenient portions, of any degree of smallness, and bearing
a recognized proportion to one another; and the trouble was
saved of weighing and assaying at every change of possessors,
an inconyenience which on the occasion of small purchases
would soon have become insupportable. Governments
found it their interest to take the operation into their own
hands, and to interdict all coining by private persons: indeed
their guarantee was often the only one which would have been
relied on, a reliance however which very often it ill deserved ;
profligate governments having until a very modern period
never scrupled, for the sake of robbing their creditors, to
confer on all other debtors a license to rob theirs, by the
shallow and impudent artifice of lowering the standard ; that


8 BOOK III. CHAPTER VII. § 3.


least covert of all modes of knavery, which consists in :calling
a shilling a pound, that a debt of a hundred pounds may be
eancelled by the payment of a hundred shillings. It would
have been as simple a plan, and would have answered the
purpose as well, to have enacted that “a hundred” should
always be interpreted to mean five, which would have effected
the same reduction in all pecuniary contracts, and would not
have been at all more shameless. Such strokes of policy
have not wholly ceased to be recommended, but they have
ceased to be practised; except occasionally through the
medium of paper money, in which case the character of the
transaction, from the greater obscurity of the subject, is a
little less barefaced.


§ 3. Money, when its use has grown habitual, is the
medium through which the incomes of the different members
of the community are distributed to them, and the measure
by which they estimate their possessions. As it is always by
means of money that people provide for their different neces-
sities, there grows up in their minds a powerful association
leading them to regard money as wealth in a more peculiar
sense than any other article; and even those who pass their
lives in the production of the most useful objects, acquire the
habit of regarding those objects as chiefly important by
their capacity of being exchanged for money. A person who
parts with money to obtain commodities, unless he intends
to sell them, appears to the imagination to be making a
worse bargain than a person who parts with commodities to
get money; the one seems to be spending his means, the
other adding to them. Illusions which, though now in some
measure dispelled, were long powerful enough to overmaster
the mind of every politician, both speculative and practical,
in Europe.

It must be evident however, that the mere introduction of
a particular mode of exchanging things for one another, by
first exchanging a thing for money and then exchanging the


MONEY, 9


money for something else, makes no difference in the essential
character of transactions. It is not with money that things are
really purchased. Nobody’s income (except that of the gold
or silver miner) is derived from the precious metals. The
pounds or shillings which a person receives weekly or yearly,
are not what constitutes his income; they are a sort of
tickets or orders which he can present for payment at any
shop he pleases, and which entitle him to receive a certain
value of any commodity that he makes choice of. The far-
mer pays his labourers and his landlord in these tickets, as
the most convenient plan for himself and them; but their
real income is their share of his corn, cattle, and hay, and it
makes no essential difference whether he distributes it to them
direct, or sells it for them and gives them the price: but as
they would have to sell it for money if he did not, andas he
is a seller at any rate, it best suits the purposes of all, that he
should sell their share along with his own, and leave the
labourers more leisure for work and the landlord for being
idle. The capitalists, except those who are producers of the
precious metals, derive no part of their income from those
metals, since they only get them by buying them with their
own produce: while all other persons have their incomes paid
to them by the capitalists, or by those who have received
payment from the capitalists, and as the capitalists have
nothing, from the first, except their produce, it is that and
nothing else which supplies all incomes furnished by them.
There cannot, in short, be intrinsically a more insignificant
thing, in the economy of society, than money; except in the
character of a contrivance for sparing time and labour. It
is a machinery for doing quickly and commodiously, what
would be done, though less quickly and commodiously, with-
out it: and like many other kinds of machinery, it: only
exerts a distinct and independent influence of its own when
it gets out of order.

The introduction of money does not interfere with the
operation of any of the Laws of Value laid down in the pre-


10 BOOK III. CHAPTER Vil. $ 3.


ceding chapters. The reasons which make the temporary or
market value of things depend on the demand and supply,
and their average and permanent values upon their cost of
production, are as applicable to a money system as to a SyS-
tem of barter. Things which by barter would exchange for
one another, will if sold for money sell for an equal amount
of it, and so will exchange for one another still, though the
process of exchanging them will consist of two operations
instead of only one. The relations of commodities to one
another remain unaltered by money: the only new relation
introduced, is their relation to money itself; how much or
how little money they will exchange for; in other words,
how the Exchange Value of money itself is determined.
And this is not a question of any difficulty, when the illusion
is dispelled, which caused money to be looked upon as a pe-
culiar something, not governed by the same laws as other
things. Money is a commodity, and its value is determined
like that of other commodities, temporarily by demand and
supply, permanently and on the average by cost of produc-
tion. The illustration of these principles, considered in their
application to money, must be given in some detail, on
account of the confusion which, in minds not systematically
instructed on the subject, envelopes the whole matter; partly
from a lingering remnant of the old misleading associations,
and partly from the mass of vapoury and baseless specula-
tion with which this more than any other topic of political
economy has in latter times beconmemencroundedeluechall
therefore treat of the Value of Money in a chapter apart.


CHAPTER VIII.


OF THE VALUE OF MONEY, AS DEPENDENT ON DEMAND
AND SUPPLY,


§ 1. Ir is unfortunate that in the very outset of the
subject we have to clear from our path a formidable ambiguity
of language. The Value of Money is to appearance an
expression as precise, as free from possibility of misunder-
standing, as any in science. The value of a thing, is what
it will exchange for: the value of money, is what money
will'exchange for; the purchasing power of money. If prices
are low, money will buy much of other things, and is of high
value; if prices are high, it will buy little of other things,
and is of low value. The value of money is Inversely as
general prices: falling as they rise, and rising as they fall.

But unhappily the same phrase is also employed, in the
current language of commerce, in a very different sense.
Money, which is so commonly understood as a synonyme of
wealth, is more especially the term in use to denote it when
borrowing is spoken of. When one person lends to another,
as well as when he pays wages or rent to another, what he
transfers is not the mere money, but a right to a certain
value of the produce of the country, to be selected at plea-
sure; the lender having first bought this right, by giving for
it a portion of his capital. What he really lends is so much
capital; the money is the mere instrument of transfer. But
the capital usually passes from the lender to the receiver
through the means either of money, or of an order to receive
money, and at any rate it is in money that the capital is com-
puted and estimated. Hence, borrowing capital is univer-
sally called borrowing money: the loan market is called the
money market: those who have their capital disposable for


ee Sas ow


ree


a


i
1]
t
i
i
f


12 BOOK III. CHAPTER VIII. § 2.


investment on loan are called the monied class: and the
equivalent given for the use of capital, or in other words,
interest, is not only called the interest of money, but, by a
grosser perversion of terms, the value of money. This mis-
application of language, assisted by some fallacious appear-
ances which we shall notice and clear up hereafter*, has
created a general notion among persons in business, that the
Value of Money, meaning the rate of interest, has an intimate
connexion with the Value of Money in its proper sense, the
value or purchasing power of the circulating medium. We
shall come to this subject before long: at present it is enough
to say, that by Value I shall always mean Exchange Value,
and by money the medium of exchange, not the capital
which is passed from hand to hand through that medium.


§ 2. The value or purchasing power of money depends,
in the first instance, on demand and supply. But demand
and supply, in relation to money, present themselves ina
somewhat different shape from the demand and supply of
other things.

The supply of a commodity means the quantity offered
for sale. But it is not usual to speak of offering money for
sale. People are not usually said to buy or sell money.
This, however, is merely an accident of language. In point
of fact, money is bought and sold like other things, when-
ever other things are bought and sold for money. Whoever
sells corn, or tallow, or cotton, buys money. Whoever buys
bread, or wine, or clothes, sells money to the dealer in those
articles. The money with which people are offering to buy,
1s money offered for sale. The supply of money, then, is
the quantity of it which people are wanting to lay out; that
is, all the money they have in their possession, except what
they are hoarding, or at least keeping by them as a reserve


* Infra, ch. xxiii.


VALUE OF MONEY. 13


for future contingencies. The supply of money in short, is
all the money in circulation at the time.

The demand for money, again, consists of all the goods
offered for sale. Every seller of goods is a buyer of money,
and the goods he brings with him constitute his demand.
The demand for money differs from the demand for other
things in this, that it is limited only by the means of the
purchaser. The demand for other things is for so much and
no more; but there is always a demand for as much money
as can be got. Persons may indeed refuse to sell, and with-
draw their goods from the market, if they cannot get for
them what they consider a sufficient price. But this is only
when they think that the price will rise, and that they shall
get more money by waiting. If they thought the low price
likely to be permanent, they would take what they could get.
It is always a sine gud non with a dealer to dispose of his
goods.

As the whole of the goods in the market compose the
demand for money, so the whole of the money constitutes
the demand for goods. The money and the goods are seek-
ing each other for the purpose of being exchanged. They
are reciprocally supply and demand to one another. It is
indifferent whether, in characterismg the phenomena, we
speak of the demand and the supply of goods, or the supply
and the demand of money. They are equivalent expres-
sions.

We shall proceed to illustrate this proposition more fully.
And in doing this, the reader will remark a great difference
between the class of questions which now occupy us, and
those which we previously had under discussion respecting
Values. In considering Value, we were only concerned with
causes which acted upon particular commodities, apart from
the rest. Causes which affect all commodities alike do not
act upon values. But in considering the relation between
goods and money, it is with the causes that operate upon all
goods whatever, that we are especially concerned. We are


tne al Ei AE ERIE TT


14 BOOK III. CHAPTER VIII. § 2.


comparing goods of all sorts on one side, with money on the


. other side, as things to be exchanged against each other.


Suppose, everything else being the same, that there is an
increase of the quantity of money, say by the arrival of a
foreigner in a place, with a treasure of gold and silver.
When he commences expending it (for this question it mat-
ters not whether productively or unproductively,) he adds to
the supply of money, and by the same act, to the demand
for goods. Doubtless he adds, in the first instance, to the
demand only for certain kinds of goods, namely those which
he selects for purchase ; he will immediately raise the price
of those, and so far as he is individually concerned, of those
only. If he spends his funds in giving entertainments, he
will raise the prices of food and wine. If he expends them
in establishing a manufactory, he will raise the prices of
labour and materials. But at the higher prices, more money
will pass into the hands of the sellers of these different arti-
cles; and they, whether labourers or dealers, having more
money to lay out, will create an increased demand for all the
things which they are accustomed to purchase: these accord-
ingly will rise in price, and so on until the rise has reached
everything. I say everything, although it is of course pos-
sible that the influx of money might take place through the
medium of some new class of consumers, or in such a manner
as to alter the proportions of different classes of consumers
to one another, so that a greater share of the national income
than before would thenceforth be expended in some articles,
and a smaller in others; exactly as if a change had taken
place in the tastes and wants of the community. If this
were the case, then until production had accommodated itself
to this change in the comparative demand for different things,
there would be a real alteration in values, and some things
would rise in price more than others, while some perhaps
would not rise at all. These effects, however, would evi-
dently proceed, not from the mere increase of money, but
from accessory circumstances attending it. We are now


VALUE OF MONEY. 15


only called upon to consider what would be the effect of an
increase of money, considered by itself. Supposing the
money in the hands of individuals to be increased, the wants
and inclinations of the community collectively in respect to
consumption remaining exactly the same; the increase of
demand would reach all things equally, and there would be
an universal rise of prices. We might suppose, with Hume,
that some morning, every person in the nation should wake
and find a gold coin in his pocket: this example, however,
would involve an alteration of the proportions in the demand
for different commodities; the luxuries of the poor would in
the first instance be raised in price, in a much greater degree
than other things. Let us rather suppose, therefore, that to
every pound, or shilling, or penny in the possession of any
one, another pound, shillimg, or penny were suddenly added.
There would be an increased money demand, and conse-
quently an increased money value, or price, for things of all
sorts. This increased value would do no good to any one;
would make no difference, except that of having to reckon
pounds, shillings, and pence in higher numbers. It would
be an increase of values only as estimated in money, a thing
only wanted to buy other things with; and would not enable
any one to buy more of them than before. Prices would
have risen in a certain ratio, and the value of money would
have fallen in the same ratio.

It is to be remarked that this ratio would be precisely
that in which the quantity of money had been increased.
If the whole money in circulation was doubled, prices would
be doubled. If it was only increased one-fourth, prices
would rise one-fourth. There would be one-fourth more
money, all of which would be used to purchase goods of
some description. When there had been time for the in-
creased supply of money to reach all markets, or (accord-
ing to the conventional metaphor) to permeate all the chan-
nels of circulation, all prices would haye risen one-fourth.
But the general rise of price is independent of this diffusing


.


16 BOOK Il], CHAPTER VIII. § 2.


and equalizing process. Even if some prices were raised
more, and others less, the average rise would be one-fourth.
This is a necessary consequence of the fact that a fourth
more money would have been given for only the same quan-
tity of goods. General prices, therefore, would in any case
be a fourth higher.

The very same effect would be produced on prices if we
suppose the goods diminished, instead of the money increased:
and the contrary effect if the goods were increased, or the
money diminished. If there were less money in the hands
of the community, and the same amount of goods to be sold,
less money altogether would be given for them, and they
would be sold at lower prices; lower, too, in the precise ratio
in which the money was diminished. So that the value of
money, other things being the same, varies inversely as its
quantity ; every increase of quantity lowering the value, and
every diminution raising it,in a ratio exactly equivalent.

This, it must be observed, is a property peculiar to money.
We did not find it to be true of commodities generally, that
every diminution of supply raised the value exactly in pro-
portion to the deficiency, or that every increase lowered it in
the precise ratio of the excess. Some things are usually
affected in a greater ratio than that of the excess or deficiency,
others usually in a less: because, in ordinary cases of demand,
the desire, being for the thing itself, may be stronger or
weaker ; and the amount of what people are willing to expend
on it, being in any case a limited quantity, may be affected
in very unequal degrees by difficulty or facility of attainment.
But in the case of money, which is desired as the means of
universal purchase, the demand consists of everything which
people have to sell; and the only limit to what they are
willing to give, is the limit set by their having nothing more
to offer. The whole of the goods being in any case exchanged
for the whole of the money which comes into the market to
be laid-out, they will sell for less or more of it exactly
according as less or more is brought.


VALUE OF MONEY. 17


-§ 3. From what precedes, it might for a moment be sup-
posed, that all the goods on sale in a country at any one
time, are exchanged for all the money existing and in circula-
tion at that same time: or, in other words, that there is always
in circulation in a country, a quantity of money equal in
value to the whole of the goods then and there on sale. But
this would be a complete misapprehension. The money laid
Out is equal in value to the goods it purchases; but the quan-
tity of money laid out is not the same thing with the quantity
in circulation. As the money passes from hand to hand, the
same piece of money is laid out many times, before all the
things on sale at one time are purchased and finally removed
from the market: and each pound or dollar must be counted
for as many pounds or dollars, as the number of times it
changes hands in order to effect this object. The greater
part of the goods must also be counted more than once, not
only because most things pass through the hands of several
sets of manufacturers and dealers before they assume the
form in which they are finally consumed, but because in
times of speculation (and all times are so, more or less) the
same goods are often bought repeatedly, to be resold for a
profit, before they are bought for the purpose of consumption
at all.

If we assume the quantity of goods on sale, and the
number of times those goods are resold, to be fixed quan-
tities, the value of money will depend upon its quantity,
together with the average number of times that each piece
changes hands in the process. The whole of the goods sold
(counting each resale of the same goods as so much added to
the goods) have been exchanged for the whole of the money,
multiplied by the number of purchases made on the average
by each piece. Consequently, the amount of goods and of
transactions being the same, the value of money is inversely
as its quantity multiplied by what is called the rapidity of
circulation. And the quantity of money in circulation, is
equal to the money value of all the goods sold, divided

SvOL. It. c


18 BOOK III. CHAPTER virr. § 3.


by the number which expresses the rapidity of circu-
lation.

The phrase, rapidity of circulation, requires some com-
ment. -It must not be understood to mean, the number of
purchases made by each piece of money in a given time.
Time is not the thing to be considered. The state of society
may be such, that each piece of money hardly performs more
than one purchase in a year; but if this arises from the small
number of transactions—from the small amount of business
done, the want of activity in traffic, or because what traflie
there is, mostly takes place by barter—it constitutes no reason
why prices should be lower, or the value of money higher.
The essential point is, not how often the same money changes
hands in a given time, but how often it changes hands in
order to perform a given amount of traffic. We must com-
pare the number of purchases made by the money in a given
time, not with the time itself, but with the goods sold in
that same time. If each piece of money changes hands on
an average ten times while goods are sold to the value of a
million sterling, it is evident that the money required to cir-
culate those goods is 100,000/. And conversely, if the money
in circulation is 100,0002., and each piece changes hands by
the purchase of goods ten times in a month, the sales of
goods for money which take place every month must amount
on the average to 1,000,000/.

Rapidity of circulation being a phrase so ill adapted to
express the only thing which it is of any importance to
express by it, and having a tendency to confuse the subject
by suggesting a meaning extremely different from the one
intended, it would be a good thing if the phrase could be got
rid of, and another substituted, more directly significant of
the idea meant to be conveyed. Some such expression as
“the efficiency of money,” though not unexceptionable,
would do better; as it would point attention to the quantity
of work done, without suggesting the idea of estimating it
by time. Until an appropriate term can be devised, we


VALUE OF MONEY. 19


must be content to express the idea by the circumlocution
which alone conveys it adequately, namely, the average num-
ber of purchases made by each piece in order to effect a given
pecuniary amount of transactions.


§ 4. The proposition which we have laid down respect-
ing the dependence of general prices upon the quantity of
money in circulation, must for the present be understood as
applying only to a state of things in which money, that is,
gold or silver, is the exclusive instrument of exchange, and
actually passes from hand to hand at every purchase, credit
in any of its shapes beg unknown. When credit comes
into play as a means of purchasing, distinct from money in
hand, we shall hereafter find that the connexion between
prices and the amount of the circulating medium is much
less direct and intimate, and that such connexion as does
exist no longer admits of so simple a mode of expression.
But on a subject so full of complexity as that of currency
and prices, it is necessary to lay the foundation of our theory
in a thorough understanding of the most simple cases, which
we shall always find lying as a groundwork or substratum
under those which arise in practice. That an increase of the
quantity of money raises prices, and a diminution lowers
them, is the most elementary proposition in the theory of
currency, and without it we should have no key to any of
the others. In any state of things, however, except the
simple and primitive one which we have supposed, the pro-
position is only true other things being the same: and what
those other things are, which must be the same, we are not
yet ready to pronounce. We can, however, point out, even
now, one or two of the cautions with which the principle
must be guarded in attempting to make use of it for the
practical explanation of phenomena: cautions the more
indispensable, as the doctrine, though a scientific truth, has
of late years been the foundation of a greater mass of false
theory, and erroneous interpretation of facts, than any other

c 2


20 BOOK Ill. CHAPTER vill. § 4.


proposition relating to interchange. From the time of the
resumption of cash payments by the Act of 1819, and espe-
cially since the commercial crisis of 1825, the favourite ex-
planation of every rise or fall of prices has been “ the
currency ;” and like most popular theories, the doctrine has
been applied with little regard to the conditions necessary for
making it true.

For example, it is habitually assumed that whenever there
is a greater amount of money in the country, or in existence,
arise of prices must necessarily follow. But this is by no
means an inevitable consequence. In no commodity is it
the quantity in existence, but the quantity offered for sale,
that determines the value. Whatever may be the quantity
of money in the country, only that part of it will affect
prices, which goes into the markets for commodities, and is
there actually exchanged against goods. Whatever increases
the amount of this portion of the money in the country,
certainly tends to raise prices. But money hoarded does
not act on prices. Money kept in reserve by individuals to
meet contingencies which do not occur, does not act on
prices. The money in the coffers of the Bank, or retained
as a reserve by private bankers, does not act on prices until
drawn out, nor even then unless drawn out to be expended
in commodities.

It frequently happens that money, to a considerable
amount, is brought into the country, is there actually em-
ployed as capital, and again flows out, without having ever
once acted upon the markets of commodities, but only upon
the market of securities, or, as it is commonly though im-
properly called, the money market. Let us return to the
cease already put for illustration, that of a foreigner landing
in the country with a treasure. We supposed him to employ
his treasure in the purchase of goods for his own use, or in
setting up a manufactory and employing labourers; and in
either case he would, ceteris paribus, raise prices. But
instead of doing of either of these things, he might very


VALUE OF MONEY. Past


probably prefer to invest his fortune at interest; which we
shall suppose him to do m the most obvious way, by
becoming a competitor for a portion of the stock, exchequer
bills, railway debentures, mercantile bills, mortgages, &c.,
which are at all times in the hands of the public. By doing
this he would raise the prices of those different securities, or
in other words would lower the rate of interest; and since
this would disturb the relation previously existing between
the rate of interest on capital in the country itself, and that
in foreign countries, it would probably induce some of those
who had floating capital seeking employment, to send it
abroad for foreign. investment, rather than buy securities at
home at the advance of price. As much money might thus
go out as had previously come in, while the prices of com-
modities would have shown no trace of its temporary pre-
sence. This is a case highly deserving of attention: and it
is a fact now beginning to be recognized, that the passage of
the precious metals from country to country is determined
much more than was formerly supposed, by the state of the
loan market in different countries, and much less by the state
of prices.

Another point must be adverted to, in order to avoid
serious error in the interpretation of mercantile phenomena.
If there be, at any time, an increase in the number of money
transactions, a thing continually liable to happen from
differences in the activity of speculation, and even in the
time of year (since certain kinds of business are transacted
only at particular seasons); an increase of the currency which
is only proportional to this increase of transactions, and is of
no longer duration, has no tendency to raise prices. At the
quarterly periods when the public dividends are paid at the
Bank, a sudden increase takes place of the money in the
hands of the public; an increase estimated at from a fifth to
two-fifths of the whole issues of the Bank of England. Yet
this never has any effect on prices; and in a very few weeks,
the currency has again shrunk into its usual dimensions, by a


22 BOOK III. CHAPTER VIII. § 4.


mere reduction in the demands of the public (after so copious
a supply of ready money) for accommodation from the Bank
in the way of discount or loan. In like manner the currency
of the agricultural districts fluctuates in amount at different
seasons of the year. It is always lowest in August: “it
rises generally towards Christmas, and obtains its greatest
elevation about Lady-day, when the farmer commonly lays
in his stock, and has to pay his rent and summer taxes,” and
when he therefore makes his principal applications to country
bankers for loans. ‘Those variations occur with the same
regularity as the season, and with just as little disturbance of
the markets as the quarterly fluctuations of the notes of the
Bank of England. As soon as the extra payments have been
completed, the superfluous” currency, which is estimated at
half a million, “as certainly and immediately is reabsorbed
and disappears *.”

If extra currency were not forthcoming to make these
extra payments, one of three things must happen. Either
the payments must be made without money, by a resort to
some of those contrivances by which its use is dispensed
with; or there must be an increase in the rapidity of circu-
lation, the same sum of money being made to perform more
payments; or if neither of these things took place, money
to make the extra payments must be withdrawn from the
market for commodities, and prices, consequently, must
fall. An increase of the circulating medium, conformable in
extent and duration to the temporary stress of business, does
not raise prices, but merely prevents this fall.

The sequel of our investigation will point out many other
explanations and qualifications with which the proposition
must be received, that the value of the circulating medium


depends on the demand and supply; and is in the inverse ratio
of the quantity.


* Pullarton on the Regulation of Currencies, 2nd edit. pp. 87—9.


CHAPTER IX.


OF THE VALUE OF MONEY, AS DEPENDENT ON COST OF
PRODUCTION.


§ 1. Burt money, no more than commodities in general,
has its value definitively determined by demand and supply.
The ultimate regulator of its value is Cost of Production.

We are supposing, of course, that things are left to them-
selves. Governments have not always left things to them-
selves. They haye undertaken to prevent the quantity of
money from adjusting itself according to spontaneous laws,
and have endeavoured to regulate it at their pleasure; gene-
rally with a view of keeping a greater quantity of money in
the country, than would otherwise have remained there. It
was, until lately, the policy of all governments to interdict
the exportation and the melting of money; while, by en-
couraging the exportation and impeding the importation of
other things, they endeavoured to haye a stream of money
constantly flowmg in. By this course they gratified two
prejudices: they drew, or thought that they drew, more money
into the country, which they believed to be tantamount to
more wealth; and they gave, or thought that they gave,
to all producers and dealers, high prices, which, though no real
advantage, people are always inclined to suppose to be one,

In this attempt to regulate the value of money artificially
by means of the supply, governments have never succeeded
in the degree, or even in the manner, which they intended.
Their prohibitions against exporting or melting the coin have
never been effectual. A commodity of such small bulk in
proportion to its value is so easily smuggled, and still more
easily melted, that it has been impossible by the most
stringent measures to prevent these operations. All the risk


i
|


it


| |


24 BOOK III. CHAPTER Ix. § l.


which it was in the power of governments to attach to them,
was outweighed by a very moderate profit*. In the more
indirect mode of aiming at the same purpose, by throwing
difficulties in the way of making the returns for exported
goods in any other commodity than money, they have not
been quite so unsuccessful. They have not, indeed, succeeded
in making money flow continuously into the country; but
they have to a certain extent been able to keep it at a higher
than its natural level; and have, thus far, removed the value of
money from exclusive dependence on the causes which fix
the values of things not artificially interfered with. ve
We are however to suppose a state, not of artificial
regulation, but of freedom. In that state, and assuming no
charge to be made for coimage, the value of money will con-
form.to the value of the bullion of which it is made. A
pound weight of gold or silver in coin, and the same weight
in an ingot, will precisely exchange for one another. On
the supposition of freedom, the metal cannot be worth more
in the state of bullion than of coin; for as it can be melted
without any loss of time, and with hardly any expense, this
would of course be done until the quantity in circulation
was so much diminished as to equalize its value with that of
the same weight in bullion. It may be thought however
that the coin, though it cannot be of less, may be, and being
a manufactured article will naturally be, of greater value
than the bullion contained in it, on the same principle on
which linen cloth is of more value than an equal weight of
Imen yarn. This would be true, were it not that Govern-
ment, in this country and in some others, coins money gratis
for any one who furnishes the metal. The labour and ex-


* The effect of the prohibition cannot, however, have been so entirely
insignificant as it has been supposed to be by writers on the subject. The
facts adduced by Mr. Fullarton, in the note to page 7 of his work on the
Regulation of Currencies, shew that it required a greater percentage of
difference in yalue between coin and bullion than has commonly been
imagined, to bring the coin to the melting-pot.


VALUE OF MONEY. 25


pense of coinage, when not charged to the possessor, do not
raise the value of the article. If Government opened an
office where, on delivery of a given weight of yarn, it re-
turned tie same weight of cloth to any one who asked for it,
cloth would be worth no more in the market than the yarn
it contained. As soon as coin is worth a fraction more than
the value of the bullion, it becomes the interest of the hold-
ers of bullion to send it to be coined. If Government, how-
ever, throws the expense of coinage, as is reasonable, upon
the holder, by making a charge to cover the expense, (which
is done by giving back rather less in com than has been re-
ceived in bullion, and is called levying a seignorage), the coin
will rise, to the extent of the seignorage, above the value of
the bullion. If the mint kept back one per cent, to pay the
expense of coinage, it would be against the interest of the
holders of bullion to have it coined, until the coim was more
valuable than the bullion by at least that fraction. The
coin, therefore, would be kept one per cent higher in value,
which could only be by keeping it one per cent less in quan-
tity, than if its coinage were gratuitous.

The Government might attempt to obtain a profit by the
transaction, and might lay on a seignorage calculated for
that purpose; but whatever they took for comage beyond
its expenses, would be so much profit on private coining.
Coining, though not so easy an operation as melting, is far
from a difficult one, and, when the coin produced is of full
weight and standard fineness, is very difficult to detect. If,
therefore, a profit could be made by coining good money, it
would certainly be done; and the attempt to make seignorage
a source of revenue would be defeated. Any attempt to keep
the value of the coin at an artificial elevation, not by a seig-
norage, but by refusing to coin, would be frustrated in the
same manner™*.


* Tn England, although there is no seignorage on gold coin, (the Mint
returning in coin the same weight of pure metal which it receives in bul-


26 BOOK III. CHAPTER Ix. § 2.


§ 2. The value of money, then, conforms permanently,
and, in a state of freedom, almost immediately, to the value
of the metal of which it is made; with the addition, or not,
of the expenses of coinage, according as those expenses are
borne by the individual or by the state, This simplifies ex-
tremely the question which we have here to consider: since
gold and silver bullion are commodities like any others, and
their value depends, like that of other things, on their cost of
production.

To the majority of civilized countries, gold and silver are
foreign products: and the circumstances which govern the
values of foreign products, present some questions which we
are not yet ready to examine. For the present therefore we
must suppose the country which is the subject of our
inquiries, to be supplied with gold and silver by its own mines,
reserving for future consideration how far our conclusions
require modification, to adapt them to the more usual case.

Of the three classes into which commodities are divided—
those absolutely limited in supply, those which may be had
in unlimited quantity ata given cost of production, and those
which may be had in unlimited quantity, but at an increasing
cost of production—the precious metals, being the produce of
mines, belong to the third class. Their natural value, there-
fore, is proportional to their cost of production in the most
unfavourable existing circumstances, that is, at the worst mine
which it is necessary to work in order to obtain the required
supply. A pound weight of gold, will, in the country of the
mines, exchange on the average for as much of every other


lion) there is a delay of a few weeks after the bullion is deposited, before
the coin can be obtained, occasioning a loss of interest, which, to the
holder, is equivalent to a trifling seignorage. From this cause, the value of
coin is in general slightly above that of the bullion it contains. An ounce
of gold, according to the quantity of metal in a sovereign, should be worth
31. 17s. 103d.; but it was usually quoted at 3/. 17s. 6d., until the Bank


Charter Act of 1844 made it imperative on the Bank to give its notes for all
bullion offered to it at the rate of 31. 17s. 9d.


VALUE OF MONEY. 27


commodity, as is produced at a cost equal to its own; mean-
ing by its own cost, the cost of producing it at the worst
mines which the existing demand makes it necessary to work.
The average value of gold is made to conform to its natural
value in the same manner as the values of other things are
made to conform to their natural value. Suppose that it were
selling above its natural value; that is, above the value which
is an equivalent for the labour and expense of mining, and for
the risks attending a branch of industry in which nine out of
ten experiments are failures. A part of the mass of floating
capital which is on the look-out for investment, would take
the direction of mining enterprise; the supply would thus be
increased, and the value would fall. If, on the contrary, it
were selling below its natural value, miners would not be
obtaining the ordinary profit; they would slacken their
works; if the depreciation was great, some of the inferior
mines would perhaps stop working altogether: and a falling
off in the annual supply, preventing the annual wear and tear
from being completely compensated, would by degrees reduce
the quantity, and restore the value.

When examined more closely, the followmg are the
details of the process. If gold is above its natural or cost
value—the coin, as we have seen, conforming in its value to the
bullion—money will be of high value, and the prices of all
things, labour included, will be low. These low prices will
lower the expenses of all producers: but as their returns will
also be lowered, no advantage will be obtained by any pro-
ducer, except the producer of gold: whose returns from his
mine, not depending on price, will be the same as before, and
his expenses being less, he will obtain extra profits, and will
be stimulated to increase his production.  converso if the
metal is below its natural value: since this is as much as to
say that prices are high, and the money expenses of all pro-
ducers unusually great: for this, however, all other producers
will be compensated by increased money returns: the miner
alone will extract from his mine no more metal than before,


28 BOOK Ill. CHAPTER Ix. § 3.


while his expenses will be greater: his profits therefore being
diminished or annihilated, he will diminish his production, if
not abandon his employment.

In this manner it is that the value of money is made to
conform to the cost of production of the metal of which it is
made. It may be well however to repeat (what has been
said before) that the adjustment takes a long time to effect,
in the case of a commodity so generally desired and at the
same time so durable as the precious metals. Being so
largely used not only as money but for plate and ornament,
there is at all times a very large quantity of these metals in
existence: while they are so slowly worn out, that a com-
paratively small annual production is sufficient to keep up the
supply, and to make any addition to it which may be required
by the increase of goods to be circulated, or by the
increased demand for gold and silver articles by wealthy con-
sumers. Even if this small annual supply were stopt
entirely (which it never is, the richer mines continuing to be
worked, though at some diminution of rent) it would require
many years to reduce the quantity so much as to make any
very material difference in prices. The quantity may be in-
creased, much more rapidly than it can be diminished; but
the increase must be very great before it can make itself much
felt over such a mass of the precious metals as exists in the
whole commercial world. And hence the effects of all
changes in the conditions of production of the precious metals
are at first, and continue to be for many years, questions of
quantity only, with little reference to cost of production.


§ 3. Since, however, the value of money really conforms,


for any other commodity, when the truth is that it is


! like that of other things, although more slowly, to its cost

et of production, some political economists have objected alto-

4 gether to the statement that the value of money depends on

ling its quantity combined with the rapidity of circulation; which,

i: they think, is assuming a law for money that does not exist
|


VALUE OF MONEY. 29


governed by the very same laws. To this we may answer,
in the first place, that the statement in question assumes no
peculiar law. It is simply the law of demand and supply,
which is acknowledged to be applicable to all commodities,
and which, in the case of money as of most other things, is
controlled, but not set aside, by the law of cost of produc-—
tion, since cost of production would have no effect on value
if it could have none on supply. But, secondly, there really
is, in one respect, a closer connexion between the value of
money and its quantity, than between the values of other
things and their quantity. The value of other things conforms
to the changes in the cost of production, without requiring,
as a condition, that there should be any actual alteration of
the supply: the potential alteration is sufficient; and if
there even be an actual alteration, it is but a temporary one,
except in so far as the altered value may make a difference
in the demand, and so require an increase or diminution of
supply, as a consequence, not a cause, of the alteration in
value. Now this is also true of gold and silver, considered
as articles of expenditure for ornament and luxury; but it is
not true of money. If the cost of production of gold were
reduced one-fourth, by the discovery of more fertile mines, it
might happen that there would not be more of it bought for
plate, gilding, or jewellery, than before; and if so, though
the value would fall, the quantity extracted from the mines
for these purposes would be no greater than previously. Not
so with the portion used as money: that portion could
not fall in value one-fourth, unless actually increased one-
fourth; for, at prices one-fourth higher, one-fourth more
money would be required to make the accustomed purchases;
and if this were not forthcoming, some of the commodities
would be without purchasers, and prices could not be kept
up. Alterations, therefore, in the cost of production of the
precious metals, do not act upon the value of money except
just in proportion as they increase or diminish its quantity;
which cannot be said of any other commodity, It would


30 BOOK III, CHAPTER Ix. § 2.


therefore, I conceive, be an error, both scientifically and
practically, to discard the proposition which asserts a con-
nexion between the value of money and its quantity.

It is evident, however, that the cost of production, in the
long run, regulates the quantity; and that every country
(temporary fluctuations excepted) will possess, and have in
circulation, just that quantity of money, which will perform
all the exchanges required of it, consistently with maintaining
a value conformable to its cost of production. The prices of
things will, on the average, be such that money will exchange
for its own cost in all other goods: and, precisely because
the quantity cannot be prevented from affecting the value,
the quantity itself will be kept at the amount consistent with
that standard of prices—at the amount necessary for perform-
ing, at those prices, all the business required of it.

“The quantity wanted will depend partly on the cost of
producing gold, and partly on the rapidity of its circulation.
The rapidity of circulation being given, it would depend on
the cost of production: and the cost of production being
given, the quantity of money would depend on the rapidity
of its circulation*.” After what has been already said, |
hope that neither of these propositions stands in need of any
further illustration.

Money, then, like commodities in general, having a value
dependent on, and proportional to, its cost of production; the
theory of money is, by the admission of this principle, stript
of a great part of the mystery which apparently surrounded
it. We must not forget, however, that this doctrine only
applies to the places in which the precious metals are actu~
ally produced; and that we have yet to enquire whether the
law of the dependence of value on cost of production applies
to the exchange of things produced at distant places. But


* From some printed, but not published, Lectures of Mr. Senior: in
which the great differences in the business done by money, as well as in the
rapidity of its circulation, in different states of society and civilization, are
interestingly illustrated.


VALUE OF MONEY. 31


however this may be, our propositions with respect to value
will require no other alteration, where money is an imported
commodity, than that of substituting for the cost of its pro-
duction, the cost of obtaining it in the country. Every
foreign commodity is bought by giving for it some domestic
production; and the labour and capital which a foreign com-
modity costs to us, is the labour and capital expended in
producing the quantity of our own goods which we give in
exchange for it. What this quantity depends upon,—what
determines the proportions of interchange between the pro-
ductions of one country and those of another,—is indeed a
question of somewhat greater complexity than those we have
hitherto considered. But this at least is indisputable, that
within the country itself the value of imported commodities
is determined by the value, and consequently by the cost of
production, of the equivalent given for them; and money,


where it is an imported commodity, is subject to the same
law.


CHAPTER X.


OF A DOUBLE STANDARD, AND SUBSIDIARY COINS.


§ 1. Atruover the qualities necessary to fit any com-
modity for being used as money are very rarely united in any
considerable perfection, there are two commodities which
possess them in an eminent, and nearly an equal degree; the
two precious metals, as they are called; gold and silver.
Some nations have accordingly attempted to compose their
circulating medium of these two metals indiscriminately.

There is an obvious convenience in making use of the
more costly metal for larger payments, and the cheaper one
for smaller; and the only question relates to the mode in
which this can best be done. The mode most frequently
adopted has been to establish between the two metals a fixed
proportion ; to decide, for example, that a gold coin called a
sovereign should be equivalent to twenty of the silver coins
called shillings: both the one and the other being called, in
the ordinary money of account of the country, by the same
denomination, a pound; and it being left free to every one
who has a pound to pay, either to pay it in the one metal or
in the other.

At the time when the valuation of the two metals rela-
tively to each other, say twenty shillings to the sovereign, or
twenty-one shillings to the guinea, was first made, the pro-
portion probably corresponded, as nearly as it could be made
to do, with the ordinary relative values of the two metals,
grounded on their cost of production ; and if those natural
or cost values always continued to bear the same ratio to one
another, the arrangement would be unobjectionable. This,
however, is far from being the fact. Gold and silver, though
the least variable in yalue of all commodities, are not invari-


DOUBLE STANDARD, AND SUBSIDIARY COINS. 33


able, and do not always vary simultaneously. Silver, for
example, was lowered in permanent value more than gold, by
the discovery of the American mines; and those small varia-
tions of value which take place occasionally, do not affect
both metals alike. Suppose such a variation to take place:
the value of the two metals relatively to one another no
longer agreeing with their rated proportion, one or other of
them will now be rated below its bullion value, and there will
a profit to be made by melting it.

Suppose, for example, that gold rises in value relatively
to silver, so that the quantity of gold in a sovereign is now
worth more than the quantity of silver in twenty shillings. ©
Two consequences will ensue. No debtor will any longer
find it his interest to pay in gold. He will always pay in
silver, because twenty shillimgs are a legal tender for a debt of
one pound, and he can procure silver convertible into twenty
shillings for less gold than that contained ina sovereign. The
other consequence will be that unless a sovereign can be sold
for more than twenty shillings, all the sovereigns will be
melted, since as bullion they will purchase a greater number
of shillings than they exchange for as coin. The converse
of all this would happen if silver, instead of gold, were the
metal which had risen in comparative value. A sovereign
would not now be worth so much as twenty shillings, and
whoever had a pound to pay would prefer paying it by a
sovereign; while the silver coins would be collected for the
purpose of being melted, and sold as bullion for gold at their
real value, that is, above the legal valuation. The money of
the community, therefore, would never really consist of both
metals, but of the one only which, at the particular time,
best suited the interest of debtors; and the standard of the
currency would be constantly liable to change from the one
metal to the other, at a loss to the public, on each change, of
the expense of coinage on the metal which fell out of use.

It appears, therefore, that the value of money is liable to
more frequent fluctuations when both metals are a legal

VOL. II. D


eer Ona reese


34 BOOK Ill. CHAPTER x. § 2.


tender at a fixed valuation, than when the exclusive standard
of the currency is either gold or silver. Instead of being
only affected by variations in the cost of production of one
metal, it is subject to derangement from those of two. The
particular kind of variation to which a currency is rendered
more liable by having two legal standards, is a fall of value,
or what is commonly called a depreciation ; since practically
that one of the two metals will always be the standard, of
which the real has fallen below the rated value. If the ten-
dency of the metals be to rise in value, all payments will be
made in the one which has risen least; and if to fall, then in
that which has fallen most.


§ 2. The plan of a double standard is still occasionally
brought forward by here and there a writer or orator as a
great improvement in currency. It is probable that, with
most of its adherents, its chief merit is its tendency to a sort
of depreciation, there being at all times abundance of sup-
porters for any mode, either open or covert, of lowering the
standard. Some, however, are influenced by an exaggerated
estimate of an advantage which to a certain extent is real,
that of being able to have recourse, for replenishing the
circulation, to the united stock of gold and silver in the
commercial world, instead of being confined to one of them,
which, from accidental absorption, may not be obtainable
with sufficient rapidity. The advantage without the dis-
advantages of a double standard, seems to be best obtained
by those nations, with whom one only of the two metals is a
legal tender, but the other also is coined, and allowed to pass
for whatever value the market assigns to it. This is the
case in France. Silver alone is (I believe) a legal tender,
and all sums are expressed and accounts kept in francs, a
silver coin. Gold is also coined, for convenience, but does
not pass at a fixed valuation: the twenty francs marked on
a napoleon are merely nominal, napoleons being never to be
bought for that sum, but always bearing a small premium,


(Sy


DOUBLE STANDARD, AND SUBSIDIARY COINS. 3


or agio as it is called; though, as the agio is very trifling,
(the bullion value differmg very little from twenty francs) it
is seldom possible to pass a napoleon for more than that
sum in ordinary retail transactions. Silver, then, is the real
money of the country, and gold coin only a merchandize; but
though not a legal tender, it answers all the real purposes of
one, since no creditor is at all likely to refuse receiving it at
the market price, in payment of his debt.

When this plan is adopted, it is naturally the more costly
metal which is left to be bought and sold as an article of
commerce. But nations which, hke Hngland, adopt the
more costly of the two as their standard, resort to a different
expedient for retaining them both in circulation, namely, to
make silver a legal tender, but only for small payments. In
England no one can be compelled to receive silver in pay-
ment for a larger amount than forty shillings. With this
regulation there is necessarily combined another, namely,
that silver coin should be rated, in comparison with gold,
somewhat above its intrinsic value; that there should not
be, in twenty shillings, as much silver as is worth a sovereign:
for if there were, a very slight turn of the market in its
favour would make it worth more than a sovereign, and it
would be profitable to melt the silver coin. The over-valua-
tion of the silver coin creates an inducement to buy silver
and send it to the mint to be coined, since it is received back
at a higher value than properly belongs to it: this, however,
has been guarded against, by limiting the quantity of the
silver coinage, which is not left, like that of gold, to the
discretion of individuals, but is determined by the govern-
ment, and restricted to the amount supposed to be required
for small payments. The only precaution necessary is not to
put so high a valuation upon the silver, as to hold out a
strong temptation to private coining.


CHAPTER XI.


OF CREDIT, AS A SUBSTITUTE FOR MONEY.


§1. Tur functions of credit, have been a subject of as
much misunderstanding and as much confusion of ideas, aS
any single topic in Political Economy. This is not owing to
any peculiar difficulty in the theory of the subject, but to the
complex nature of some of the mercantile phenomena arising
from the forms in which credit clothes itself; by which atten-
tion is diverted from the properties of credit in general, to the
peculiarities of its particular forms.

As a specimen of the confused notions entertained re-
specting the nature of credit, we may advert to the exaggerated
language so often used respecting its national importance.
Credit has a great, but not, as many people seem to suppose
a magical power; it cannot make something out of nothing,
How often is an extension of credit talked of as an equivalent
to a creation of capital, or as if credit actually were capital.
It seems strange that there should be any need to point out,
that credit being only permission to use the capital of another
person, the means of production cannot be increased by it,
but only transferred. If the borrower’s means of production
and of employing labour are increased by the credit given him,
the lender’s are as much diminished. The same sum cannot
be used as capital both by the owner, and also by the person
to whom it is lent: it cannot supply its full value in wages,
tools, and materials, to two sets of labourers at once. It is
true that the capital which A has borrowed from B, and
makes use of in his business, still forms part of the wealth of
B for other purposes; he can enter into engagements in
reliance on it, and can even borrow, when needful, an equiva~
lent sum on the security of it; so that toa superficial eye it


CREDIT AS A SUBSTITUTE FOR MONEY. 37)


might seem as if both B and A had the use of it at once.
But the smallest consideration will shew that when B has
parted with his capital to A, the use of it as capital rests
with A alone, and that B has no other service from it than in
so far as his ultimate claim upon it serves him to obtain the
use of another capital from a third person, C. All capital
(not his own) of which any person has really the use, is, and
must be, so much subtracted from the capital of some one
else.


§ 2. But though credit is never anything more than a
transfer of capital from hand to hand, it is generally, and
naturally, a transfer to hands more competent to employ the
capital efficiently in production. If there were no such thing
as credit, or if, from general insecurity and want of confi-
dence, it were scantily practised, many persons who possess
more or less of capital, but who from their occupations, or
for want of the necessary skill and knowledge, cannot person-
ally superintend its employment, would derive no benefit
from it: their funds would either lie idle, or would be, per-
haps, wasted and annihilated in unskilful attempts to make
them yield a profit. All this capital is now lent at interest,
and made available for production. Capital thus circum-
stanced forms a large portion of the productive resources of
any commercial country ; and is naturally attracted to those
producers or traders who, being in the greatest business, have
the means of employing it to most advantage; because such

‘are both the most desirous to obtain it, and able to give the
best security. Although, therefore, the productive funds of
the country are not increased by credit, they are called into a
more complete state of productive activity. As the confi-
dence on which credit is grounded extends itself, means are
developed by which even the smallest portions of capital, the
sums which each person keeps by him to meet contingencies,
are made available for productive uses. The principal instru-
ments for this purpose are banks of deposit. Where these


38 BOOK Ill. CHAPTER x1. § 2.


do not exist, a prudent person must keep a sufficient sum
unemployed in his own possession, to meet every demand
which he has even a slight reason for thinking himself liable
to. When the practice however has grown up of keeping this
reserve not in his own custody but with a banker, many
small sums, previously lying idle, become aggregated in the
banker’s hands; and the banker, being taught by experience
what proportion of the amount is likely to be wanted in a
given time, and knowing that if one depositor happens to
require more than the average, another will require less, is
able to lend the remainder, that is, the far greater part, to
i i producers and dealers: thereby adding the amount, not indeed
jeu td to the capital in existence, but to that in employment, and
(ie |
|


SS


making a corresponding addition to the aggregate production
of the community.

While credit is thus indispensable for rendering the whole
capital of the country productive, it is also the means by
Baie | which the industrial talent of the country is turned to most
account for purposes of production. Many a person who
has either no capital of his own, or very little, but who has
qualifications for business which are known and appreciated
by some persons of capital, is enabled to obtain either ad-
vances in money or more frequently goods on credit, by
which his industrial capacities are made instrumental to the
increase of the public wealth: and this benefit will be reaped
far more largely, whenever, through better laws and better
education, the community shall have made such progress in
integrity, that personal character can be accepted as a suffi-
cient guarantee not only against dishonestly appropriating,
but against dishonestly risking, what belongs to another.

Such are, in the most general point of view, the uses of
credit to the productive resources of the world. But these
considerations only apply to the credit given to the indus-
trious classes—to producers and dealers. Credit given by
dealers to unproductive consumers is never an addition, but
always a detriment, to the sources of public wealth. It makes


CREDIT AS A SUBSTITUTE FOR MONEY. 39


over in temporary use, not the capital of the unproductive
classes to the productive, but that of the productive to the
unproductive. If A, a dealer, supplies goods to B, a land-
owner or annuitant, to be paid for at the end of five years, as
much of the capital of A as is equal to the value of these
goods, remains for five years unproductive. During such a
period, if payment had been made at once, the sum might
have been several times expended and replaced, and goods
-to the amount might have been several times produced, con-
sumed, and reproduced : consequently B’s withholding 100/.
for five years, even if he pays at last, has cost to the labouring
classes of the community during that period an absolute
loss of probably several times that amount. A, individually,
is compensated, by putting a higher price upon his goods,
which is ultimately paid by B: but there is no compensation
made to the labouring classes, the chief sufferers by every
diversion of capital, whether permanently or temporarily, to
unproductive uses. The country has had 100i. less of capital
during those five years, B having taken that amount from
A’s capital, and spent it unproductively, in anticipation of
his own means, and having only after five years set apart
a sum from his income and converted it into capital for the
purpose of indemnifying A.


§ 3. Thus far of the general function of Credit in produc-
tion. It is not a productive power in itself, though, without
it, the productive powers already existing could not be brought
into complete employment. But a more intricate portion of
the theory of Credit is its influence on prices; the chief cause
of most of the mercantile phenomena which perplex ob-
servers. In a state of commerce in which much credit is
habitually given, general prices at any moment depend much
more upon the state of credit than upon the quantity of
money. For credit, though it is not productive power, is
purchasing power; and a person who, having credit, avails
himself of it in the purchase of goods, creates just as much


SE a et eS


40 BOOK Ill. CHAPTER xi. § 3.


demand for the goods, and tends quite as much to raise their
price, as if he made an equal amount of purchases with ready
money.

The credit which we are now called upon to consider, as
a distinct purchasing power, independent of money, is of
course not credit in its simplest form, that of money lent by
one person to another and paid directly into his hands; for
when the borrower expends this in purchases, he makes the
purchases with money, not credit, and exerts no purchasing
power over and above that conferred by the money. The
forms of credit which create purchasing power, are those in
which no money passes at the time, and very often does not
pass at all, the transaction being included with a mass of
other transactions in an account, and nothing paid but a
balance. This takes place in a variety of ways, which we
shall proceed to examine, beginning, as is our custom, with
the simplest. -

‘First: Suppose A and B to be two dealers, who have
transactions with each other both as buyers and as sellers.
A buys from B on credit. B does the like with respect to A.
At the end of the year the sum of A’s debts to B is set
against the sum of B’s debts to A, and it is ascertained to
which side a balance is due. This balance, which may be
less than the amount of many of the transactions singly, and
is necessarily less than the sum of the transactions, is all
that is paid in money; and perhaps even this is not paid, but
carried over in an account current to the next year. A single
payment of a hundred pounds may in this manner suffice to
liquidate a long series of transactions, some of them to the
value of thousands.

But secondly: the debts of A to B may be paid with-
out the intervention of money, even though there be no
reciprocal debts of B to A. A may satisfy B by making
over to him a debt due to himself from a third person C.
This is conveniently done by means of a written instrument
ealled a bill of exchange, which is in fact a transferable


CREDIT AS A SUBSTITUTE FOR MONEY. 41


order by a creditor upon his debtor, and when accepted by
the debtor, that is, authenticated by his signature, becomes
an acknowledgment of debt.


§ 4. Bills of exchange were first introduced to save
the expense and risk of transporting the precious metals
from place to place. “Let it be supposed,” says Mr. Henry
Thornton*, “that there are in London ten manufacturers
who sell their article to ten shopkeepers in York, by whom
it is retailed; and that there are in York ten manufacturers
of another commodity, who sell it to ten shopkeepers in
London. There would be no occasion for the ten shop-
keepers in London to send yearly to York, guineas for the
payment of the York manufacturers, and for the ten York
shopkeepers to send yearly as many guineas to London. It
would only be necessary for the York manufacturers to
receive from each of the shopkeepers at their own door, the
money in question, giving in return letters which should
acknowledge the receipt.of it; and which should also direct
the money, lying ready in the hands of their debtors in
London, to be paid to the London manufacturers, so as to
cancel the debt in London in the same manner as that at
York. The expense and the risk of all transmission of
money would thus be saved. Letters ordering the transfer
of the debt are termed, in the language of the present day,
pills of exchange. They are bills by which the debt of one
person is exchanged for the debt of another ; and the debt,
perhaps, which is due in one place for the debt due in
another.”

Bills of exchange having been found convenient as means
of paying debts at distant places without the expense of


a


* Enquiry into the Nature and Effects of the Paper Credit of Great
Britain, p. 24. This work, published in 1802, is even now the clearest
exposition that I am acquainted with, in the English language, of the
modes in which eredit is given and taken in a mercantile community.


49 BOOK Ill. CHAPTER xI. § 4.


transporting the precious metals, their use was afterwards
greatly extended from another motive. It is usual in every
trade to give a certain length of credit for goods bought:
three months, six months, a year, even two years, according
to the convenience or custom of the particular trade. A
dealer who has sold goods, for which he is to be paid in six
months, but who desires to receive the amount sooner, draws
a bill on his debtor payable in six months, and gets the bill
discounted by a banker or other money-lender, that is,
transfers the bill to him, receiving the amount, minus interest
for the time it has still torun. It has become one of the
chief functions of bills of exchange to serve as a means by
which a debt due from one person can thus be made available
for obtaining credit from another. The convenience of the
expedient has led to the frequent creation of bills of exchange
not grounded on any debt previously due to the drawer of
the bill by the person on whom it is drawn. These are
called accommodation bills; and sometimes, with a tinge of
disapprobation, fictitious bills. Their nature is so clearly
stated, and with such judicious remarks, by the author whom
I have just quoted, that I shall transcribe the entire pas-
sage™. ;

“A, being in want of 100/., requests B to accept a note
or bill drawn at two months, which B, therefore, on the face
of it, is bound to pay; it is understood, however, that A
will take care either to discharge the bill himself, or to furnish
B with the means of paying it. A obtains ready money for
the bill on the joint credit of the two parties. A fulfils his
promise of paying it when due, and thus concludes the
transaction. This service rendered by B to A is, however,
not unlikely to be requited at a more or less distant period
by a similar acceptance of a bill on A, drawn and discounted
for B’s convenience.

“‘ Let us now compare such a bill with a real bill. Let


* Pp, 29— 33.


CREDIT AS A SUBSTITUTE FOR MONEY. 43


us consider in what points they differ, or seem to differ; and
in what they agree.

“They agree, inasmuch as each is a discountable article ;
each has also been created for the purpose of being dis-
counted; and each is, perhaps, discounted in fact. Hach,
therefore, serves equally to supply means of speculation to
the merchant. So far, moreover, as bills and notes con-
stitute what is called the circulating medium, or paper cur-
rency of the country, and prevent the use of guineas, the
fictitious and the real bill are upon an equality; and if the
price of commodities be raised in proportion to the quantity
of paper currency, the one contributes to that rise exactly in
the same manner as the other.

“ Before we come to the points in which they differ, let
us advert to one point in which they are commonly supposed
to be unlike; but in which they cannot be said always or
necessarily to differ.

“ Real notes (it is sometimes said) represent actual pro-
perty. There are actual goods in existence, which are the
counterpart to every real note. Notes which are not drawn
in consequence of a sale of goods, are a species of false
wealth, by which a nation is deceived. These supply only
an imaginary capital; the others indicate one that is real.

“Tn answer to this statement it may be observed, first,
that the notes given in consequence of a real sale of goods
cannot be considered as on that account certainly representing
any actual property. Suppose that A sells 100/. worth of
goods to B at six months credit, and takes a bill at six
months for it; and that B, within a month after, sells the
same goods, at a like credit, to C, taking a like bill; and
again, that C, after another month, sells them to D, taking a
like bill, and so on. There may then, at the end of six
months, be six bills of 100/. each, existing at the same time;
and every one of these may possibly have been discounted.
Of all these bills, then, only one represents any actual pro-
_perty-


44 BOOK III. CHAPTER xI. § 4.


“In order to justify the supposition that a real bill (as it
is called) represents actual property, there ought to be some
power in the bill-holder to prevent the property which the
bill represents, from being turned to other purposes than
that of paying the bill in question. No such power exists;
neither the man who holds the real bill, nor the man who
discounts it, has any property in the specific goods for which
it was given: he as much trusts to the general ability to pay
of the giver of the bill, as the holder of any fictitious bill
does. The fictitious bill may, in many cases, be a bill given
by a person having a large and known capital, a part of which
the fictitious bill may be said in that case to represent. The
supposition that real bills represent property, and that ficti-
tious bills do not, seems, therefore, to be one by which more
than justice is done to one of these species of bills, and some-
thing less than justice to the other.

“We come next to some points in which they differ.

“First, the fictitious note, or note of accommodation, is
lable to the objection that it professes to be what it is not.
This objection, however, lies only against those fictitious
bills which are passed as real. In many cases, it is suffi-
ciently obvious what they are. Secondly, the fictitious bill
is, in general, less likely to be punctually paid than the real
one. There is a general presumption, that the dealer in
fictitious bills is a man who is a more adventurous speculator
than he who carefully abstains from them. It follows,
thirdly, that fictitious bills, besides being less safe, are less
subject to limitation as to their quantity. The extent of a
man’s actual sales forms some limit to the amount of his real
notes; and as it is highly desirable in commerce that credit
should be dealt out to all persons in some sort of regular and
due proportion, the measure of a man’s actual sales certified
by the appearance of his bills drawn in virtue of those sales,
is some rule in the case, though a very imperfect one in many
respects.

“A fictitious bill, or bill of accommodation, is evidently,


CREDIT AS A SUBSTITUTE FOR MONEY. 45


in substance, the same as any common promissory note; and
even better in this respect, that there is but one security to
the promissory note, whereas in the case of the bill of
accommodation, there are two. So much jealousy subsists
lest traders should push their means of raising money too
far, that paper, the same in its general nature with that which
is given, being the only paper which can be given, by men
out of business, is deemed somewhat discreditable when
coming from a merchant. And because such paper, when in
the merchant’s hand, necessarily imitates the paper which
passes on the occasion of a sale of goods, the epithet fictitious
has been cast upon it; an epithet which has seemed to coun-
tenance the confused and mistaken notion, that there is
something altogether false and delusive in the nature of a
certain part both of the paper and of the apparent wealth of
the country.”

A bill of exchange, when merely discounted, and kept in
the portfolio of the discounter until it falls due, does not
perform the functions or supply the place of money, but is
itself bought and sold for money. It is no more currency
than the public funds, or any other securities. But when a
bill drawn upon one person is paid to another (or even to the
same person) in discharge of a debt or a pecuniary claim, it
does something for which, if the bill did not exist, money
would be required: it performs the functions of currency.
This is a use to which bills of exchange are often applied.
“They not only,” continues Mr. Thornton*, “spare the use
of ready money; they also occupy its place in many cases.
Let us imagine a farmer in the country to discharge a debt of
102. to his neighbouring grocer, by giving him a bill for that
sum, drawn on his cornfactor in London for grain sold in the
metropolis; and the grocer to transmit the bill, he having
previously indorsed it, to a neighbouring sugar-baker, in dis-
charge of a like debt; and the sugar-baker to send it, when


E40:


46 BOOK III. CHAPTER XI. § 5.


again indorsed, to a West India merchant in an outport, and
the West India merchant to deliver it to his country banker,
who also indorses it, and sends it into further circulation.
The bill in this case will have effected five payments exactly
as if it were a 10/. note payable to bearer on demand. A
multitude of bills pass between trader and trader in the
country, in the manner which has been described ; and they
evidently form, in the strictest sense, a part of the circulating
medium of the kingdom.”

Many bills, both domestic and foreign, are at last pre-
sented for payment quite covered with indorsements, each
of which represents either a fresh discounting, or a pecuniary
transaction in which the bill has performed the functions of
money. Up to twenty years ago, the circulating medium of
Lancashire for sums above five pounds, was almost entirely
composed of such bills.


§ 5. A third form in which credit is employed as a
substitute for currency, is that of promissory notes. A bill
drawn upon any one and accepted by him, and a note of hand
by him promising to pay the same sum, are, as far as he is con-
cerned, exactly equivalent, except that the former commonly
bears interest and the latter generally does not. But it is
chiefly in the latter form that it has become, in commercial
countries, an express occupation to issue such substitutes for
money. Dealers in money (as lenders by profession are
improperly called) desire, like other dealers, to stretch their
operations beyond what can be carried on by their own
means: they wish to lend, not their capital merely, but their
credit, and not only such portion of their credit as consists
of funds actually deposited with them, but their power of
obtaining credit from the public generally, so far as they
think they can safely employ it. This is done in a very
convenient manner by lending their own promissory notes
payable to bearer on demand: the borrower being willing to
accept these as so much money, because the credit of the


CREDIT AS A SUBSTITUTE FOR MONEY. 47


lender makes other people willingly receive them on the same
footing, in purchases or other payments. These notes, there-
fore, perform all the functions of currency, and render an
equivalent amount of money which was previously in circu-
lation, unnecessary. As, however, being payable on demand,
they may be at any time returned on the issuer, and money
demanded for them, he must, on pain of bankruptcy, keep
by him as much money as will enable him to meet any
claims of that sort which can be expected to occur within
the time necessary for providing himself with more: and
prudence also requires that he should not attempt to issue
notes beyond the amount which experience shows can remain
in circulation without being presented for payment.

The convenience of this mode of (as it were) coining
credit, having once been discovered, governments have
availed themselves of the same expedient, and have issued
their own promissory notes in payment of their expenses; a
resource the more useful, because it is the only mode in
which they are able to borrow money without paying interest,
their promises to pay on demand being, in the estimation of
the holders, equivalent to money in hand. The practical
differences between such government notes and the issues of
private bankers, and the further diversities of which this
class of substitutes for money are susceptible, will be con-
sidered presently.


§ 6. A fourth mode of making credit answer the pur-
poses of money, by which, when carried far enough, money
may be very completely superseded, consists in making pay-
ments by cheques. The custom of keeping the spare cash
reserved for immediate use or against contingent demands,
in the hands of a banker, and making all payments, except
small ones, by orders on bankers, is in this country spreading
to a continually larger portion of the public. If the person
making the payment, and the person receiving it, kept their
money with the same banker, the payment would take place


48 BOOK Ill. CHAPTER xI. § 6,


without any intervention of money, by the mere transfer of
its amount in the banker’s books from the credit of the
payer to that of the receiver. If all persons in London kept
their cash at the same banker’s, and made all their payments
by means of cheques, no money would be required or used
for any transactions beginning and terminating in London,
This ideal limit is almost attained in fact, so far as regards
transactions between dealers. It is chiefly in the retail
transactions between dealers and consumers, and in the pay-
ment of wages, that money or bank notes now pass, and
then only when the amounts are small. In London, even
shopkeepers of any amount of capital or extent of business
haye generally an account with a banker; which, besides the
safety and convenience of the practice, is to their advantage
in another respect, by giving them an understood claim to
have their bills discounted in cases when they could not
otherwise expect it. As for the merchants and larger dealers,
they habitually make all payments in the course of their
business by cheques. They do not, however, all deal with
the same banker, and when A gives a cheque to B, B usually
pays it not into the same but into some other bank. But
the convenience of business has given birth to an arrange-
ment which makes all the banking houses of the City of
London, for certain purposes, virtually one establishment.
A banker does not send the cheques which are paid into his
banking house, to the banks on which they are drawn, and
demand money for them. There is a building called the
Clearing-house, to which every City banker sends, each after-
noon, all the cheques on other bankers which he has received
during the day, and they are there exchanged for the cheques
on him which have come into the hands of other bankers,
the balances only being paid in money. By this contrivance,
all the business transactions of the City of London during
that day, amounting often to millions of pounds, and a vast
amount besides of country transactions, represented by bills
which country bankers have drawn upon their London cor-


CREDIT AS A SUBSTITUTE FOR MONEY. 49


respondents, are liquidated by payments not exceeding on
the average 200,000/.*

By means of the various instruments of credit which
have now been explained, the immense business of a country
like Great Britain is transacted with an amount of the pre-
cious metals surprisingly small; many times smaller, in pro-
portion to the pecuniary value of the commodities bought
and sold, than is found necessary in France, or any other
country in which, the habit and the disposition to give credit
not being so generally diffused, these “economizing expe-
dients,” as they have been called, are not practised to the
same extent. What becomes of the money thus superseded
in its functions, and by what process it is made to disappear
from circulation, are questions the discussion of which must
be for a short time postponed.


* According to Mr. Tooke (Inquiry into the Currency Principle, p. 27,)
the adjustments at the clearing house “in the year 1839 amounted to
954,401,6007., making an average amount of payments of upwards of
3,000,000. of bills of exchange and cheques daily effected through the
medium of little more than 200,0007. of bank notes.”


ViOiee Dil 40)


noose dL BO Bet ES


CHAPTER XII.


INFLUENCE OF CREDIT ON PRICES.


§ 1. Havine now formed a general idea of the modes
in which credit is made available as a substitute for money,
we have to consider in what manner the use of these substi-
tutes affects the value of money, or, what is equivalent, the
prices of commodities. It is hardly necessary to say that the
permanent value of money—the natural and average prices
of commodities—are not in question here. These are deter-
mined by the cost of producing or of obtaining the precious
metals. An ounce of gold or silver will in the long run ex-
change for as much of every other commodity, as can be pro-
duced or imported at the same cost with itself. And an
order, or note of hand, or bill payable at sight, for an ounce
of gold, while the credit of the giver is unimpaired, is worth
neither more nor less than the gold itself.

It is not, however, with ultimate or average, but with
immediate and temporary prices, that we are now concerned.
These, as we have seen, may deviate very widely from the
standard of cost of production. Among other causes of
fluctuation, one we have found to be, the quantity of money
in circulation. Other things being the same, an increase of
the money in circulation raises prices, a diminution lowers
them. If more money is thrown into circulation than the
quantity which can circulate at a value conformable to its
cost of production, the value of money, so long as the excess
lasts, will remain below the standard of cost of production,
and general prices will be sustained above the natural
rate. :

But we have now found that there are other things, such
as bank notes, bills of exchange, and cheques, which circulate


INFLUENCE OF CREDIT ON PRICES. Salt


as money, and perform all the functions of it: and the ques-
tion arises, Do these various substitutes operate on prices in
the same manner as money itself? Does an increase in the
quantity of transferable paper tend to raise prices, in the
same manner and degree as an increase in the quantity of
money? There has been no small amount of discussion on
this point among writers on currency, without any result so
conclusive as to have yet ebtained general assent.

I apprehend that bank notes, bills, or cheques, as such,
do not act on prices at all. What does act on prices is
Credit, in whatever shape given, and whether it gives rise to
any transferable instruments capable of passing into circula-
tion, or not.

I proceed to explain and substantiate this opinion.


§ 2. Money acts upon prices in no other way than by
being tendered in exchange for commodities. The demand
which influences the prices of commodities consists of the
money offered for them. But the money offered, is not the
same thing with the money possessed. It is sometimes less,
sometimes very much more. In the long run indeed, the
money which people lay out will be neither more nor less
than the money which they have to lay out: but this is far
from being the case at any given time. Sometimes they
keep money by them for fear of an emergency, or in expec-
tation of a more advantageous opportunity for expending it.
In that case the money is said not to be im circulation: in
plainer language, it is not offered, nor about to be offered, for
commodities. Money not in circulation has no effect on
prices. The converse, however, is a much commoner case ;
people make purchases with money not in their possession.
An article, for instance, which is paid for by a cheque on a
banker, is bought with money which not only is not in the
payer’s possession, but generally not even in the banker’s,
having been lent by him (all but the usual reserve) to other
persons. We just now made the imaginary supposition that

E 2


52 BOOK Ill. CHAPTER XII. § 2.


all persons dealt with a bank, and all with the same bank,
payments being universally made by cheques. In this ideal
case, there would be no money any where except in the hands
of the banker; who might then safely part with all of it, by
selling it as bullion, or lending it, to be sent out of the
country in exchange for goods or foreign securities. But
though there would then be no money in possession, or ulti-
mately perhaps even in existence, money would be offered,
and commodities bought with it, just as at present. People
would continue to reckon their incomes and their capitals in
money, and to make their usual purchases with orders for
the receipt of a thing which would have literally ceased to
exist. There would be in all this nothing to complain of,
so long as the money, in disappearing, left behind it an equi-
valent value in other things, applicable when required to the
reimbursement of those to whom the money originally
belonged.

In the case however of payment by cheques, the pur-
chases are at any rate made, though not with money in the
buyer’s possession, yet with money to which he has a right.
But he may make purchases with money which he only
expects to have, or even only pretends to expect. He may
obtain goods in return for his acceptances payable at a future
time; or on his note of hand; or on a simple book credit,
that is, on a mere promise to pay. All these purchases have
exactly the same effect on price, as if they were made with
ready money. The amount of purchasing power which a
person can exercise, is composed of all the money in his
possession or due to him, and of all his credit. For exercis-
ing the whole of this power he finds a sufficient motive only
under peculiar circumstances; but he always possesses it;
and the portion of it which he at any time does exercise, is
the measure of the effect which he produces on price.

Suppose that, in the expectation that some commodity
will rise in price, he determines, not only to invest in it all
his ready money, but to take up on credit, from the producers


INFLUENCE OF CREDIT ON PRICES. 53)


or importers, as much of it as their opinion of his resources
will enable him to obtain. Every one must see that by thus
acting he produces a greater effect on price, than if he limited
his purchases to the money he has actually in hand. He
creates a demand for the article to the full amount of his
money and credit taken together, and raises the price propor-
tionally to both. And this effect is produced, although none
of the written instruments called substitutes for currency
may be called into existence; though the transaction may
give rise to no bill of exchange, nor to the issue of a single
bank note. The buyer, instead of taking a mere book credit,
might have given a bill for the amount; or might have paid
for the goods with bank notes borrowed for that purpose
from a banker, thus making the purchase not on his own
credit with the seller, but on the banker’s credit with the
seller, and his own with the banker. Had he done so, he
would have produced as great an effect on price as by a
simple purehase to the same amount on a book credit, but
no greater effect. The credit itself, not the form and mode
in which it is given, is the operating cause.


§ 3. The inclination of the mercantile public to mcrease
their demand for commodities by making use of all or much
of their credit as a purchasing power, depends on their
expectation of profit. When there is a general impression
that the price of some commodity is likely to rise, from an
extra demand, a short crop, obstructions to importation, or
any other cause, there is a disposition among dealers to
increase their stocks, in order to profit by the expected rise.
This disposition tends in itself to produce the effect which it
looks forward to, a rise of price; and if the rise is consider-
able and progressive, other speculators are attracted, who, so
long as the price has not begun to fall, are willing to believe
that it will continue rising. These, by further purchases,
produce a further advance: and thus a rise of price for
which there were originally some rational grounds, is often


fae ee


54 BOOK III. CHAPTER XII. § 3.


heightened by merely speculative purchases, until it greatly
exceeds what the original grounds will justify. After a time
this begins to be perceived; the price ceases to rise, and the
holders, thinking it is time to realize their gains, are anxious
to sell. Then the price begins to decline: the holders rush
into the market to avoid a still greater loss; and, few being
willing to buy in a falling market, the price falls much more
suddenly than it rose. Those who have bought at a higher
price than reasonable calculation justified, and who have been
overtaken by the revulsion before they had realized, are losers
in proportion to the greatness of the fall, and to the quantity
of the commodity which they hold, or have bound themselves
to pay for.

Now all these effects might take place in a community to
which credit’°was unknown: the prices of some commodities
might rise from speculation, to an extravagant height, and
then fall rapidly back. But if there were no such thing as
credit, this could hardly happen with respect to commodities
generally. If all purchases were made with ready money,
the payment of increased prices for some articles would draw
an unusual proportion of the money of the community into
the markets for those articles, and must therefore draw it
away from some other class of commodities, and thus lower
their prices. The vacuum might, it is true, be partly filled
up by increased rapidity of circulation; and, in fact, the
money of the community is virtually increased in a time of
speculative activity, because people keep little of it by them,
but hasten to lay it out in some tempting adventure aS soon
as possible after they receive it. This resource, however, is
limited: on the whole, people cannot, while the quantity of
money remains the same, lay out much more of it in some
things, without laying out less in others. But what they
cannot do by ready money, they can do by an extension of
credit. When people go into the market and purchase with
money which they hope to receive hereafter, they are drawing
upon an unlimited, not a limited fund. Speculation, thus


INFLUENCE OF CREDIT ON PRICES. 55


supported, may be going on in any number of commodities,
without disturbing the regular course of business in others.
It might even be going on in all commodities at once. We
could imagine that in an epidemic fit of the passion of gamb-
ling, all dealers, instead of giving only their accustomed
orders to the manufacturers or growers of their commodity,
commenced buying up all of it which they could procure,
as far as their capital and credit would go. All prices would
rise enormously, even if there were no increase of money,
and no paper credit, but a mere extension of purchases on
book credits. After atime those who had bought would wish
to sell, and prices would collapse.

This is the ideal extreme case of what is called a com-
mercial crisis. There is said to be a commercial crisis, when
a great number of merchants and traders at once, either have,
or apprehend that they shall have, a difficulty in meeting
their engagements. The most usual cause of this general
embarrassment, is the recoil of prices after they have been
raised by a spirit of speculation, intense in degree, and
extending to many commodities. Some accident, which ex-
cites expectations of rising prices, such as the opening of a
new foreign market, or simultaneous indications of a short
supply of several great articles of commerce, sets speculation
at work in seyeral leading departments at once. The prices
rise, and the holders realize, or appear to have the power of
realizing, great gains. In certain states of the public mind,
such examples of rapid increase of fortune call forth nume-
rous imitators, and speculation not only goes much beyond
what is justified by the original grounds for expecting rise of
price, but extends itself to articles in which there never was any
such ground: these, however, rise like the rest as soon as
speculation sets in. At periods of this kind, a great exten-
sion of credit takes place. Not only do all whom the conta-
gion reaches, employ their credit much more freely than
usual; but they really have more credit, because they seem to
be making unusual gains, and because a generally reckless


56 BOOK Ill. CHAPTER XII. § 3.


and adventurous feeling prevails, which disposes people to
give as well as take credit more largely than at other times,
and give it to persons not entitled to it. In this manner, in
the celebrated speculative year 1825, and at various other
periods during the present century, the prices of many of the
principal articles of commerce rose greatly, without any fall
in others, so that general prices might without incorrectness
be said to have risen. When, after such a rise, the reaction
comes, and prices begin to fall, though at first perhaps only
through the desire of the holders to realize, speculative pur-
chases cease: but were this all, prices would only fall to the
level from which they rose, or to that which is justified by
the state of the consumption and of the supply. They fall,
however, much lower; for as, when prices were rising, and
everybody apparently making a fortune, it was easy to obtain
almost any amount of credit, so now when everybody seems
to be losing, and many fail entirely, it is with difficulty that
firms of known solidity can obtain even the credit to which
they are accustomed, and which it is the greatest inconvenience
to them to be without: because all dealers having engage-
ments to fulfil, and nobody feeling sure that the portion of
his means which he has entrusted to others will be available
in time, no one likes to part with ready money, or to post-
pone his claim to it. To these rational considerations there
is superadded, in extreme cases, a panic as unreasoning as the
previous over-confidence; money is borrowed for short periods
at almost any rate of interest, and sales of goods for imme-
diate payment are made at almost any sacrifice. ‘Thus gene-
ral prices, during a commercial revulsion, fall as much below
the usual level, as during the previous period of speculation
they had risen above it: the fall, as well as the rise, originat-
ing not in anything affecting money, but in the state of
credit—an unusually extended employment of credit during
the earlier period, followed by a great diminution, never
amounting however to an entire cessation of it, in the later.
It is not, however, universally true that the contraction


INFLUENCE OF CREDIT ON PRICES. 57


of credit, characteristic of a commercial crisis, must have
been preceded by an extraordinary and irrational extension
of it. There are other causes; and the most recent crisis,
that, of 1847, is an imstance, having been preceded by no
particular extension of credit, and by no speculations; except
those in railway shares, which, though in many cases extra-
vagant enough, yet being carried on mostly with that portion
of means which the speculators could afford to lose, were not
calculated to produce the wide-spread ruin which arises from
vicissitudes of price in the commodities in which men habi-
tually deal, and in which the bulk of their capital is invested.
The crisis of 1847 belonged to another class of mercantile
phenomena. ‘There occasionally happens a concurrence: of
circumstances tending to withdraw from the loan market a
considerable portion of the capital which usually supplies it.
These circumstances, in the present case, were great foreign
payments, (occasioned by the high price of cotton and the
unprecedented importation of food) together with the con-
tinual demands on the circulating capital of the country by
railway calls and the loan transactions of railway companies,
for the purpose of being converted into fixed capital and
made unavailable for future lending. These various demands
fell principally, as such demands always do, on the loan
market. A great, though not the greatest part of the im-
ported food, was actually paid for by the proceeds of a
government loan. The extra payments which purchasers
of corn and cotton, and railway shareholders, found them-
selves obliged to make, were either made with their own
spare cash, or with money raised for the occasion. On the
first supposition, they were made by withdrawing deposits
from bankers, and thus cutting off a part of the streams which
fed the loan market; on the second supposition, they were
made by actual drafts on the loan market, either by the sale of
securities or by taking up moneyat interest. This combination
of a fresh demand for loans with a curtailment of the capital
disposable for them, raised the rate of interest, and made it


58 BOOK Ill. CHAPTER XIl. § 4.


impossible to borrow except on the very best security.
Some firms, therefore, which by an improvident and unmer-
nae: cantile mode of conducting business had allowed their capital
i ead to become either temporarily or permanently unavailable,
became unable to command that perpetual renewal of credit
which had previously enabled them to struggle on. These firms
stopped payment: their failure involved more or less deeply
Nea | many other firms which had trusted them; and, as usual in
! such cases, the general distrust, commonly called a panic,
began to set in, and might have produced a destruction of


.
anh credit equal to that of 1825, had not circumstances which
i at may almost be called accidental, given to a very simple mea-

Hee sure of the government a fortunate power of allaying panic,

4 ii to which, when considered in itself, it had no sort of claim.


| § 4. The general operation of credit upon prices being
such as we have described, it is evident that if any particular
mode or form of credit is calculated to have a greater opera-
tion on prices than others, it can only be by giving greater
facility, or greater encouragement, to the multiplication of
credit transactions generally. If bank notes, for instance, or
bills, have a greater effect on prices than book credits, it is
not by any difference in the transactions themselves, which
are essentially the same whether taking place in the one way
or in the other: it must be that there are likely to be more
of them. If credit is likely to be more extensively used as
a purchasing power when bank notes or bills are the instru-
ment used, than when the credit is given by mere entries in
an account, to that extent and no more there is ground for
ascribing to the former a greater power over the markets
than belongs to the latter.

Now it appears that there is some such distinction. As
far as respects the particular transaction, it makes no differ-
ence in the effect on price whether A buys goods of B on
simple credit, or gives a bill for them, or pays for them with
hank notes lent to him by a banker C. The difference is in


INFLUENCE OF CREDIT ON PRICES. 59


a subsequent stage. If A has bought the goods on a book
credit, there is no obvious or convenient mode by which B can
make A’s debt to him a means of extending his own credit.
Whatever credit he has, will be due to the general opinion
entertained of his solvency; he cannot specifically pledge A’s
debt to a third person, as a security for money lent or goods
bought.. But if A has given him a bill for the amount, he
can get this discounted, which is the same thing as borrowing
money on the joint credit of A and himself: or he may pay
away the bill in exchange for goods, which is obtaining goods
on the same joint credit. In either case, here is a second
credit transaction, grounded on the first, and which would
not have taken place if the first had been transacted without
the intervention of a bill. Nor need the transactions end
here. The bill may be again discounted, or again paid away
for goods, several times before it is itself presented for pay-
ment. Nor would it be correct to say that these successive
holders, if they had not had the bill, might have attained
their purpose by purchasing goods on their own credit with
the dealers. They may not all of them be persons of credit,
or they may already have stretched their credit as far as it
will go. And at all events, either money or goods are more
readily obtained on the credit of two persons than of one.
Nobody will pretend that it is as easy a thing for a merchant
to borrow a thousand pounds on his own credit, as to get a
bill discounted to the same amount, when the drawee is of
known solvency; or that he can as easily obtain goods on a
book credit, as by paying for them with such a bill.

If we now suppose that A, instead of giving a bill, obtains
a loan of bank notes from a banker C, and with them pays
B for his goods, we shall find the difference to be still greater.
B is now independent even of a discounter: A’s bill would
have been taken in payment only by those who were ac-
quainted with his reputation for solvency, but a banker is a
person who has credit with the public generally, and whose
notes are taken in payment by every one, at least in his own


60 BOOK III. CHAPTER XII. § 4.


neighbourhood: insomuch that, by a custom which has
grown into law, payment in bank notes is a complete acquit-
tance to the payer, whereas if he has paid by a bill he still
remains liable to the:debt, if the person on whom the bill is
drawn fails to pay it when due. B therefore can expend the
whole of the bank notes without at all involving his own
credit; and whatever power he had before of obtaining goods
on book credit, remains to him unimpaired, in addition to
the purchasing power he derives from the possession of the
notes. The same remark applies to every person in succes-
sion, into whose hands the notes may come. It is only A,
the first holder, (who used his credit to obtain the notes as a
loan from the issuer,) who can possibly find the credit he
possesses in other quarters abated by it; and even in his
case that result is not probable; for though, in reason, and if
all his circumstances were known, every draft already made
upon his credit ought to diminish by so much his power of
obtaining more, yet in practice: the reverse more frequently
happens, and his having been trusted by one person is sup-
posed to be a reason why he may safely be trusted by others
also.

It appears, therefore, that bank notes are a more powerful
instrument for raising prices than bills, and bills than book
credits. It does not, indeed, follow that credit wéll be more
used because it can be. When the state of trade holds out
no particular temptation to make large purchases on credit,
dealers will use only a small portion of the credit-power,
and it will depend only on convenience whether the portion
which they use will be taken in one form or in another. [¢
is not until the circumstances of the markets, and the state of
the mercantile mind, render many persons desirous of stretch-
ing their credit to an unusual extent, that the distinctive
properties of the different forms of credit display themselves,
Credit already stretched to the utmost in the form of book
debts, would be susceptible of great additional extension by
means of bills, and of still greater by means of bank notes,


INFLUENCE OF CREDIT ON PRICES. 61


The first, because each dealer, in addition to his own credit,
would be enabled to create a further purchasing power out of
the credit which he had himself given to others: the second,
because the banker’s credit with the public at large, coimed
into notes, as bullion is coined into pieces of money to make
it portable and divisible, is so much purchasing power super-
added, in the hands of every successive holder, to that which
he may derive from his own credit. To state the matter
otherwise; one single exertion of the credit-power, in the
form of book credit, is only the foundation of a single pur-
chase: but if a bill is drawn, that same portion of credit
may serve for as many purchases as the number of times the
bill changes hands: while every bank note issued, renders
the credit of the banker a purchasing power to that amount
in the hands of all the successive holders, without impairing
any power they may possess of effecting purchases on their
own credit. Credit, in short, has exactly the same pur-
chasing power with money; and as money tells upon prices
not simply in proportion to its amount, but to its amount
multiplied by the number of times it changes hands, so also
does credit ; and credit transferable from hand to hand is in
that proportion more potent, than credit which only performs
one purchase.


§ 5. All this purchasing power, however, is operative
upon prices, only according to the proportion of it which is
used: and the effect, therefore, is only felt m a state of cir-
cumstances calculated to lead to an unusually extended use
of credit. In such a state of circumstances, that is, in
speculative times, it cannot, I think, be denied, that prices
are likely to rise higher if the speculative purchases are made
with bank notes, than when they are made with bills, and
when made by bills than when made by book credits. This,
however, is of far less practical importance than might at
first be imagined; because, in point of fact, speculative pur-
chases are not, in the great majority of cases, made either


i


62 BOOK II. CHAPTER XII, $ 5.


with bank notes or with bills, but are made almost exclu
sively on book credits. “Applications to the Bank for ex-
tended discount,” says the highest authority on such sub-
jects*, (and the same thing must be true of applications to
other banks) “occur rarely if ever in the origin or progress of
extensive speculations in commodities. These are entered
into, for the most part if not entirely, in the first instance,
on credit for the length of term usual in the several trades;
thus entailing on the parties no immediate necessity for
borrowing so much as may be wanted for the purpose
beyond their own available capital. This applies particularly
to speculative purchases of commodities on the spot, with a
view to resale. But these generally form the smaller pro-
portion of engagements on credit. By far the largest of
those entered into on the prospect of a rise of prices, are
such as have in view importations from abroad. The same
remark too is applicable to the export of commodities, when
a large proportion is on the credit of the shippers or their
consignees. As long as circumstances hold out the prospect
of a favourable result, the credit of the parties is generally
sustamed. If some of them wish to realize, there are
others with capital and credit, ready to replace them; and
if the events fully justify the grounds on which the specu~
lative transactions were entered into (thus admitting of
sales for consumption in time to replace the capital em-
barked) there is no unusual demand for borrowed capital to
Sustain them. It js only when by the vicissitudes of political
events or of the seasons, or other adventitious circumstances,
the forthcoming supplies are found to exceed the computed
rate of consumption, and a fall of prices ensues, that an
Increased demand for capital takes place; the market rate of
terest then rises, and increased applications are made to the
Bank of England for discount.” So that the multiplication


* From the fourth volume, just published, of Mr. Tooke’s History of
Prioes, pp. 125—6.


INFLUENCE OF CREDIT ON PRICES. 63


of bank notes and other transferable paper does not, for the
most part, accompany and facilitate the speculation; but
comes into play chiefly when the tide is turning, and difficul-
ties begin to be felt.

Of the extraordinary height to which speculative trans-
actions can be carried upon mere book credits, without the
smallest addition to what is commonly called the currency,
very few persons are at all aware. “The power of pur-
chase,” says Mr. Tooke*, “by persons having capital and
credit, is much beyond anything that those who are unac-
quainted practically with speculative markets have any idea
of... . A person having the reputation of capital enough
for his regular business, and enjoying good credit im his trade,
if he takes a sanguine view of the prospect of a rise of price
of the article in which he deals, and is favoured by circum-
stances in the outset and progress of his speculation, may
effect purchases to an extent perfectly enormous, compared
with his capital.” Mr. Tooke confirms this statement by
some remarkable instances, exemplifying the immense pur-
chasing power which may be exercised, and rise of price
which may be produced, by credit not represented by either
bank notes or bills of exchange.

“Amongst the earliest speculators for an advance in the
price of tea, in consequence of our dispute with China in 1839,
were several retail grocers and tea-dealers. There was a
general disposition among the trade to get into stock ; that is,
to lay in at once a quantity which would meet the probable
demand from their customers for several months to come.
Some, however, among them, more sanguine and adventurous
than the rest, availed themselves of their credit with the im-
porters and wholesale dealers, for purchasing quantities much
beyond the estimated demand in their own business. As the
purchases were made in the first instance ostensibly, and


* Inquiry into the Currency Principle, pp. 79 and 136—8.


64 BOOK Ill. CHAPTER XII. § 5.


perhaps really, for the legitimate purposes and within the
limits of their regular business, the parties were enabled to
buy without the condition of any deposit; whereas specula-
tors, known to be such, are required to pay 2/. per chest, to
cover any probable difference of price which might arise’
before the expiration of the prompt, which, for this article,
is three months. Without, therefore, the outlay of a single
farthing of actual capital or currency in any shape, they
made purchases to a considerable extent; and with the profit
realized on the resale of a part of these purchases, they were
enabled to pay the deposit on further quantities when required,
as was the case when the extent of the purchases attracted
attention. In this way, the speculation went on at advancing
prices (100 per cent and upwards) till nearly the expiration
of the prompt, and if at that time circumstances had been
such as to justify the apprehension which at one time pre-
vailed, that all future supplies would be cut off, the prices
might have still further advanced, and at any rate not have
retrograded. In this case, the speculators might have rea-
lized, if not all the profit they had anticipated, a very hand-
Some sum, upon which they might have been enabled to
extend their business greatly, or to retire from it altogether,
with a reputation for great sagacity in thus making their for
tune. But instead of this favourable result, it so happened
that two or three cargoes of tea which had been transhipped
were admitted, contrary to expectation, to entry on their
arrival here, and it was found that further indirect shipments
were in progress, Thus the supply was increased beyond the
calculation of the speculators: and at the same time, the
consumption had been diminished by the high price. There
was, consequently, a violent reaction on the market; the
speculators were unable to sell without such a sacrifice as
disabled them from fulfilling their engagements, and several
of them consequently failed. Among these, one was men-
tioned, who haying a capital not exceeding 1,200/., which was
locked up in his business, had contrived to buy 4,000 chests,


INFLUENCE OF CREDIT ON PRICES. 65


value above 80,000/., the loss upon which was about
16,0001. :

“The other example which I have to give, is that of the
operation on the corn market between 1838 and 1842. There
was an instance of a person who, when he entered on his
extensive speculations, was, as it appeared by the subsequent
examination of his affairs, possessed of a capital not exceed-
ing 5000/., but being successful in the outset, and favoured
by circumstances in the progress of his operations, he con-
trived to make purchases to such an extent, that when he
stopped payment his engagements were found to amount to
between 500,000/. and 600,000/. Other instances might be
cited of parties without any capital at all, who, by dint of
mere credit, were enabled, while the aspect of the market
favoured their views, to make purchases to a very great
extent.

«And be it observed, that these speculations, involving
enormous purchases on little or no capital, were carried on
in 1839 and 1840, when the money market was in its most
contracted state ; or when, according to modern phraseology,
there was the greatest scarcity of money.”

But although the great instrument of speculative pur-
chases is book credits, it cannot be contested that in specu-
lative periods an increase does take place in the quantity
both of bills of exchange and of bank notes. This increase, in-
deed, so far as bank notes are concerned, hardly ever takes
place in the earliest stage of the speculations ; advances from
bankers (as Mr. Tooke observes) not being applied for in
order to purchase, but in order to hold on without selling
when the usual term of credit has expired, and the high price
which was calculated on has not arrived. But the tea
speculators mentioned by Mr. Tooke could not have carried
their speculations beyond the three months which are the
usual term of credit in their trade, unless they had been able
to obtain advances from bankers, which, if the expectation of

WOlke Wic F


66 BOOK III. CHAPTER XII. § 5.


a rise of price had still continued, they probably could have
done.

Since, then, credit in the form of bank notes is a more
potent instrument for raising prices than book credits, an
unrestrained power of resorting to this instrument may Con-
tribute to prolong and heighten the speculative rise of prices,
and hence to aggravate the subsequent recoil. But in what
degree? and what importance ought we to ascribe to this
possibility? It may help us to form some judgment on this
point, if we consider the proportion which the utmost in-
crease of bank notes in a period of speculation, bears, I do
not say to the whole mass of credit in the country, but to the
bills of exchange alone. The average amount of bills in
existence at any one time is supposed considerably to exceed
a hundred millions sterlmg*. The bank note circulation of
Great Britain and Ireland is less than thirty-five millions,
and the increase in speculative periods at most two or three.


* The most approved estimate is that of Mr. Leatham, grounded on the
official returns of bill stamps issued. The following are the results :—


Bills created in Great Britain
and Ireland, founded on Average amount in —

Year. returns of Bill Stamps circulation at one time in

issued from the Stamp Office. each year.
1832 £356,153,409 £89,038,352
1833 383,659,585 95,914,896
1834 379,155,052 94,788,763
1835 405,403,051 101,350,762
1836 485,943,473 121,485,868
1837 455,084,445 113,771,111
1838 465,504,041 116,376,010
1839 528,493,842 132,123,460


“Mr. Leatham,” says Mr. Tooke, “gives the process by which, upon the
data furnished by the returns of stamps, he arrives at these results; and I
am disposed to think that they are as near an approximation to the truth
as the nature of the materials admits of arriving at.’—Inguiry into the
Currency Principle, p. 26.


INFLUENCE OF CREDIT ON PRICES. 67


And even this, as we have seen, hardly ever comes into play
until that advanced period of the speculation at which the
tide shows signs of turning, and the dealers generally are
rather thinking of the means of fulfilling their existing en-
gagements, than meditating an extension of them: while the
quantity of bills in existence is largely increased from the
very commencement of the speculations.


§ 6. It is well known that of late years, an artificial
limitation of the issue of bank notes has been regarded by
many political economists, and by a great portion of the
public, as an expedient of supreme efficacy for preventing,
and when it cannot prevent, for moderating, the fever of
speculation; and this opinion received the recognition and
sanction of the legislature by the Currency Act of 1844. At
the point, however, which our inquiries have reached,
although we have conceded to bank notes a greater power
over prices than is possessed by bills or book credits, we
have not found reason to think that this superior efficacy
has much share in producing the rise of prices which
accompanies a period of speculation, nor consequently
that any restraint applied to this one instrument, can be
efficacious to the degree which is often supposed, in
moderating either that rise, or the recoil which follows
it. We shall be still less inclined to think so, when we
consider that there is a fourth form of credit transactions, by
cheques on bankers, and transfers in a banker’s books, which
is exactly parallel in every respect to bank notes, giving
equal facilities to an extension of credit, and capable of act-
ing on prices quite as powerfully. In the words of Mr.
Fullarton*, “there is not a single object at present attained
through the agency of Bank of England notes, which might
not be as effectually accomplished by each individual keeping
an account with the bank, and transacting all his payments
of five pounds and upwards by cheque.” A bank, instead of


* On the Regulation of Currencies, p. 41.
F 2


ews


68 BOOK III. CHAPTER XII. § 6.


lending its notes to a merchant or dealer, might open an
account with him, and credit the account with the sum it
had agreed to advance: on an understanding that he should
not draw out that sum in any other mode than by drawing
cheques against it in favour of those to whom he had occa-
sion to make payments. These cheques might possibly
even pass from hand to hand like bank notes; more com-
monly however the receiver would pay them into the hands
of his own banker, and when he wanted the money, would
draw a fresh cheque against it: and hence an objector may
suggest, that as the original cheque would very soon be pre-
sented for payment, when it must be paid either in notes or
in coin, notes or coin to an equal amount must be provided
as the ultimate means of liquidation. It is not so, however.
The person to whom the cheque is transferred, may pethaps
deal with the same banker, and the cheque may return to
the very bank on which it was drawn: this is very often the
case in country districts; if so, no payment will be called
for, but a simple transfer in the banker’s books will settle
the transaction. If the cheque is paid into a different bank, it
will not be presented for payment, but liquidated by set-off
against other cheques; and in a state of circumstances
favourable to a general extension of banking credits, a
banker who has granted more credit, and has therefore More
cheques drawn on him, will also have more cheques on other
bankers paid to him, and will only have to provide notes or
cash for the payment of balances; for which purpose the
ordinary reserve of prudent bankers, one-third of their
liabilities, will abundantly suffice. Now, if he had granted
the extension of credit by means of an issue of his own notes,
he must equally have retained in coin the usual reserve: So
that he can, as Mr. Fullarton says, give every facility of
credit by what may be termed a cheque circulation, which he
could give by a note circulation.

This extension of credit by entries in a banker’s books,
has all that superior efficiency in acting on prices, which we


rr


INFLUENCE OF CREDIT ON PRICES. 69


ascribed to an extension by means of bank notes. As a
bank note of 20/., paid to any one, gives him 20/. of pur-
chasing-power based on credit, over and above whatever
credit he had of his own, so does a cheque paid to him do
the same: for, although he may make no purchase with the
cheque itself, he deposits it with his banker, and can draw
against it. As this act of drawing a cheque against another
which has been exchanged and cancelled, can be repeated
as often as a purchase with a bank note, it effects the same
increase of purchasing power. The original loan, or credit
given by the banker to his customer, is potentially multiphed
as a means of purchase, in the hands of the successive per-
sons to whom portions of the credit are paid away, just as
the purchasing power of a bank note is multiplied by the
number of persons through whose hands it passes before it
is returned to the issuer.

These considerations abate very much from the importance
of any effect which can be produced in allaying the vicissitudes
of commerce, by so superficial a contrivance as the one so
much relied on of late, the restriction of the issue of bank
notes by an artificial rule. An examination of all the con-
sequences of that restriction, and a full estimate of the reasons
for and against it, must be deferred until we have treated of
the foreign exchanges, and the international movements of
bullion. At present we are only concerned with the general
theory of prices, of which the different influence of different


kinds of credit is an essential part.


§ 7. Some high authorities have claimed for bank notes,
as compared with other modes of credit, a greater distinction
in respect to influence on price than we have seen reason to
allow; a difference, not in degree, but in kind. They ground
this distinction on the fact, that bank notes have the pro-
perty, in common with metallic money, of finally closing the
transactions in which they are employed; while no other
mode of paying one debt by transferring another, has that


7


/


0 BOOK III. CHAPTER XII. § 7.


privilege, but, on the contrary, all bills and cheques, as
well as all book-debts, are from the first intended to be,
and actually are, ultimately liquidated either in coin or in
notes. The bank notes in circulation, jointly with the coin,
are therefore, according to these authorities, the basis on
which all the other expedients of credit rest ; and in propor-
tion to the basis will be the superstructure; insomuch that
the quantity of bank notes determines that of all the other
forms of credit. If bank notes are multiplied, there will,
they seem to think, be more bills, more payments by cheque,
and, I presume, more book credits; and, by regulating and
limiting the issue of bank notes, they think that all other
forms of credit are, by an indirect consequence, brought
under a similar limitation. I believe I have stated the
opinion of these authorities correctly, though I have no-
where seen the grounds of it set forth with such distinctness
as to make me feel quite certain that I understand them. I
can see no reason for the doctrine, that according as there
are more or fewer bank notes, there will be more or less of
other descriptions of credit. If indeed we begin by assum-
ing, as I suspect is tacitly done, that prices are regulated by
com and bank notes, the proposition maintained will cer-
tamly follow; for, according as prices are higher or lower,
the same purchases will give rise to bills, cheques, and book-~
credits of a larger or smaller amount. But the premiss in
this reasoning is the very proposition to be proved. Setting
this assumption aside, I know not how the conclusion can be
substantiated. The credit given to any one by those with
whom he deals, does not depend on the quantity of bank
notes or coin in circulation at the time, but on their opinion
of his solvency: if any consideration of a more general cha-
racter enters into their calculation, it is only in a time of
pressure on the loan market, when they are not certain of
being themselves able to obtain the credit on which they
have been accustomed to rely; and even then, what they
look to is the general state of the loan market, and not (pre-


INFLUENCE OF CREDIT ON PRICES. al


conceived theory apart) the amount of bank notes. So far, as
to the willingness to give credit. And the willingness of any
one to use his credit, depends on his expectations of gain,
that is, on his opinion of the probable future price of his
commodity; an opinion grounded either on the rise or fall
already going on, or on his prospective judgment respecting
the supply and the rate of consumption. When a dealer
extends his purchases beyond his immediate means of pay-
ment, engaging to pay at a specified time, he does so in the
expectation either that the transaction will have terminated
favourably before that time arrives, or that he shall then be
in possession of sufficient funds from the proceeds of his
other transactions. The fulfilment of these expectations de-
pends upon prices, but not specially upon the amount of
bank notes. He may, doubtless, also ask himself, in case he
should be disappointed in these expectations, to what quarter
he can look for a temporary advance, to enable him, at the
worst, to keep his engagements. But in the first place, this
prospective reflection on the somewhat more or less of diffi-
culty which he may have in tiding over his embarrassments,
seems too slender an inducement to be much of a restraint
in a period supposed to be one of rash adventure, and upon
persons so confident of success as to involve themselves be-
yond their certain means of extrication. And further, I
apprehend that their confidence of being helped out in the
event of ill fortune, will mainly depend on their opinion of
their own individual credit, with, perhaps, some considera-
tion, not of the quantity of the currency, but of the general
state of the loan market. They are aware that, in case of a
commercial crisis, they shall have difficulty in obtaining ad-
vances. But if they thought it likely that a commercial
crisis would occur before they had realized, they would not
speculate. If no great contraction of general credit occurs,
they will feel no doubt of obtaining any advances which they
absolutely require, provided the state of their own affairs At
the time affords in the estimation of lenders a sufficient
prospect that those advances will be repaid.


CHAPTER XIII.


OF AN INCONVERTIBLE PAPER CURRENCY.


§ 1. Arrer experience had shown that pieces of paper, of
no intrinsic value, by merely bearing upon them the written
profession of being equivalent to a certain number of francs,
dollars, or pounds, could be made to circulate as such, and to
produce all the benefit to the issuers which could have been
produced by the coins which they purported to represent;
governments began to think that it would be a happy device
if they could appropriate to themselves this benefit, free
from the condition to which individuals issuing such paper
substitutes for money were subject, of giving, when required,
for the sign, the thing signified. They determined to try
whether they could not emancipate themselves from this un-
pleasant obligation, and make a piece of paper issued by
them pass for a pound, by merely calling it a pound, and
consenting to receive it in payment of the taxes, And such
is the influence of almost all established governments, that
they have generally succeeded in attaining this object: I
believe I might say they have always succeeded for a time,
and the power has only been lost to them after they had
compromised it by the most flagrant abuse.

In the case supposed, the functions of money are per-
formed by a thing which derives its power of performing
them solely from convention; but convention is quite suffi-
cient to confer the power; since nothing more is needful to
make a person accept anything as money, and even at any
arbitrary value, than the persuasion that it will be taken from
Iim on the same terms by others. The only question is,
what determines the value of such a currency? since it
cannot be, as in the case of gold and silver (or paper


ms:


INCONVERTIBLE PAPER CURRENCY. 73


exchangeable for them at pleasure), the cost of pro-
duction.

We have seen, however, that even in the case of a metal-
lic currency, the immediate agency in determining its value
is its quantity. If the quantity, instead of depending on the
ordinary mercantile motives of profit and loss, could be
arbitrarily fixed by authority, the value would depend on the
fiat of that authority, not on cost of production. The quan-
tity of a paper currency not convertible into the metals at
the option of the holder, can be arbitrarily fixed; especially
if the issuer is the sovereign power of the state. The value,
therefore, of such a currency, is entirely arbitrary.

Suppose that, ina country of which the currency is wholly
metallic, a paper currency is suddenly issued, to the amount
of half the metallic circulation: not by a banking establish-
ment, or in the form of loans, but by the government, in pay-
ment of salaries and purchase of commodities. The currency
being suddenly increased by one-half, all prices will rise, and


“among the rest, the prices of all things made of gold and


silver. An ounce of manufactured gold will become more
valuable than an ounce of gold coin, by more than that custo-
mary difference which compensates for the value of the
workmanship ; and it will be profitable to melt the coin for
the purpose of being manufactured, until as much has been
taken from the currency by the subtraction of gold, as had
been added to it by the issue of paper. Then prices will
relapse to what they were at first, and there will be nothing
changed except that a paper currency has been substituted
for half of the metallic currency which existed before. Sup-
pose now a second emission of paper; the same series of
effects will be renewed; and so on, until the whole of the
metallic money has disappeared: that is, if paper be issued
of as low a denomination as the lowest coin; if not, as much
will remain, as convenience requires for the smaller pay-
ments. The addition made to the quantity of gold and
silver disposable for ornamental purposes, will somewhat


74 BOOK IlI. CHAPTER Xill. $§ 1.


reduce, for a time, the value of the article; and as long as
this is the case, even though paper has been issued to the
original amount of the metallic circulation, as much coin wil
remain in circulation along with it, as will keep the value d
the currency down to the reduced value of the metallic
material: but the value having fallen below the cost of pro
duction, a stoppage or diminution of the supply from the
mines will enable the surplus to be carried off by the ordi
nary agents of destruction, after which, the metals and the
currency will recover their natural value. We are here sup-
posing, as we have supposed throughout, that the country
has mines of its own, and no commercial intercourse with
other countries: for, in a country having foreign trade, the
coin which is rendered superfluous by an issue of paper 3
carried off by a much prompter method.

Up to this point, the effects of a paper currency are sub-
stantially the same, whether it is convertible into specie or
not. It is when the metals have been completely super
seded and driven from circulation, that the difference between
convertible and inconvertible paper begins to be operative
When the gold or silver has all: gone from circulation, and
an equal quantity of paper has taken its place, suppose thata
still further issue is superadded. The same series of pheno-
mena recommences: prices rise, among the rest the prices
of gold and silver articles, and it becomes an object as before
to procure coin in order to convert it into bullion. There is
no longer any coin in circulation; but if the paper currency is
convertible, coin may still be obtained from the issuers, In
exchange for notes. All Additional notes, therefore, which
are attempted to be forced into circulation after the metals
have been completely Superseded, will return upon the
issuers in exchange for coin; and they will not be able to
maintain in circulation such a quantity of convertible paper,
as to sink its value below the metal which it represents. It
is not so, however, with an inconyertible currency. To the
increase of that (if permitted by law) there is no check. The


INCONVERTIBLE PAPER CURRENCY. 75


issuers may add to it indefinitely, lowering its value and
raising prices in proportion; they may, im other words, de-
preciate the currency without limit. :

Such a power, in whomsoever vested, is an intolerable
evil. All variations in the value of the circulating medium
are mischievous: they disturb existing contracts and expec-
tations, and the liability to such changes renders every pecu-
niary engagement of long date entirely precarious. The
person who buys for himself, or grants to another, an annuity
of 100/., does not know whether it will be equivalent to 200/.
or to 50/. a few years hence. Great as this evil would be if
it depended only on accident, it is still greater when placed
at the arbitrary disposal of a man or a body of men; who
may have any kind or degree of interest to be served by an
artificial fluctuation in fortunes; and who have at any rate a
strong interest in issuing as much as possible, each issue
being in itself a source of profit. Not to add, that the issuers
may have, and in the case of a government paper, always
have, a direct interest in lowering the value of the currency,
because it is the medium in which their own debts are com-


puted.


§ 2. In order that the value of the currency may be
secure from being altered by design, and may be as little as
possible liable to fluctuation from accident, the articles least
liable of all known commodities to vary in their value, the
precious metals, have been made in all civilized countries the
standard of value for the circulating medium; and no paper
currency ought to exist of which the value cannot be made
to conform to theirs: Nor has this fundamental maxim ever
been entirely lost sight of, even by the governments which
have most abused the power of creating inconvertible paper.
If they have not (as they generally have) professed an inten-
tion of paying in specie at some indefinite future time, they
have at least, by giving to their paper issues the names of
their coins, made a virtual, though generally a false, profes-


PA Sk Ta Ae eet Se het ae os


5

¥
:e
rt


f


¢


76 BOOK III. CHAPTER XIII. § 2.


sion of intending to keep them at a value corresponding to
that of the coins. This is not impracticable, even with an
inconvertible paper. There is not indeed the self-acting
check which convertibility brings with it. But there isa
clear and unequivocal indication by which to judge whether
the currency is depreciated, and to what extent. That indi-
cation is, the price of the precious metals. When holders of
paper cannot demand coin to be converted into bullion, and
when there is none left in circulation, bullion rises and falls
in price like other things; and if it is above the mint price,
if an ounce of gold, which would be coined into the equivalent
of 3/. 17s. 104d., is sold for 41. or 5/. in paper, the value of
the currency has sunk just that much below what the value
of a metallic currency would be. If, therefore, the issue of
inconvertible paper were subjected to strict rules, one Tule
being that whenever bullion rose above the mint price, the
issues should be contracted until the market price of bullion
and the mint price were again in accordance, such a curreney
would not be subject to any of the evils usually deemed
inherent in an inconvertible paper.

But also such a system of currency would have no advan-
tages sufficient to recommend it to adoption. An inconyey
tible currency, regulated by the price of bullion, would cop-
form exactly, in all its variations, to a convertible one; and
the only advantage gained, would be that of exemption from
the necessity of keeping any reserve of the precious metals,
which is not a very important consideration, especially as q
government, so long as its good faith is not suspected, needs
not keep so large a reserve as private issuers, being NOt go
hable to great and sudden demands, since there never can be
any real doubt of its solvency. Against this small advantage
is to be set, in the first place, the possibility of fraudulent
tampering with the price of bullion for the sake of acting op
the currency; in the manner of the fictitious sales of corn, to
influence the averages, so much and so justly complained of
while the corn laws were in force. But a still stronger con.


INCONVERTIBLE PAPER CURRENCY. 77


sideration is the importance of adhering toa simple principle,
intelligible to the most untaught capacity. Everybody can
understand convertibility; every one sees that what can be
at any moment exchanged for five pounds, is worth five
pounds. Regulation by the price of bullion is a more com-
plex idea, and does not recommend itself through the same
familiar associations. There would be nothing like the same
confidence, by the public generally, in an inconvertible cur-
rency so regulated, as in a convertible one: and the most
instructed person might reasonably doubt whether such a
rule would be as likely to be inflexibly adhered to. The
grounds of the rule not being so well understood by the
public, opinion would probably not enforce it with as much
rigidity, and, in any circumstances of difficulty, would be
likely to turn against it; while to the government itself a
suspension of convertibility would appear a much stronger
and more extreme measure, than a relaxation of what might
possibly be considered a somewhat artificial rule. There is
therefore a great preponderance of reasons in favour of a
convertible, in preference to even the best regulated incon-
vertible currency. The temptation to over-issue, in certain
financial emergencies, is so strong, that nothing is admissible
which can tend, in however slight a degree, to weaken the
barriers that restrain it.


§ 3. Although no doctrine in political economy rests
upon more obvious grounds than the mischief of a paper
currency not maintained at the same value with a metallic,
either by convertibility, or by some principle of hmitation
equivalent to it; and although, accordingly, this doctrine
has, though not till after the discussions of many years, been
tolerably effectually drummed into the public mind; yet dis-
sentients are still numerous, and projectors every now and
then start up, with plans for curing all the economical evils
of society by means of an unlimited issue of inconvertible
paper. There is, in truth, a great charm in the idea. To be


ail a
rR
4
4
iy
g


78 BOOK Ill. CHAPTER xi. § 3.


able to pay off the national debt, defray the expenses d
government without taxation, and in fine, to make the for
tunes of the whole community, is a brilliant prospect, when
once aman is capable of believing that printing a few.chi-
racters on bits of paper will do it. The philosopher’s stone
could not be expected to do more. :

As these projects, however often slain, always resuscitats,

it is not superfluous to examine one or two of the fallacies by
which the schemers Impose upon themselves. One of the
commonest is, that a paper currency cannot be issued in
excess so long as every note issued represents property, or
has a foundation of actual property to rest on. These
phrases, of representing and resting, seldom convey any dis-
tinct or well-defined idea: when they do, their meaning is no
more than this—that the issuers of the paper must have pro-
perty, either of their own, or entrusted to them, to the value
of all the notes they issue ; though for what purpose, does
not very clearly appear; for if the property cannot be
claimed in exchange for the notes, it is difficult to divine in
what manner its mere existence can serve to uphold their
value. I presume, however, it is intended asa guarantee that
the holders would be finally reimbursed, in case any untoward
event should cause the whole concern to be wound up. On
this theory there have been many schemes for “ coining the
whole land of the country into money” and the like.

In so far as this notion has any connexion at all with
reason, it seems to originate in confounding two entirely dis-
tinct evils, to which a paper currency is liable. One is, the
insolvency of the issuers 3 which, if the paper is grounded on
their credit—if it makes any promise of payment in cash,
either on demand or at any future time—of course deprives
the paper of any value which it derives from that promise.
To this eyil paper credit is equally liable, however moderately
used; and against it, a proviso that all issues should be
“founded on property,” as for instance that notes should
only be issued on the security of some valuable thing


INCONVERTIBLE PAPER CURRENCY # 79
HH


expressly pledged for their redemption, would really be effi-
cacious as a precaution. But the theory takes no account of }
another evil, which is incident to the notes of the most sol-
vent firm, company, or government: that of being depre- !
ciated in value from being issued in excessive quantity. The !
assignats, during the French Revolution, were a model of a
currency grounded on these principles. The assignats
“represented” an immense amount of highly valuable pro- )
perty, namely the lands of the crown, the church, the monas-
teries, and the emigrants, amounting perhaps to half the terri-
tory of France. They were, in fact, orders or assignments {
on this mass of land. The revolutionary government had
the idea of “coining” these lands into money; but, to do i
them justice, they did not originally contemplate the il
immense multiplication of issues to which they were even- Hi
tually driven by the failure of all other financial resources. {
They imagined that the assignats would come rapidly back to
the issuers in exchange for land, and that they should be able
to reissue them continually until the lands were all disposed i
of, without having at any time more than a very moderate |
quantity in circulation. Their hope was frustrated: the land
did not sell so quickly as they expected; buyers were not in-
clined to invest their money in possessions which were likely Ht
to be resumed without compensation if the Revolution
succumbed: the bits of paper which represented land, 4
becoming prodigiously multiplied, could no more keep up
their value than the land itself would have done if it had all
been brought to market at once: and the result was, that it
at last required an assignat of five hundred francs to pay for 1
a cup of coffee. if
The example of the assignats has been said not to be i}
conclusive, because an assignat only represented land in Hl
general, but not a definite quantity of land. To have pre- i
vented their depreciation, the proper course, it is affirmed, |
would have been, to have made a valuation of all the confis-.
cated property at its metallic value, and to have issued :


aT, yi


WOEAR Soak pi EE


e
+.


+4
|
i
i|
qf


80 BOOK III. CHAPTER XIII. § 3.


assignats up to, but not beyond, that limit; giving to the |
holders a right to demand any piece of land, at its registered |
valuation, in exchange for assignats to the same amount, |
There can be no question about the superiority of this plan
over the one actually adopted. Had this course been
followed, the assignats could never have been depreciated to
the inordinate degree they were; for—as they would have re-
tained all their purchasing power in relation to land, however
much they might have fallen in respect to other things—before
they had lost very much of their market value, they would
probably have been brought in to be exchanged for land. It
must be remembered, however, that their not being depre-
ciated would presuppose that no greater number of them
continued in circulation than would have circulated if they
had been convertible into cash. However convenient, there-
fore, in a time of revolution, this currency convertible into
land on demand might have been, as a contrivance for
selling rapidly a great quantity of land with the least possible
sacrifice ; it is difficult to see what advantage it would have,
as the permanent system of a country, over a currency con-
vertible into coin: while it is not at all difficult to see what
would be its disadvantages; since land is far more variable
in value than gold and silyer; and besides, land, to most
persons, being rather an incumbrance than a desirable pos-
Session, except to be converted into money, people would
submit to a much greater depreciation before demanding
land, than they will before demanding gold or silver*.


* Among the schemes of currency to which, strange to say, intelligent
men have been found to give their sanction, one is as follows: that the state
should receive in pledge, or mortgage, any kind or amount of property,
such as land, stock, &¢., and should advance to the owners inconvertible
paper money to the estimated value. Such a currency would not eyen
have the recommendations of the imaginary assignats supposed in the text;
since those into whose hands the notes were paid by the persons who
received them, could not return them to the Government and demand in
exchange land or stock which was only pledged, not alienated. There
would be no reflux of such assignats as these, and their depreciation would
be indefinite.


aa


en


- |


INCONVERTIBLE PAPER CURRENCY. 81


§ 4. Another of the fallacies from which the advocates
of an inconyertible currency derive support,.is the notion
that an increase of the currency quickens industry. This
idea was set afloat-by Hume, in his Essay on Money, and
has had many devoted adherents since; witness the Bir-
mingham currency school of the present day, of whom Mr.
Attwood was for a time the most conspicuous representative.
Mr. Attwood maintained that a rise of prices produced by an
increase of paper currency, stimulates every producer to his
utmost exertion, and brings all the capital and labour of the
country into complete employment; and that this has inva-
riably happened in all periods of rising prices, when the rise
was on a sufficiently great scale. I presume, however, that
the inducement which, according to Mr. Attwood, excited
this unusual ardour in all persons engaged in production,
must have been the expectation of getting more of commo-
dities generally, more real wealth, in exchange for the pro-
duce of their labour, and not merely more pieces of paper.
This expectation, however, must have been, by the very
terms of the supposition, disappointed, since, all prices being
supposed to rise equally, no one was really better paid for
his goods than before. Those who agree with Mr. Attwood
could only succeed in winning people on to these unwonted
exertions, by a prolongation of what would in fact be a delu-
sion; contriving matters so, that by a progressive rise of money
prices, every producer shall always seem to be in the very act
of obtaining an increased remuneration which he never, in
reality, does obtam. It is unnecessary to advert to any
other of the objections to this plan, than that of its total
impracticability. It calculates on finding the whole world
persisting for ever in the belief that more pieces of paper are
more riches, and never discovering that, with all their paper,
they cannot buy more of anything than they could before.
No such mistake was made during any of the periods of high
prices, on the experience of which this school lays so much
stress. At the periods which Mr. Attwood mistook for

VOL. IT. G


82 BOOK IJI. CHAPTER xilI. § 4.


times of prosperity, and which were simply (as all periods of
high prices, under a convertible currency, must be) times of
speculation, the speculators did not think they were grow
ing rich because the high prices would last, but because they
would not last, and because whoever contrived to realize
while they did last, would find himself, after the recoil, in
possession of a greater number of pounds sterling, without
their having become of less value. If, at the close of the
speculation, an issue of paper had been made, sufficient to
keep prices up to the point which they attained when at the
highest, no one would have been more disappointed than the
speculators: since the gain which they thought to have reaped
by realizing in time (at the expense of their competitors,
who bought when they sold, and had to sell after the revul-
sion) would have faded away in their hands, and instead of
it they would have got nothing except a few more paper
tickets to count by.

Hume’s version of the doctrine differed in a slight degree
from Mr. Attwood’s. He thought that all commodities
would not rise in price simultaneously, and that some per-
sons therefore would obtain a real gain, by getting more
money for what they had to sell, while the things which
they wished to buy might not yet have risen. And those
who would reap this gain would always be (he seems to
think) the first comers. It seems obvious, however, that
for every person who thus gains more than usual, there
is necessarily some other person who gains less. The loser,
if things took place as Hume supposes, would be the seller
of the commodities which are slowest to rise; who, by the
supposition, parts with his goods at the old prices to pur-
chasers who have already benefited by the new. ‘This seller
has obtained for his commodity only the accustomed quantity
of money, while there are already some things of which that
money will no longer purchase as much as before. If, there-
fore, he knows what is going on, he will raise his price, and
then the buyer will not have the gain, which is supposed to


SOT


CRONE I ESN CRIP ET


PE a ee ee Ee ee


INCONVERTIBLE PAPER CURRENCY. 83


stimulate his industry. But if, on the contrary, the seller
does not know the state of the case, and only discovers it
when he finds, in laying his money out, that it does not go so
far, he then obtains less than the ordinary remuneration for
his labour and capital: and if the other dealer’s industry is
encouraged, it should seem that his must, from the opposite
cause, be impaired.

§ 5. There is no way in which a general and permanent
rise of prices, or in other words, depreciation of money, can
benefit anybody, except at the expense of somebody else.
The substitution of paper for a metallic currency is a national
gain: any further increase of paper beyond this is but a form
of robbery.

An issue of notes is a manifest gain to the issuers, who,
until the notes are returned for payment, obtain the use of


.them as if they were a real capital: and so long as the notes


are no permanent addition to the currency, but merely super-
sede gold or silver to the same amount, the gain of the issuer
is a loss to no one; it is obtained by saving to the community
the expense of the more costly material. But if there is no
gold or silver to be superseded—if the notes are added to
the currency, instéad of being substituted for the metallic
part of it—all holders of currency lose, by the depreciation of
its value, the exact equivalent of what the issuer gains. A
tax is virtually levied on them for his benefit. It will be
objected by some, that gains are also made by the producers
and dealers who, by means of the increased issue, are accom-
modated with loans. Theirs, however, is not an additional
gain, but a portion of that which is reaped by the issuer at
the expense of all possessors of money. The profits arising
from the contribution levied upon the public, he does not
keep to himself, but divides with his customers.

But besides the benefit reaped by the issuers, or by
others through them, at the expense of the public generally,
there is another unjust gain obtained by a larger class,

G 2


84 BOOK Ill. CHAPTER xl. § 6.


namely by those who are under fixed pecuniary obligations.
All such persons are freed, by a depreciation of the currency,
from a portion of the burden of their debts or other engage-
ments: in other words, part of the property of their creditors
is gratuitously transferred to them. On a superficial view it
may be imagined that this is an advantage to industry ; since
the productive classes are great borrowers, and generally owe
larger debts to the unproductive (if we include among the
latter all persons not actually in business) than the unpro-
ductive classes owe to them; especially if the national debt
be included. It is only thus that a general rise of prices
can be a source of benefit to producers and dealers ; by di-
minishing the pressure of their fixed burdens. And this
might be accounted an advantage, if integrity and good faith
were of no importance to the world, and to industry and
commerce in particular. Not many, however, have been
found to say that the currency ought to be depreciated on the
simple ground of its being desirable to rob the national cre-
ditor and private creditors of a part of what is in their bond,
The schemes which have tended that way have almost always
had some appearance of special and circumstantial justifica-
tion, such as the necessity of compensating for a prior Injus-
tice committed in the contrary direction.


§ 6. Thus in England, from 1819 to the present time,
it has been pertinaciously contended, that a large portion of
the national debt, and a multitude of private debts still in
existence, were contracted between 1797 and 1819, when the
Bank of England was exempted from giving cash for its
notes; and that it is grossly unjust to borrowers, (that is, in
the case of the national debt, to all tax-payers) that they
should now be paying interest on the same nominal sums in
a currency of full value, which were borrowed in a depreciated
one. The depreciation, according to the views and objects
of the particular writer, is represented to have averaged
thirty, fifty, or even more than fifty per cent: and the con-


INCONVERTIBLE PAPER CURRENCY. 85


clusion is, that either we ought to return to this depreciated
currency, or to strike off from the national debt, and from
private debts of old standing (such as mortgages), a per-
centage corresponding to the estimated amount of the depre-
ciation.

To this doctrine the following is the answer usually made.
Granting that, by returning to cash payments without lower-
ing the standard, an injustice was done to debtors, in holding
them lable for the same amount of a currency enhanced in
value, which they had borrowed while it was depreciated ; it
is now too late to make reparation for this injury. The
debtors and creditors of to-day are not the debtors and
creditors of 1819: the lapse of years has entirely altered the
pecuniary relations of the community; and it being impos-
sible now to ascertain the particular persons who were either
benefited or injured, to attempt to retrace our steps would
be not redressing a wrong, but superadding a second act of
wide-spread injustice to the one already committed. This
argument is certainly conclusive on the practical question ;
but it places the honest conclusion on too narrow and too
low a ground. It concedes that the measure of 1819, called
Peel’s Bill, by which cash payments were resumed at the
original standard of 3/, 17s. 104d., was really the injustice it
is said to be. This is an admission wholly opposed to the
truth. Parliament had no alternative: it was absolutely
bound to adhere to the acknowledged standard; as may be
shown on three distinct grounds, two of fact, and one of
principle.

The reasons of fact are these. In the first place, it is not
true that the debts, private or public, incurred during the
Bank restriction, were contracted im a currency of lower
value than that in which the interest is now paid. It is
indeed true that the suspension of the obligation to pay in
specie, did put it in the power of the Bank to depreciate the
currency. It is true also that the Bank really exercised that
power, though to a far less extent than is often pretended ;


86 BOOK Ill. CHAPTER xtIl. § 6.


since the difference between the market price of gold and
the mint valuation, during the greater part of the interval,
was very trifling, and when it was greatest, during the last five
years of the war, did not much exceed thirty per cent. To
the extent of that difference, the currency was depreciated,
that is, its value was below that of the standard to which it
professed to adhere. But the state of Europe at that time
was such—there was so unusual an absorption of the precious
metals by hoarding, and by the military chests of the vast
armies which then desolated the Continent, that the value of
the standard itself was very considerably raised: and the
best authorities, among whom it is sufficient to name Mr.
Tooke, have, after an elaborate investigation, satisfied them-
selves that the difference between paper and bullion was
not greater than the enhancement in value of gold itself,
and that the paper, though depreciated relatively to the
then value of gold, did not sink below the ordinary value,
at other times, either of gold or of a convertible paper. If
this be true (and the evidences of the fact are conclusively
stated in Mr. Tooke’s History of Prices,) the foundation of
the whole case against the fundholder and other creditors on
the ground of depreciation is subverted.

But, secondly, even if the currency had really been
lowered in value at each period of the Bank restriction, in the
same degree in which it was depreciated in relation to its
standard, we must remember that a part only of the
national debt, or of other permanent engagements, were
incurred during the Bank restriction. A large part had
been contracted before 1797; a still larger during the early
years of the restriction, when the difference between paper
and gold was yet small. To the holders of the former part,
an injury was done, by paying the interest for twenty-two
years in a depreciated currency : those of the second, suffered
an injury during the years in which the interest was paid in
a currency more depreciated than that in which the loans
were contracted. ‘To have resumed cash payments at a lower


INCONVERTIBLE PAPER CURRENCY. 87


standard would have been to perpetuate the injury to these
two classes of creditors, in’ order to avoid giving an undue
benefit to a third class, who had lent their money during the
few years of greatest depreciation. As it is, there was an
underpayment to one set of persons, and an overpayment to
another. The late Mr. Mushet took the trouble to make an
arithmetical comparison between the two amounts. He
ascertained by calculation, that if an account had been made
out in 1819, of what the fundholders had gained and lost by
the variation of the paper currency from its standard, they
would have been found as a body to have been losers ; so that
if any compensation was due on the ground of depreciation,
it would not be from the fundholders collectively, but to
them.

Thus it is with the facts.of the case. But these reasons
of fact are not the strongest. There is a reason of principle,
still more powerful. Suppose that, not a part of the debt
merely, but the whole, had been contracted in a depreciated
currency, depreciated not only in comparison with its stand-
ard, but with its own value before and after; and that we are
now paying this debt in a currency fifty or even a hundred
per cent more valuable than that in which it was contracted.
What difference would this make im the obligation of paying
it, if the condition that it should be so paid was part of the
original compact? Now this is not only truth, but less than
the truth. The compact stipulated better terms for the
fundholder than he has received. During the whole con-
tinuance of the Bank restriction, there was a parliamentary
pledge, by which the legislature was as much bound as any
legislature is capable of binding itself, that cash payments
should be resumed on the original footing, at farthest in six
months after the conclusion of a general peace. This was
therefore an actual condition of every loan; and the terms of
the loans were more favourable in consideration of it. With-
out some such stipulation, the government could not have
expected to borrow unless on the terms on which men lend


=a


Pee SR SLE


Fragrant
Fae.


eae withdees


hog
aos


as


88 BOOK III. CHAPTER XIIl. § 6.


to the native princes of India. If it had been understood
and avowed that, after borrowing the money, the standard at
which it was computed might be permanently lowered, to
any extent which to the “ collective wisdom” of a legislature
of borrowers might seem fit—who can say what rate of interest
would have been a sufficient inducement to a person of com-
mon sense to risk his savings in such an adventure? How-
ever much the fundholders had gained by the resumption of
cash payments, the terms of the contract insured their giving
ample value for it. They gave value for more than they
received; since cash payments were not resumed in six
months, but in as many years, after the peace. So that,
waving all our arguments except the last, and conceding all
the facts asserted on the other side of the question, the fund-
holders, mstead of being unduly benefited, are the injured
party; and would have a claim to compensation, if such claims
were not very properly barred by the impossibility of adjudica-
tion, and by the salutary general maxim of law and policy,
“quod interest reipublice ut sit finis litium.”


CHAPTER XIV.


4 OF EXCESS OF SUPPLY.


§1. Arrer the elementary exposition of the theory of
money contained in the last few chapters, we shall return
to a question in the general theory of Value, which could
not be satisfactorily discussed until the nature and operations
of Money were in some measure understood, because the
errors against which we have to contend mainly originate in
a misunderstanding of those operations.

We have seen that the value of everything gravitates to-
wards a certain medium point (which has been called the
Natural Value), namely, that at which it exchanges for every
other thing in the ratio of their cost of production. We
have seen, too, that the actual or market value coincides, or
nearly so, with the natural value, only on an average of years;
and is continually either rising above, or falling below it,
from alterations in the demand, or casual fluctuations in the
supply: but that these variations correct themselves, through
the tendency of the supply to accommodate itself to the de-
mand which exists for the commodity at its natural value.
A general convergence thus results from the balance of oppo-
site divergences. Dearth, or scarcity, on the one hand, and
over-supply, or in mercantile language, glut, on the other,
are incident to all commodities. In the first case, the com-
modity affords to the producers or sellers, while the defi-
ciency lasts, an unusually high rate of profit: in the second,


Because this phenomenon of over-supply, and consequent haul


|
the supply being in excess of that for which a demand exists Hi
at such a value as will afford the ordinary profit, the sellers i
must be content with less, and must even, in extreme cases, |
submit to a loss. \


90 BOOK Ill. CHAPTER XIV. § l.


inconvenience or loss to the producer or dealer, may exist in
the case of any one commodity whatever, many persons, in-
cluding some distinguished political economists, have thought
that it may exist with regard to all commodities; that there
may be a general over-production of wealth; a supply of
commodities, in the aggregate, surpassing the demand; and
a consequent depressed condition of all classes of producers,
Against this doctrine, of which Mr. Malthus and Dr. Chal-
mers in this country, and M. de Sismondi on the Continent,
were the chief apostles, I have already contended in the
First Book*; but it was not possible, in that stage of our
i inquiry, to enter into a complete examination of an error (as
a ete I conceive) essentially grounded on a misunderstanding of
4 the phenomena of Value and Price.

i The doctrine appears to me to inyolye so much inconsis-
| tency in its very conception, that I feel considerable difficulty
in giving any statement of it which shall be at once clear, and
satisfactory to its supporters. They agree in maintaining
that there may be, and sometimes is, an excess of produe-
tions in general beyond the demand for them; that when
this happens, purchasers cannot be found at prices which will
repay the cost of production with a profit; that there ensues
a general depression of prices or values (they are seldom ac-
curate in discriminating between the two), so that producers,
the more they produce, find themselves the poorer, instead of
richer; and Dr. Chalmers accordingly inculcates on capital-
ists the practice of a moral restraint in reference to the pur-
suit of gain: while Sismondi deprecates machinery, and the
various inventions which increase productive power. They
both maintain that accumulation of capital may proceed too
fast, not merely for the moral, but for the material interests
of those who produce and accumulate; and they enjoin the
rich to guard against this evil by an ample unproductive
consumption.


* Supra, vol. i. pp. 82—5.


: § 2. When these writers speak of the supply of com-
: modities as out-running the demand, it is not clear which of
5 the two elements of demand they have in view—the desire to t
possess, or the means of purchase; whether their meaning is i
that there are, in such cases, more consumable products in ih
existence than the public desires to consume, or merely more 2
than it is able to pay for. In this uncertainty, it is neces- it
sary to examine both suppositions.

First, let us suppose that the quantity of commodities
produced is not greater than the community would be glad ii


i
EXCESS OF SUPPLY. 91
ti
{


to consume: is it, in that case, possible that there should be I
a deficiency of demand for all commodities, for want of the i
means of payment? Those who think so cannot have con- Hi
sidered what it is which constitutes the means of payment


for commodities. It is simply, commodities. Each person’s
means of paying for the productions of other people consists
of those which he himself possesses. All sellers are ineyi- Hal
tably and ew vi termini buyers. Could we suddenly double NF
the productive powers of the country, we should double the
supply of commodities in every market; but we should, by

the same stroke, double the purchasing power. Everybody
would bring a double demand as well as supply: everybody th
would be able to buy twice as much, because every one would |
have twice as much to offer in exchange. It is probable, in-
deed, that there would now be a superfluity of certain things.
Although the community would willingly double its aggre-
gate consumption, it may already have as much as it desires
of some commodities, and it may prefer to do more than
double its consumption of others, or to exercise its increased ue
purchasing power on some new thing. If so, the supply will at
adapt itself accordingly, and the values of things will con-

tinue to conform to their cost of production. At any rate, it |
is a sheer absurdity that all things should fall in value, and
that all producers should, in consequence, be insufficiently
remunerated. If values remain the same, what becomes of
prices is immaterial, since the remuneration of producers it


92 BOOK IIT. CHAPTER Xiv.. § 3.


does not depend on how much money, but on how much of |
consumable articles, they obtain for their goods. Besides,
money is a commodity; and if all commodities are supposed
to be doubled in quantity, we must suppose money to be
doubled too, and then prices would no more fall than values
would.


§ 3. A general over-supply, or excess of all commodities
above the demand, so far as demand consists in means of pay-
ment, is thus shown to be an impossibility. But it may per
haps be. supposed that it is not the ability to purchase, but
the desire to possess, that falls short, and that the general
produce of industry may be greater than the community
desires to consume—the part, at least, of the community
as which has an equivalent to give. It is evident enough, that
Fd produce makes a market for produce, and that there is
i wealth in the country with which to purchase all the wealth
in the country; but those who have the means, may not have
the wants, and those who have the wants may be without
the means. A portion, therefore, of the commodities pro-
duced, may be unable to find a market, from the absence of _
means in those who have the desire to consume, and the
want of desire in those who have the means.

This is much the most plausible form of the doctrine, and
does not, like that which we first examined, involve a contradic-
tion. There may easily be a greater quantity of any particular
commodity than is desired by those who have the ability to
purchase, and it is abstractedly conceivable that this might
be the case with all commodities. The error is in not perceiy-
ing that although all who have an equivalent to give, might
be fully provided with every consumable article which they
desire, the fact that they go on adding to the production
ati proves that this is not actually the case. Assume the most
favourable hypothesis for the purpose, that of a limited com-
munity, every member of which possesses as much of neces-
a saries and of all known luxuries as he desires: and since it


A Oe” i ee


gd ee eee a, ey


EXCESS OF SUPPLY. 93


is not conceivable that persons whose wants were completely
satisfied would labour and economize to obtain what they
did not desire, suppose that a foreigner arrives, and produces
an additional quantity of something of which there was
already enough. Here, it will be said, is over-production:
true, I reply; over-production of that particular article: the
community wanted no more of that, but it wanted some-
thing. The old inhabitants indeed wanted nothing; but did
not the foreigner himself want something? When he pro-
duced the superfluous article, was he labouring without a
motive? He has produced, but the wrong thing instead of
the right. He wanted, perhaps, food, and has produced
watches, with which everybody was sufficiently supplied.
The newcomer brought with him into the country a demand
for commodities, equal to all that he could produce by his
industry, and it was his business to see that the supply he
brought should be suitable to that demand. If he could not
produce something capable of exciting a new want or desire
in the community, for the satisfaction of which some one
would grow more food and give it to him in exchange, he
had the alternative of growing food for himself; either on
fresh land, if there was any unoccupied, or as a tenant, or
partner, or servant, of some former occupier, willing to be
partially relieved from labour. He has produced a thing not
wanted, instead of what was wanted; and he himself, per-
haps, is not the kind of producer who 1s: wanted; but there
is no over-production ; production is not excessive but merely
ill assorted. We saw before that whoever brings additional
commodities to the market, brings an additional power of
purchase; we now see, that he brings also an additional
desire to consume; since if he had not that desire, he would
not have troubled himself to produce. Neither of the ele-
ments of demand, therefore, can be wanting, when there is
an additional supply; though it is perfectly possible that the
demand may be for one thing, and the supply may unfortu-
nately consist of another.


Se ee


94 BOOK III. CHAPTER xiv. § 4.


Driven to his last retreat, an opponent may perhaps
allege, that there are persons who produce and accumulate
from mere habit; not because they have any object in grow-
ing richer, or desire to add in any respect to their consump-
tion, but from vis inertie. They continue producing because
the machine is ready mounted, and save and re-invest their
savings because they have nothing on which they care to ex-
pend them. I grant that this is possible, and in some few
instances probably happens; but these do not in the smallest
degree affect our conclusion. For, what do these persons do
se with their savings? They invest them productively; that
Bin is, expend them in employing labour. In other words, hay-
ing a purchasing power belonging to them, more than they
know what to do with, they make over the surplus of it for
the general benefit of the labouring class. Now, will that
class also not know what to do with it? Are we to suppose
that they too have their wants perfectly satisfied, and go on
labourmg from mere habit? Until this is the case; until the
working classes have also reached the point of satiety—there
will be no want of demand for the produce of capital, how-
ever rapidly it may accumulate: since, if there is nothing else
for it to do, it can always find employment in producing the
necessaries or luxuries of the labouring class. And when
they too had no further desire for necessaries or luxuries,
they would take the benefit of any further increase of wages
by diminishing their work; so that the over-production which
then for the first time would be possible in idea, could not
even then take place in fact, for want of labourers. Thus, in
whatever manner the question is looked at, even though we
go to the extreme verge of possibility to invent a supposition
favourable to it, the theory of general over-production implies
an absurdity.


§ 4. What then is it by which men who have reflected
much on economical phenomena, and have even contributed
to throw new light upon them by original speculations, have


Se teemnnaes


EXCESS OF SUPPLY. 95


been led to embrace so irrational a doctrine? I conceive
them to have been deceived by a mistaken interpretation of
certain mercantile facts. They imagined that the possibility
of a general oversupply of commodities was proved by ex-
perience. They believed that they saw this phenomenon in
certain conditions of the markets, the true explanation of
which is totally different.

I have already described the state of the markets for
commodities which accompanies what is termed a commer-
cial crisis. At such times there is really an excess of all
commodities above the money demand : in other words, there
is an under-supply of money. From the sudden annihilation
of a great mass of credit, every one dislikes to part with
ready money, and many are anxious to procure it at any
sacrifice. Almost everybody therefore is a seller, and there
are scarcely any buyers: so that there may really be, though
only while the crisis lasts, an extreme depression of general
prices, from what may be indiscriminately called a glut of
commodities or a dearth of money. But it is a great error
to suppose, with Sismondi, that a commercial crisis is the
effect of a general excess of production. It is simply the
consequence of an excess of speculative purchases. It is not
a gradual advent of low prices, but a sudden recoil from
prices extravagantly high : its immediate cause is a contraction
of credit, and the remedy is, not a diminution of supply, but
the restoration of confidence. It is also evident that this
temporary derangement of markets is an evil only because
it is temporary. The fall being solely of money prices, if
prices did not rise again no dealer would lose, since the
smaller price would be worth as much to him as the larger
price was before. In no manner does this phenomenon
answer to the description which these celebrated economists
have given of the evil of over-production. That permanent
decline in the circumstances of producers, for want of mar-
kets, which those writers contemplate, is a conception to
which the nature of a commercial crisis gives no support.


96 BOOK III. CHAPTER xiv. § 4.


The other phenomenon from which the notion of a gene.
ral excess of wealth and superfluity of accumulation seems
to derive countenance, is one of a more permanent nature,
namely, the fall of profits and interest which naturally takes
place with the progress of population and production. The
cause of this decline of profit is the increased cost of main:
taining labour, which results from an increase of population
and of the demand for food, outstripping the advance of
agricultural improvement. © This important feature m the
economical progress of nations will receive full consideration
and discussion in the succeeding Book*. It is obviously a
totally different thing from a want of market for commodi-
ties, though often confounded with it in the complaints of
the producing and trading classes. The true interpretation
of the modern or present state of industrial economy, 1s,
aaa that there is hardly any amount of business which may not
fd sual? be done, if people will be content to do it on small profits;
bd ai and this, all active and intelligent persons in business per
ali fectly well know: but even those who comply with the
necessities of their time, grumble at what they comply with,
and wish that there were less capital, or as they express If,
less competition, in order that there might be greater profits,
Low profits, however, are a different thing from deficiency
of demand; and the production and accumulation which
Hh merely reduce profits, cannot be called excess of supply or of
(Hele production. What the phenomenon really is, and its effects
j and necessary limits, will be seen when we treat of that
express subject.
fatal bal T know not of any economical facts, except the two T have
ie specified, which can have given occasion to the opinion that a
general over-production of commodities ever presented itself
in actual experience. I am convinced that there is no fact in
commercial affairs, which, in order to its explanation, stands
in need of that chimerical supposition.


* Infra, book iv. ch. 4,


wine OLNEY


ere


Rh eh ress ik bet Det
Tea Skt


EXCESS OF SUPPLY. 97


The point is fundamental; any difference of opinion on it
involves radically different conceptions of Political Economy,
especially in its practical aspect. On the one view, we have
only to consider how a sufficient production may be com-
bined with the best possible distribution, but on the other
there is a third thing to be considered—how a market can
be created for produce, or how production can be limited to
the capabilities of the market. Besides; a theory so essen-
tially self-contradictory cannot intrude itself without carry-
ing confusion into the very heart of the subject, and making
it impossible even to conceive with any distinctness many of
the more complicated economical workings of society. This
error has been, I conceive, fatal to the systems, as systems, of
the three distinguished economists to whom I before referred,
Malthus, Chalmers, and Sismondi; all of whom have admi-
rably conceived and explained several of the elementary
theorems of political economy, but this fatal misconception
has spread itself like a veil between them and the more
difficult portions of the subject, not suffering one ray of
light to penetrate. Still more is the same confused idea
constantly crossing and bewildering the speculations of minds
inferior to theirs. It is but justice to two eminént names, to
call attention to the fact, that the merit of having placed this
most important point in its true light, belongs principally,
on the Continent, to the judicious J. B. Say, and in this
country to Mr. Mill; who, (besides the conclusive exposition
which he gave of the subject in his Elements of Political
Economy), had set forth the correct doctrine with great
force and clearness in an early pamphlet, called forth by a
temporary controversy, and entitled, “Commerce Defended;”
the first of his writings which attained any celebrity, and
which he prized more as having been his first introduction to
the friendship of David Ricardo, the most valued and most
intimate friendship of his life.


VOL, Il. H


Ss ae


CHAPTER XV.


OF A MEASURE OF VALUE.


§1. THere has been much discussion among political


economists respecting a Measure of Value. An importance
has been attached to the subject, greater than it deserved,
and what has been written respecting it has contributed not
a little to the reproach of logomachy, which is brought, with
much exaggeration, but not altogether without ground,
against the speculations of political economists. It is neces-
sary however to touch upon the subject, if only to show
how little there is to be said on it.

A Measure of Value, in the ordinary sense of the word
measure, would mean, something, by comparison with which
we may ascertain what is the value of any other thing. When
we consider farther, that value itself is relative, and that two
things are necessary to constitute it, independently of the
third thing which is to measure it ; we may define a Measure
of Value to be something, by comparing with which any
two other things, we may infer their value in relation to one
another.

In this sense, any commodity will serve as a measure of
value at a given time and place; since we can always infer
the proportion in which things exchange for one another,
when we know the proportion in which each exchanges for
any third thing. To serve as a convenient measure of value
is one of the functions of the commodity selected as a
medium of exchange. It is in that commodity that the
values of all other things are habitually estimated. We say
that one thing is worth 2/., another 37.; and it is then known
without express statement, that one is worth two-thirds of
the other, or that the things exchange for one another in the


MEASURE OF VALUE, 99


proportion of 2 to 3. Money is a complete measure of their
value.

But the desideratum sought by political economists is
not a measure of the value of things at the same time and
place, but a measure of the value of the same thing at differ-
ent times and places: something by comparison with which
it may be known whether any given thing is of greater or less
value now than a century ago, or in this country than in
America or China. And for this also, money, or any other
commodity, will serve quite as well as at the same time and
place, provided we can obtain the same data; provided we
are able to compare with the measure not one commodity
only, but the two or more which are necessary to the idea of
value. If wheat is now 50s. the quarter, and a fat sheep the
same, and if in the time of Henry the Second wheat was
20s., and a sheep 10s., we know that a quarter of wheat was
then worth two sheep, and is now only worth one, and that
the value therefore of a sheep, estimated in wheat, is
twice as great as it was then; quite independently of the
value of money at the two periods, either in relation to those
two articles (in respect to both of which we suppose it to
haye fallen), or to other commodities, in respect to which we
need not make any supposition.

What seems to be desired, however, by writers on the
subject, is some means of ascertaining the value of a com-
modity by merely comparing it with the measure, without
referring it specially to any other given commodity. They
would wish to be able, from the mere fact that wheat is now
50s. the quarter, and was formerly 20s., to decide whether
wheat has varied in its value, and in what degree, without
selecting a second commodity, such as a sheep, to compare
it with; because they are not desirous of knowing how much
wheat has varied in value relatively to sheep, but how much
it has varied relatively to things in general.

The first obstacle arises from the necessary indefiniteness
of the idea of general exchange value—yalue in relation not

H 2


100 BOOK III. CHAPTER xv. § 2.


to some one commodity, but to commodities at large. ven
if we knew exactly how much a quarter of wheat would have
purchased at the earlier period, of every marketable article
considered separately, and that it will now purchase more
of some things and less of others, we should often find
it impossible to say whether it had risen or fallen in relation
to things in general. How much more impossible when we
only know how it has varied in relation to the measure. To
enable the money price of a thing at two different periods to
measure the quantity of things in general which it will
exchange for, the same sum of money must correspond at
both periods to the same quantity of things in general, that
is, money must always have the same exchange value, the
same general purchasing power. Now, not only is this not
true of money, or of any other commodity, but we cannot,
even in mere hypothesis, suppose any state of circumstances
in which it would be true.


§ 2. A measure of exchange value, therefore, being im-
possible, writers have formed a notion of something, under
the name of a measure of value, which would be more pro-
perly termed a measure of cost of production. They have
imagined a commodity invariably produced by the same
quantity of labour; to which supposition it is necessary to
add, that the fixed capital employed in the production must
bear always the same proportion to the wages of the imme-
diate labour, and must be always of the same durability: in
short, the same capital must be advanced for the same length
of time, so that the element of value which consists of profits,
as well as that which consists of wages, may be unchangeable.
We should then have a commodity always produced under
one and the same combination of all the circumstances which
affect permanent value. Such a commodity would be by no
means constant in its exchange value; for (even without
reckoning the fluctuations arising from supply and demand)
its’ exchange value would be altered by every change in the


MEASURE OF VALUE. 101


circumstances of production of the things against which it
was exchanged. But if there existed such a commodity, we
should derive this advantage from it, that whenever any other
thing varied in relation to it, we should know that the cause
of variation was not in it, but in the other thing. It would
thus be fitted to serve as a measure, not indeed of the value
of other things, but of their cost of production. ~ If a com-
modity acquired a greater permanent purchasing power in
relation to the invariable commodity, its cost of production
must have become greater; and in the contrary case, less.
This measure of cost, is what political economists have gene-
rally meant by a measure of value.

But a measure of cost, though perfectly conceivable, can
no more exist in fact, than a measure of exchange value.
There is no commodity which is invariable in its cost of
production. Gold comes nearest to the idea; but gold is
hable to vary in cost of production, from the exhaustion of
old mines, the discovery of new, and improvements in the
mode of working. If we attempt to ascertam the changes
in the cost of production of any commodity from the changes
in its money price, the conclusion will require to be corrected
by the best allowance we can make for the intermediate
changes in the cost of production of money itself.

Adam Smith fancied that there were two commodities
peculiarly fitted to serve as a measure of value: corn, and
labour. Of corn, he said that although its value fluctuates
much from year to year, it does not vary greatly from century
to century. This we now know to be an error: corn tends
to rise in cost of production with every increase of popula-
tion, and to fall with every improvement in agriculture, either
in the country itself or in any foreign country from which it
draws a portion of its supplies. The supposed constancy of
the cost of production of corn depends on,the maintenance
of a complete equipoise between these antagonizing forces,
an equipoise which, if ever realized, can only be accidental.
With respect to labour as a measure of value, the language of


102 BOOK Ill. CHAPTER xv. § 2.


Adam Smith is not uniform. He sometimes speaks of it as
a good measure only for short periods, saying that the value
of labour (or wages) does not vary much from year to year,
though it does from generation to generation. On other
occasions he speaks as if labour were intrinsically the most
proper measure of value, on the ground that one day’s ordi-
nary muscular exertion of one man, may be looked upon as
always, to him, the same amount of effort or sacrifice. But
this proposition, whether in itself admissible or not, discards
the idea of exchange value altogether, substituting a totally
different idea, more analogous to value in use. If a day’s
labour will purchase in America twice as much of ordinary
consumable articles as in England, it seems a vain subtlety
to insist on saying that labour is of the same value in both
countries, and that it is the value of the other things which
is different. Labour, in this case, may be correctly said to
be twice as valuable, both in the market and to the labourer
himself, in America as in England.

If the object were to obtain an approximate measure by
which to estimate value in use, perhaps nothing better could
be chosen than one day’s subsistence of an average man,
reckoned in the ordinary food consumed by the class of un-
skilled labourers. If in America a pound of maize flour
will support a labouring man for a day, a thing might be
deemed more or less valuable in proportion to the number of
pounds of maize flour it exchanged for. If one thing, either
by itself or by what it would purchase, could maintain a
labouring man for a day, and another could maintain him for
a week, there would be some reason in saying that the one
was worth, for ordinary human uses, seven times as much as
the other. But this would not measure the worth of the
thing to its possessor for his own purposes, which might be
greater to any amount, though it could not be less, than the
worth of the food which the thing would purchase.

The idea of a Measure of Value must not be confounded
with the idea of.the regulator, or determining principle, of


MEASURE OF VALUE. 103


value. When it is said by Ricardo and others, that the value
of a thing is regulated by quantity of labour, they do not
mean the quantity of labour for which the thing will ex-
change, but the quantity required for producing it. This,
they mean to affirm, determines its value; causes it to be of
the value it is, and of no other. But when Adam Smith
and Malthus say that labour is a measure of value, they do
not mean the labour by which the thing was or can be made,
but the quantity of labour which it will exchange for, or
purchase; in other words, the value of the thing, estimated
im labour. And they do not mean that this regulates the
general exchange value of the thing, or has any effect in
determining what that value shall be, but only ascertains
what it is, and whether and how much it varies from time to
time and from place to place. To confound these two ideas
would be much the same thing as to overlook the distinction
between the thermometer and the fire.


CHAPTER XVI.


OF SOME PECULIAR CASES OF VALUE.


§ 1. Tue general laws of value, in all the more im
portant cases of the interchange of commodities in the same
country, have now been investigated. We examined, first,
the case of monopoly, in which the value is determined by
either a natural or an artificial limitation of quantity, that 1s
by demand and supply: secondly, the case of free competi
tion, when the article can be produced in indefinite quantity
at the same cost; in which case the permanent value is
determined by the cost of production, and only the fluctua-
tions by supply and demand: thirdly, a mixed case, that of
the articles which can be produced in indefinite quantity, but
not at the same cost; in which case the permanent value is
determined by the greatest cost which it is necessary
incur in order to obtain the required supply. And lastly, we
have found that money itself is a commodity of the third
class; that its value, ina state of freedom, is governed by the
same laws as the values of other commodities of its class;
and that prices, therefore, follow the same laws as values.
From this it appears that demand and supply govern the
fluctuations of values and prices in all cases, and the perma-
nent values and prices of all things of which the supply 1s
determined by any agency other than that of free compet
tion: but that, under the regime of competition, things are, on
the average, exchanged for each other at such values, and
sold at such prices, as afford equal expectation of advantage
to all classes of producers; which can only be when things


exchange for one another in the ratio of their cost of produc-
tion.


It is now, however, necessary to take notice of certain,


,
i
.
f
5
qf
qj


SOME PECULIAR CASES OF VALUE. 105


cases, to which, from their peculiar nature, this law of ex-
change value is inapplicable.

It sometimes happens that two different commodities
have what may be termed a joint cost of production. They
are both products of the same operation, or set of operations,
and the outlay is incurred for the sake of both together, not
part for one and part for the other. The same outlay would
have to be incurred for either of the two, if the other were
not wanted or used at all. There are not a few instances of
commodities thus associated in their production. For exam-
ple, coke and coal-gas are both produced from the same
material, and by the same operation. In a more partial
sense, mutton and wool are an example: beef, hides, and
tallow: calves and dairy produce: chickens and eggs. Cost
of production can have nothing to do with deciding the yalue
of the associated commodities relatively to each other. It
only decides their joint value. The gas and the coke together
have to repay the expenses of their production, with the
ordinary profit. To do this, a given quantity of gas, together
with the coke which is the residuum of its manufacture,
must exchange for other things in the ratio of their jomt
cost of production. But how much of the remuneration of
the producer shall be derived from the coke, and how much
from the gas, remains to be decided. Cost of production
does not determine their prices, but the sum of their prices.
A principle is wanting to apportion the expenses of produc-
tion between the two.

Since cost of production here fails us, we must revert to
a law of value anterior to cost of production, and more fun-
damental, the law of demand and supply. That law is, that
the demand for a commodity varies with its value, and that
the value adjusts itself so that the demand shall be equal to
the supply. This supplies the principle of repartition which
x we are in quest of.

Suppose that a certain quantity of gas is produced and
sold at a certain’ price, and that the residuum of coke is


106 BOOK 11I. CHAPTER Xvi. § 1.


offered at a price which, together with that of the gas, repays i
the expenses with the ordinary rate of profit. Suppose, too, ©
that at the price put upon the gas and coke respectively, the |
whole of the gas finds an easy market, without either surplus
or deficiency, but that purchasers cannot be found for all the _
coke corresponding to it. The coke will be offered ata
lower price in order to force a market. But this lover
price, together with the price of the gas, will not be rem-
nerating: the manufacture, as a whole, will not pay its e
penses with the ordinary profit, and will not, on these terms
continue to be carried on. The gas, therefore, must be sold
at a higher price, to make up for the deficiency on the coke,
‘The demand consequently contracting, the production will he
somewhat reduced; and prices will become stationary whe
by the joint effect of the rise of gas and the fall of coke,9
much less of the first is sold, and so much more of the secont, ©
that there is now a market for all the coke which results from |
the existing extent of the gas manufacture.
Or suppose the reverse case; that more coke is wanted F
at the present prices, than can be supplied by the operations |
required by the existing demand for gas. Coke, being nowin ©
deficiency, will rise in price. The whole operation will yield
more than the usual rate of profit, and additional capital wil
be attracted to the manufacture. The unsatisfied demand
for coke will be supplied; but this cannot be done without
increasing the supply of gas too; and as the existing demand
was fully supplied already, an increased quantity can only
find a market by lowering the price. The result will be that
the two together will yield the return required by their joint
cost of production, but that more of this return than before
will be furnished by the coke, and less by the gas. Kquili-
brium will be attaimed when the demand for each article fits
so well with the demand for the other, that the quantity |
required of each is exactly as much as is generated in pro-
ducing the quantity required of the other. If there is any
surplus or deficiency on either side 3 if there is a demand for


r


SOME PECULIAR CASES OF VALUE. 107


coke, and not a demand for all the gas produced along with
it, or vice versd; the values and prices of the two things will
so readjust themselves that both shall find a market.

When, therefore, two or more commodities have a joint
cost of production, their natural values relatively to each
other are those which will create a demand for each, in the
ratio of the quantities in which they are sent forth by the
productive process. This theorem is not in itself of any
great importance: but the illustration it affords of the law of
demand, and of the mode in which, when cost of production
fails to be applicable, that other principle steps in to supply
the vacancy, is worthy of particular attention, as we shall
find in the next chapter but one that something very similar
takes place in cases of much greater moment.


§ 2. Another case of value which merits attention, is
that of the different kinds of agricultural produce. This is
rather a more complex question than the last, and requires
that attention should be paid to a greater number of influ:
encing circumstances.

The case would present nothing peculiar, if different
agricultural products were either grown indiscriminately and
with equal advantage on the same soils, or wholly on different
soils, The difficulty arises from two things: first, that most
soils are fitter for one kind of produce than another, without
being absolutely unfit for any; and secondly, the rotation of
crops.

For simplicity, we will confine our supposition to two
kinds of agricultural produce, for stance, wheat and oats.
If all soils were equally adapted for wheat and for oats, both
would be grown indiscriminately on all soils, and their rela-
tive cost of production, being the same everywhere, would
govern their relative value. If the same labour which grows
three quarters of wheat on any given soil, would always grow
on that soil five quarters of oats, the three and the five quarters
would be of the same value. If, again, wheat and oats could


Pate 5


> 3 4. = . * SSe: = s @ ce wt ey hey 4 4 ?. om =
i aS SS iat aC a ae ik eS Se eee


108 BOOK III. CHAPTER XVI. § 2.


not be grown on the same soil at all, the value of each would ©
be determined by its peculiar cost of production on the leat
favourable of the soils adapted for it, which the existing
demand required a recourse to. The fact, however, is that ©
both wheat and oats can be grown on almost any soil whith
is capable of producing either: but some soils, such as the
stiff clays, are better adapted for wheat, while others’ (the
light sandy soils,) are more suitable for oats. There may
be some soils which will yield, to the same quantity d
labour, only four quarters of oats to three of wheat; other
perhaps less than three of wheat, to five quarters of oats |
Among these diversities, what determines the relative value
of the two things?

It is evident that each grain will be cultivated in prefet-
ence, on the soils which are better adapted for it than for the .
other; and if the demand is supplied from these alone, the —
values of the two grains will have no reference to one anl- |
ther. But when the demand for both is such as to requitt
that each should be grown not only on the soils peculiarly
fitted for it, but on the medium soils which, without being
specifically adapted to either, are about equally suited for
both, the cost of production on those medium soils will de
termine the relative value of the two grains; while the rent
of the soils specifically adapted to each, will be regulated by
their productive power, considered with reference to that on
alone to which they are peculiarly applicable. Thus far the
question presents no difficulty, to any one to whom thé
general principles of value are familiar.

It may happen, however, that the demand for one of the |
two, as for example wheat, may so outstrip the demand for :
the other, as not only to occupy the soils specially suited for |
wheat, but to engross entirely those equally suitable to both,
and even encroach upon those which are better adapted to
oats. To create an inducement for this unequal apportion
ment of the cultivation, wheat must be relatively dearer, and
oats cheaper, than according to the cost of their production


SOME PECULIAR CASES OF VALUE. 109


on the medium land. Their relative value must be in pro-
portion to the cost on that quality of land, whatever it may
be, on which the comparative demand for the two grains
requires that both of them should be grown. If, from the
state of the demand, the two cultivations meet on land
more favourable to one than to the other, that one will be
cheaper and the other dearer, in relation to each other and
to things in general, than if the proportional demand were
as we at first supposed.

Here, then, we obtain a fresh illustration, in a somewhat
different manner, of the operation of demand, not as an occa-
sional disturber of value, but as a permanent regulator of it,
conjoined with, or supplementary to, cost of production.

The case of rotation of crops does not require separate
analysis, being a case of joint cost of production, like that
of gas and coke. If it were the practice to grow white and
green crops on all land, in alternate years, the one being
necessary as much for the sake of the other as for its own
sake; the farmer would derive his remuneration for two
years’ expenses from one white and one green crop, and the
prices of the two would so adjust themselves as to create a
demand which would carry off an equal number of white and
of green crops.

There would be little difficulty in finding other anomalous
cases of value, which it might be a useful exercise to resolve:
but it is neither desirable nor possible, in a work like the
present, to enter more into details than is necessary for the
elucidation of principles. I now therefore proceed to the
only part of the general theory of exchange which has not
yet been touched upon, that of International Exchanges, or,
to speak more generally, exchanges between distant places.


CHAPTER XVII.


OF INTERNATIONAL TRADE.


§ 1. THE causes which occasion a commodity to be
brought from a distance, instead of being produced, as con-
venience would seem to dictate, as near as possible to the
market where it is to be sold for consumption, are usually
conceived in a rather superficial manner. Some things it is
physically impossible to produce, except in particular cl:
cumstances of heat, soil, water, or atmosphere. But there
are many things which, though they could be produced at
home without difficulty, and in any quantity, are yet imported
from a distance. The explanation which would be popularly
given of this would be, that it is cheaper to import than to
produce them: and this is the true reason. But this reason
itself requires that a reason be given for it. Of two things
produced in the same place, if one is cheaper than the other,
the reason is that it can be produced with less labour and
capital, or, in a word, at less cost. Is this also the reason as
between things produced in different places? Are things
never imported but from places where they can be produced
with less labour (or less of the other element of cost, time)
than in the place to which they are brought? Does the lay,
that permanent value is proportioned to cost of production,
hold good between commodities produced in distant places,
as it does between those produced in adjacent places?

We shall find that it does not. A thing may sometimes
be sold cheapest, by being produced in some other place than
that at which it can be produced with the smallest amount of
labour and abstinence. England might import corn from
Poland, and pay for it in cloth, even though she had a decided
advantage over Poland in the production of both the one and


Sy saa


=
q
:


5
‘Wed
=


INTERNATIONAL TRADE. WAL


the other. England might send cottons to Portugal in ex-
change for wine, although Portugal might be able to produce
cottons with a less amount of labour and capital than England
could.

This could not happen between adjacent places. If the
north bank of the Thames possessed an advantage over the
south bank in the production of shoes, no shoes would be
produced on the south side; the shoemakers would remove
themselves and their capitals to the north bank, or would
have established themselves there originally; for, being com-
petitors in the same market with those on the north side, they
could not compensate themselves for their disadvantage at
the expense of the consumer; the amount of it would fall
entirely on their profits; and they would not long content
themselves with a smaller profit, when, by simply crossing a
river, they could increase it. But between distant places,
and especially between different countries, profits may con-
tinue different; because persons do not usually remove
themselves or their capitals to a distant place, without a
very strong motive. If capital moved to remote parts of the
world, as readily, and for as small an inducement, as it moves
to another quarter of the same town; if people would trans-
port their manufactories to America or China whenever they
could save a small percentage in their expenses by it; pro-
fits would be alike all over the world, and all things would
be produced in the places where the same labour and capital
would produce them in greatest quantity and of best quality.
A tendency may, even now, be observed towards such a state
of things ; capital is becoming more and more cosmopolitan ;
there is so much greater similarity of manners and institutions
than formerly, and so much less alienation of feeling, among
the more civilized countries, that both population and capital
will now move from one of those countries to another on
much less temptation than heretofore. But there are still
extraordinary differences, both of wages and of profits, be-
tween different parts of the world. It needs but a small


Sr ASS eh


of eae ene
res aE =


ut 112 BOOK IJI. CHAPTER XvII. § 2.
i


motive to transplant capital, or even persons, from Wat
wickshire to Yorkshire; but a much greater to make them
remoye to India, the colonies, or Ireland. To France, Ger
many, or Switzerland, capital moves perhaps almost as readily ©
as to the colonies; the differences of language and goven:
ment being scarcely so great a hindrance as climate and
distance. To countries still barbarous, or, like Russia a
Turkey, only beginning to be civilized, capital will not Mi:
ir} pass erate, unless under the inducement of a very great extta
profit.
et Between all distant places therefore in some degree, b
especially between different countries (whether under the |
i a Same supreme government or not,) there may exist greal
i PA. inequalities in the return to labour and capital, withou
te causing them to move from one place to the other in such |
quantity as to level those inequalities. The capital belong:
ing to a country will, to a great extent, remain in the count; ;


It f.


; a even if there be no mode of employing it in which it woull L
ip not be more productive elsewhere. Yet even a country thus ;

te E circumstanced might, and probably would, carry on trade with

a other countries. It would export articles of some sort, evel ©


to places which could make them with less labour than itself} |
because those countries, supposing them to have an adyal-
tage over it in all productions, would have a greater advan-
tage in some things than in others, and would find it the
interest to import the articles in which their advantage W |
smallest, that they might employ more of their labour and |
capital on those in which it was greatest.


1 tomas Va git soe ceabit catt tas So eS


: § 2. As I have said elsewhere* after Ricardo (the fist
a8 who made any great step towards clearing up this subject)
Ra aeh aie :

“it 1s not a difference in the absolute cost of production, —
: which determines the interchange, but a difference in the
nite comparative cost. It may be to our advantage to procure 10h


*
Essays on some Unsettled Questions of Political Economy, Essay I.


en


INTERNATIONAL TRADE. 113


wan een


from Sweden in exchange for cottons, even although the
mines of England as well as her manufactories should be
more productive than those of Sweden; for if we have an
advantage of one-half in cottons, and only an advantage of a
quarter in iron, and could sell our cottons to Sweden at the
price which Sweden must pay for them if she produced them
herself, we should obtain our iron with an advantage of one-
half, as well as our cottons. We may often, by trading with
foreigners, obtain their commodities at a smaller expense of
labour and capital than they cost to the foreigners themselves.
The bargain is still advantageous to the foreigner, because
the commodity which he receives in exchange, though it has
cost us less, would have cost him more.”


= Tae


To illustrate the cases in which interchange of commodi-
ties will not, and those in which it will, take place between
two countries, Mr. Mill, in his Elements of Political Eco-
nomy*, makes the supposition, that Poland has an advan-
tage over England in the production of both cloth and of
com. He first supposes the advantage to be of equal amount
in both commodities; the cloth and the corn, each of which
required 100 days labour in Poland, requiring each 150 days
labour in England. “It would follow, that the cloth of 150
days labour in England, if sent to Poland, would be equal to
the cloth of 100 days labour in Poland ; if exchanged for
corn, therefore, it would exchange for the corn of only 100
days labour. But the corn of 100 days labour in Poland, was

Supposed to be the same quantity with that of 150 days
labour in England. With 150 days labour in cloth, there-
fore, England would only get as much corn in Poland as she
could raise with 150 days labour at home ; and she would,
in importing it, have the cost of carriage besides. In these
circumstances no exchange would take place.” In this case
the comparative costs of the two articles in England and in
Poland were supposed to be the same, though the absolute


* Third ed, p. 120,


aco, nls


114 BOOK III. CHAPTER xvil. § 2.


costs were different; on which supposition we see that there
would be no labour saved to either country by confining its
industry to one of the two productions, and importing the
other.

It is otherwise when the comparative, and not merely


the absolute costs of the two articles are different in the two |


countries. “If,” continues the same author, “ while the
cloth produced with 100 days labour in Poland was pto-
duced with 150 days labour in England, the corn which
was produced in Poland with 100 days. labour could not be
produced in England with less than 200 days labour; an
adequate motive to exchange would immediately arise
With a quantity of cloth which England produced with 150
days labour, she would be able to purchase as much corn m
Poland as was there produced with 100 days labour ; but the
quantity which was there produced with 100 days labour,
would be as great as the quantity produced in England with
200 days labour.’ By importing corn, therefore, from
Poland, and paying for it with cloth, England would obtain
for 150 days labour what would otherwise cost her 2005
being a saving of 50 days labour on each repetition of the
transaction: and not merely a saving to England, but a
saving absolutely; for it is not obtained at the expense of
Poland, who, with corn that costs her 100 days labour,
has purchased cloth which, if produced at home, would have
cost her the same. Poland, therefore, on this supposition,
loses nothing; but also she derives no advantage from the
trade, the imported cloth costing her as much as if it were
made at home. To enable Poland to gain anything by the
interchange, something must be abated from the gain
England: the corn produced in Poland by 100 days labour
must be able to purchase from England more cloth than
Poland could produce by that amo 5 - more there-
fore than England could produce — eee Eng-
land thus obtaining the com which would have cost her 200
days at a cost exceeding 150, though short of 200. Eng-


neresoerreen—


de tae ey


INTERNATIONAL TRADE. 115


land therefore no longer gains the whole of the labour which
is saved to the two jointly by trading with one another.


§ 3. From this exposition we perceive in what consists
the benefit of international exchange, or in other words,
foreign commerce. Setting aside its enabling countries to
obtain commodities which they could not themselves pro-
duce at all; its advantage consists in a more efficient em-
ployment of the productive forces of the world. If two
countries which trade together attempted, as far as was
physically possible, to produce for themselves what they now
import from one another, the labour and capital of the two
countries would not be so productive, the two together would
not obtain from their industry so great a quantity of commo-
dities, as when each employs itself in producing, both for
itself and for the other, the things in which its labour is rela-
tively most efficient. The addition thus made to the pro-
duce of the two combined, constitutes the advantage of the
trade. It is possible that one of the two countries may be
altogether inferior to the other in productive capacities, and
that its labour and capital could be employed to greatest
advantage by being removed bodily to the other. The labour
and capital which have been sunk in rendering Holland
habitable, would have produced a much greater return if
transported to America or Ireland. The produce of the whole
world would be greater than it is, if everything were produced
where there is the greatest absolute facility for its production.
But nations do not, at least in modern times, emigrate en
masse ; and while the labour and capital of a country remain
in the country, they are most beneficially employed in pro-
ducing for foreign markets as well as for its own, the things
in which it lies under the least disadvantage, if there be none
in which it possesses an advantage.


§ 4. Before proceeding further, let us contrast this view
of the benefits of international commerce with other theories


12


=


116 BOOK Ill. CHAPTER xviI. § 4.


which have prevailed, and which to a certain extent still
prevail, on the same subject.

According to the doctrine now stated, the only direct
advantage of foreign commerce consists in the imports. A
country obtains things which it either could not have pro-
duced at all, or which it must have produced at a greater
expense of capital and labour than the cost of the things
which it exports to pay for them. It thus obtains a more
ample supply of the commodities it wants, for the same
labour and capital; or the same supply, for less labour and
capital, leaving the surplus disposable to produce other
things. The vulgar theory disregards this benefit, and deems
the advantage of commerce to reside in the exports: as if not
what a country obtains, but what it parts with, by its foreign
trade, was supposed to constitute the gain to it. An extended
market for its produce—an abundant consumption for its
goods—a vent for its surplus—are the phrases by which it
has been customary to designate the uses and recommenda
tions of commerce with foreign countries. This notion is
intelligible, when we consider that the authors and leaders of
opinion on mercantile questions have always hitherto been
the selling class. It is in truth a surviving relic of the Mer-
cantile Theory, according to which, money being the only
wealth, selling, or in other words, exchanging goods for money;
was (to countries without mines of their own) the only way of
growing rich—and importation of goods, that is to say, parting
with money, was so much subtracted from the benefit.

The notion that money alone is wealth, has been long
defunct, but it has left many of its progeny behind it; and
even its destroyer, Adam Smith, retained some opinions which
it is impossible to trace to any other origin. Adam Smith’s
theory of the benefit of foreign trade, was that it afforded an
outlet for the surplus produce of a country, and enabled a
portion of the capital of the country to replace itself witha
profit. These expressions suggest ideas inconsistent with a

elear conception of the phenomena. The expression, surplus


alae


i
,


;


INTERNATIONAL TRADE. 117


produce, seems to imply that a country is under some kind of
necessity of producing the corn or cloth which it exports; so
that the portion which it does not itself consume, if not wanted
and consumed elsewhere, would either be produced in sheer
waste, or if it were not produced, the corresponding portion of
capital would remain idle, and the mass of productions in the
country would be diminished by so much. Either of these
suppositions would be entirely erroneous. The country pro-
duces an exportable article, in excess of its own wants, from
no inherent necessity, but as the cheapest mode of supplying
itself with other things. If prevented from exporting this
surplus, it would cease to produce it, and would no longer
import anything, being unable to give an equivalent; but
the labour and capital which had been employed in producing
with a view to exportation, would find immediate employ-
ment in producing those desirable objects which were pre-
viously brought from abroad: or, if some of them could not
be produced, in producing substitutes for them. These arti-
cles would of course be produced at a greater cost than that
of the things with which they had previously been purchased
from foreign countries. But the value and’ price of the
articles would rise in proportion; and the capital would just
as much be replaced, with the ordinary profit, from the
returns, as it was when employed in producing for the foreign
market. The only losers (after the temporary inconvenience
of the change) would be the consumers of the heretofore
imported articles ; who would be obliged either to do without
them, consuming in lieu of them something which they did
not like so well, or to pay a higher price for them than
before.

There is much misconception in the common notion of
what commerce does for a country.. When commerce is
spoken of as a source of national wealth, the imagination
fixes itself upon the large fortunes acquired by merchants,
rather than upon the saving of price to consumers. But the
gains of merchants, when they enjoy no exclusive privilege,


sia


eek
«


2


118 BOOK Ill. CHAPTER XVII. § 5.


are no greater than the profits obtained by the employment
of capital in the country itself. If it be said that the capital
now employed in foreign trade could not find employment
in supplying the home market, I might reply, that this is the
fallacy of general over-production, discussed in a former
chapter: but the thing is in this particular case too evident,
to require an appeal to any general theory. We not only
see that the capital of the merchant would find employment,
but we see what employment. There would be employment
created, equal to that which would be taken away: Exporta-
tion ceasing, importation to an equal value would cease also,
and all that part of the income of the country which had
been expended in imported commodities, would be ready to
expend itself on the same things produced at home, or on
others instead of them. Commerce is virtually a mode of
cheapening production; and in all such cases the consumer
is the person ultimately benefited: the dealer, in the end, is
sure to get his profit, whether the buyer obtains much or
little for his money. This is said without prejudice to the
effect (already touched upon, and to be hereafter fully dis-
cussed,) which the cheapening of commodities may have in
raising profits ; in the case when the commodity cheapened,
being one of those consumed by labourers, enters into


the cost of labour, by which the rate of profits 1s deter-
mined.


§ 5. Such, then, is the direct economical advantage of
foreign trade. But there are, besides, indirect effects, which
must be counted as benefits of a high order. One is, the
tendency of every extension of the market to improve the
processes of production. A country which produces for a
larger market than its own, can introduce a more extended
division of labour, can make greater use of machinery, and
is more likely to make inventions and improvements in the
processes of production. Whatever causes a greater quantity
of anything to be produced in the same vice, tends to the


INTERNATIONAL TRADE. 119


general increase of the productive powers of the world*.
There is another consideration, principally applicable to an
early stage of industrial advancement. A people may be in
a quiescent, indolent, uncultivated state, with few wants and
wishes, all their tastes being either fully satisfied or entirely
undeveloped, and they may fail to put forth the whole of
their productive energies for want of any sufficient object of
desire. The opening of a foreign trade, by making them
acquainted with new objects, or tempting them by the easier
acquisition of things which they had not previously thought
attainable, sometimes works a complete industrial revolution
in a country whose resources were previously undeveloped
for want of energy and ambition in the people: inducing
those who were satisfied with scanty comforts and little work,
to work harder for the gratification of their new tastes, and
even to save, and accumulate capital, for the still more com-
plete satisfaction of those tastes at a future time.

But the economical advantages of commerce are sur-
passed in importance by those of its effects which are intel-
lectual and moral. It is hardly possible to overrate the value,
for the improvement of human beings, of things which bring
them into contact with persons dissimilar to themselves, and
with modes of thought and action unlike those with which
they are familiar. Commerce is now, what war once was,
the principal source of this contact. Commercial adventurers
from more advanced countries have generally been the first
civilizers of barbarians. And commerce is the purpose of
the far greater part of the communication which takes place
between civilized nations. Such communication has always
been, and is peculiarly in the present age, one of the pri-
mary sources of progress. To a being like man, who, as
hitherto educated, can scarcely cultivate even a good quality
without running it into a fault, it is dispensable to be per-
petually comparing his own notions and customs with the


® Vide supra, vol. i. pp. 158 et seqq.


j
;
if
i
.
4
i
|
'


120 BOOK Ill. CHAPTER xvil. § 5.


experience and example of persons in different circumstances
from himself: and there is no nation which does not need to
borrow from others, not merely particular arts or practices;
but essential points of character in which its own types
inferior. Finally, commerce first taught nations to see with
good will the wealth and prosperity of one another. Before,
the patriot wished all countries weak, poor, and ill-governed,
but his own: he now sees in their wealth and progressé
direct source of wealth and progress to his own country. It
was in yain to inculcate feelings of brotherhood among man-
kind by moral influences alone, unless a sense of community
of interest could also be established; and that sense we owe
to commerce. It is commerce which is rapidly rendering
war obsolete, by strengthening and multiplying the personal
interests which are in natural opposition to it. And _ since
war is now almost the only event, not highly improbable,
which could throw back for any length of time the progres
of human improvement, it may be said without exaggeration
that the great extent and rapid increase of international trade,
in being the principal guarantee of the peace of the world, is
the great permanent security for the uninterrupted progres


of the ideas, the institutions, and the character of the human
race.


CHAPTER XVIII.


OF INTERNATIONAL VALUES.


§1. The values of commodities produced at the same
place, or in places sufficiently adjacent for capital to move
freely between them—let us say, for simplicity, of com-
modities produced in the same country—depend (temporary
fluctuations apart) upon their cost of production. But the
value of a commodity brought from a distant place, especially
from a foreign country, does not depend on its cost of pro-
duction in the place from whence it comes. On what, then,
does it depend? The value of a thing in any place, depends
on the cost of its acquisition in that place; which, in the
case of an imported article, means the cost of production of
the thing which is exported to pay for it.

Since all trade is in reality barter, money being a mere in-
strument for exchanging things against one another, we will,
for simplicity, begin by supposing the international trade to
be in form, what it always is in reality, an actual trucking of
one commodity against another. As far as we have hitherto
proceeded, we have found all the laws of interchange to be
essentially the same, whether money is used or not; money
never governing, but always obeying, those general laws.

If, then, England imports wine from Spain, giving for
every pipe of wine a bale of cloth, the exchange-yalue of a
pipe of wine in England will not depend upon what the
production of the wine may have cost in Portugal, but upon
what the production of the cloth has cost in England.
Though the wine may have cost in Portugal the equivalent
of only ten days labour, yet, if the cloth costs in England
twenty days labour, the wine, when brought to England,
will exchange for the produce of twenty days English labour,


ae


|

:
I
4
'
}
{
4
r


122 BOOK Ill. CHAPTER Xvill. § l.


plus the cost of carriage, including the usual profit on the im-
porter’s capital during the time it is locked up and withheld
from other employment.

The value, then, in any country, of a foreign commodity,
depends on the quantity of home produce which must be
given to the foreign country in exchange for it. In other
words, the values of foreign commodities depend on the
terms of international exchange. What, then, do these
depend upon? What is it, which, in the case supposed,
causes a pipe of wine from Spain to be exchanged with
England for exactly that quantity of cloth? We have seen
that it is not their cost of production, If the cloth and the
wine were both made in Spain, they would exchange at their
cost of production in Spain; if they were both made m
England, they would exchange at their cost of production in
England: but all the cloth being made in England, and all
the wine in Spain, they are in circumstances to which we
haye already determined that the law of cost of production is
not applicable. We must accordingly, as we have done
before in a similar embarrassment, fall back upon an ante-
cedent law, that of supply and demand: and in this we shall
again find the solution of our difficulty.

I have entered into this question very fully in a separate
Essay, already once referred to; and a repetition of part of
the exposition then given, will answer our purpose better
than an alteration made merely for alteration’s sake. I must
give notice that we are now in the region of the most com:
plicated questions which political economy affords; that the
subject is one which cannot possibly be made elementary; and
that a more continuous effort of attention than has yet been
required, will be necessary to follow the series of deductions.
The thread, however, which we are about to take in hand, is
in itself very simple and manageable; the only difficulty is


in following it through the windings and entanglements of
complex international transactions,


RE |


aie ta or aes ee Oe


INTERNATIONAL VALUES. 123


§2. “When the trade is established between the two
countries, the two commodities will exchange for each
other at the same rate of interchange in both countries—


_ bating the cost of carriage, of which, for the present, it will


be more convenient to omit the consideration. Supposing,
therefore, for the sake of argument, that the carriage of the
commodities from one country to the other could be effected
without labour and without cost, no sooner would the trade
be opened than the value of the two commodities, esti-
mated in each other, would come to a level in both
countries.

“Suppose that 10 yards of broadcloth cost in England
as much labour as 15 yards of linen, and in Germany as
much as 20.” In common with most of my predecessors, I
find it advisable, m these intricate investigations, to give
distinctness and fixity to the conception by numerical exam-
ples. These examples must sometimes, as in the present
case, be purely supposititious. I should have greatly preferred
real ones; but all that is essential is, that the numbers should
be such as admit of being easily followed through the subse-
quent combinations into which they enter.

This supposition then being made, it would be the interest
of England to import linen from Germany, and of Germany
to import cloth from England. “ When each country pro-
duced both commodities for itself, 10 yards of cloth exchanged
for 15 yards of linen in England, and for 20 in Germany.
They will now exchange for the same number of yards of
linen in both. For what number? If for 15 yards, England
will be just as she was, and Germany will gain all. If for 20
yards, Germany will be as before, and England will derive
the whole of the benefit. If for any number intermediate
between 15 and 20, the advantage will be shared between the
two countries. If, for example, 10 yards of cloth exchange
for 18 of linen, England will gain an advantage of 3 yards
on every 15, Germany will save 2 out of every 20. The
problem is, what are the causes which determine the propor-


Big] ost


}

:
. 4

\


Se


":


ama ee


Sr econ


194 BOOK Ill. CHAPTER xvill. § 2.


tion in which the cloth of England and the linen of Ger
many will exchange for each other ?
“As exchange value, in this case as in every other, 1s pt


verbially fluctuating, it does not matter what we supposelt |


to be when we begin: we shall soon see whether there ke


ER TE


any fixed point about which it oscillates, which it has a ter |
dency always to approach to, and to remain at. Let us sup |


pose, then, that by the effect of what Adam Smith calls the


higgling of the market, 10 yards of cloth, in both countries, _


exchange for 17 yards of linen. f
“The demand for a commodity, that is, the quantity af
it which can find a purchaser, varies, as we have before re-
marked, according tothe price. In Germany the price of Mm
yards of cloth is now 17 yards of linen; or whatever quanti)
of money is equivalent in Germany to 17 yards of linen.
Now, that being the price, there is some particular number
of yards of cloth, which will be in demand, or will find put-
chasers, at that price. There is some given quantity of cloth,
more than which could not be disposed of at that price; less
than which, at that price, would not fully satisfy the demand.
Let us suppose this quantity to be 1,000 times 10 yards.


“ Let us now turn our attention to England. There, the _
price of 17 yards of linen is 10 yards of cloth, or whatever
quantity of money is equivalent in England to 10 yards of


cloth. There is some particular number of yards of linen


which, at that price, will exactly satisfy the demand, and no —


more. Let us suppose that this number is 1000 times ]/
yards.

“As 17 yards of linen are to 10 yards of cloth, so ale
1000 times 17 yards to 1,000 times 10 yards. At the exist
ing exchange value, the linen which England requires will
exactly pay for the quantity of cloth which, on the same
terms of interchange, Germany requires. The demand on
each side is precisely sufficient to carry off the supply 0” the
other. The conditions required by the principle of demand
and supply are fulfilled, and the two commodities will con-


Poe LS en


INTERNATIONAL VALUES. 125


tinue to be interchanged, as we supposed them to be, in the
ratio of 17 yards of linen for 10 yards of cloth.

“But our supposition might have been different.
Suppose that, at the assumed rate of interchange, England
had been disposed to consume no greater’ quantity of linen
than 800 times 17 yards: it is evident that, at the rate sup-
posed, this would not have sufficed to pay for the 1,000
times 10 yards of cloth which we have supposed Germany to
require at the assumed value. Germany would be able to
procure no more than 800 times 10 yards, at that price. To
procure the remaining 200, which she would have no means
of dog but by bidding higher for them, she would offer
more than 17 yards of linen in exchange for 10 yards of
cloth: let us suppose her to offer 18. At that price, perhaps,
England would be inclined to purchase a greater quantity of
linen. She would consume, possibly, at that price, 900 times
18 yards. On the other hand, cloth having risen in price,
the demand of Germany for it would probably have dimi-
nished. If, instead of 1,000 times 10 yards, she is now con-
tented with 900 times 10 yards, these will exactly pay for
the 900 times 18 yards of linen which England is willing
to take at the altered price: the demand on each side will
again exactly suffice to take off the corresponding supply ;
and 10 yards for 18 will be the rate at which, in both coun-
tries, cloth will exchange for linen.

“The converse of all this would have happened, if instead
of 800 times 17 yards, we had supposed that England, at the
rate of 10 for 17, would have taken 1200 times 17 yards of
linen. In this case, it is England whose demand is not fully
supplied; it is England who, by bidding for more linen, will
alter the rate of interchange to her own disadvantage ; and 10
yards of cloth will fall, in both countries, below the value of
17 yards of linen. By this fall of cloth, or what is the same
thing, this rise of linen, the demand of Germany for cloth
will increase, and the demand of England for linen will dimi-
nish, till the rate of interchange has so adjusted’ itself that


126 BOOK Ill. CHAPTER XVIII. $§ 2.


the cloth and the linen will exactly pay for one another; and
when once this point is attained, values will remain without
further alteration.

“It may be considered, therefore, as established, that
when two countries trade together in two commodities, the
exchange value of these commodities relatively to each other
will adjust itself to the inclinations and circumstances of the
consumers on both sides, in such manner that the quantities


mers cannot be reduced to any rule, so neither can the pro-
portions in which the two commodities will be interchanged.
We know that the limits within which the variation 1s com
fined, are the ratio between their costs of production in the
one country, and the ratio between their costs of production
in the other. Ten yards of cloth cannot exchange for more
than 20 yards of linen, nor for less than 15. But they may
exchange for any intermediate number. The ratios, there-
fore, in which the advantage of the trade may be divided
between the two nations, are various. The circumstances
which the proportionate share of each country more remotely
depends, admit only of a very general indication.

“Tt is even possible to conceive an extreme case, 10 which
the whole of the advantage resulting from the interchange
would be reaped by one party, the other country gaining
nothing at all. There is no absurdity in the hypothesis
that, of some given commodity, a certain quantity is all thet
is wanted at any price; and that, when that quantity 1 ob-
tained, no fall in the exchange value would induce other
consumers to come forward, or those who are already SUp-
plied, to take more. Let us suppose that this is the case in
Germany with cloth. Before her trade with England com-
menced, when 10 yards of cloth cost her as much labour as
20 yards of linen, she nevertheless consumed as much cloth
as she wanted under any circumstances, and, if she could


required by each country, of the articles which it imports
from its neighbour, shall be exactly sufficient to pay for ont
another. As the inclinations and circumstances of cons |


es a


.
:


INTERNATIONAL VALUES. Wey


obtain it at the rate of 10 yards of cloth for 15 of linen, she
would not consume more. Let this fixed quantity be 1000
times 10 yards. At the rate, however, of 10 for 20, England
would want more linen than would be equivalent to this
quantity of cloth. She would, consequently, offer a higher
value for linen; or, what is the same thing, she would offer
her cloth at a cheaper rate. But, as by no lowering of the
value could she prevail on Germany to take a greater quan-
tity of cloth, there would be no limit to the rise of linen or
fall of cloth, until the demand of England for linen was
reduced by the rise of its value, to the quantity which 1000
times 10 yards of cloth would purchase. It might be, that
to produce this diminution of the demand, a less fall would
not suffice than that which would make 10 yards of cloth
exchange for 15 of linen. Germany would then gain the
whole of the advantage, and England would be exactly as
she was before the trade commenced. It would be for the
interest, however, of Germany herself to keep her linen a
little below the value at which it could be produced in Kng-
land, in order to keep herself from being supplanted by the
home producer. England, therefore, would always benefit
in some degree by the existence of the trade, though it might
be in a very trifling one.”

In this statement, I conceive, is contained the principle
of International Values; which it only remains to follow into
its applications. I have, as is indispensable in such abstract
and hypothetical cases, supposed the circumstances to be
much less complex than they really are: in the first place,
by suppressing the cost of carriage ; next, by supposing that
there are only two countries trading together; and lastly,
that they trade only in two commodities. Too complete the
exposition, it is necessary to restore the various circum-
Stances thus temporarily left out to simplify the argument.
Those who are accustomed to any kind of scientific investi-
gation will probably see, without formal proof, that the
introduction of these circumstances cannot alter the theory


ee:


Bost Mer ee —


as
$
7
ate) |
aitee
f ?
Aint
|
it
ae
t ie
lee
Mas
 ) 109,
id |
¢ : vt}
at +95
Ks ; : i
eta
as '
%
cil
i>
:
rl
t
b
peel! be
Bir: f
a ihe
id: oo ee
\ H
Hie
H as
| eat heas
tj j
eee
qi)


Ss: oe


mat


NN et Teh — ee


ie


FFP asw —
Miteer ae eee ere nas


sales B


128 BOOK III. CHAPTER XvIll. § 3.


of the subject. Trade among any number of countries, and
in any number of commodities, must take place on the same |


essential principles as trade between two countries and in


two commodities. Introducing a greater number of agents


precisely similar, cannot change the law of their action, no
more than putting additional weights into the two scales of @
balance alters the law of gravitation. It alters nothing but
the numerical results. For more complete satisfaction, how-
ever, we will enter into the complex cases with the same
particularity with which we have stated the simpler one.


§ 3. First, let us introduce the element of cost of cat-
riage. The chief difference will then be, that the cloth and
the linen will no longer exchange for each other at precisely
the same rate in both countries. Linen, having to be carried
to England, will be dearer there by its cost of carriage} and
cloth will be dearer in Germany by the cost of carrying iu
from England. Linen, estimated in cloth, will be dearer
England than in Germany, by the cost of carriage of both
articles; and so will cloth in Germany, estimated in linen.
Suppose that the cost of carriage of each is equivalent to one
yard of linen; and suppose that, if they could have been
carried without cost, the terms of interchange would have
been 10 yards of cloth for 17 of linen. It seems at first that
each country will pay its own cost of carriage; that is, the
carriage of the article it imports; that in Germany 10 yards
of cloth will exchange for 18 of linen, namely the original
17, and 1 to cover the cost of carriage of the cloth ; while in
England, 10 yards of cloth will only purchase 16 of linen,
1 yard being deducted for the cost of carriage of the linen.
This, however, cannot be affirmed with certainty; it will only
be true, if the linen which the English consumers would take
at the price of 10 for 16, exactly pays for the cloth which the
German consumers would take at 10 for 18. The values
must be those, whatever they are, which will establish this
equilibrium. No absolute rule, therefore, can be laid down


“
a
:


INTERNATIONAL VALUES. 129


for the division of the cost, no more than for the division of
the advantage: and it does not follow that in whatever ratio
the one is divided, the other will be divided in the same. It
is impossible to say, if the cost of carriage could be annihi-
lated, whether the producing or the importing country would
be most benefitted. All would depend on the play of inter-
national demand.

Cost of carriage has one effect more. But for it, every
commodity would be either regularly imported or regularly
exported. A country would make nothing for itself which
it did not also make for other countries. But in consequence
of cost of carriage there are many things, especially bulky
articles, which every or almost every country produces with-
in itself. After exporting the things in which it can employ
itself most advantageously, and importing those in which it
is under the greatest disadvantage, there are many lying be-
tween, of which the relative cost of production in that and
in other countries differs so little, that the cost of carriage
would absorb more than the whole saving in cost of pro-
duction which would be obtained by Importing one and
exporting another. This is the case with numerous com-
modities of common consumption; including the coarser
qualities of many articles of food and manufacture, of which


the fmer kinds are the subject of extensive international
traffic.


§4. Let us now introduce a greater number of com-
modities than the two we have hitherto supposed. Let
cloth and linen, however, be still the articles of which the
comparative cost of production in England and in Germany
differs the most; so that if they were confined to two com-
modities, these would be the two which it would be most
their interest to exchange. We will now again omit cost of
carriage, which, having been shown not to affect the essentials
of the question, does but embarrass unnecessarily the state-
ment of it. Let us suppose, then, that the demand of

VOL. I. uss


130 BOOK III, CHAPTER XVIII. $§ 4.


England for linen is either so much greater than. that 0
Germany for cloth, or so much more extensible by be
ness, that if England had no commodity but cloth which!
Germany would take, the demand of England would oy
up the terms of interchange to 10 yards of cloth for te
16 of linen, so that England would gain only the ce
between 15 and 16, Germany the difference between 16 a
20. But let us now suppose that England has also ne
commodity, say iron, which is in demand in Germany, an
that the quantity of iron which is of equal value in Ene
with 10 yards of cloth, (let us call this quantity a bo
weight) will, if produced in Germany, cost as much pe
as 18 yards of linen, so that if offered by England for 17!
will undersell the German producer. In these circumstance
linen will not be forced up to the rate of 16 yards for 10 ‘
cloth, but will stop at 17; for although, at that rate of ts
change, Germany will not take enough cloth to pay for
the linen required by England, she will take iron for th?
remainder, and it is the same thing to England whether -
gives a hundred weight of iron or 10 yards of cloth, bo™
being made at the same cost. If we now superadd coals oF
cottons on the side of England, and wine, or corn, or timbe
on the side of Germany, it will make no difference in th?
principle. The exports of each country must exactly pay
for the imports ; meaning now the
imports, not those of particular commodities taken singly’
The produce of fifty days English labour, whether in cloths
coals, iron, or any other exports, will exchange for the pl
duce of forty, or fifty, or sixty days German labour, in line™
wine, corn, or timber, according to the international deman“


There is some proportion at which the demand of the tw?
y countries for each other’s products will ex
|


so that the things supplied by England to
completely paid for, and no more, by those supplied by
i Germany to England. This accordingly will he the ratio i?


which the produce of English and the produce of Germ##
labour will exchange for one another,


ageregate exports a!


Do se


actly correspond
Germany will be


= x


sth bee AR Fo Ud


INTERNATIONAL VALURS. 131


If, therefore, it be asked what country draws to itself the
greatest share of the advantage of any trade it carries on, the
answer is, the country for whose productions there is in other
countries the greatest demand, and a demand the most sus-
ceptible of increase from additional cheapness. In so far as
the productions of any country possess this property, the
country obtains all foreien commodities at less cost. It gets
its imports cheaper, the greater the intensity of the demand
in foreign countries for its exports. It also gets its imports
cheaper, the less the extent and intensity of its own demand
for them. The market is cheapest to those whose demand is


small. A country which desires few foreign productions, and


only a limited quantity of them, while its own commodities


are in great request in foreign countries, will obtain its limited

imports at extremely small cost, that is, in exchange for the

produce of a very small quantity of its labour and capital.
Lastly, having introduced more than the original two


commodities into the hypothesis, let us also introduce more
than the original two countries. After the demand of Eng-
land for the linen of Germany has raised the rate of inter-
change to 10 yards of cloth for 16 of linen, suppose a trade
opened between England and some other country which
also exports linen. And let us suppose that if England had
no trade but with this third country, the play of international
demand would enable her to obtain from it, for 10 yards of
cloth or its equivalent, 17 yards of linen. She evidently
would not go on buying linen from Germany at the former
rate: Germany would be undersold, and must consent to
give 17 yards, like the other country. In this case, the cir-
cumstances of production and of demand in the third country
are supposed to be in themselves more advantageous to Eng-
land than the circumstances of Germany ; but this supposi-
tion is not necessary: we might suppose, that if the trade
_ with Germany did not exist, England would be obliged to
give to the other country the same advantageous terms which
she gives to Germany; 10 yards of cloth for 16, or even less


K 2


132 BOOK Ill. CHAPTER xvill. § 4.


than 16, of linen. Even so, the opening of the third country
makes a great difference in favour of England. There
now a double market for English exports, while the demand
of England for linen is only what it was before. This
necessarily obtains for England more advantageous terms of
interchange. The two countries, requiring much mote of her
produce than was required by either alone, must, In order ta
obtain it, force an increased demand for their exports, by
offering them at a lower value.
It deserves notice, that this effect in favour of England
from the opening of another market for her exports, wil
equally be produced even though the country from which the
demand comes should have nothing to sell which Englandis
willing to take. Suppose that the third country, though she
requires cloth or iron from England, produces no linen, nor
any other article which is in demand there. She; ho
produces exportable articles, or she would have no means v
paying for imports: her exports, though not suitable to the
English consumer, can find a market somewhere. As we Bs
only supposing three countries, we must assume her to find
this market in Germany, and to pay for what she imports
from England by orders on her German customers: Ger-
many, therefore, besides having to pay for her own imports,
now owes a debt to England on account of the third county;
and the means for both purposes must be derived from het
exportable produce. She must therefore tender that oe
to England on terms sufficiently favourable to force 4 deman
equivalent to this double debt. . Everything will take place
+ precisely as if the third country had bought German produce
with her own guods, and offered that produce to England
. exchange for her’s. There is an increased demand for
English goods, for which German goods have to furnish the
payment; and this can only be done by forcing an increased
demand for them in England, that is, by lowering their
value. Thus an increase of demand for a country’s exports;
in any foreign country, enables her to obtain more cheaply


al EE St i
oe 7


NS Spee ee RAN 0 dy SS Il A Se ea |


| EN IE TS ee


eT


ie


INTERNATIONAL VALUES. 133


even those imports which she procures from other quarters.
And conversely, an increase of her own demand for any
foreign commodity, compels her, ceteris paribus, to pay
dearer for all foreign commodities.


§5. The law which we have now illustrated, may be
appropriately named, the Equation of International Demand.
It may be concisely stated as follows. The produce of a
country exchanges for the produce of other countries, at such
values as are required in order that the whole of her exports
may exactly pay for the whole of her imports. This law of
International Values is but an extension of the more general
law of Value, which we called the Equation of Supply aud
Demand*. We have seen that the value of a commodity
always so adjusts itself as to bring the demand to the exact
level of the supply. But all trade, either between nations or
individuals, is an interchange of commodities, in which the
things that they respectively have to sell, constitute also
their means of purchase: the supply brought by the one
constitutes his demand for what is brought by the other. So
that supply and demand are but another expression for reci-
procal demand: and to say that value will adjust itself so as
to equalize demand with supply, is in fact to say that it will
adjust itself so as to equalize the demand on one side with
the demand on the other.

To trace the consequences of the law of International
Values through their wide ramifications, would occupy more
space than can be devoted to such a purpose in the present
treatise. Several of those consequences were indicated in the
Kssay already quoted; and others have been pointed out in
the writings of Colonel Torrens, who appears to me substan-
tially correct in his general view of the subject, and who has
Supported it with great closeness and consecutiveness of reason-
ing, though his conclusions are occasionally pushed much


* Supra, vol. i. p. 529.


134 BOOK III. CHAPTER xvill. $§ 5.


beyond what appear to me the proper limits of the prinaple
on which they are grounded.

There is one special application of the law, which I think
it advisable to notice, both as being in itself not unimportant,
and as bearing on the question which will occupy us in the
next chapter, but especially as conducing to the more full
and clear understanding of the law itself.

We have seen that the value at which a country pur
chases a foreign commodity, does not conform to the cost of
production in the country from which the commodity comes.
Suppose now a change in that cost of production; an im-
provement, for example, in the process of manufacture. Will
the benefit of the improvement be fully participated in by
other countries? Will the commodity be sold as much
cheaper to foreigners, as it is produced cheaper at home?
This question, and the considerations which must be entered
into in order to resolve it, are well adapted to try the worth
of the theory.

Let us first suppose, that the improvement is of a nature
to create a new branch of export; to make foreigners resort
to the country for a commodity which they had previously
produced at home. On this supposition, the foreign demand
for the productions of the country is increased 5 which
necessarily alters the international values to its advantage,
and to the disadvantage of foreign countries, who, therefore,
though they participate in the benefit of the new product
must purchase that benefit by paying for all the other pro-
ductions of the country at a dearer rate than before. How
much dearer, will depend on the degree necessary for Te
establishing, under these new conditions, the Equation of
International Demand. These consequences follow in @ Vely
obvious manner from the law of international values, and!
shall not occupy space in illustrating them, but shall pass
to the more frequent case, of an improvement which
does not create a new article of export, but lowers the


cost of production of something which the country already
exported.


ee mareeremrnrton
ae (pain at


4


INTERNATIONAL VALUES. 135


It being advantageous, in discussions of this complicated
nature, to employ definite numerical amounts, we shall
return to our original example. Ten yards of cloth, if pro-
duced in Germany, would require the same amount of labour


and capital as twenty yards of linen; but, by the play of in-


ternational demand, they can be obtained from England for
seventeen. Suppose now, that by a mechanical improvement
made in Germany, and not capable of being transferred to
England, the same quantity of labour and capital which pro-
duced twenty yards of linen, is enabled to produce thirty.
Linen falls one-third in value in the German market, as
compared with other commodities produced in Germany.
Will it also fall one-third as compared with English cloth,
thus giving to England, in common with Germany, the full
benefit of the improvement? Or (ought we not rather to
say), since the cost to England of obtaining linen was not
regulated by the cost to Germany of producing it, and since
England, accordingly, did not get the entire benefit even of
the twenty yards which Germany could have given for ten
yards of cloth, but only obtained seventeen—why should she
now obtain more, merely because this theoretical limit is
removed ten degrees further off?

It is evident that in the outset, the improvement will
lower the value of linen in Germany, in relation to all other
commodities in the German market, including, among the
rest, even the imported commodity, cloth. If 10 yards of
cloth previously exchanged for 17 yards of linen, they will
now exchange for half as much more, or 252 yards. But
whether they will continue to do so, will wholly depend on
the effect which this increased cheapness of linen produces
on the international demand. The demand for linen in
England could scarcely fail to be increased. But it might
be increased either in proportion to the cheapness, or in a
greater proportion than the cheapness, or in a less pro-
portion.

If the demand was increased in the same proportion with


136 BOOK III. CHAPTER XVIII. 9 5.


the cheapness, England would take as many times 254 yards
of linen, as the number of times 17 yards which she took
previously. She would expend in linen exactly as much a
cloth, or of the equivalents of cloth, as much in short of the
collective income of her people, as she did before. Germany,
on her part, would probably require, at that rate of inter-
change, the same quantity of cloth as before, because it would
in reality cost her exactly as much; 254 yards of linen being
now of the same value in her market, as 17 yards were
before. In this case, therefore, 10 yards-of cloth for 253 of
linen is the rate of interchange which under these new Con
ditions would restore the equation of international demand;
and England would obtain linen one-third cheaper than
before, being the same advantaye as was obtained by Ger
many.


F
i
i
;
1


It might happen, however, that this great cheapening of
linen would increase the demand for it in England in a greater
ratio than the increase of cheapness; and that if she before
wanted 1000 times 17 yards, she would now require more
than 1000 times 254 yards to satisfy her demand. If so; the
equation of international demand cannot establish itself at
that rate of interchange; to pay for the linen England must
offer cloth on more advantageous terms: say, for example,
10 yards for 21 of linen; so that Encland will not have the
full benefit of the improvement in fe production of linen,
while Germany, in addition to that benefit, will also pay less
for cloth. | But again, it is possible that England might not
desire to increase her consumption of linen in even So great
a proportion as that of the increased cheapness ; she might
not desire so great a quantity as 1000 times 254 yards : and
in that case Germany must force a demand, by offering Mor
than 254 yards of linen for 10 of cloth: linen will be cheap-
ened in England in a still greater doeree than in Germany;
while Germany will obtain cloth on more unfayourable terms,
and at a higher exchange value than before.

After what has already been said, it is not necessary to


INTERNATIONAL VALUES. 137


particularize the manner in which these results might be
modified by introducing into the hypothesis other countries
and other commodities. There is a further circumstance by
which they may also be modified.. In the case supposed, the
consumers of Germany have had a part of their incomes set
at liberty by the increased cheapness of linen, which they
may indeed expend in increasing their consumption of that
article, but which they may, likewise, expend in other arti-
cles, and among others, in cloth or other imported com-
modities. This would be an additional element in the inter-
national demand, and would modify more or less the terms
of interchange.

Of the three possible varieties in the influence of cheap-
ness on demand, which is the more probable? that the demand
would be increased more than the cheapness, as much as the
cheapness, or less than the cheapness? This depends on the
nature of the particular commodity, and on the tastes of
purchasers. When the commodity is one in general request,
and the fall of its price brings it within the reach of a much
larger class of incomes than before, the demand is often
increased in a greater ratio than the fall-of price, and a larger
sum of money is on the whole expended in the article. Such
was the case with coffee, when its price was lowered by suc-
cessive reductions of taxation; and such would probably be
the case with sugar, wine, and a large class of commodities
which, though not necessaries, are largely consumed, and in
which many consumers indulge when the articles are cheap
and economize when they are dear. But it more frequently
happens that when a commodity falls in price, less money is
spent in it than before: a greater quantity is consumed, but
not so great a value. The consumer who saves money by
the cheapness of the article, will be likely to expend part of
his saying in increasing his consumption of other things: and
unless the low price attracts a large class of new purchasers
who were either not consumers of the article at all, or only
in small quantity and occasionally, a less aggregate sum will


138 BOOK III. CHAPTER XVIII. § 6.


be expended on it. Speaking generally, therefore, the thid
of our three cases is the most probable: and an improve
ment in an exportable article is likely to be as beneficial, if
not more beneficial, to foreign countries, than to the country
where the article is produced.


§ 6. We now pass to another essential part of the theory
of the subject. There are two senses in which a country
obtains commodities cheaper by foreign trade: in the sens
of Value, and in the sense of Cost. It gets them cheaperin
the first sense, by their falling in value relatively to other
things: the same quantity of them exchanging, in the coun-
try, for a smaller quantity than before of the other produce of
the country. In England, after the trade was opened, all
consumers of linen obtained 17 or some greater number of
yards for the same quantity of all other things for which
they before obtained only 15. The degree of cheapness, n
this sense of the term, depends on the law which has nov
been so copiously illustrated, that of the Equation of Inter-
national Demand. But in the other sense, that of Cost, a
country gets a commodity cheaper, when it obtains a greater
quantity of the commodity with the same expenditure of
labour and capital. In this sense of the term, cheapness
a great measure depends upon a cause of a different nature:
a country gets its imports cheaper, in proportion to the
general productiveness of its domestic industry; to the gene-
ral efficiency of its labour. The labour of one country may
be, as a whole, much more efficient than that of another; all
or most of the commodities capable of being produced in
both, may be produced in one at less absolute cost than in
the other; which, as we haye seen, will not necessarily pre-
vent the two countries from exchanging commodities. The
things which the more favoured country will import from
others, are of course those in which it is least superior } but
by importing them it acquires, even in those commodities,
the same advantage which it possesses in the articles it gives


.


INTERNATIONAL VALUES. 139


in exchange for them. Thus the countries which obtain
their own productions at least cost, also get their imports at
least cost.

This truth will be made more obvious if we suppose two
competing countries. England sends cloth to Germany, and
gives 10 yards of it for 17 yards of linen, or for something
else which in Germany is the equivalent of those 17 yards.
Another country, as for example France, does the same.
The one giving 10 yards of cloth fora certain quantity of
German commodities, so must the other: if, therefore, in
England, these 10 yards are produced by only half as much
labour as that by which they are produced in France, the
linen or other commodities of Germany will cost to England
only half the amount of labour which they will cost to
France. England would thus obtain her imports at less
cost than France, in the ratio of the greater efficiency of her
labour in the production of cloth: which might be taken as
an approximative estimate of the efficiency of her labour
generally; since France, as well as England, by selecting
cloth as her article of export, would have shown that (not-
withstanding her absolute inferiority) it was still the com-
modity in which her labour was relatively the most efficient.
It follows, therefore, that every country gets its imports at
less cost, in proportion to the general efficiency of its labour.

This proposition was first clearly seen and expounded by
Mr. Senior*, but only as applicable to the importation of the
precious metals. I think it important to point out, that the
proposition holds equally true of all other imported commo-
dities; and further, that it is only a portion of the truth.
For, in the case supposed, the cost to England of the linen
which she pays for with ten yards of cloth, does not depend
solely upon the cost to herself of ten yards of cloth, but
partly also upon how many yards of lmen she obtains in
exchange for them. What her imports cost to her is a func-


* Three Lectures on the Cost of Obtaining Money.


Kt
iba!

Bi!
tat
i Aa
iif it /
a)
Re es
ty eS a i
4, it 4
Ht cate
er Oe
ait 4 ek
son Be

4
it

ic

aE ‘
rd 4
Eu r My


140 BOOK Ill.. CHAPTER XVIII. $§ 6.


tion of two variables; the quantity of her own commodities


which she gives for them, and the cost of those commodities
Of these, the last only depends on the efficiency of her
labour; the first depends on the law of international values;
that is, on the intensity and extensibility of the foreig
demand for her commodities, compared with her demand {or
foreign commodities.

In the case just now supposed of a competition between
England and France, the state of international values affectel
both competitors alike, since they were supposed to trade
with the same country, and to export and import the same
commodities. The difference, therefore, in what their import
cost them, depended solely on the other cause, the unequal
efficiency of their labour. They gave the same quantities;
the difference could only be in the cost of production. But
if England traded to Germany with cloth, and France with
iron, the comparative demand in Germany for those tv0
commodities would bear a share in determining the compr
rative cost, in labour and capital, with which England and
France would obtain German products. If iron were mort
in demand in Germany than cloth, France would recove,
through that channel, part of her disadvantage: if less, her
disadvantage would be increased. The efficiency, therefore,
of a country’s labour, is not the only thing which determines
even the cost at which that country obtains imported commo-
dities—while it has no share whatever in determining either


their exchange value, or, as we shall presently see; their
price.


=
z


nw


CHAPTER XIX:


OF MONEY, CONSIDERED AS AN IMPORTED COMMODITY.


§1. THe degree of progress which we have now made
in the theory of Foreign Trade, puts it in our power to
supply what was previously deficient in our view of the
theory of Money; and this, when completed, will in its
turn enable us to conclude the subject of Foreign Trade.

Money, or the material of which it is composed, is, in
Great Britain, and in most other countries, a foreign com-
modity. Its value and distribution must therefore be regu-
lated, not by the law of value which obtains in adjacent
places, but by that which is applicable to imported commo-
dities—the law of International Values.

In the discussion into which we are now about to enter,
Ishall use the terms Money and the Precious Metals indiscri-
minately. This may be done without leading to any error ; it
having been shewn that the value of money, when if consists
of the precious metals, or even of a paper currency conver-
tible into them on demand, is entirely governed by the value
of the metals themselves; from which it never differs, except
by the expense of comage when this is paid by the indivi-
dual and not by the state.

Money is brought into a country in two different ways.
It is imported (chiefly in the form of bullion) like any other
merchandize, as being an advantageous article of commerce.
It is also imported in its other character of a medium of ex-
change, to pay some debt due to the country, either for
goods exported or on any other account. There are other
ways in which it may be introduced casually; these are the
two in which it is received in the ordinary course of business,


we aes OS Saker KO Ee


ae


33 /gh 84
oo
ote oy eee
i eS ae


sg ot AOS


142 BOOK Ill. CHAPTER xix. § 2.


and which determine its value. The existence of these two
distinct modes in which money flows into a country, while
other commodities are habitually introduced only in the fist
of these modes, occasions somewhat more of complexity and
obscurity than exists in the case of other commodities, aud
for this reason only is any special and minute exposition
necessary.


§ 2. In so far as the precious metals are imported in the
ordinary way of commerce, their value must depend on the
same causes, and conform to the same laws, as the value ot
any other foreign production. It is in this mode chiefly that
gold and silver diffuse themselves from the mining countries
into all other parts of the commercial world. They are the
staple commodities of those countries, or at least are amon}
their great articles of regular export; and are shipped on
speculation, in the same manner as other exportable commo-
dities. The quantity, therefore, which a country (say
England) will give of its own produce, for a certain quantity
of bullion, will depend, if we suppose only two countries and
two commodities, upon the demand in England for bullion,
compared with the demand in the mining country (which we
will call Brazil) for what England has & give. They must
exchange in such Proportions as will leave no unsatisfied de-
mand on either side, to alter values by its competition.
The bullion required by England must exactly pay for the
Cottons or other English commodities required by Braall
If, however, we substitute for this simplicity the degree of
complication which really exists, the equation of interna-
tional demand must be established not between the bullion
wanted in England and the cottons or broadcloth wanted in
Rae but between the whole of the imports of England
ie hse ee ere oe The demand in foreign coun-

: ‘ » must be brought into equilibrium
with the demand in England for the products of foreign
countries; and all foreign commodities, bullion among the


NE RETEST SL a ee ee ne ee ee ee ee |


MONEY AS AN IMPORTED COMMODITY. 143


rest, must be exchanged against English products in such
proportions, as will, by the effect they produce on the demand,
establish this equilibrium.

There is nothing in the peculiar nature or uses of the
precious metals, which should make them an exception to the
general principles of demand. So far as they are wanted for
purposes of luxury or the arts, the demand increases with
the cheapness, in the same irregular way as the demand for
any other commodity. So far as they are required for money,
the demand increases with the cheapness in a perfectly regular
way, the quantity needed being always in inverse proportion
to the value. This is the only real difference, in respect to
demand, between money and other things; and for the
present purpose it is a difference altogether immaterial.

Money, then, if imported solely as a merchandize, will,
like other imported commodities, be of lowest value in the
countries for whose exports there is the greatest foreign de-
mand, and which have themselves the least demand for
foreign commodities. To these two circumstances it is how-
ever necessary to add two others, which produce their effect
through cost of carriage. The cost of obtaining bullion is
compounded of two elements; the goods given to purchase
it, and the expense of transport: of which last, the bullion
countries will bear a part, (though an uncertain part), in the
adjustment of international values. The expense of transport
is partly that of carrying the goods to the bullion countries,
and partly that of bringing back the bullion: both these
items are influenced by the distance from the mines; and the
former is also much affected by the bulkiness of the goods.
Countries whose exportable produce consists of the finer
manufactures, obtain bullion, as well as all other foreign
articles, ceteris paribus at less expense, than countries which
export nothing but bulky raw produce.

To be quite accurate, therefore, we must say—The
countries whose exportable productions are most in demand
abroad, and contain greatest value in smallest bulk, which are


ar 7
Sean: San


ws i saat tect


144 BOOK Ill, CHAPTER xIx. § 2,


nearest to the mines, and which have least demand for foreign
productions, are those in which money will be of lowest
value, or in other words, in which prices will habitually
range the highest. If we are speaking not of the value of
money, but of its cost, (that is, the quantity of the country’s
labour which must be expended to obtain it), we must addto
these four conditions of cheapness a fifth condition, namely,
“whose productive industry is the most efficient.” This,
however, does not at all affect the value of money, estimated
in commodities: it affects the general abundance and facility
with which all things, money and commodities together, can
be obtained.

Although, therefore, Mr. Senior is right in pointing out
the great efficiency of English labour as the chief cause why
the precious metals are obtained at less cost by England
than by most other countries, I cannot admit that it at all
accounts for their being of less value; for their going less far
in the purchase of commodities. This, in so far as it isa
fact, and not an illusion, must be occasioned by the great
demand in foreign countries for the staple commodities of
England, and the generally unbulky character of those com-
modities, compared with the corn, wine, timber, sugar, wool,
hides, tallow, hemp, flax, tobacco, raw cotton, &c.; which
form the exports of other commercial countries. These two
causes will account for a somewhat higher range of general
prices in England than elsewhere, notwithstanding the coun-
teracting influence of her own great demand for foreign com-
modities. I am, however, strongly of opinion, that the high
prices of commodities, and low purchasing power of money in
England, are more apparent than real. Food, indeed, is
somewhat dearer; and food composes so large a portion of
the expenditure when the income is small and the family
large, that to such families England is a dear country. Set
vices also, of most descriptions, are dearer than on the Conti-
nent, from the less costly manner in which the poorer classes
on the Continent are contented to live. But almost all sorts


SRSA SACL REDO Se ae EET ENN OO Ny nee


P
a


MONEY, AS AN IMPORTED COMMODITY. 145


of manufactured commodities are decidedly cheaper; or would
be so, if buyers would be content with the same quality of
material and of workmanship. What is called the dearness
of living in England, is mainly an affair not of necessity but
of foolish custom ; it being thought imperative by all classes
in England above the condition of a day-labourer, that the
things they consume should either be of the same quality
with those used by much richer people, or at least should be


as nearly as possible undistinguishable from them in out-
ward appearance.


§3. From the preceding considerations, it appears that
those are greatly in error who contend (as has been done in
the controversies called forth by the recent publications of
Colonel Torrens) that the value of money, in countries where
it is an imported commodity, must be entirely regulated by
its value in the countries which produce it; and cannot be
raised or lowered in any permanent manner unless some
change has taken place in the cost of production at the
mines. On the contrary, any circumstance which disturbs
the equation of international demand with respect to a par-
ticular country, not only may, but must, affect the value of
Money in that country—its value at the mines remaining the
same. The opening of a new branch of export trade from
England; an increase in the foreign demand for English
products, either by the natural course of events or by the
abrogation of duties; a check to the demand in England for
foreign commodities, by the laying on of import duties in
England or of export duties elsewhere ; these, and all other
events of similar tendency, would make the imports of Eng-
land (bullion and other things taken together) no longer an
equivalent for her exports; and the countries which take her
exports would be obliged to offer their commodities, and
bullion among the rest, on cheaper terms, in order to re-
establish the equation of demand: and thus England would
obtain money cheaper, and would acquire a generally higher

VOM. Ul. se


146 BOOK III. CHAPTER XIx. § 3.


range of prices. Incidents the reverse of these would pro-
duce effects the reverse—would reduce prices; or, in othe
words, raise the value of the precious metals. It win be
observed, however, that money would be thus raised in value
only with respect to home commodities: in relation to all
imported articles it would remain as before, since their value
would be affected in the same way and in the same degree
with its own. A country which, from any of the causes
mentioned, gets money cheaper, obtains all its other imports
cheaper likewise.

It is by no means necessary that the increased demand
for English commodities, which enables England to supply
herself with bullion at a cheaper rate, should be a demand mh
the mining countries. England might export nothing what:
ever to those countries, and yet might be the country which
obtained bullion from them on the lowest terms, poe
there were a sufficient intensity of demand in other foreign
countries for English goods, which would be paid for cireult-
ously with gold and silver from the mining countries. The
whole of its exports are what a country exchanges against
the whole of its imports, and not its exports and imports
and from any one country; and the general foreign demand it
its productions will determine what equivalent it must give
for imported goods, in order to establish an equilibrium be
tween its sales and purchases generally; without regard to
the maintenance of a similar equilibrium between it and any
country singly.


CHAPTER XX.


OF THE FOREIGN EXCHANGES,


$1. Wehave thus far considered the precious metals as
acommodity, imported like other commodities in the com-
mon course of trade, and have examined what are the cir-
cumstances which would in that case determine their value.
But those metals are also imported in another character, that
which belongs to them as a medium of exchange ; not as an
article of commerce, to be sold for money, but as themselves
money, to pay a debt, or effect a transfer of property. It
remains to consider whether the lability of gold and silver to
be transported from country to country for such purposes, in
any way modifies the conclusions we have already arrived at,
or places those metals under a different law of value from
that to which, in common with all other imported commodi-
ties, they would be subject if international trade were an
affair of direct barter.

Money is sent from one country to another for various
purposes, such as the payment of tributes or subsidies;
remittances of revenue to or from dependencies, or of rents
or other incomes to their absent owners ; emigration of capi-
tal, or transmission of it for foreign investment. The most
usual purpose, however, is that of payment for goods. To
shew in what circumstances money actually passes from coun-
try to country for this or any of the other purposes mentioned,
it is necessary briefly to state the nature of the mechanism by
which international trade is carried on, when it takes place
not by barter but through the medium of money.


$2. In practice, the exports and imports of a country
not only are not exchanged directly against each other, but
L 2


WP
al


ene


‘ O).
148 BOOK Ill. CHAPTER xx. §


often do not even pass through the same an a
separately bought and paid for with money. V os nomace
however that, even in the same country, money —- “
tually pass from hand to hand each time that Be - avian
made with it, and still less does this happe? betw ee Ae.
countries. The habitual mode of paying and ee: . :
ment for commodities, between country and country, © }}
bills of exchange. English comm-

A merchant in England, A, has exported a in France,
dities, consigning them to his correspondent French com-
Another merchant in France, C, has exported ee Din
Modities, suppose of equivalent value, to @ are a shoul
Eneland. It is evidently unnecessary that B uy ee should
send money to A in England, and that D in eae onan
send an equal sum of money to © in France. d the double
may be applied to the payment of the other, Aa. 1 B for the
cost of carriage be thus saved. A draws a bill a ee
amount which B owes to him: D, having an ae i o C, who,
pay in France, buys this bill from A, and sends ‘ PR
at the expiration of the number of days which debt due
to run, presents it to B for payment. Thus Late: ‘
from France to England, and the debt due from ¢ wold or
France, are both paid without sending an ounce 0" 5
silver from one country to the other.

In this statement however it is supposed, ae sum of
of the debts due from France to England, and ae Pe,
those due from England to France, are equal ; * all or
country has exactly the same number of ounces : oxen
silver to pay and to receive. This implies (if we ie .
for the present any other international payments a ts and
occurring in the course of commerce;) that the omnes a
imports exactly pay for one another, or in other wee When
the equation of international demand is established. idated
such is the fact, the international transactions are me.
without the passage of any money from one cou ail ‘
other. But if there is a greater sum due from Eng/2ne to


at the sum


THE FOREIGN EXCHANGES. 149


France, than is due from France to England, or vice versd, the
debts cannot be simply written off against one another. After
the one has been applied, as far as it will go, towards covering
the other, the balance must be transmitted in the precious
metals. In point of fact, the merchant who has the amount
to pay, will even then pay for it by a bill. Whena person
has a remittance to make to a foreign country, he does not
himself search for some one who has money to receive from
that country, and ask him for a bill of exchange. In this, as
in other branches of business, there is a class of middlemen
or brokers, who bring buyers and sellers together, or stand
between them, buying bills from those who have money to
receive, and selling bills to those who have money to pay.
When a customer comes to a broker for a bill on Paris or
Amsterdam, the broker sells to him, perhaps the bill he may
himself have bought that morning from a merchant, perhaps
a bill on his own correspondent in the foreign city: and to
enable his correspondent to pay, when due, all the bills he
has granted, he remits to him all those which he has bought
and has not resold. In this manner these bill-brokers, or
exchange-brokers, take upon themselves the whole settlement
of the pecuniary transactions between distant places, being
remunerated by a small commission or percentage on the
amount of each bill which they either sell or buy. Now, if
the brokers find that they are asked for bills on the one part,
to a greater amount than bills are offered to them on the
other, they do not on this account refuse to give them ; but
since, in that case, they have no means of enabling the cor-
respondents on whom their bills are drawn, to pay them
when due, except by transmitting part of the amount in gold
or silver, they require from those to whom they sell bills an
additional price, sufficient to cover the freight and insurance
of the gold and silver, with a profit sufficient to compensate
them for their trouble and for the temporary occupation of
a portion of their capital. This premium (as it is calf€d,)
the buyers are willing to pay, because they must otherwise


150 BOOK Ill. CHAPTER xx. § 2.


go to the expense of remitting the precious metals them-
selves, and it is done cheaper by those who make doing ita
part of their especial business. But although only some of
those who have a debt to pay would have actually to remit
money, all will be obliged, by each other’s competition, to
pay the premium; and the brokers are for the same reason
obliged to pay it to those whose bills they buy. The reverse
of all this happens, if, on the comparison of exports and
imports, the country, instead of having a balance to pay; has
a balance to receive. The brokers find more bills offered to
them, than are sufficient to cover those which they are re
quired to grant. Bills on foreign countries consequently fall
to a discount; and the competition among the brokers,
which is exceedingly active, prevents them from retaining
this discount as a profit for themselves, and obliges them to
give the benefit of it to those who buy the bills for purposes
of remittance.

Let us suppose that all countries had the same currency;
as in the progress of political improvement they one day
will have: and, as most familiar to the reader, let us suppos
this currency to be the English. When England had the
same number of pounds sterling to pay to France, which
France had to pay to her, one set of merchants in England
would want bills, and another set would have bills to dispose
of, for the very same number of pounds sterling; and conse-
quently a bill on France for 100/. would sell for exactly 100),
or, in the phraseology of merchants, the exchange would be
at par. As France also, on this supposition, would have an
equal number of pounds sterling to pay and to receive, bills
on England would be at par in France, whenever bills on
France were at par in England.

Tes however, England had a larger sum to pay to France
than to receive from her, there would be persons requiring bills
on France for a greater number of pounds sterling than there
were bills drawn by persons to whom money was due. A bill
on France for 100/. would then sell for more than 100/., and


THE FOREIGN EXCHANGES. 151


bills would be said to be at a premium. The premium, how-
ever, could not exceed the cost and risk of making the
remittance in gold, together with a trifling profit; because if
it did, the debtor would send the gold itself, in preference to
buying the bill.

If, on the contrary, England had more money to receive
from France than to pay, there would be bills offered for a
greater number of pounds than were wanted for remittance,
and the price of bills would fall below par: a bill for 100J.
might be bought for somewhat less than 100/., and bills would
be said to be at a discount.

When England has more to pay than to receive, France
has more to receive than to pay, and vice versd. When,
therefore, in Hngland, bills on France bear a premium, then,
in France, bills on England are at a discount: and when
bills on France are at a discount in England, bills on England
are at a premium in France. If they are at par in either
country, they are so, as we have already seen, in both.

Thus do matters stand between countries, or places, which
have the same currency. So much of barbarism, however,
still remains in the transactions of the most civilized nations,
that almost all independent countries choose to assert their
nationality by having, to their own inconvenience and that of
their neighbours, a peculiar currency of their own. ‘To our
present purpose this makes no other difference, than that
instead of speaking of equal sums of money, we have to
speak of equivalent sums. By equivalent sums, when both
currencies are composed of the same metal, are meant sums
which contain exactly the same quantity of the metal, in
weight and fineness: but when, as in the case of France and
England, the metals are different, what is meant is that the
quantity of gold in the one sum, and the quantity of silver in
the other, are of the same value in the general market of the
world: there being no material difference between one place
and another in the relative value of these metals. Suppose
25 francs to be (as within a trifling fraction it is) the equiva-


BOOK III. CHAPTER xx. § 2.


152


lent of a pound sterling. The debts and credits of the two
countries would be equal, when the one owed as many times
25 francs, as the other owed pounds. When this was the
case, a bill on France for 2500 francs would be worth in
England 100/., and a bill on England for 1007. would be
worth in France 2500 francs. The exchange is then said to
be at par: and 25 francs (in reality 25 francs and a trifle
more) is called the par of exchange with France. When
England owed to France more than the equivalent of what
France owed to her, a bill for 2500 francs would be ata
premium, that is, would be worth more than 1002. When
France owed to England more than the equivalent of what
England owed to France, a bill for 2500 francs would be
worth less than 100/., or would be at a discount. it

When bills on foreign countries are at a premium, It 1s
customary to say that the exchanges are against the country,
or unfavourable to it. In order to understand these phrases,
we must take notice of what “the exchange,” in the language
of merchants, really means. It means the power which
the money of the country has of purchasing the money of
other countries. Supposing 25 francs to be the exact pat ot
exchange, then when it requires more than 100/. to buy a
bill for 2500 francs, 100/. of English money are worth less
than their real equivalent of French money: and this 1s
called, an exchange unfavourable to England. The only
persons in England, however, to whom it is really unfayout-
able, are those who have money to pay in France; for they
come into the bill market as buyers, and have to pay 4 Pl
mium: but to those who have money to receive in France,
the same state of things is favourable; for they come a
sellers, and receive the premium. The premium, howevel,
indicates that a balance is due by England, which must be
eventually liquidated in the precious metals; and since,
according to the old theory, the benefit of a trade consisted
in bringing money into the country, this prejudice introduced
the practice of calling the exchange favourable when it indi-


THE FOREIGN EXCHANGES. 153


cated a balance to receive, and unfavourable when it indicated
one to pay: and the phrases in turn tended to maintain the
prejudice. ‘


§ 3. It might be supposed at first sight that when the
exchange is unfavourable, or in other words, when bills are
at a premium, the premium must always amount to a full
equivalent for the cost of transmitting money: since, as there


“is really a balance to pay, and as the full cost must therefore


be incurred by some of those who have remittances to make,
their competition will compel all to submit to an equivalent
sacrifice. And such would certainly be the case, if it were
always necessary that whatever is destined to be paid should
be paid immediately. The expectation of great and imme-
diate foreign payments sometimes produces a most startling
effect on the exchanges*. But a small excess of imports above
exports, or any other small amount of debt to be paid to
foreign countries, does not usually affect the exchanges to the
full extent of the cost and risk of transporting bullion. The
length of credit allowed, generally permits, on the part of
some of the debtors, a postponement of payment, and in the
mean time the balance may turn the other way, and restore
the equality of debts and credits without any actual trans-


* On the news of Bonaparte’s landing from Elba, the price of bills
advanced in one day as much as ten per cent. Of course this premium was
not a mere equivalent for cost of carriage, since the freight of such an
article as gold, even with the addition of war insurance, could never have
amounted to so much. This great price was an equivalent not for the
difficulty of sending gold, but for the anticipated difficulty of procuring it
to send; the expectation being that there would be such immense remit-
tances to the Continent in subsidies and for the support of armies, as would
press hard on the stock of bullion in the country (which was then entirely
denuded of specie), and this, too, in a shorter time than would allow of its
being replenished. Accordingly the price of bullion rose likewise, with
the same suddenness. It is hardly necessary to say that this took place
during the Bank restriction. In a convertible state of the currency, no


. such thing could have occurred until the Bank stopped payment.


154 BOOK III, CHAPTER xx. § 3.


mission of the metals. And this is the more likely to happen,
as there is a self-adjusting power in the variations of the
exchange itself. Bills are at a premium because a greater
money value has been imported than exported. But the
premium is itself an extra profit to those who export. Be:
sides the price they obtain for their goods, they draw for the
amount and gain the premium. It is, on the other hand, a
diminution of profit to those who import. Besides the price
of the goods, they have to pay a premium for remittance
So that what is called an unfavourable exchange is an encou-
ragement to export, and a discouragement to import. And
if the balance due is of small amount, and is the consequence
of some merely casual disturbance in the ordinary course of
trade, it is soon liquidated in commodities, and the account
adjusted by means of bills, without the transmission of any
bullion. Not so, however, when the excess of imports above
exports, which has made the exchange unfavourable, arises
from a permanent cause. In that case, what disturbed the
equilibrium must have been the state of prices, and it can
only be restored by acting on prices. It is impossible that
prices should be such as to invite to an excess of imports,
and yet that the exports should be kept permanently up to
the imports by the extra profit on exportation derived from
the premium on bills; for if the exports were kept up 0 the
imports, bills would not be at a premium, and the extra profit
would not exist. It is throuc ay mmodities
that the correction must be eee a
Disturbances, therefore, of the equilibrium of imports
and exports, and consequent disturbances of the exchange,
may be considered as of two classes ; the one casual or acci-
dental, which, if not on too large a scale, correct themselves
through the premium on bills, without any transmission of
the precious metals; the other arising from the general state
of prices, which cannot be corrected without the subtraction
of actual money from the circulation of one of the coun
tries, or an annihilation of credit equivalent to it, since the


THE FORKIGN EXCHANGES. 155


mere transmission of bullion (as distinguished from money),
not having any effect on prices, is of no avail to abate the
cause from which the disturbance proceeded.

It remains to observe, that the exchanges do not depend
on the balance of debts and credits with each country sepa-
rately, but with all countries taken together. England may
owe a balance of payments to France; but it does not follow
that the exchange with France will be against England, and
that bills on France will be at a premium; because a balance
may be due to England from Holland or Hamburg, and she
may pay her debt to France with bills on those places; which
is technically called arbitration of exchange. There is some
little additional expense, partly commission and partly loss of
interest, in settling debts in this circuitous manner, and to
the extent of that small difference the exchange with one
country may vary apart from that with others; but in the
main, the exchanges with all foreign countries vary together,
according as the country has a balance to receive or to pay
on the general result of its foreign transactions.


CHAPTER XXI.


OF THE DISTRIBUTION OF THE PRECIOUS METALS
THROUGH THE COMMERCIAL WORLD.


§ 1. Havine now examined the mechanism by which
the commercial transactions between nations are actually
conducted, we have next to inquire whether this mode of
conducting them makes any difference in the conclusions
respecting international values, which we previously arrived
at on the hypothesis of barter.

The nearest analogy would lead us to presume the neg
tive. We did not find that the intervention of money and
its substitutes made any difference in the law of value as
applied to adjacent places. Things which would have been
equal in value if the mode of exchange had been by barter,
are worth equal sums of money. The introduction of money
is a mere addition of one more commodity, of which the
value is regulated by the same laws as that of all other com-
modities. We shall not be surprised, therefore, if we find
that international values also are determined by the same
causes under a money and bill system, as they would be
under a system of barter; and that money has little to do in
the matter, except to furnish a convenient mode of comp®
ring values,

All interchange is, in substance and effect, barter: he
who sells his productions for money, and with that money
buys other goods, really buys those goods with his ow? P!0
duce. And so of nations: their trade is a mere exchange
of exports for imports; and whether money is employed o
not, things are only in their permanent state when the ex
ports and imports exactly pay for each other, When this1s
the case, equal sums of money are due from each country to


DISTRIBUTION OF THE PRECIOUS METALS. 157


the other, the debts are settled by bills, and there is no
balance to be paid in the precious metals. The trade is in a
state like that which is called in mechanics a condition of
stable equilibrium.

But the process by which things are brought back to this
state when they happen to deviate from it, is, at least out-
wardly, not the same in a barter system and in a money sys-
tem. Under the first, the country which wants more imports
than its exports will pay for, must offer its exports at a
cheaper rate, as the sole means of creating a demand for
them sufficient to re-establish the equilibrium. When
money is used, the country seems to do a thing totally dif-
ferent. She takes the additional imports at the same price
as before, and as she exports no equivalent, the balance of
payments turns against her; the exchange becomes unfavour-
able, and the difference has to be paid in money. This is
In appearance a very distinct operation from the former.
Let us see if it differs in its essence, or only in its
mechanism.

Let the country which has the balance to pay be Eng-
land, and the country which receives it, France. By this
transmission of the precious metals, the quantity of the cur-
rency is diminished in England, and increased in France.
This I am at liberty to assume. As we shall see hereafter,
it would be a very erroneous assumption if made in regard to
all payments of international balances. A balance which
has only to be paid once, such as the payment made for an
extra importation of corn in a season of dearth, may be paid
from hoards, or from the reserves of bankers, without acting
on the circulation. But we are now supposing that there is
an excess of imports over exports, arising from the fact that
the equation of international demand is not yet established:
that there is at the ordinary prices a permanent demand in
England for more French goods than the English goods
required in France at the ordinary prices will pay for. When
this is the case, if a change were not made in the prices,


roan


rebeipeaks


canon


SBI tie abs Ee
ee NY ETN


pain


STG. Se


158 BOOK Ill. CHAPTER xx!. § l.


there would be a perpetually renewed balance to be paid im
money. The imports require to be permanently diminished
or the exports to be increased; which can only be accom-
plished through prices; and hence, even if the balances are
at first paid from hoards, or by the exportation of bullion,
they will reach the circulation at last, for until they ¢o,
nothing can stop the drain.

When, therefore, the state of prices is such that the
equation of international demand cannot establish itself, the
country requiring more imports than can be paid for by her
exports; it is a sign that the country has more of the preciots
metals or their substitutes, in circulation, than can perma
nently circulate, and must necessarily part with some of
them before the balance can be restored. Her currency
accordingly contracted : prices fall, and among the rest, the
prices of exportable articles; for which, accordingly, there
arises, in foreign countries, a greater demand: while im-
ported commodities have possibly risen in price; from the
influx of money into foreign countries, and at all events have
not participated in the general fall. But until the increased
cheapness of English goods induces foreign countries t0 fake
a greater pecuniary value, or until the increased dearness
(positive or comparative) of foreign goods makes England
take a less pecuniary value, the exports of England will be
no nearer to paying for her imports than before, and the
stream of the precious metals which had begun ‘to flow out
of England, will still flow on. This efflux will continue, until
the fall of prices in England brings within reach of the
foreign market some commodity which England did not pre-
viously send thither; or until the reduced price of the things
which she did send, has forced a demand abroad for a sufi-
cient quantity to pay for the imports, aided, perhaps; by
reduction of the English demand for foreign goods, from


their enhanced price, either positive or comparative.


Now this 1s the very process which took place on our
original supposition of barter. Not only, therefore, does the


|


DISTRIBUTION OF THE PRECIOUS METALS. V59


trade between nations tend to the same equibrium between
exports and imports, whether money is employed or not, but
the means by which this equilibrium is established are essen-
tially the same. The country whose exports are not suffi-
cient to pay for her imports, offers them on cheaper terms,
until she succeeds in forcing the necessary demand: in other
words, the Equation of International Demand, under a money
system as well as under a barter system, is the law of inter-
national trade. Every country exports and imports the very
same things, and in the very same quantity, under the one
system as under the other. In a barter system, the trade
gravitates to the pot at which the sum of the imports ex-
actly exchanges for the sum of the exports: in a money
system, it gravitates to the poimt at which the sum of the
imports and the sum of the exports exchange for the same
quantity of money. And since things which are equal to
the same thing are equal to one another, the exports and
imports which are equal in money price, would, if money
were not used, precisely exchange for one another ~.


“ The subjoined extract from the separate Hssay previously referred to,
will give some assistance in following the course of the phenomena. It is
adapted to the imaginary case used for illustration throughout that Essay,
the case of a trade between England and Germany in cloth and linen.

“We may, at first, make whatever supposition we will with respect to
tle value of money. Let us suppose, therefore, that before the opening of
the trade, the price of cloth is the same in both countries, namely, six
shillings per yard. As 10 yards of cloth were supposed to exchange in
England for 15 yards of linen, in Germany for 20, we must suppose that
linen is sold in England at four shillings per yard, in Germany at three.
Cost of carriage and importer’s profit are left, as before, out of conside-
ration.

“Tn this state of prices, cloth, it is evident, cannot yet be exported
from England into Germany: but linen can be imported from Germany
into England. It will be so; and, in the first instance, the linen will be
paid for in money.

“The efflux of money from England, and its influx into Germany, will
raise money prices in the latter country, and lower them in the former.
Linen will rise in Germany above three shillings per yard, and cloth above
six shillings. Linen in England, being imported from Germany, will


ae Cc 9
160 BOOK III. CHAPTER XxI. § 2.


§ 2. It thus appears that the law of international Ne
and, consequently, the division of the advantages ot trade


(since cost of carriage is not reckoned) sink to the same ee
country, while cloth will fall below six shillings. As ees be ene
cloth is lower in England than in Germany, it will nee nae re
and the price of cloth in Germany will fall to what it Fe ae 4 sponte
long as the cloth exported does not suffice to pay for i ea prices gene
money will continue to flow from England into Gemany ‘ By the fall
rally will continue to fall in England and rise in Germa ae ae
however, of cloth in England, cloth will fall in Germany x ee, ann
demand for it will increase. By the rise of linen ae Re fell in
rise in England also, and the demand for it will diminish. ; ih
price and linen rose, there would be some particular meee 9 cactly pay fi
at which the cloth exported and the linen imported would exe atte
each other. At this point prices would remain, because Boe Phe
cease to move out of England into Germany. What this sats é = a
would entirely depend upon the circumstances and inclination Rei
chasers on both sides. If the fall of cloth did not much none rapidly the
for it in Germany, and the rise of linen did not diminish baelee.
demand for it in England, much money must pass before the a Fngiat
restored ; cloth would fall very much, and linen would rise, u2 ae for her
perhaps, had to pay nearly as much for it as when she predaee «ain
self. But if, on the contrary, the fall of cloth caused a very "@P a
of the demand for it in Germany, and the rise of linen in Go ee
very rapidly the demand in England from what it was under t sloth would
of the first cheapness produced by the opening of the trade; the ¢ ee.
very soon suffice to pay for the linen, little money would pass be penefit af
two countries, and England would derive a large portion of the a
the trade. We have thus arrived at precisely the same cone a
posing the employment of money, which we found to hold under #4
sition of barter. e
“Tn what shape the benefit accrues to the two nations from the Rei
clear enough. Germany, before the commencement of the trade, PE i.
shillings per yard for broadcloth: she now obtains it at a lore of
This, however, is not the whole of her advantage. As the money-Prces
all her other commodities hay


: : her pro-
e risen, the money-incomes of all
ducers have increased. This


is no advantage to them in buying from Ae
other, because the price of what they buy has risen in the same ratio with
their means of paying for it : but it is an advantage to them in bee
thing which has not risen, and, still more, anything which has fallen. ee
therefore, benefit as consumers of cloth, not merely to the extent fo Wich
cloth has fallen, but also to the extent to which other prices have risen.


:


DISTRIBUTION OF THE PRECIOUS METALS, 161


among the nations which carry it on, are the same, on the
supposition of money, as they would be in a state of barter,
In international, as in ordinary domestic interchanges, money
is to commerce only what oil is to machinery, or railways to
locomotion, a contrivance to diminish friction. In order still


Suppose that this is one-tenth. The same proportion of these money-
incomes as before, will suffice to supply their other wants; and the re-
mainder, being increased one-tenth in amount, will enable them to purchase
one-tenth more cloth than before, even though cloth had not fallen: but it
has fallen ; so that they are doubly gainers, They purchase the same
quantity with less money, and have more to expend upon their other
wants.

“In England, on the contrary, general money-prices have fallen. Linen,
howeyer, has fallen more than the rest, having been lowered in=price by
importation from a country where it was cheaper ; whereas the others have
fallen only from the consequent efflux of money. Notwithstanding, there-
fore, the general fall of money-prices, the English producers will be exactly
as they were in all other respects, while they will gain as purchasers of linen,

“The greater the efflux of money required to restore the equilibrium,
the greater will be the gain of Germany, both by the fall of cloth and by
the rise of her general prices. The less the efflux of money requisite, the
greater will be the gain of England; because the price of linen will con-
tinue lower, and her general prices will not be reduced so much. It must
not, however, be imagined that high money-prices are a good, and low
money-prices an evil, in themselves. But the higher the general money-
prices in any country, the greater will be that country’s means of purchasing
those commodities which, being imported from abroad, are independent of
the causes which keep prices high at home.”

In practice, the cloth and the linen would not, as here supposed, be at
the same price in England and in Germany : each would be dearer in money-
price in the country which imported than in that which produced it, by
the amount of the cost of carriage, together with the ordinary profit on
the importer’s capital for the average length of time which elapsed before
the commodity could be disposed of. But it does not follow that each
country pays the cost of carriage of the commodity it imports; for the addi-
tion of this item to the price may operate as a greater check to demand on
one side than on the other; and the equation of international demand,
and consequent equilibrium of payments, may not be maintained. Money
would then flow out of one country into the other, until, in the manner already
illustrated, the equilibrium was restored: and, when this was effected, one
country would be paying more than its own cost of carriage, and the other


less,
VOL. It. ‘Mt


162 BOOK Il]. CHAPTER XxI. § 2.


further to test these conclusions, let us proceed to re-examine,
on the supposition of money, a question which we have al-
ready investigated on the hypothesis of barter, namely, to
what extent the benefit of an improvement in the production
of an exportable article, is participated in by the countries
importing it.

The improvement may either consist in the cheapening
of some article which was already a staple production of the
country, or in the establishment of some new. branch of
industry, or of some process rendering an article exportable
which had not till then been exported at all. It will be con
venient to begin with the case of a new export, as being
somewhat the simpler of the two.

The first effect is that the article falls in price, and a de
mand arises for it abroad. This new exportation disturbs
the balance, turns the exchanges, money flows into the cout
try (which we shall suppose to be England), and continues
to flow until prices rise. This higher range of prices will
somewhat check the demand on foreign countries for the
new article of export; and will diminish the demand which
existed abroad for the other things which England was in
the habit of exporting. The exports will thus be diminished;


while at the same time the English public, haying more
money, will have a greater :
modities.
chase,


power of purchasing foreign com
If they make use of this increased power of pur
ee ae be an Increase of imports ; and by this, and
Ss tsi ae the equilibrium of imports and ON
a eon ae - The result to foreign countries will
imports sac ah © yee dearer than before for their othet
ae ae PEIN commodity cheaper than be
say this, being well eae fee Haglead herself dass

at the article would be actually at


the very same pr}

y € price (cost of carri

: : carriage exe i nd
in other countries. The che : po) in ie


DISTRIBUTION OF THE PRECIOUS METALS. 163


price is the same to the English and to the foreign consumers;
but the former pay that price from money-incomes which have
been increased by the new distribution of the precious metals;
while the latter have had their money-incomes probably
diminished by the same cause. The trade, therefore, has not
imparted to the foreign consumer the whole, but only a por-
tion, of the benefit which the English consumer has derived
from the improvement; while England has also benefited in
the prices of foreign commodities. Thus, then, any indus-
trial improvement which leads to the opening of a new
branch of export trade, benefits a country not only by the
cheapness of the article in which the improvement has taken
place, but by a general cheapening of all imported pro-
ducts.

Let us now change the hypothesis, and suppose that the
improvement, instead of creating a new export from England,
cheapens an existing one. When we examined this ‘case on
the supposition of barter, it appeared to us that the foreign
consumers might either obtain the same benefit from the
improvement as England herself, or a less benefit, or even a
greater benefit, according to the degree in which the con-
sumption of the cheapened article is calculated to extend
itself as the article diminishes in price. The same conclu-
sions will be found true on the supposition of money.

Let the commodity in which there is an improvement, be
cloth. The first effect of the improvement is that its price
falls, and there is an increased demand for it in the foreign
market. But this demand is of uncertain amount. Suppose
the foreign consumers to increase their purchases in the exact
ratio of the cheapness, or in other words, to lay out in cloth
the same sum of money as before; the same aggregate pay-
ment as before will be due from foreign countries to England;
the equilibrium of exports and imports will remain undis-
turbed, and foreigners will obtain the full advantage of the
increased cheapness of cloth. But if the foreign demand for


cloth is of such a character aS to increase in a greater ratio
M 2


eee


|
|


164 BOOK Ill. CHAPTER xxI. § 2.


than the cheapness, a larger sum than formerly will be due
to England for cloth, and when paid will raise English prices,
the price of cloth included; this rise, ‘however, will affect
only the foreign purchaser, English incomes being raised ina
corresponding proportion; and the foreign consumer will
thus derive a less advantage than England from the improye-
ment. If, on the contrary, the cheapening of cloth does not
extend the foreign demand for it in a proportional degree, a
less sum of debts than before will be due to England for
cloth, while there will be the usual sum of debts due from
England to foreign countries ; the balance of trade will tum
against England, money will be exported, prices (that of
cloth included) will fall, and cloth will eventually be cheap-
ened to the foreign purchaser in a still greater ratio, than the
improvement has cheapened it to England. These are the


very conclusions which we deduced on the hypothesis of
a Fe barter.


iS ARNE Po eee


ere rnen #5


=


The result of the preceding discussion cannot be better
summed up than in the words of Ricardo*. “ Gold and silver
having been chosen for the general medium of circulation, they
are, by the competition of commerce, distributed in such pro-
portions amongst the different countries of the world, as to
accommodate themselves to the natural traffic which would
take place if no such metals existed, and the trade between
countries were purely a trade of barter.” Of this principle,
so fertile in consequences, previous to which the theory of
foreign trade was an unintelligible chaos, Mr. Ricardo,
though he did not pursue it into its ramifications, WS the
: real originator. No writer who preceded him appears to
a) Gee a : have had a glimpse of it: and few are those who even Smt


his time have had an adequate conception of its scientific
value.


ote


§ 3. It is now necessary to inquire, in what manner this


eee ene eee


* Principles of Political Economy and Taxation, 3rd ed. p- 143.


yA a RES


DISTRIBUTION OF THE PRECIOUS METALS. 165


law of the distribution of the precious metals by means of
the exchanges, affects the exchange value of money itself;
and how it tallies with the law by which we found that the
value of money is regulated when imported as a mere article
of merchandize. For there is here a semblance of contradic-
tion, which has, I think, contributed more than anything
else to make some distinguished political economists resist
the evidence of the preceding doctrines. Money, they justly
think, is no exception to the general laws of value 3 itis a
commodity like any other, and its average or natural value
must depend on the cost of producing, or at least of obtain-
ing it. That its distribution through the world, therefore,
and its different value in different places, should be liable to
be altered, not by causes affecting itself, but by a hundred
causes unconnected with it; by everything which affects the
trade in other commodities, so as to derange the equilibrium
of exports and imports ; appears to these thinkers a doctrine
altogether inadmissible.

But the supposed anomaly exists only in semblance.
The causes which bring money into or carry it out of a
country through the exchanges, to restore the equilibrium of
trade, and which thereby raise its value in some countries
and lower it in others, are the very same causes on which the
local value of money would depend, if it were never imported
except as a merchandize, and never except directly from the
mines. When the value of money ina country is permanently
lowered by an influx of it through the balance of trade, the
cause, if it is not diminished cost of production, must be one
of those causes which compel a new adjustment, more favour-
able to the country, of the equation of international demand:
namely, either an increased demand abroad for her commo-
dities, or a diminished demand on her part for those of foreign
countries. Now an increased foreign demand for the commo-
dities of a country, or a diminished demand in the country
for imported commodities, are the very causes which, on the
general principles of trade, enable a country to purchase all


a


ithe alt ee ee oe


166 BOOK Ill. CHAPTER xxi. $4.


imports, and consequently the precious metals, at a lower
value, There is therefore no contradiction, but the most
perfect accordance, in the results of the two different modes
in which the precious metals may be obtained. When money
flows from country to country in consequence of changes in
the international demand for commodities, and by so doing
alters its own local value, it merely realizes, by a more rapid
process, the effect which would otherwise take place more
slowly, by an alteration in the relative breadth of the streams
by which the precious metals flow into different regions of
the earth from the mining countries. As therefore we before
saw that the use of money as a medium of exchange does
not in the least alter the law on which the values of other
things, either in the same country or internationally, depend,
so neither does it alter the law of the value of the prenous
metal itself: and there is in the whole doctrine of inter.
national values as now laid down, a unity and harmony
which is a strong collateral presumption of truth.


§4. Before closing this discussion, it is fitting to point
out in what manner and degree the preceding conclusions
ane affected by the existence of international payments not
originating im commerce, and for which no equivalent in
either money or commodities is expected or received ; such as
e tribute, or remittances of rent to absentee landlords = e
interest to foreign creditors, or a government expenditure
abroad, such as England incurs in the management of some
of her colonial dependencies.

To begin with the case of barter. The supposed annual
remittances being made in commodities, and being exports for
pie there is to be no return, it is He longer requisite that
ooo exports should pay for one another : 02 the
: » there must be an annual excess of exports OY
apes ae to the value of the remittance. If, before th

Ty became li son com~
merce was in its a oO Rae ae pbs €
equilibrium, 16 w1


DISTRIBUTION OF THE PRECIOUS METALS. 167


necessary for the purpose of effecting the remittances, that
foreign countries should be induced to take a greater quantity
of exports than before; which can only be done by offering
those exports on cheaper terms, or in other words, by paying
dearer for foreign commodities. The international values
will so adjust themselves that either by greater exports, or
smaller imports, or both, the requisite excess on the side of
exports will be brought about; and this excess will become
the permanent state. The result is, that a country which
makes regular payments to foreign countries, besides losing
what it pays, loses also something more, by the less advan-
tageous terms on which it is forced to exchange its produc-
tions for foreign commodities.

The same results follow on the supposition of money.
Commerce being supposed to be in a state of equilibrium
when the obligatory remittances begin, the first remittance is
necessarily made in money. This lowers prices in the
remitting country, and raises them in the receiving. The
natural effect is that more commodities are exported than
before, and fewer imported, and that, on the score of com-
merce alone, a balance of money will be constantly due from
the receiving to the paying country. When the debt thus
annually due to the tributary country becomes equal to the
annual tribute or other regular payment due from it, no fur-
ther transmission of money takes place; the equilibrium of
exports and imports will no longer exist, but that of pay-
ments will; the exchange will be at par, the two debts will
be set off against one another, and the tribute or remittance
will be virtually paid in goods. The result to the interests of
the two countries will be as already pointed out: the paying
country will give a higher price for all that it buys from the
receiving country, while the latter, besides receiving the
tribute, obtains the exportable produce of the tributary coun-
try at a lower price.


CHAPTER XXII.


INFLUENCE OF CURRENCY ON THE EXCHANGES AND ON
FOREIGN TRADE.


§1. In our inquiry into the laws of mternational trade,
we commenced with the principles which determine inter-
national exchanges and international values on the hypothesis
of barter. We next shewed that the introduction of money
as a medium of exchange, makes no difference in the laws of
exchanges and of values between country and country, no
more than between individual and individual: since the pre-
cious metals, under the influence of those same laws, distribute
themselves in such proportions among the different countries
of the world, as to allow the very same exchanges to g0 ;
and at the same values, as would be the case under a system
of barter. We lastly considered how the value of money
itself is affected, by those alterations in the state of trade
which arise from alterations either in the demand and supply
of commodities or in their cost of production. It remains
to consider the alterations in the state of trade which origi-
nate not in commodities but in money.

Gold and silver may vary like other things, though they .
are not liable to vary so much as other things, in their cost
of production. The demand for them in foreign countries
may also vary. It may increase, by augmented employment
of the metals for purposes of art and ornament, or because
the increase of production and of transactions has created a
greater amount of business to be done by the circulating
medium. It may diminish, for the opposite reasons; oF
from the extension of the economizing expedients by which
the use of metallic money is partially dispensed with. These
changes act upon the trade between other countries and the


INFLUENCE OF CURRENCY ON FOREIGN TRADE. 169


mining countries, and upon the value of the precious metals,
according to the general laws of the value of imported com-
modities: which have been set forth in the previous chapters
with sufficient fulness.

What I propose to examine in the present chapter, is, not
those circumstances affecting money, which alter the per-
manent conditions of its value; but the effects produced on
international trade by casual or temporary variations in the
value of money, which have no connexion with any causes
affecting its permanent value. This is a subject of import-
ance, on account of its bearing upon the practical problem
which has excited so much discussion for fifty years past, the
regulation of the currency.


§ 2. Let us suppose in any country a circulating me-
dium purely metallic, and a sudden casual increase made to
it; for example, by bringing again into circulation hoards of
treasure, which had been concealed in a previous period of
foreign invasion or internal disorder. The natural effect
would be, arise of prices. This would check exports, and
encourage imports ; the imports would exceed the exports,
the exchanges would become unfavourable, and the newly-
acquired stock of money would diffuse itself over all coun-
tries with which the supposed country carried on trade, and
from them, progressively, through all parts of the com-
mercial world. The money which thus overflowed would
spread itself to an equal depth over all commercial countries.
For it would go on flowing until the exports and imports
again balanced one another: and this (as no change is sup-
posed in the permanent circumstances of international de-
mand) could only be, when the money had diffused itself so
equally that prices had risen in the same ratio in all coun-
tries, so that the alteration of price would be for all practical
purposes ineffective, and the exports and imports, though at a
higher money valuation, would be exactly the same as they
were originally. This diminished value of money throughout


2) Rest


emia at ok Moll
‘


ih


170 BOOK Ill. CHAPTER XXII. § 2.


the world, would cause a suspension, or at least a diminution, ©


of the annual supply from the mines; since the metal woull
no longer command a value equivalent to its highest costof
production. The annual waste would, therefore, not be fully


made up, and the usual causes of destruction would gradually |
reduce the aggregate quantity of the precious metals to it —


former amount; after which their production would recon


mence on its former scale. The discovery of the treasure ~


would thus produce only temporary effects; namely, a bref


disturbance of international trade until the treasure hal |


disseminated itself through the world, and then a temporary
depression in the value of the metal, below that which ca
responds to the cost of producing or of obtaining it; which
depression would gradually be corrected, by a temporanly
diminished production in the producing countries, and impor
tation in the importing countries.

The same effects which would thus arise from the dis
covery of a treasure, accompany the process by which bank
notes, or any of the other substitutes for money, take the
place of the precious metals. Suppose that England pos
sessed a currency wholly metallic, of twenty millions ste
ling, and that suddenly twenty millions of bank notes wert
sent into circulation. If these were issued by bankers, they
would be employed in loans, or in the purchase of securities,
and would therefore create a sudden fall in the rate of interest,
which would probably send a great part of the twenty mil
lions of gold out of the country as capital, to seek a higher
rate of interest elsewhere, before there had been time for any
action on prices. But we will suppose that the notes at
not issued by bankers, or money lenders of any kind, but by
manufacturers, in the payment of wages and purchase af
materials, or by the government in its ordinary expenses, 90
that the whole amount would be rapidly carried into the
markets for commodities. The following would be the
natural order of consequences. All prices would rise greatl)
Exportation would almost cease ; importation would he pro-


INFLUENCE OF CURRENCY ON FOREIGN TRADE. 171


digiously stimulated. A great balance of payments would
become due; the exchanges would turn against England, to
the full extent of the cost of exporting money; and the
surplus coin would pour itself rapidly forth, over the various
countries of the world, in the order of their proximity, geo-
graphically and commercially, to England. The efflux would
continue until the currencies of all countries had come to a
level; by which I do not mean, until money became of the
same yalue everywhere, but until the differences were only
those which existed before, and which corresponded to per-
manent differences in the cost of obtaining it. When the
rise of prices had extended itself in an equal degree to all
countries, exports and imports would everywhere revert to
what they were at first, would balance one another, and the
exchanges would return to par. So large a sum of money as
twenty millions, even when spread over the whole surface of
the commercial world, would probably raise the general level in
aperceptible degree ; but for no very long period. No altera-
tion having occurred in the general conditions under which
the metals were procured, either in the world at large or in
any part of it, the reduced value would no longer be remu-
nerating, and the supply from the mines would cease par-
tially or wholly, until the twenty millions were absorbed ;
after which absorption, the currencies of all countries would
be, in quantity and in value, nearly at their original level. I
say nearly, for in strict accuracy there would be a slight
difference. A somewhat smaller annual supply of the pre-
cious metals would now be required, there being in the world
twenty millions less of metallic money undergoing waste.
The equilibrium of payments, consequently, between the
mining countries and the rest of the world, would thenceforth
require that the mining countries should either export rather
more of something else, or import rather less of foreign
commodities; which implies a somewhat lower range of prices
than previously in the mining countries, and a somewhat
higher in all others; a scantier currency in the former, and


sien, BR TT


ee “rm


*


Sa i
SATA EEE, Sas De


ae


SCOORR IRS


1/2 BOOK III. CHAPTER xxi. § 2.


rather fuller currencies in the latter. This effect, which
would be too trifling to require notice except for the illustra
tion of a principle, is the only permanent change which
would be produced on international trade, or on the value or


- quantity of the currency of any country.


Effects of another kind, however, will have been produced,
Twenty millions which formerly existed in the unproductive
form of metallic money, have been converted into what is, or
is capable of becoming, productive capital. This gain is at
first made by England at the expense of other countries,
who have taken her superfluity of this costly and unpr-
ductive article off her hands, giving for it an equivalent value
in other commodities. By degrees the loss is made up to
those countries by diminished influx from the mines, and
finally the world has gained a virtual addition of twenty mil
lions to its productive resources. Adam Smith’s illustration,
though so well known, deserves for its extreme aptness to be
once more repeated. He compares the substitution of paper
in the room of the precious metals, to the construction of a
highway through the air, by which the ground now occupied
by roads would become available for agriculture. As in that
case a portion of the soil, so in this a part of the accumulated
wealth of the country, would be relieved from a function in
which it was only employed in rendering other soils and
capitals productive, and would itself become applicable to
production; the office it previously fulfilled being equally well
discharged by a medium which costs nothing.

The value saved to the community by thus dispensing
with metallic money, is a clear gain to those who provide the
substitute. They have the use of twenty millions of cireu-
lating medium which have cost them only the expense of an
engraver’s plate. If they employ this accession to their
fortunes as productive capital, the produce of the country is
increased. and the community benefited, as much as by any
other capital of equal amount. Whether it is so employed
or not, depends, in some degree, upon the mode of issuing It.


INFLUENCE OF CURRENCY ON FOREIGN TRADE. 173


If issued by the government, and employed in paying off
debt, it would probably become productive capital. The
government, however, may prefer employing this extra-
ordinary resource in its ordinary expenses; may squander it
uselessly, or make it a mere temporary substitute for taxation
to an equivalent amount; in which last case the amount is


saved by the taxpayers at large, who ether add it to their


capital or spend it as income. When paper currency is sup-


plied, as in our own country, by bankers and banking com-
panies, the amount is almost wholly turned into productive
capital: for the issuers, being at all times liable to be called
upon to refund the value, are under the strongest induce-
ments not to squander it, and the only cases in which it is
not forthcoming are cases of fraud or mismanagement. A
banker’s profession being that of a money lender, his issue
of notes is a simple extension of his ordinary occupation.
He lends the amount to farmers, manufacturers, or dealers,
who employ it in their several businesses. So employed, it
yields, like any other capital, wages of labour and profits of
stock. The profit is shared between the banker, who receives
interest, and a succession of borrowers, mostly for short
periods, who after paying the interest, gain a profit in addition,
ora convenience equivalent to profit. The capital itself in
the long run becomes entirely wages, and when replaced by
the sale of the produce, becomes wages again ; thus affording
a perpetual fund of the value of twenty millions for the
maintenance of productive labour, and increasing the annual
produce of the country by all that can be produced through
the means of a capital of that value. To this gain must be
added a further saving to the country, of the annual supply
of the precious metals necessary for repairing the wear and
tear, and other waste, of a metallic currency.

The substitution, therefore, of paper for the precious
metals, should always be carried as far as is consistent with
safety ; no greater amount of metallic currency being retained,
than is necessary to maintain, both in fact and in public belief,


174 BOOK Ill. CHAPTER XxII. § 3.


the convertibility of the paper. A country with the exten-
sive commercial relations of England, is liable to be suddenly
called upon for large foreign payments, sometimes in loans,
or other investments of capital abroad, sometimes as the
price of some unusual importation of goods, the most fre-
quent case being that of large importations of food, conse-
quent on a bad harvest. To meet such demands it is neces-
sary that there should be, either in circulation or im the
coffers of the banks, coin or bullion to a very considerable
amount, and that this, when drawn out by any emergency,
should be allowed to return after the emergency is past. But
since gold wanted for exportation is almost invariably drawn
from the reserves of the banks, and is never likely to he
taken directly from the circulation while the banks remain
solvent, the only advantage which can be obtained from
retaining partially a metallic currency for daily purposes, is
that the banks may occasionally replenish their reserves
from it.


§ 3. When metallic money had been entirely superseded
and expelled from circulation, by the substitution of an equal
amount of bank notes, any attempt to keep a still further
quantity of paper in circulation must, if the notes are con
vertible, be a complete failure. The new issue would again
set in motion the same train of consequences by which the
gold coin had already been expelled. The metals would, as
before, be required for exportation, and would be for that
purpose demanded from the banks, to the full extent of the
superfluous notes ; which thus could not possibly be retained
in circulation. If, indeed, the notes were inconvertible, there
would be no such obstacle to the increase of their quantity:
An inconvertible paper acts in the same way as a convertible,
while there remains any coin for it to supersede: the differ-
ence begins to manifest itself when all the coin is driven
from circulation (except what may be retained for the con
venience of small change), and the issues still go on increas-


INFLUENCE OF CURRENCY ON FOREIGN TRADE. 175


ing. When the paper begins to exceed in quantity the
metallic currency which it superseded, prices of course rise :
things which were worth 5/. in metallic money, become worth
67. in inconvertible paper, or more, as the case may be. But
_ this ri8e of price will not, as in the cases before examined,
stimulate import, and discourage export. The imports and
exports are determined by the metallic prices of things, not
by the paper prices: and it is only when the paper is ex-
changeable at pleasure for the metals, that paper prices and
metallic prices must correspond.

Let us suppose that England is the country which has
the depreciated paper. Suppose that some English produc-
tion could be bought, while the currency was still metallic, for
5/., and sold in France for 57. 10s., the difference covering the
expense and risk, and affording a profit to the merchant. On
account of the depreciation, this commodity will now cost in
England 62., and cannot be sold in France for more than
51. 10s., and yet it will be exported as before. Why? Be-
cause the 57. 10s. which the exporter can get for it in France,
is not depreciated paper, but gold or silver; and since in
England bullion has risen, in the same proportion with other
things—if the merchant brings the gold or silver to England,
he can sell his 5/. 10s. for 6/. 12s., and obtain as. before 10
per cent for profit and expenses.

It thus appears, that a depreciation of the currency does
not affect the foreign trade of the country: this is carried on
precisely as if the currency maintained its value. But though
the trade is not affected, the exchanges are. When the im-
ports and exports are in equilibrium, the exchange, in a me-
tallic currency, would be at par; a bill on France for the
equivalent of five sovereigns, would be worth five sovereigns.
But five sovereigns, or the quantity of gold contained in them,
having come to be worth in England 6/., it follows that a bill
on France for 5/. will be worth 67. When, therefore, the
real exchange is at par, there will be a nominal exchange
against the country, of as much per cent as the amount of the


176 BOOK Ill. CHAPTER xxII. $3.


depreciation. If the currency is depreciated 10, 15, or 20 pet
cent, then in whatever way the real exchange, arising from
the variations of international debts and credits, may vary,
the guoted exchange will always differ 10, 15, or 20 per cent
from it. However high this nominal premium may be, it
has no tendency to send gold out of the country, for the pur-
pose of drawing a bill against it, and profiting by the pre
mium ; because the gold so sent must be procured, not from
the banks and at par, as in the case of a conyertible cut-
rency, but in the market, at an advance of price equal to the
premium. In such cases, instead of saying that the exchange
is unfavourable, it would be a more correct representation to
say that the par has altered, since there is now requireda
larger quantity of English currency to be equivalent to the


same quantity of foreign. The exchanges, however, con-.


tinue tobe computed according to the metallic par The
quoted exchanges, therefore, when there is a depreciated
currency, are compounded of two elements or factors; dl
real exchange, which follows the variations of internationel
payments, and the nominal exchange, which varies with the
depreciation of the currency, but which, while there 1s any
depreciation at all, must always be unfavourable. Since the
amount of depreciation is exactly measured by the degree 1
which the market price of bullion exceeds the mint valuation,
we have a sure criterion to determine what portion of the
quoted exchange, being referable to depreciation, may be
struck off as nominal; the result so corrected expressing the
real exchange.

The same disturbance of the exchanges and of interna-
tional trade, which is produced by an increased issue of con-
vertible bank notes, is in like manner produced by those
extensions of credit, which, as was so fully shown im a pre-
ceding chapter, have the same effect on prices as an increase
of the currency. Whenever circumstances have given such
an impulse to the spirit of speculation as to occasion 4 great
increase of purchases on credit, money prices rise, Just as


n


INFLUENCE OF CURRENCY ON FOREIGN TRADE. 177


much as they would have risen if each person who so buys
on credit had bought with money. All the effects, therefore,
must be similar. As a consequence of high prices, exporta-
tion is checked and importation stimulated ; though in fact
the increase of importation seldom waits for the rise of prices
which is the consequence of speculation, inasmuch as some
of the great articles of import are usually among the things
in which speculative overtrading first shows itself. There is,
therefore, in such periods, usually a great excess of imports
over exports; and when the time comes at which these must
be paid for, the exchanges become unfavourable, and gold
flows out of the country. In what precise manner this efflux
of gold takes effect on prices, depends on circumstances of
which we shall presently speak more fully; but that its effect
is to make them recoil downwards, is certain and evident.
The recoil, once begun, generally becomes a total rout, and the
unusual extension of credit is rapidly exchanged for an unusual
contraction of it. Accordingly, when credit has been im-
prudently stretched, and the speculative spirit carried to
excess, the turn of the exchanges, and consequent pressure
on the banks to obtain gold for exportation, are generally
the proximate cause of the catastrophe. But these pheno-
mena, though a conspicuous accompaniment, are no essen-
tial part, of the collapse of credit called a commercial CrISIS 5
which, as we formerly showed*, might happen to as great an
extent, and is quite as likely to happen, in a country, if any
such there were, altogether destitute of foreign trade.


Supra, pp. 54—6.


VOL. II. iN


seem a Ba ben EERE! Chagos


2


y


CHAPTER XXIII.


OF THE RATE OF INTEREST.


§ 1. Tne present seems the most proper place for discuss
ing the circumstances which determine the rate of interest
The interest of loans, being really a question of exchange-valit,
falls naturally into the present division of our subject: and
the two topics of Currency and Loans, though in themselves
distinct, are so intimately blended in the phenomena of what
is called the money market, that it is impossible to under
stand the one without the other, and in many minds the tro
subjects are mixed up in the most inextricable confusion.

In the preceding Book* we defined the relation in which
interest stands to profit. We found that the gross profit af
capital might be distinguished into three parts, which ate
respectively the remuneration for risk, for trouble, and fr
the capital itself, and may be termed insurance, wages a
superintendence, and interest. After making compensation
for risk, that is, after covering the average losses to which
capital is exposed, either by the general circumstances of

society or by the hazards of the particular employment
there remains a surplus, which partly goes to repay the
owner of the capital for his abstinence, and partly the em
ployer of it for his time and trouble. How much goes (0
the one and how much to the other, is shown by the amount
of the remuneration which, when the two functions are sept
rated, the owner of capital can obtain from the employer fa
its use. This is evidently a question of demand and supply:
Nor have demand and supply any different meaning or effec
in this case from what they have in all others. The rate af


* Supra, vol. i. pp. 477—80.


|


|


RATE OF INTEREST. 179


interest will be such as to equalize the demand for loans with
the supply of them. It will be such, that exactly as much as
some people are desirous to borrow at that rate, others shall
be willing to lend. If there is more offered than demanded,
interest will fall; if more is demanded than offered, it will
tise ; and in both cases, to the point at which the equation of
supply and demand is re-established.

Both the demand and supply of loans fluctuate more in-
cessantly than any other demand or supply whatsoever. The
fluctuations in other things depend on a limited number of
influencing circumstances; but the desire to borrow, and the
willingness to lend, are more or less influenced by every cir-
cumstance which affects the state or prospects of industry or
commerce, either generally or in any of their branches. The
rate of interest, therefore, on good security, which alone we
have here to consider (for interest in which considerations of
tisk bear a part, may swell to any amount) is seldom, in the
great centres of money transactions, precisely the same for
two days together ; as is shewn by the never-ceasing varia-
tions in the quoted prices of the funds and other negociable
securities. Nevertheless, there must be, as in other cases of
value, some rate which (in the language of Adam Smith and
Ricardo) may be called the natural rate; some rate about
which the market rate oscillates, and to which it always tends
to return. This rate partly depends on the amount of accu-
mulation going on in the hands of persons who cannot them-
selves attend to the employment of their savings, and partly
on the comparative taste existing in the community for the
active pursuits of industry, or for the leisure, ease, and inde-
pendence of an annuitant.


§ 2. To exclude casual fluctuations, we will suppose
commerce to be in a quiescent condition, no employment
being unusually prosperous, and none particularly distressed.
In these circumstances, the more thriving producers and


traders have their capital fully employed, and many are able
N 2


180 BOOK Ill. CHAPTER XXII. § 2.


to transact business to a considerably greater extent than
they have capital for. These are naturally borrowers; and
the amount which they desire to borrow, and can give se-
curity for, constitutes the demand for loans on account of
productive employment. To these must be added the loan
required by Government, and by landowners or other unpto-
ductive consumers who have good security to give. This
constitutes the mass of loans for which there is an habitual
demand.

Now it is conceivable that there might exist, in the hands
of persons disinclined or disqualified for engaging personally |


rar LT ae


i ; i in business, a mass of capital equal to, and even exceeding,
a this demand. In that case there would be an habitual ext |
eet ft of competition on the part of lenders, and the rate of interest
ae) i would bear a low proportion to the rate of profit. Interest
d


would be forced down to the point which would either tempt
borrowers to take a greater amount of loans than they hada
reasonable expectation of being able to employ thet
business, or would so discourage a portion of the lenders, as
to make them either forbear to accumulate, or endeavour to
increase their income by engaging in business oD their own
account, and incurring the risks, if not the labours, of indus-
trial employment.

On the other hand, the capital owned by persons mi
prefer lending it at interest, or whose avocations prevent
them from personally superintending its employment, mij
be short of the habitual demand for loans. It may bem
great part absorbed by the investments afforded by the
public debt and by mortgages, and the remainder may not
be sufficient to supply the wants of commerce. If 50, ie
rate of interest will be raised so high as in some WAY CONG)
establish the equilibrium. When there is only @ small dit
ference between interest and profit, many borrowers ™4Y ti
longer be willing to increase their responsibilities and involve
their credit for so small a remuneration: or some who would
otherwise have engaged in business, may prefer leisure, and


* ’


= FS Se we: = eat :


tia)
4
ial

i


’
I


ES aE


RATE OF INTEREST. 181


become lenders instead of borrowers: or others, under the
inducement of high interest and easy investment for their
capital, may retire from business earlier, and with smaller
fortunes, than they otherwise would have done. Or, lastly,
there is another process by which, in England and other
commercial countries, a large portion of the requisite supply
of loans is obtained. Instead of its being afforded by per-
sons not in business, the affording it may itself become a
business. A portion of the capital employed in trade may
be supplied by a class of professional money lenders. These
money lenders, however, must have more than a mere
interest; they must have the ordinary rate of profit on their
capital, risk and all other circumstances being allowed for.
But it can never answer to any one who borrows for the pur-
poses of his business, to pay a full profit for capital from
which he will only derive a full profit: and money-lending, as
an employment, for the regular supply of trade, cannot there-
fore be carried on except by persons who in addition to their
own capital, can lend their credit, or in other words, the
capital of other people: that is, bankers, and persons (such
as bill-brokers) who are virtually bankers, since they receive
money in deposit. A bank which lends its notes, lends
capital which it borrows from the community, and for which
it pays no interest. A bank of deposit lends capital which it
collects from the community in small parcels; sometimes
without paying any interest, as is the case with the London
private bankers; and if, like the Scotch, the joint stock, and
most of the country banks, it does pay interest, it still pays
much less than it receives; for the depositors, who in any
other way could mostly obtain for such small balances no
interest worth taking any trouble for, are glad to receive even
alittle. Having this subsidiary resource, bankers are enabled
to obtain, by lending at interest, the ordinary rate of profit
on their own capital. In any other manner, money-lending
could not be carried on as a regular mode of business, except
upon terms on which none would consent to borrow but


182 BOOK III; CHAPTER XxIlI. § 3.


persons either counting on extraordinary profits, or in urgent
need; unproductive consumers who have exceeded their
means, or merchants in fear of bankruptcy. The disposable
capital deposited in banks, or represented by bank notes,
together with the funds belonging to those who, either from
necessity or preference, live upon the interest of their pro-
perty, constitute the general loan fund of the country: and
the amount of this aggregate fund, when set against the
habitual demands of producers and dealers, and those of the
government and of unproductive consumers, determine tle
permanent or average rate of interest ; which must always
be such as to adjust these two amounts to one another’.
But, while the whole of this mass of lent capital takes effect
upon the permanent rate of interest, the fluctuations depend
almost entirely upon the portion which is in the hands of
bankers; for it is that portion almost exclusively, which,
being lent for short times only, is continually in the market
seeking an investment. The capital of those who live on
the interest of their own fortunes, has generally sought and
found some fixed investment, such as the public funds,
mortgages, or the bonds of public companies, which invest
ment, except under peculiar temptations or necessities, 18 not
changed.


§ 3. Fluctuations in the rate of interest arise from valle


* I do not include in the general loan fund of the country the capitals,
large as they sometimes are, which are habitually employed in speculatively
buying and selling the public funds and other securities. It is true, that al
who buy securities add, for the time, to the general amount of money
on loan, and lower pro tanto the rate of interest. But as the persons I
speak of buy only to sell again at a higher price, they are alternately in the
position of lenders and of borrowers: their operations raise the rate of
miterest at one time, exactly as much as they lower it at another. . Like al
persons who buy and sell on speculation, their function is to equalize, not
to raise or lower, the value of the commodity. When they speculate pru-


dently, they temper the fluctuations of price; when imprudently, they often
aggravate them. ;


eS ee


ER Am ED Ty


————————————


RATE OF INTEREST. 183


tions either in the demand for loans, or in the supply. The
supply is liable to variation, though less so than the demand.
The willingness to lend is greater than usual at the com-
mencement of a period of speculation, and much less than
usual during the revulsion which follows. In speculative
times, money-dealers as well as other people are inclined to
extend their business by stretching their credit; they lend
more than usual (just as other,classes of dealers and producers
employ more than usual), of capital which does not belong to
them. Accordingly, these are the times when the rate of
interest is low; though for this too (as we shall immediately
see), there are other causes. During the revulsion, on the
contrary, interest always rises inordinately, because, while
there is a most pressing need on the part of many persons to
borrow, there is a general disinclination to lend. This dis-
inclination, when at its extreme point, is calleda panic. It
occurs when a succession of unexpected failures has created
in the mercantile, and sometimes also in the non-mercantile
public, a general distrust in each other’s solvency ; disposing
every one not only to refuse fresh credit, except on very
onerous terms, but to call in, if possible, all credit which he
has already given. Deposits are withdrawn from banks;
notes are returned on the issuers in exchange for specie;
bankers raise their rate of discount, and withhold their custo-
mary advances; merchants refuse to renew mercantile bills.
At such times the most calamitous consequences were for-
merly experienced from the attempt of the law to prevent
more than a certain limited rate of interest from being given
or taken. Persons who could not borrow at five per cent,
had to pay, not six or seven, but ten or fifteen per cent, to
compensate the lender for risking the penalties of the law: or
had to sell securities or goods for ready money at a still
greater sacrifice. These evils have been less felt, since mer-
cantile bills have been exempted by statute from the operation


of the usury laws.
Except at such periods, the amount of capital disposable


ee eh Tos Se


Rt


ees a
err ome
=e


nati ee


184. BOOK Ill. CHAPTER xx1I. § 2.


on loan is subject to little other variation than that which
arises from the gradual process of accumulation; which pro-
cess howeyer, in the great commercial countries, is sufficiently
rapid to account for the almost periodical recurrence of these
fits of speculation; since, when a few years have elapsed
without a crisis, and no new and tempting channel for inyest-
ment has been opened in the meantime, there is alyvays
found to have occurred in those few years so large an increase
of capital seeking investment, as to have lowered considerably
the rate of interest, whether indicated by the prices of sect:
rities or by the rate of discount on bills; and this diminution |
of interest tempts the possessors to incur hazards in hopes
of a more considerable return.
The demand for loans varies much more largely than the
supply, and embraces longer cycles of years in its aberrations.
A time of war, for example, is a period of unusual drafts on
the loan markets. The Government, at such times, generally
incurs new loans, and as these usually succeed each other Tar
pidly as long as the war lasts, the general rate of interest 1s
kept higher in war than in peace, without reference to the rate
of profit, and productive industry is stinted of its usual sup- :
plies. During a part of the last war, the government could
not borrow under six per cent, and of course all other |
borrowers had to pay at least as much. Nor does the influ:
ence of these loans altogether cease when the government
ceases to contract others; for those already contracted con-
tinue to afford an investment for a greatly increased amount
of the disposable capital of the country, which, if the
national debt were paid off, would be added to the mass of
capital seeking investment, and (independently of temporary


disturbance) could not but, to some extent, permanently
lower the rate of interest.


The same effect on interest Ww
ment loans for war expenditur
opening of any new
nent investment.


hich is produced by gover
e, is produced by the sudden
and generally attractive mode of perma-
The Only instance of the kind in recent


RATE OF INTEREST. 185


history on a scale comparable to that of the war loans, is the
absorption of capital in the construction of railways. This
capital must have been principally drawn from the deposits
in banks, or from savings which would have gone into deposit,
and which were destined to be ultimately employed in buying
securities from persons who would have employed the pur-
chase money in discounts or other loans at interest: in either
case, it was a draft on the general loan fund. It is, in fact,
evident, that unless savings were made expressly to be em-
ployed in railway adventure, the amount thus employed must
have been derived either from the actual capital of persons
in business, or from capital which would have been lent to
persons in business. In the first case, the subtraction, by
crippling their means, obliges them to be larger borrowers,
in the second, it leaves less for them to borrow; in either
case it equally tends to raise the rate of interest.


$4. From the preceding considerations it would be
seen, even it were not otherwise evident, how great an error
it is to imagine that the rate of interest bears any necessary
relation to the quantity or value of the money in circulation.
An increase of the currency has in itself no effect, and is
incapable of having any effect, on the rate of interest. A
paper currency issued by government in the payment of its
ordinary expenses, in however great excess it may be issued,
affects the rate of interest in no manner whatever. It dimi-
nishes indeed the power of money to purchase commodities,
but not the power of money to purchase money. Ifa hundred
pounds will buy a perpetual annuity of four pounds a year,
a depreciation which makes the hundred pounds worth only
half as much as before, has precisely the same effect on the
four pounds, and therefore cannot alter the relation between
the two. Unless, indeed, it is known and reckoned upon
that the depreciation will only be temporary; for people
certainly might be willing to lend the depreciated currency
on cheaper terms if they expected to be repaid in money of
full value.


186 BOOK IlJ. CHAPTER XXIII. § 4.


It is perfectly true that in England, and most other com-
mercial countries, an addition to the currency almost alyays
scems to have the effect of lowering the rate of interest; be
cause it is almost always accompanied by something which
really has that tendency. The currency in common ts,
being a currency provided by bankers, is all issued in the way
of loans, except such part as happens to be employed in the
purchase of gold or silver. The same operation, therefore,
which adds to the currency, also adds to the loans, or to the
capital seeking investment on loan; properly, indeed, the
currency is only increased in order that the loans may be
increased. Now, though as currency these issues have notan
effect on interest, as loans they have. Inasm uch therefore as
an expansion or contraction of paper currency, when that
currency consists of bank notes, is always also an expansion
or contraction of credit; the distinction is seldom properly
drawn between the effects which belong to it in the former
and in the latter character. The confusion is thickened by
the unfortunate misapplication of language, which designates
the rate of interest by a phrase (“the value of money”) which
properly expresses the purchasing power of the circulating
medium. Not only, therefore, are bank notes supposed t
produce effects as currency, which they only produce as loans,
but attention is habitually diverted from effects similar in kind
and much greater in degree, when produced by an action on
loans which does not happen to be accompanied by ay
action on the currency.

For example, in considering the effect produced by the
proceedings of banks in encouraging the excesses of specula-
lation, an immense effect is usually attributed to their issues
of notes, but until of late hardly any attention was paid to
the management of their deposits, although nothing is more
certain than that their imprudent extensions of credit take
place more frequently by means of their deposits than of their
issues. ‘There is no doubt,” says Mr. Tooke*, “that


* Inquiry into the Currency Principle, ch. xiv.


EE Se ere


RATE OF INTEREST. 187


banks, whether private or joint stock, may, if imprudently
conducted, minister to an undue extension of credit for the
purpose of speculations, whether in commodities, or in over-
trading in exports or imports, or in building or mining
operations, and that they have so ministered not unfrequently,
and in some cases to an extent ruinous to themselves, and
without ultimate benefit to the parties to whose views their
resources were made subservient.” But, “ supposing all the
deposits received by a banker to be in coin, is he not, just as
much as the issuing banker, exposed to the importunity of cus-
tomers, whom it may be impolitic to refuse, for loans or dis-
counts, or to be tempted by a high interest? and may he not
be induced to encroach so much upon his deposits, as to leave
him, under not imprebable circumstances, unable to meet the
demands of his depositors? In what respect, indeed, would
the case of a banker in a perfectly metallic circulation, differ
from that of a London banker at the present day? He is not
a creator of money, he cannot avail himself of his privilege as
an issuer in aid of his other business, and yet there have been
lamentable instances of London bankers issuing money in
excess.””

In the discussions, too, which have been for so many
years carried on respecting the operations of the Bank of
England, and the effects produced by those operations on the
state of credit, although for nearly half a century there never
has been a commercial crisis which the Bank has not been
strenuously accused either of producing or of aggravating, it
has been almost universally assumed that the influence
of its acts was felt only through the amount of its notes in
circulation, and that if it could be prevented from exercising
any discretion as to that one feature in its position, it would
no longer have any power liable to abuse. This at least is an
error which, after the experience of the year 1847, we may hope
has been committed for the last time. During that year the
hands of the Bank were absolutely tied, in its character of a
bank of issue ; but through its operations as a bank of deposit


SaaS


piécisyget pen aac epeirs


ri


188 BOOK III, CHAPTER XXII. § 5.


it exercised as great an influence, or apparent influence, on
the rate of interest and the state of credit, as at any former
period; it was exposed to as vehement accusations of abusing
that influence; and a crisis occurred, such as few that pre-
ceded it had equalled, and none perhaps surpassed, in in-
tensity.


§5. Before quitting the general subject of this chapter,
I will make the obvious remark, that the rate of interest de-
termines the value and price of all those saleable articles
which are desired and bought, not for themselves, but for the
income which they are capable of yielding. The public
funds, shares in joint stock companies, and all descriptions of
securities, are at a high price in proportion as the rate of
interest is low. They are sold at the price which will give
the market rate of interest on the purchase money; with
allowance for all differences in the risk incurred, or m any
circumstance of convenience. Exchequer bills, for example,
usually sell at a higher price than consols, proportionally to
the interest which they yield; because, although the security
is the same, yet the former being annually paid off at par,
the purchaser (unless obliged to sell in a moment of general
emergency) is in no danger of losing anything by the resale,
except the premium he may have paid.

The price of land, mines, and all other fixed sources of
income, depends in like manner on the rate of interest.
Land usually sells at a higher price, in proportion to the in-

» come afforded by it, than the public funds, not only because
it is thought, even in this country, to be somewhat more
secure, but because ideas of power and dignity are associated
with its possession. But these aueences are constant, or
nearly so; and in the variations of price, land follows, ceteris
paribus, the permanent (though of course not the daily)
variations of the rate of interest. When interest is low; land
will naturally be dear; when interest is high, land will be
cheap. ‘he last war presented a striking S Gono" to this


RATE OF INTEREST. 189


rule, since the price of land as well as the rate of interest was
then remarkably high. For this, however, there was a special
cause. The continuance of a very high average price of corn
for many years, had raised the rent of land even more than
in proportion to the rise of interest and fall of the selling
price of fixed incomes. Had it not been for this accident,
chiefly dependent on the seasons, land must have sustained
as great a depreciation in value as the public funds: which it
probably would do, were a war to break out hereafter; to the
signal disappointment of those landlords and farmers who,
generalizing from the casual circumstances of a remarkable
period, so long persuaded themselves that a state of war was
peculiarly advantageous, and a state of peace disadvantageous,
to what they chose to call the interests of agriculture.


CHAPTER XXIV.


OF THE REGULATION OF A CONVERTIBLE PAPER
CURRENCY.


§1. Tur frequent recurrence during the last half century
of the painful series of phenomena called a commercial crisis,
has directed much of the attention both of economists and
of practical politicians to the contriving’ of expedients for
averting, or at the least, mitigating its evils. And the habit
which grew up during the era of the Bank restriction, of
ascribing all alternations of high and low price to the issues
of banks, has caused inquirers in general to fix their hopes
of success in moderating those vicissitudes, upon schemes for
the regulation of bank notes. A scheme of this nature, after
having obtained the sanction of high authorities, so far esta-
blished itself in the public mind, as to be, with general appro-
bation, converted into a law, at the last renewal of the Charter
of the Bank of England: and the regulation is still mn force,
though with a great abatement of its popularity, and with its
prestige impaired by a temporary suspension, on the respons:
bility of the executive, little more than three years after ifs
enactment. It is proper that the merits of this plan for the
regulation of a conyertible bank note currency should be
here considered. Before touching upon the practical provi-
sions of Sir Robert Peel’s Act of 1844, I shall briefly state
the nature and examine the grounds of the theory on which
if is founded.

It is believed by many that banks of issue universally,
or the Bank of England in particular, have a powe? of

-throwing their notes into circulation, and thereby raising

prices, arbitrarily ; that this power is only limited by the

degree of moderation with waich they think fit to exercise it;


REGULATION OF CURRENCY. 191


that when they increase their issues beyond the usual amount,
the rise of prices, thus produced, generates a‘spirit of specu-
lation in commodities, which carries prices still higher, and
ultimately causes a reaction and recoil, amounting in extreme
cases to a commercial crisis; and that every such crisis
which has occurred in this country within mercantile memory,
has been either originally produced by this cause, or greatly
aggravated by it. To this extreme length the currency theory
has not been carried by the eminent political economists who
have given to a more moderate form of the same theory the
sanction of their names. But I have not overstated the
extravagance of the popular version; which is a remarkable
instance to what lengths a favourite theory will hurry, not the
closet-students whose competency in such questions is often
treated with so much contempt, but men of the world and of
business, who pique themselves on the practical knowledge
which they have at least had ample opportunities of acquiring.
Not only has this fixed idea of the currency as the prime
agent in the fluctuations of price, made them shut their eyes
to the multitude of circumstances which, by influencing the
expectation of supply, are the true causes of almost all specu-
lations and of almost all fluctuations of price; but in order
to bring about the chronological agreement required by their
theory between the variations of bank issues and those of
prices, they have played such fantastic tricks with facts and
dates, as would be thought incredible, if an eminent practical
authority had not taken the trouble of meeting them, on the
ground of mere history, with an elaborate and systematic
exposure. I refer, as all conversant with the subject must
be aware, to Mr. Tooke’s History of Prices. The result of
Mr. Tooke’s investigations was thus stated by himself, in his
examination before the Commons Committee on the Bank
Charter question in 1832; and the evidences of it stand
recorded in his book: “In point of fact, and historically, as
far as my researches have gone, in every signal instance of a
rise or fall of prices, the rise or fall has preceded, and


192 BOOK Ill. CHAPTER xxiv. $1.


therefore could not be the effect of, an enlargement or con-
traction of the bank circulation.”

The extravagance of the currency theorists, in attributing
almost every rise or fall of prices to an enlargement or con-
traction of the issues of bank notes, has raised up, by reae-
tion, a theory the extreme opposite of the former, of which,
in scientific discussion, the most prominent representatives
are Mr. Tooke and Mr. Fullarton. 'This counter-theory denies
to bank notes, so long as their convertibility is maintained,
any power whatever of raising prices, and to banks any
power of increasing their circulation, except as @ Gone
quence of, and in proportion to, an increase of the business :
to be done. This last statement is supported by the unank
mous assurances of all the country bankers who have ben
examined before successive Parliamentary Committees on the
subject. They all bear testimony that (in the words of Mr
Fullarton*) “the amount of their issues is exclusively Tes
lated by the extent of local dealings and expenditure in theit
respective districts, fluctuating with the fluctuations of pee:
duction and price, and that they neither can increase thet
issues beyond the limits which the range of such dealings
and expenditure prescribes, without the certainty of having
their notes immediately returned to them, nor diminish them,
but at an almost equal certainty of the vacancy being fille
up from some other source.” From these premises Us Is al-
gued by Mr. Tooke and Mr. Fullarton, that bank 1ssues,
since they cannot be increased in amount unless there bean
increased demand, cannot possibly raise prices; cannot en-
courage speculation, nor occasion a commercial crisis; ad
that the attempt to guard against that evil by an artificial
management of the issue of notes, is of no effect for the
intended purpose, and liable to produce other consequences
extremely calamitous.


tui terran ara meet ie
at


aN agice


* i
Regulation of Currencies, p. 85.


Db)


REGULATION OF CURRENCY. 193


§ 2. As much of this doctrine as rests upon testimony,
and not upon inference, appears to me incontrovertible.
I give complete credence to the assertion of the country
bankers, very clearly and correctly condensed into a small
compass in the sentence just quoted from Mr. Fullarton. I
am convinced that they cannot possibly increase their issue
of notes in any other circumstances than those which are
there stated. I believe, also, that the theory, grounded by
Mr. Fullarton upon this fact, contains a large portion of
truth, and is far nearer to being the expression of the whole
truth than any form whatever of the currency theory.

There are two states of the markets: one which may be
termed the quiescent state, the other the expectant, or specu-
lative state. The first is that in which there is nothing
tending to engender in any considerable portion of the mer-
cantile public a desire to extend their operations. The
producers produce and the dealers purchase only their
usual stocks, having no expectation of a more than usually
rapid vent for them. Tach person transacts his ordinary
amount of business and no more, or increases it only in cor-
Tespondence with the increase of his capital or connexions,
or with the gradual growth of the demand for his commodity,
occasioned by the public prosperity. Not meditating any
unusual extension of their own operations, producers and
dealers do not need more than the usual accommodation
from bankers and other money lenders; and as it is only by
extending their loans that bankers increase their issues, none
but a momentary augmentation of issues is in these circum-
stances possible. If at a certain time of the year a portion of
the public have larger payments to make than at other times,
or if an individual, under some peculiar exigency, requires
an extra advance, they may apply for more bank notes, and
obtain them ; but the notes will no more remain in circulation,
than the extra quantity of Bank of England notes which are
issued once in every three months in payment of the divi-
dends. The person to whom, after being borrowed, the

VOL. It. o)


194. BOOK IlJ. CHAPTER xxiv. § 2


notes are paid away, has no extra payments to make, and no
peculiar exigency, and he keeps them by him unused, or
sends them into deposit, or repays with them a previous
advance made to him by some banker: in any case he does
not buy commodities with them, since by the supposition
there is nothing to induce him to lay in a larger stock of
commodities than before. In this case, therefore, there can
be no addition, at the discretion of bankers, to the general
circulating medium: any increase of their issues either comes
back to them, or remains idle in the hands of the public, and
no rise takes place in prices.

But there is another state of the markets, strikingly con-
trasted with the preceding, and to this state it is not so
obvious that the theory of Mr. Tooke and Mr. Fullarton is
applicable: namely, when an impression prevails, whether
well founded or groundless, that the supply of one or more
great articles of commerce is likely to fall short of the
ordimary consumption. In such circumstances all persons
connected with those commodities desire to extend their
operations. The producers or importers desire to produce
or import a larger quantity, speculators desire to lay ma
stock in order to profit by the expected rise of price, and
holders of the commodity desire additional advances to enable
them to continue holding. All these classes are disposed to
make a more than ordinary use of their credit, and to this
desire it is not denied that bankers very often unduly admi-
nister. Effects of the same kind may be produced by any-
thing which, exciting more than usual hopes of profit, gives
increased briskness to business: for example, @ sudden
foreign demand for commodities on a large scale, oF the
expectation of it ; such as occurred on the opening of Spanish
America to English trade, and has occurred on various 9¢¢a-
sions in the trade with the United States. Such occurrences
produce a tendency to a rise of price in exportable articles,
and generate speculations, sometimes of a reasonable, and
(as long as a large proportion of men in business prefer


REGULATION OF CURRENCY. 195


excitement to safety) frequently of an irrational or immo-
derate character. In such cases there is a desire in the mer-
cantile classes, or in some portion of them, to employ their
credit, in a more than usual degree, as a power of purchasing.
This is a state of business which, when pushed to an extreme
length, brings on the revulsion called a commercial crisis
and it is a known fact that such periods of speculation hardly
ever pass off without having been attended, during some
part of their progress, by a considerable increase of bank
notes.
To this, however, it is replied by Mr. Tooke and Mr.
Fullarton, that the increase of the circulation always follows


instead of preceding the rise of prices, and is not its cause,


but its effect. That in the first place, the speculative pur-
chases by which prices are raised, are not effected by bank
notes but by cheques, or still more commonly on a simple
book credit: and secondly, even if they were made with bank


notes, borrowed for that express purpose from bankers, the
notes after being used for that purpose would, if not wanted
for current transactions, be returned into deposit by the per-
sons receiving them. In this I fully concur, and I regard it
as proved, both scientifically and historically, that during the
ascending period of speculation, and as long as it is confined
to transactions between dealers, the issues of bank notes are
seldom materially increased, nor contribute anything to the
speculative rise of prices. It seems to me, however, that
this can no longer be affirmed when speculation has pro-
ceeded so far as to reach the producers. Speculative orders
given by merchants to manufacturers induce them to extend
their operations, and to become applicants to bankers for
increased advances, which, if made in notes, are not paid
away to persons who return them into deposit, but are par-
tially expended in paying wages, and pass into the various
channels of retail trade, where they become directly effective
in producing a further rise of prices. I cannot but think
that this employment of bank notes must have been power-
02


a ne


PURER ANP BETTE IS CS eas Srrae ses
. r pope och. TR 8 na


196 BOOK Il]. CHAPTER XXIV. § 2.


fully operative on prices at the time when notes of one and
two pounds value were permitted by law. Admitting, hoy-
ever, that the prohibition of notes below five pounds has now
rendered this part of their operation comparatively insig-
nificant by greatly limiting their applicability to the payment
of wages, there is another form of their instrumentality
which comes into play in the later stages of speculation, and
which forms the principal argument of the more moderate
supporters of the currency theory. Although advances by
bankers are seldom demanded for the purpose of buying on
speculation, they are largely demanded by unsuccesstul specu-
lators for the purpose of holding on; and the competition of
these speculators for a share of the Joanable capital, makes
even those who have not speculated, more dependent than
before on bankers for the advances they require. Between
the ascending period of speculation and the revulsion, there
is an interval, extending to weeks and sometimes months, of
struggling against a fall. The tide haying shown signs of
turning, the speculative holders are unwilling to sell ina
falling market, and in the mean time they require funds to
enable them to fulfil even their ordinary engagements: It is
this stage that is ordinarily marked by a considerable imerease
in the amount of the bank note circulation. That such an
increase does usually take place, is denied by no one And!
think it must be admitted that this increase tends to prolong
the duration of the speculations; that it enables the spear
lative prices to be kept up for some time after they would
otherwise have collapsed; and therefore prolongs and in-
creases the drain of the precious metals for exportation, which
is a Jeading feature of this stage in the progress of a com-
a ae eee of which drain at last endan-
gering the power of th _ : f
paying es notes on A os iad eee
their credit more suddenl d z ae. ld have
? y and severely than wou
been necessary if they had been prevented from propping up
speculation by increased advances, after the time when the
recoil had become inevitable.


REGULATION OF CURRENCY. 197


§3. To prevent this retardation of the recoil, and ulti-
mate aggravation of its severity, is the object of the scheme
for regulating the currency, of which Mr. Loyd, Mr. Norman,
and Colonel Torrens, were the first promulgators, and which
has, in a slightly modified form, been enacted into law.

According to the scheme in its original purity, the issue
of promissory notes for circulation was to be confined to one
body. In the form adopted by Parliament, all existing
issuers are permitted to retain this privilege, but none are to
be hereafter admitted to it, even in the place of those who
may discontinue their issues: and, for all except the Bank
of England, a maximum of issues is prescribed, on a scale
intentionally low. To the Bank of England no maximum
is fixed for the aggregate amount of its notes, but only for
the portion which are issued on securities, or in other words,
on loan. These are never to exceed a certain limit, fixed for
the present at fourteen millions*. All issues beyond that
amount must be in exchange for bullion; of which the Bank
is bound to purchase, at a trifle below the mint valuation, any
quantity which is offered to it, giving its notes in exchange.
In regard, therefore, to any issue of notes beyond the limit
of fourteen millions, the Bank is purely passive, having no
function but the compulsory one of giving its notes for gold
at 3/. 17s. 9d., and gold for its notes at 3/. 17s. 103d., when-
ever and by whomsoever it is called upon to do so.

The object for which’ this mechanism is intended is, that
the bank note currency may vary in its amount at the exact
times, and in the exact degree, in which a purely metallic
currency would vary. The precious metals being by universal
experience the commodity approaching nearest to that inva-
riability in all the circumstances influencing value, which fits
by arrangement with any country bank the issues of that bank are discon-
tinued, and Bank of England notes substituted: and even then the increase


is capriciously limited to two-thirds of the amount of the country notes to
be thereby superseded.


198 BOOK Ill. CHAPTER XXIV. 9§ 3.


a commodity for being adopted as a medium of exchange, it
is an essential requisite of any substitute for those metals,
that it should conform exactly in its value to a metallic cur-
rency, and for that purpose it is very plausibly considered
necessary that it should conform in its quantity likewise.
How far this purpose is really fulfilled by the means
adopted, we shall presently examine. First, however, let us
consider whether the measure effects the practical object
chiefly relied on in its defence by the more sober of its advo-
cates, that of arresting speculative extensions of credit at an
earlier period, with a less drain of gold, and consequently by
a milder and more gradual process. I think it must be
admitted that to a certain degree it is successful in this object.
I am aware of what may be urged, and reasonably urged,
in opposition to this opinion. It will be said, that when the
time arrives at which the banks are pressed for increased
advances to enable speculators to fulfil their engagements, a
limitation of the issue of notes will not prevent the banks, if
otherwise willing, from making these advances; that they
have still their deposits as a source from which loans may be
made beyond the point which is consistent with prudence as
bankers; and that, even if they refuse to do so, the only
effect would be, that the deposits themselves would be drawn
out to supply the wants of the depositors; which would he
just as much an addition to the bank notes and coin the
hands of the public, as if the notes themselves were increased.
This is true, and is a sufficient answer to those who think
that the advances of banks to prop up failing speculations
are objectionable chiefly as an increase of the currency: But
the mode in which they are really objectionable, is as an exten-
sion of credit. If, instead of lending their notes, the banks
allow the demand of their customers for disposable capital to
act on the deposits, there is the same increase of currency;
(for a short time at least,) but there is not an increase of
loans. The rate of interest, therefore, is not prevented from
rising at the first moment when the difficulties consequent


REGULATION OF CURRENCY. 199


on excess of speculation begin to be felt. Speculative holders
are obliged to submit earlier to that loss by resale, which
could not have been prevented from coming on them at last:
the recoil of prices and collapse of general credit take place
sooner.

To appreciate the effect which this acceleration of the
crisis has in mitigating its intensity, let us advert more par-
ticularly to the nature and effects of that leading feature in
the period just preceding the collapse, the drain of gold. A
rise of prices produced by a speculative extension of credit,
even when bank notes have not been the instrument, is not
the less effectual (if it lasts long enough) in turning the ex-
changes: and when the exchanges have turned from this
cause, they can only be turned back, and the drain of gold
stopped, either by a fall of prices or by a rise of the rate of
interest. A fall of prices will stop it by removing the cause
which produced it, and by rendering goods a more advan-
tageous remittance than gold, even for paying debts already
due. A rise of the rate of interest, and fall, consequently, of
the prices of securities, will accomplish the purpose still
more rapidly, by inducing foreigners, instead of taking away
the gold which is due to them, to leave it for investment
within the country, and even send gold into the country to
take advantage of the increased rate of interest. Of this last
mode of stopping a drain of gold, the year 1847 afforded
signal examples. But until one of these two things takes
place—until either prices fall, or the rate of interest rises—
nothing can possibly arrest, or even moderate, the efflux of
gold. Now, neither will prices fall nor interest rise, so long
as the unduly expanded credit is upheld by the continued
advances of bankers. It is well known that when a drain of
gold has set in, even if bank notes have not increased in
quantity, if is upon them that the contraction first falls, the
gold wanted for exportation being always obtained from the
Bank of England in exchange for its notes. But under the
system which preceded 1844, the Bank of England, bemg


BOOK Ill. GHAPTER xxiv. § 3.


200


subjected, in common with other banks, to the importunities
for fresh advances which are characteristic of such a time,
could, and often did, immediately re-issue the notes which
had been returned to it in exchange for bullion. It is a
great error, certainly, to suppose that the mischief of this
re-issue chiefly consisted in preventing a contraction of the
currency. It was, however, quite as mischievous as it has
ever been supposed to be. As long as it lasted, the efflux of
gold could not cease, since neither would prices fall nor IDs
terest rise while these advances continued. Prices, having |
risen without any increase of bank notes, could well haye |
fallen without a diminution of them; but having risen in
consequence of an extension of credit, they could not fall
without a contraction of it. As long, therefore, as the Bank
of England and the other banks persevered in this course; 80
long gold continued to flow out, until so little was left that
the Bank of England, being in danger of suspension of pay- :
ments, was compelled at last to contract its discounts and
other loans so greatly and suddenly as to produce a much
more extreme variation in the rate of interest, inflict much
greater loss and distress on individuals, and destroy @ much
greater amount of the ordinary credit of the country, than
any real necessity required.

I acknowledge, (and the experience of 1847 has proved
even to those who overlooked it before) that the mischief now
described may be wrought, and in large measure, by the
Bank of England, through its deposits alone. It may ¢on-
tinue or even increase its discounts and advances, when it
ought to contract them; with the ultimate effect of making
ee ee a
error with their denon: eee ey yuich baa fe
were at liberty to make ear a ae: ee
well as their deposits. I am eo echsewmih thet ae
being restricted from increasing pee ne tuple oe :

: : § their issues, is a real impedi-
ment to their making those advances which arrest the tide at


REGULATION OF CURRENCY. 201


its turn, and make it rush like a torrent afterwards. If the
restrictions of the Act of 1844 were no obstacle to the
advances of banks in the interval preceding the crisis, why
were they found an insuperable obstacle during the crisis? an
obstacle which nothing less would overcome than a suspension
of the law, through the assumption by Government of a
temporary dictatorship? Eyidently they are an obstacle*;
and when the Act is blamed for interposing obstacles at a
time when not obstacles but facilities are needed, it must in
justice receive credit for interposing them when they are an
acknowledged benefit. In this particular, therefore, I think
it cannot be denied, that the new system is a real improye-
ment upon the old.


§ 4. But although I am compelled to differ thus far,
from the opinion of Mr. Tooke and of Mr. Fullarton, I con-
cur with them in thinking that these advantages, whatever
value may be put on them, are purchased by still greater dis-
advantages.

In the first place, a large extension of credit by bankers,
though most hurtful when, credit being already in an inflated
state, it can only serve to retard and aggravate the collapse,
is most salutary when the collapse has come, and when credit
instead of being in excess is in distressing deficiency, and
increased advances by bankers instead of being an addition
to the ordinary amount of floating credit, serve to replace a


* It would not be to the purpose to say, by way of objection, that the


obstacle may be evaded by granting the increased advance in book credits, ~


to be drawn against by cheques, without the aid of bank notes. This is
indeed possible, as Mr. Fullarton has remarked, and as I have myself said
ina former chapter. But this substitute for bank-note currency certainly
has not yet been organized ; and the law having clearly manifested its in-
tention that, in the case supposed, increased credits should not be granted,
it is yet a problem whether the law would not reach what might be regarded
as an evasion of its prohibitions, or whether deference to the law would not
produce (as it has hitherto done) on the part of banking establishments,
conformity to its spirit and purpose, as well as to its mere letter.


;


202 BOOK Ill. CHAPTER xxiv. § 4.


mass of other credit which has been suddenly destroyed.
Antecedently to 1844, if the Bank of England occasionally
aggravated the severity of a commercial revulsion by render-
ing the collapse of credit more tardy and thence more violent
than necessary, it in return rendered invaluable services during
the revulsion itself, by coming forward with advances to sup-
port solvent firms, at a time when all other paper and almost
all mercantile credit had become comparatively valueless.
This service was eminently conspicuous in the crisis of 1825-6,
the severest probably ever experienced; during which thes 3
Bank increased what is called its circulation by many millions, |
in advances to those mercantile firms of whose ultimate sol

vency it felt no doubt; advances which if it had been obliged

to withhold, the severity of the crisis would have been even

greater than it was. If the Bank, it is justly remarked by

Mr. Fullarton*, complies with such applications, “it THUSe

comply with them by an issue of notes, for notes constitute =
the only instrumentality through which the Bank is in the
practice of lending its credit. But those notes aré not
intended to circulate, nor do they circulate. There is no more
demand for circulation than there was before. On the con-
trary, the rapid decline of prices which the case in SUppoS!
tion presumes, would necessarily contract the demand for
circulation. The notes would either be returned to the Bank
of England, as fast as they were issued, in the shape of depo-
sits, or would be locked up in the drawers of the private
London bankers, or distributed by them to their correspon-
dents m the country, or intercepted by other capitalists, who,
during the fervour of the previous excitement, had contracted


liabilities which they might be imperfectly prepared on the
sudden to encounter.


In such emergencies, every man CoN
nected with business, who has been trading on other means
t=)


than his own, is placed on the defensive, and his whole object
is to make himself as strong as possible, an object which can-


- Zi ae. Se oe
SR RTT a gies


* PP. 106;


SS a


REGULATION OF CURRENCY. 203


not be more effectually answered than by keeping by him as
large areserve as possible in paper which the law has made a
legal tender. The notes themselves never find their way into
the produce markets; and if they at all contribute to retard”
(or, as I should rather say, to moderate) “the fall of prices,
it is not by promoting in the slightest degree the effective
demand for commodities, not by enabling consumers to buy
more largely for consumption, and so giving briskness to com-
merce, but by a process precisely the reverse, by enabling the
holders of commodities to hold on, by obstructing traffic and
repressing consumption.”

The opportune relief thus afforded to credit, during the
excessive contraction which succeeds to an undue expansion, is
consistent with the principle of the new system; for an extra-
ordinary contraction of credit, and fall of prices, inevitably
draw gold into the country, and the principle of the system
is that the bank-note currency shall be permitted, and even
compelled, to enlarge itself, in all cases in which a metallic
currency would do the same. But, what the principle of the
law would encourage, its provisions, in this instance preclude,
by not suffering the increased issues to take place until the
gold has actually arrived ; which is never until the worst part
of the crisis is past, and almost all the losses and failures
attendant on it are consummated. The machinery of the
System withholds, until for many purposes it comes too late,
the very medicine which the theory of the system prescribes
as the sovereign remedy.

This function of banks in filling up the gap made in
mercantile credit by the consequences of undue speculation
and its revulsion, is so entirely indispensable, that if the Act
of 1844 continues unrepealed, there can be no difficulty in
foreseeing that its provisions must be suspended as they were
in 1847, in every period of great commercial difficulty, as
Soon as the crisis has really and completely set in. Were
this all, there would be no absolute inconsistency in main-
taining the restriction as a means of preventing a crisis, and


204 BOOK III. CHAPTER XxIv. § 4.


relaxing it for the purpose of relieving one. But there is
another objection, of a still more radical and comprehensive
character, to the new system.

Professing, in theory, to require that a paper currency
shall yary in its amount in exact conformity to the variations
of a metallic currency, it provides in fact, that in every case
of an efflux of gold, a corresponding diminution shall take
place in the quantity of bank notes; in other words, that
every exportation of the precious metals shall be virtually
drawn from the circulation ; it being assumed that this would
be the case if the currency were wholly metallic. ‘This
theory, and these practical arrangements, are adapted to the
case in which the drain of gold originates in a rise of prices
produced by an undue expansion of currency or credit ; but
they are adapted to no case beside.

When the efflux of gold is the last stage of a series of effects
arising from an increase of the currency, or from an expan-
sion of credit tantamount in its effect on prices to an increase
of currency, it is in that case a fair assumption that ina
purely metallic system the gold exported would be drawn
from the currency itself; because such a drain, beg in its
nature unlimited, will necessarily continue as long as culTenty
and credit are undiminished. But an exportation of the pre-
cious metals often arises from no causes affecting currency 0
credit, but simply from an unusual extension of foreign Pay-
see arising either from the state of the markets for com-
modities, or from some circumstance not commercial. In
this class of causes, four, of powerful operation, are included,
of each of which the last fifty years of English history afford
Tepeated instances. The first is that Bee an extraordinary
Co int emi ser pli oa
The second is the ie e ae mete ee for
foreign investment : isk Vine i Bde a ee an
which partly Counined x Se toad pat ee oe the
American speculations whi h e ae 2 Loe

ch were the principal cause of the


REGULATION OF CURRENCY. 205


crisis of 1839. The third is a failure of crops in the coun-
tries which supply us with the raw material of important
manufactures; such as the cotton failure in America, which
compelled England in 1847 to incur unusual liabilities for the
purchase of that commodity at an advanced price. The
fourth is a bad harvest, and a great consequent importation
of food: of which the years 1846 and 1847 present an ex-
ample surpassing all antecedent experience.

In none of these cases, if the currency were metallic,
would the gold or silver exported for the purposes in question
be necessarily, or even probably, drawn from the circulation.
It would be drawn from the hoards, which under a metallic
currency always exist to a very large amount; in uncivilized
countries, in the hands of all who can afford it ; in civilized
countries, chiefly in the form of banker’s reserves. Mr.
Tooke, in his “ Inquiry into the Currency Principle,” bears
testimony to this fact; but it is to Mr. Fullarton that the
public are indebted for the clearest and most satisfactory
elucidation of it. As I am not aware that this part of the
theory of currency has been set forth by any other writer
with anything like the same degree of completeness, I shall
quote somewhat largely from this able production.

“No person who has ever resided in an Asiatic country,
where hoarding is carried on to a far larger extent in propor-
tion to the existing stock of wealth, and where the practice
has become much more deeply engrafted in the habits of the
people, by traditionary apprehensions of insecurity and the
difficulty of finding safe and remunerative investments, than
in any European community—no person who has had per-
sonal experience of this state of society, can be at a loss to
recollect innumerable instances of large metallic treasures
extracted in times of pecuniary difficulty from the coffers of
individuals by the temptation of a high rate of interest, and
brought in aid of the public necessities, nor, on the other
hand, of the facility with which those treasures have been
absorbed again, when the inducements which had drawn


206 BOOK Ill. CHAPTER Xxiv. $4.


them into light were no longer in operation. In countries
more advanced in civilization and wealth than the Asiatie
principalities, and where no man is in fear of attracting the
cupidity of power by an external display of riches, but
where the interchange of commodities is still almost univer
sally conducted through the medium of a metallic circulation,
as is the case with most of the commercial countries on the
Continent of Europe, the motives for amassing the precious
metals may be less powerful than in the majority of Asiatic
principalities; but the ability to accumulate being more
widely extended, the absolute quantity amassed will be found
probably to bear a considerably larger proportion to the
population*. In those states which lie exposed to hostile
invasion, or whose social condition is unsettled and menaec-
ing, the motive indeed must still be very strong; and ina
nation carrying on an extensive commerce, both foreign and
internal, without any considerable aid from any of the banking
substitutes for money, the reserves of gold and silver indis-
pensably required to secure the regularity of payments, must
of themselves engross a share of the circulating coin which
it would not be easy to estimate.

“Tn this country, where the banking system has been car-
ried to an extent and perfection unknown in any other part
of Europe, and may be said to have entirely superseded the
use of coin, except for retail dealings and the purposes of
foreign commerce, the incentives to private hoarding exist no
longer, and the hoards have all been transferred to the banks,
or rather, I should say, to the Bank of England. But in
France, where the bank-note circulation is still comparatively
limited, the quantity of gold and silver coin in existence!


: iain insu from unquestionable facts, that the hoards of money at all
pose existing in the hands of the French peasantry, often from @ remote
date, Surpass any amount which could have been memned possible ; and
even in so poor a country as Treland, it has of late Ben scertained, that
the small farmers sometimes possess hoard ca ;


visible means of subsistence, pac. aepzop ortioned 10 a


REGULATION OF CURRENCY. ~ 207


find now currently estimated, on what are described as the
latest authorities, at the enormous sum of 120 millions ster-
ling; nor is the estimate at all at variance with the reasonable
probabilities of the case. Of this vast treasure there is every
reason to presume that a very large proportion, probably
by much the greater part, is absorbed in the hoards. If you
present for payment a bill for a thousand francs to a French
banker, he brings you the silver in a sealed bag from his
strong room. And not the banker only, but every merchant
and trader, according to his means, is under the necessity of
keeping by him a stock of cash sufficient not only for his
ordinary disbursements, but to meet any unexpected de-
mands. That the quantity of specie accumulated in these
innumerable depdts, not in France only, but all over the
Continent, where banking institutions are still either entirely
wanting or very dmperfectly organized, is not merely im-
mense in itself, but admits of being largely drawn upon, and
transferred even in vast masses from one country to another,


with very little, if any, effect on prices, or other material de-


? among


rangements, we have had some remarkable proofs :?
others, “the signal success which attended the simultaneous
efforts of some of the principal European powers (Russia,
Austria, Prussia, Sweden, and Denmark) to replenish their
treasuries, and to replace with coin a considerable portion of
the depreciated paper which the necessities of the war had
forced upon them, and this at the very time when the ayail-
able stock of the previous metals over the world had been
reduced by the exertions of England to recover her metallic
currency. ... There can be no doubt that these combined
operations were on a scale of very extraordinary magnitude,
that they were accomplished without any sensible injury to
commerce or public prosperity, or any other effect than
some temporary derangement of the exchanges, and that the
private hoards of treasure accumulated throughout Europe
during the war must have been the principal source from
which all this gold and silver was collected. And no person,


208 BOOK Ill. CHAPTER Xxiv. § 4.


I think, can fairly contemplate the vast superflux of metallie
wealth thus proved to be at all times in existence, and,
though in a dormant and inert state, always ready to spring
into activity on the first indication of a sufficiently intense
demand, without feeling themselves compelled to admit the
possibility of the mines being even shut up for years to-
gether, and the production of the metals altogether sus-
pended, while there might be scarcely a perceptible alteration
in the exchangeable value of the metal *.””

Applying this to the currency doctrine and its advocates,
“one might imagine,” says Mr. Fullarton +, “ that they sup-
posed the gold which is drained off for exportation from a
country using a currency exclusively metallic, to be collected
by driblets at the fairs and markets, or from the tills of the
grocers and mercers. They never even allude to the exist-
ence of such a thing as a great hoard of the metals, though
upon the action of the hoards depends the whole economy of
international payments between specie-circulating communl
ties, while any operation of the money collected in hoards
upon prices must, even according to the currency hypothesis,
be wholly impossible. We know from experience what enor-
mous payments in gold and silver specie-circulating countries
are capable, at times, of making, without the least disturbance
of their internal prosperity; and whence it is supposed that
these payments come, but from their hoards? Let us think
how the money market of a country transacting all its ex-
changes through the medium of the precious metals only,
would be likely to be affected by the necessity of making a
foreign payment of several millions. Of course the necessity
could only be satisfied by a transmission of capital ; and
would not the competition for the possession of capital for
transmission which the occasion would call forth, necessarily
raise the market rate of interest? If the payment was to be


* Fullarton on the Regulation


of Currencies, pp. 71—4-
+ Ib., pp. 139—42. of Currencies, pp. 71


REGULATION OF CURRENCY. 209


made by the government, would not the government, in all
probability, have to open a new loan on terms more than
usually favourable to the lender>®” If made by merchants,
would it not be drawn either from the deposits in banks, or
from the reserves which merchants keep by them in default
of banks, or would it not oblige them to obtain the necessary
amount of specie by going into the money market as bor-
towers? “And would not all this inevitably act upon the
hoards, and draw forth into activity a portion of the gold
and silver which the money-dealers had been accumulating,
and some of them with the express view of watching such
opportunities for turning their treasures to advantage ?

“I would desire, indeed, no more convincing evidence of
the competency of the machinery of the hoards in specie-
paying countries to perform every necessary office of inter-
national adjustment, without any sensible aid from the general
circulation, than the facility with which France, when but
just recovering from the shock of a destructive foreign inva-
sion, completed within the space of twenty-seven months
the payment of her forced contribution of nearly twenty
millions to the allied powers, and a considerable proportion
of that sum in specie, without any perceptible contraction or
derangement of her domestic currency, or even any alarming
fluctuation of her exchanges.

“Or, to come to the present time [1844], the balance of
payments with nearly all Hurope has for about four years
past been in favour of this country, and gold has been pour-
Ing in till the influx amounts to the unheard-of sum of about
fourteen millions sterling. Yet in all this time, has any one
heard a complaint of any serious suffering inflicted on the
people of the Continent? Have prices there been greatly
depressed beyond their range im this country? Have wages
fallen, or have merchants been extensively ruined by the
universal depreciation of their stock? There has occurred
nothing of the kind. The tenor of commercial and monetary
affairs has been everywhere even and tranquil; and in France


VOL, Il. iS


210 BOOK Ill. CHAPTER xxiv. § 4.


“


an improving revenue and extended com


merce bear testimony to the continued progress of internal
prosperity. It may be doubted, indeed, if this great efflux
of gold has withdrawn from that portion of the metallic
wealth of the nation which really circulates, a single napoleon.
And it has been equally obvious, from the undisturbed state
of credit, that not only has the supply of specie indispen-
sable for the conduct of business in the retail market been
all the while uninterrupted, but that the hoards have con-
tinued to furnish every facility requisite for the regularity of
mercantile payments. It is of the very essence of the
metallic system, that the hoards, in all cases of probable
occurrence, should be equal to both objects; that they should,
in the first place, supply the bullion demanded for exporta-
tion, and in the next place, should keep up the bome circu:
lation to its legitimate complement. Every man trading
under that system, who, in the course of his business, ™4y
have frequent occasion to remit large sums in specie to foreign
countries, must either keep by bim a sufficient treasure of
his own, or must have the means of borrowing enough
from his neighbours, not only to make up when wanted
the amount of his remittances, but to enable him more-
Gversior Carns on his ordinary transactions at home without
interruption.”

pte i eee a credit is carried
Haein ® ) great BSenNe in a sing
ly RS ank of England, supplies the place, as
pate metals are concerned, of the multitudinous reserves
i ein The theoretical principle therefore ‘
the metal which ee EOL emacs e ei
be taken pach (: ahr me eee i ‘al
upon the ene a pe ee ones a
eae he coffers of the Bank of England,
y attempt to stop it either by a diminution of the
currency or by a contraction of el mn eran
there be any sae - credit: Nor to the a
= objection, unless the drain were


more particularly,


to so great an
le establish-
far as the


REGULATION OF CURRENCY. OVI


so great as to threaten the exhaustion of the reserve, and a
consequent stoppage of payments; a danger against which it
is easy to take adequate precautions, because in the cases
which we are considering, the drain is for foreign payments
of definite amount, and stops of itself as soon as these are
effected. And in all systems it is admitted that the habitual
teserve of the Bank should exceed the utmost amount to
which experience warrants the belief that such a drain may
extend; which extreme limit Mr. Fullarton affirms to be
seven millions, but Mr. Tooke recommends an average reserve
of ten.

The machinery, however, of the new system insists upon
bringing about by force, what its principle not only does not
Tequire, but positively condemns. Every drain for exporta-
tion, whatever may be its cause, and whether under a metallic
currency it would affect the circulation or not, is now com-
pulsorily drawn from that source alone. The bank-note cir-
culation, and the discounts or other advances of the Bank,
must be diminished by an amount equal to that of the metal
exported, though it be to the full extent of seven or ten
millions, And this, be it remembered, when there has been
no speculative rise of prices which it is indispensable to cor-
rect, no unusual extension of credit requiring contraction;
but the demand for gold is solely occasioned by foreign pay-
ments on account of government, or large corn importations
consequent on a bad harvest. ‘There is at least one object,
therefore,” says Mr. Fullarton*, “which would be effectually
accomplished by acting on this system. It would be per-
fectly calculated, I think, to ensure, that no derangement of
the exchange, or none at least subsisting in coincidence with
anything like pressure on the money market, should ever be
permitted to pass off, without one of those crises hitherto
fortunately of rare occurrence, but of which the results,
when they have occurred, have been so extensive and
deplorable.”


SER EY


212 BOOK 11J. CHAPTER xxiv. § 4.


Are not the events of 1847 a fulfilment of this prediction?
The crisis of that year was preceded by no inflation of credit,
no speculative rise of prices. The only speculations (the com
market excepted) were those in railway shares, which had no
tendency to derange the imports and exports of commodities,
or to send any gold out of the country, except the small
amount paid in instalments by shareholders in this country
to foreign railways. The drain of gold, great as it was,
originated solely in the bad harvest of 1846 and the potato
failure of that and the following year, and in the increased
price of raw cotton in America. There was nothing in these
circumstances which could require either a fall of general
prices or a contraction of credit. An unusual demand for
credit existed at the time, in consequence of the pressure of
railway calls, and this necessitated a rise of the rate of
interest. If the bullion in the Bank of England was sufi-
cient to bear the drain without exhaustion, where was the
necessity for adding to the distress and difficulty of the time,
by requiring all who wanted gold for’ exportation, either to
draw it from the deposits, that is, to subtract it from the
already insufficient loanable capital of the country, °? to
become themselves competitors for a portion of that ia-
dequate fund, thus still further raising the rate of in-
terest? The only necessity was created by the Act of
1844, which would not suffer the Bank to meet this extra
demand of credit by lending its notes, not even the notes
returned to it in exchange for gold. The crisis of 1847
was of that sort which the provisions of the Act had not
the smallest tendency to ayert; and when the crisis came
the mercantile difficulties were probably doubled by its
existence.
pe aD oe ee eae a .
cease of themselves, a sae i ee the Bank reserve until at
would not be ae a Ree ey ang ° a ;
limitation of issues were ee only postponed; since 1

resorted to for the purpose of


REGULATION OF CURRENCY. Dales


checking the drain in its commencement, the same or a still
greater limitation must take place afterwards, in order, by
acting on prices, to bring back so large a quantity of gold, for
the indispensable purpose of replenishing the Bank reserve.
But in this argument several things are overlooked. In the
first place the gold might be brought back, not by a fall of
prices, but by the much more rapid and convenient medium
of a rise of the rate of interest, involving no fall of any
prices except the prices of securities. Hither English secu-
ities would be bought on account of foreigners, or foreign
securities held in England would be sent abroad for sale,
both which operations took place largely during the mercan-
tile difficulties of 1847, and not only checked the efflux of
gold, but turned the tide and brought the metal back. It


was not, therefore, brought back by a contraction of the


currency, though in this case it certainly was so by a con-
traction of loans. But is even this always indispensable ?
For in the second place, it is not necessary that the gold
should return with the same suddenness with which it went
out. A great portion would probably return in the ordinary
Way of commerce, in payment for exported commodities.
The extra gains made by dealers and producers in foreign
countries through the extra payments they receive from this
country, are very likely to be partly expended in increased
purchases of English commodities, either for consumption or
on speculation, although the effect may not manifest itself with
sufficient rapidity to enable the transmission of gold to be
dispensed with in the first instance. These extra purchases
would turn the balance of payments in favour of the country,
and gradually restore a portion of the exported gold; and the
remainder would probably be brought back, not by a rise of
the rate of interest in England, but by the fall of it in foreign
countries, occasioned by the addition of some millions of
gold to the loanable capital of those countries. If it were
necessary to accelerate the process by an artificial action on
the rate et interest in England, a very moderate rise would


214 BOOK III. CHAPTER XXIV. § 5.


be sufficient, instead of the very great one which is the
consequence of allowing the whole demand for gold for
exportation to act suddenly and at once on the existing
resources of the loan market.

Thus stand, according to the best judgment I am able to
form, the advantages and disadvantages of the currency
system established by the Act of 1844: of which, as it
seems to me, the disadvantages greatly preponderate. I
am, however, far from thinking that on a subject at once so
intricate and so new, a subject which has only begun to be
understood through the controversies of the last few years,
experience and discussion have nothing further to disclose. I
give the foregoing opinions as the results to which I have
been guided by the lights that have hitherto fallen on the
subject; conscious that additional lights are almost sure to be
struck out when the knowledge of principles and of facts
necessary for the elucidation of the question becomes united
im a greater number of individuals.


ing a bank-note


§ 5. There remain two questions respect
of considerable


currency, which haye also been a subject a
discussion of late years: whether the privilege of providing
it should be confined to a single establishment, such as
the Bank of England, or a plurality of issuers should be
allowed; and in the latter case, whether any peculiar pre-
cautions are requisite or advisable, to protect the holders
of notes against losses occasioned by the insolvency of the
issuers.

The course of the preceding speculations has |
attach so much less of peculiar importance to bank
as compared with other forms of credit, than accords with
the notions generally current, that questions respecting the
regulation of so very small a part of the general mass
of credit, cannot appear to us of such momentous import
as they are sometimes considered. Bank notes, how-
ever, have so far a real peculiarity, that they a the


ed us to
notes,


REGULATION OF CURRENCY. 215


only form of credit sufficiently convenient for all the pur-
poses of circulation, to be able entirely to supersede the
use of metallic money for internal purposes. Although the
extension of the use of cheques has a tendency more and
more to diminish the number of bank notes, as it would that
of the sovereigns or other coins which would take their place
if they were abolished ; there is sure, for a long time to come,
to be a considerable supply of them, wherever the necessary
degree of commercial confidence exists, and their free use is
permitted. The exclusive privilege, therefore, of issuing them,
if reserved to the government or to some one body, is a source
of great pecuniary gain. That this gain should be obtained
for the nation at large is both practicable and desirable: and
if the management of a bank-note currency ought to be so
completely mechanical, so entirely a thing of fixed rule, as it
is made by the Act of 1844, there seems no reason why this
mechanism should be worked for the profit of any private
issuer, rather than for the public treasury. If, however, a
plan be preferred which leaves the variations in the amount
of issues in any degree whatever to the discretion of the
issuers, it is not desirable that to the ever growing attributions
of the government, so delicate a function should be super-
added; and that the attention of the heads of the state should
be diverted from larger objects, by their being besieged with
the applications, and made a mark for all the attacks, which
are never spared to those deemed to be responsible for any
acts, however minute, connected with the regulation of the
currency. It would be better that treasury notes, exchange-
able for gold on demand, should be issued to a fixed amount,
not exceeding the minimum of a bank note currency, the
remainder of the notes which may be required being left to
be supplied either by one or by a number of private banking
establishments. Or an establishment like the Bank of Eng-
land might supply the whole country, on condition of lending
fifteen or twenty millions of its notes to the government
without interest: which would give the same pecuniary


ML
i
hy
ty
I
fi
|
i
j
it
he te


Se


216 BOOK III. CHAPTER XXIv. § 6.


advantage to the state as if it issued that number of its own
notes.

The reason ordinarily alleged in condemnation of the
system of plurality of issuers which existed in England
before the Act of 1844, and under certain limitations still
subsists, is, that the competition of these different issuers
induces them to increase the amount of their notes to an
injurious extent. But we have seen that the power which
bankers have of augmenting their issues, and the degree of
mischief which they can produce by it, are quite trifling com-
pared with the current over-estimate. As remarked by Mr.
Fullarton*, the extraordinary increase of banking competi-
tion occasioned by the establishment of the joint-stock banks,
a competition often of the most reckless kind, has proved
utterly powerless to enlarge the aggregate mass of the bank-
note circulation; that aggregate circulation having, on the
contrary, actually decreased. In any case it appears desir-
able to maintain one great establishment like the Bank of
England, distinguished from other banks of issue in this, that
it alone is required to pay in gold, the others being at liberty
to pay their notes with notes of the central establishment.
The object of this is that there may be one body, responsible
for maintaining a reserve of the precious metals sufficient to
meet any drain that can reasonably be expected to take place.
By disseminating this responsibility among a number of
banks it is prevented from operating efficaciously upon any;
or if it be still enforced against one, the reserves of the
metals retained by all the others are capital kept idle in pure
waste, which may be dispensed with by allowing them at
their option to pay in Bank of England notes.


‘8 6. The question remains whether, in case of a plu-
rality of issuers, any peculiar precautions are needed to pro-
tect the holders of notes from the consequences of failure of


* Pp. 89—99,


apo CELT ie,


REGULATION OF CURRENCY. 217


payment. Before 1826, the insolvency of banks of issue was
a frequent and very serious evil, often spreading distress
through a whole neighbourhood, and at one blow depriving
provident industry of the results of long and painful saving.
This was one of the chief reasons which induced Parliament,
in that year, to prohibit the issue of bank notes of a denomi-
nation below five pounds, that the labouring classes at least
might be as little as possible exposed to participate in this
suffering. As an additional safeguard, it has been suggested
to give the holders of notes a priority over other creditors,
or to require bankers to deposit stock or other public securi-
ties as a pledge for the whole amount of their issues. The
insecurity, however, of the former bank-note currency of
England was altogether the work of the law, which, in order
to give a qualified monopoly of banking business to the Bank
of England, had actually made the formation of safe banking
establishments a punishable offence, by prohibiting the exist-
ence of any banks, in town or country, whether of issue or
deposit, with a number of partners exceeding six. This truly
characteristic specimen of the old system of monopoly and
restriction, was done away with in 1826, both as to issues and
deposits, everywhere but in a district of sixty five miles
radius round London, and in 1833 in that district also, as far
as relates to deposits. The numerous joint-stock banks since
established, have, by furnishing a more trustworthy currency,
made it almost impossible for any private banker to maintain
his circulation, unless his capital and character inspire the
most complete confidence. And although there has been in
some instances very gross mismanagement by joint-stock
banks (less, however, in the department of issues than in
that of deposits) the failure of these hanks is extremely rare,
and the cases still rarer in which loss has ultimately been
sustained by any one except the shareholders. The banking
system of England is now almost as secure to the public, as
that of Scotland (where banking was always free) has been
for two centuries past ; and the legislature might without any


218 BOOK III], CHAPTER xxIv. § 6.


bad consequences, at least of this kind, revoke its interdict
(which was never extended to Scotland) against one and two
pound notes. I cannot therefore think it at all necessary, or
that it would be anything but vexatious meddling, to enforce
any kind of special security in favour of the holders of notes.
The true protection to creditors of all kinds is a good law of
insolvency (a part of the law at present shamefully deficient),
and, in the case of joint-stock companies at least, complete
publicity of their accounts: the publicity now very properly
given to their issues, being a very small portion of what the
state has a right to require in return for their being allowed
to constitute themselves, and be recognized by the law, as a
collective body.


CHAPTER XXV.


OF THE COMPETITION OF DIFFERENT COUNTRIES IN
THE SAME MARKET.


§1. In the phraseology of the Mercantile System, the
language and doctrines of which are still the basis of what
may be called the political economy of the selling classes, as
distinguished from the buyers or consumers, there is no word
of more frequent recurrence or more perilous import than
the word underselling. 'To undersell other countries—not to
be undersold by other countries—were spoken of, and are
still very often spoken of, almost as if they were the sole
purposes for which production and commodities exist. The
feelings of rival tradesmen, prevailing among nations, over-
ruled for centuries all sense of the general community of
advantage which commercial countries derive from the pros-
perity of one another: and that commercial spirit, which is
now one of the strongest obstacles to wars, was during a
certain period of Kuropean history their principal cause.

Kyen in the more enlightened view now attainable of the
nature and consequences of international commerce, some,
though a comparatively small, space must still be made for
the fact of commercial rivality. Nations may, like mdividual
dealers, be competitors, with opposite interests, in the markets
of some commodities, while in others they are in the more
fortunate relation of reciprocal customers. The benefit of
commerce does not consist, as it was once thought to do, in
the commodities sold; but, since the commodities solid are
the means of obtaining those which are bought, a nation
would be cut off from the real advantage of commerce,


the imports, if it could not induce other nations to take
p)


220 BOOK III. CHAPTER xxv. $l.


any of its commodities in exchange; and in proportion as
the competition of other countries compels it to offer its
commodities on cheaper terms, on pain of not selling them
at all, the imports which it obtains by its foreign trade are
procured at greater cost. aaa

These points have been adequately, though incidentally,
illustrated in some of the preceding chapters. But the great
space which the topic has filled, and continues to fill,
economical speculations, and in the practical anxieties both
of politicians and of dealers and manufacturers, makes it desi-
rable, before quitting the subject of international ae
to subjoin a few observations on the things which do, an
on those which do not, enable countries to undersell one
another. .

One country can only undersell another in a given
market, to the extent of entirely expelling her from 1, on
two conditions. In the first place, she must have a greater
advantage than the second country in the production of the
article exported by both ; meaning by a greater me
(as has been already so fully explained) not absolutely, i
in comparison with other commodities: and in the secon
place, such must be her relation with the customer ae
in respect to the demand for each other’s products, and suc
the consequent state of international values, as to give away
to the customer country more than the whole advantage
possessed by the rival country; otherwise the rival will still
be able to hold her ground in the market.

Let us revert to the imaginary hypothesis which we have
found so convenient, that of a trade between England and Ger-
many in cloth and linen; England being capable of producing
10 yards of cloth at the same cost with 15 yards of nen,
Germany at the same cost with 20, and the two commodities
being exchanged between the two countries (cost of cartage
apart) at some intermediate rate, say 10 for 17. Germany
could not be permanently undersold in the English market,
and expelled from it, unless by a country which offered not


COMPETITION OF COUNTRIES IN THE SAME MARKET. 221


merely more than 17, but more than 20 yards of linen for
10 of cloth. Short of that, the competition would only
oblige Germany to pay dearer for cloth, but would not dis-
able her from exporting linen. The country, therefore, which
could undersell Germany, must, in the first place, be able to
produce linen at less cost, compared with cloth, than Ger-
many herself; and in the next place, must have such a
demand for cloth, or other English commodities, as would
compel her, even when she became sole occupant of the
market, to give a greater advantage to England than Ger-
many could give by resigning the whole of hers; to give, for
example, 21 yards for 10. For if not—if, for example, the
equation of international demand, after Germany was ex-
cluded, gave a ratio of 18 for 10, Germany could again enter
into the competition ; Germany would be now the underselling
nation; and there would be a point, perhaps 19 for 10, at
which both countries would be able to maintain their ground,
and to sell in England enough linen to pay for the cloth, or
other English commodities, for which, on these newly adjusted
terms of interchange, they had a demand. In like manner
England, as an exporter of cloth, could only be driven from
the German market by some rival whose superior advantages
in the production of cloth enabled her, and the intensity of
Whose demand for German produce compelled her, to offer
10 yards of cloth, not merely for less than 17 yards of linen,
but for less than 15. In that case, England could no longer
carry on the trade without loss; but in any case short of this,
she would merely be obliged to give to Germany more cloth
for less linen than she had previously given.

It thus appears that the alarm of being permanently
undersold may be taken much too easily; may be taken
when the thing really to be anticipated is not the loss of the
trade, but the minor inconvenience of carrying it on at a
diminished advantage; an inconvenience chiefly falling on
the consumers of foreign commodities, and not on the pro-
ducers or sellers of the exported article. It is no sufficient


: ’
’ f
Ki
7
i
ee Be a
tea, ft E
fae 4 F


nik
ie Fist as + at


999 BOOK Ill. CHAPTER xxv. §$ 2.


ground of apprehension to the English producers, to find
that some other country can sell cloth in foreign markets at
some particular time, a trifle cheaper than they can them-
selves afford to do in the existing state of prices in England.
Suppose them to be temporarily undersold, and their exports
diminished: the imports will exceed the exports, there will


be a new distribution of the precious metals, prices will fall,


and as all the money expenses of the English producers will
be diminished, they will be able (if the case falls short of that
stated in the preceding paragraph) again to compete with
their rivals. The loss which England will incur, will not
fall upon the exporters, but upon those who consume im-
ported commodities; who, with money incomes reduced in
amount, will have to pay the same or even an increased price
for all things produced in foreign countries.


§ 2. Such, I conceive, is the true theory, or rationale, of
underselling. It will be observed that it takes no account of
some things which we hear spoken of, oftener perhaps than
any others, in the character of causes exposing a country to
be undersold.

According to the preceding doctrine, a country cannot be
undersold in any commodity, unless the rival country has a
stronger inducement than itself for devoting its labour and
capital to the production of the commodity ; arising from the
fact that by doing so it occasions a greater saving of labour
and capital, to be shared between itself and its customers—a
greater increase of the aggregate produce of the world. The
underselling, therefore, though a loss to the undersold country,
is an advantage to the world at large; the substituted com-
merce being one which economizes more of the labour and
capital of mankind, and adds more to their collective wealth,
than the commerce superseded by it. The advantage, of
course, consists in being able to produce the commodity of
better quality, or with less labour (compared with other
things,) or perhaps not with less labour, but in less times with


COMPETITION OF COUNTRIRS IN THE SAME MARKET. 223


a less prolonged detention of the capital employed. This
may arise from greater natural advantages (such as soil,
climate, richness of mines); superior capability, either natural
or acquired, in the labourers; better division of labour, and
better tools, or machinery. But there is no place left in this
theory for the case of lower wages. This, however, in the
theories commonly current, is a favourite cause of under-
selling. We continually hear of the disadvantage under
which the British producer labours, both in foreign markets
and even in his own, through the lower wages paid by his
foreign rivals. These lower wages, we are told, enable, or are
always on the point of enabling them to sell at lower prices,
and to dislodge the English manufacturer from all markets in
which he is not artificially protected.

Before examining this opinion on grounds of principle,
it is worth while to bestow a moment’s consideration upon
it as a question of fact. Is it true, that the wages of
manufacturing labour are lower in foreign countries than in
England, in any sense in which low wages are an advantage
to the capitalist? The artisan of Ghent or Lyons may earn
less wages in a day, but does he not do less work? Degrees
of efficiency considered, does his labour cost less to his
employer? ‘Though wages may be lower on the Continent,
is not the Cost of Labour, which is the real element in the
competition, very nearly the same? That it is so, seems the
opinion of competent judges, and is confirmed by the very
little difference in the rate of profit between England and
the Continental countries. But if so, the opinion is absurd
that English producers can be undersold by their Continental
rivals from this cause. It is only in America that the sup-
position is primd facie admissible. In America wages are
much higher than in England, if we mean by wages the
daily earnings of a labourer: but the productive power of
American labour is so great—its efficiency, combined with
the favourable circumstances in which it is exerted, makes it
worth so much to the purchaser, that the Cost of Labour is


224 BOOK III. CHAPTER xxv. § 3.


lower in America than in England; as is proved by the
fact that the general rate of profits and of interest is very
much higher.


§ 3. But is it true that low wages, even in the sense of
low Cost of Labour, enable a country to sell cheaper in the
foreign market? I of course mean, low wages which are
common to the whole productive industry of the country.

If wages, in any of the departments of industry which
supply exports, are kept, artificially, or by some accidental
cause, below the general rate of wages in the country, this is
a real advantage in the foreign market. It lessens the com-
parative cost of production of those articles, in relation to
others; and has the same effect as if their production
required so much less labour. Take, for instance, the case
of the United States in respect to certain commodities. In
that country, tobacco and cotton, two great articles of export,
are produced by slave labour, while food, and manufactures
generally, are produced by free labourers, who either work on
their own account or are paid by wages. In spite of the
inferior efficiency of slave labour, there can be no reasonable
doubt that in a country where the wages of free labour are so
high, the work executed by slaves is a better bargain to the
capitalist. To whatever extent it is so, this smaller cost of
labour, being not general, but limited to those employments,
is just as much a cause of cheapness in the products, both in
the home and in the foreign market, as if they had been
made by a less quantity of labour. If the slaves in the
Southern States were emancipated, and their wages rose to
the general level of the earnings of free labour in America,
she might be obliged to erase some of the slaye-grown articles
from the catalogue of her exports, and would certainly be
unable to sell any of them in the foreign market at the
present price. Their cheapness is partly an artificial cheap-
ness, which may be compared to that produced by a bounty


on production or on exportation: or, considering the means


COMPETITION OF COUNTRIES IN THE SAME MARKET. 225


by which it is obtained, an apter comparison would be with
the cheapness of stolen goods.

An advantage of a similar economical, though of a very
different moral character, is that possessed by domestic manu-
factures ; fabrics produced in the leisure hours of families
partially occupied in other pursuits, who, not depending for
subsistence on the produce of the manufacture, can afford to
sell it at any price, however low, for which they think it
worth while to take the trouble of producing. In an account
of the Canton of Zurich, to which I have had occasion to refer
on another subject, it is observed,* “The workman of Zurich
is to-day a manufacturer, to-morrow again an agriculturist, and
changes his occupation with the seasons, in a continual round.
Manufacturing industry and tillage advance hand in hand, in
inseparable alliance, and in this union of the tw
the secret may be found, why the simple and un
manufacturer can always go on competing,


© Occupations
learned Swiss


and increasing
in prosperity, in the face of those extensive establishments
fitted out with great economic, and (


what is still more impor-
tant) intellectual, resources.


Even in those parts of the
Canton where manufactures have extended themselves the
most widely, only one-seventh of all the families belong to
manufactures alone ; four-sevenths combine that employment
with agriculture. The advantage of this domestic or family
manufacture consists chiefly in the fact, that it is compatible
with all other avocations, or rather that it may in part be
tegarded as only a supplementary employment. In winter,
in the dwellings of the operatives, the whole family employ
themselves in it; but as soon as spring appears, those on
whom the early field labours devolye, abandon the in-door
work; many a shuttle stands still: by degrees, as the field-work
increases, one member of the family follows another, till at
last, at the harvest, and during the so-called ‘great works, all


hands seize the implements of husbandry: but in unfavour-
* Historisch-geographisch-statistisches Gemdlde der Schweiz. Erstes Heft.
1834. p. 105.
VOL. It. Q


226 BOOK Ill. CHAPTER xxv. § 4.


able weather, and in all otherwise vacant hours, the work in
the cottage is resumed, and when the ungenial season again
recurs, the people return in the same gradual order to their
home occupation, until they have all resumed it.”

In the case of these domestic manufactures, the compara-
on which the interchange between


tive cost of production,
in proportion to the


countries depends, is much lower than
quantity of labour employed. The workpeople, looking to
the earnings of their loom for a part only, if for any part, of
their actual maintenance, can afford to work for a less remu-
neration than the lowest rate of wages which can exist in the
employments by which the labourer has to support the whole
expense of a family. Working, as they do, not for an em-
ployer but for themselves, they may be said to carry on the
manufacture at no cost at all, except the small expense of a
loom and of the material: and the limit of possible cheap:
ness is not the necessity of living by their trade, but that of
earning enough by the work, to make that social employment
of their leisure hours not disagreeable.


§ 4. These two cases, of slave labour and of domestic
manufactures, exemplify the conditions under which low
wages enable a country to sell its commodities cheaper i
foreign markets, and consequently to undersell its rivals, or
to avoid being undersold by them. But no such advantage
is conferred by low wages when common to all branches of
industry. General low wages never caused any country to
undersell its rivals, nor did general high wages ever hinder it
from doing so.

To demonstrate this, we must return to an ele
principle which was discussed in a former chapter*- General
low wages do not cause low prices, nor high wages high
prices, within the country itself. General prices are not raised
by a rise of wages, any more than they would be raised by an
increase of the quantity of labour required in all production.


mentary


a ae
Supra, book iii, ch. iy.


Y


COMPETITION OF COUNTRIES IN THE SAME MARKET, 997


Expenses which affect all commodities equally, have no
influence on prices. If the maker of broadcloth or cutlery,
and nobody else, had to pay higher wages, the price of his
commodity would rise, just as it would if he had to employ
more labour ; because otherwise he would gain less profit than
other producers, and nobody would engage in the employ-
ment. But if everybody has to pay higher wages, or every-
body to employ more labour, the loss must be submitted to;
asit affects everybody alike, no one can hope to get rid of it
by a change of employment, each therefore resigns himself
to a diminution of profits, and prices remain as they were.
In like manner, general low wages, or a general increase in
the productiveness of labour, does not make prices low, but
profits high. If wages fall, (meaning here by wages the cost
of labour) why, on that account, should the producer lower
his price? He will be forced, it may be said, by the compe-
tition of other capitalists who will crowd into his employ-
ment. But other capitalists are also paying lower wages, and
by entering into competition with him they would gain
nothing but what they are gaining already. The rate then at
which labour is paid, as well as the quantity of it which is
employed, affects neither the value nor the price of the com-


- modity produced, except in so far as it is peculiar to that com-


modity, and not common to commodities generally.

Since low wages are not a cause of low prices in the
country itself, so neither do they cause it to offer its commo-
dities in foreign markets at a lower price. It is quite true
that if the cost of labour is lower in America than in Eng-
land, America could sell her cottons to Cuba at a lower price
than England, and still gain as high a profit as the English
manufacturer. But it is not with the profit of the English
manufacturer that the American cotton spinner will make his
comparison ; it is with the profits of other American capita-
lists. These enjoy, in common with himself, the benefit of a
low cost of labour, and have accordingly a high rate of profit.
This high profit the cotton spmner must also nae: he will

QZ


298 BOOK Ill. CHAPTER xxv. § 5.


not content himself with the English profit. It is true he
may go on for a time at that lower rate, rather than change
his employment’; and a trade may be carried on, sometimes
for a long period, at-a much lower profit than that for which
it would have been originally engaged in. Countries which
have a low cost of labour, and high profits, do not for that
reason undersell others, but they do oppose a more obstinate
resistance to being undersold, because the producers can
often submit to a diminution of profit without being unable
to live, and even to thrive, by their business. But that is all
which their advantage does for them ; and in this resistance
they will not long persevere, when a change of times which
may give them equal profits with the rest of their country-
men has become manifestly hopeless.


§ 5. There is a class of trading and exporting commu:
nities, on which a few words of explanation seem to be


required, These are hardly to be looked upon as countries,


th other countries,
or manufacturing
Our West


ountries,


carrying on an exchange of commodities wl
but more properly as outlying agricultural
establishments belonging to a larger community.
India colonies, for example, cannot be regarded as ¢
with a productive capital of their own. If Manchester,
instead of being where it is, were on a rock in the North
Sea (its present industry nevertheless continuing,) it would
still be but a town of England, not a country trading with
England: it would be merely, as now, the place where England
finds it convenient to carry on her cotton manufacture. The
West Indies, in like manner, are the place where England
finds it convenient to carry on the production of suga, coffee,
and a few other tropical commodities. All the capital em-
ployed is English capital ; almost all the industry is carried
on for English uses; there is little production of anything
except the staple commodities, and these are sent to England,
not to be exchanged for things exported to the colony and
consumed by its inhabitants, but to be sold in England for


COMPETITION OF COUNTRIES IN THE SAME MARKET. 229


the benefit of the proprietors there. The trade with the
West Indies is therefore hardly to be considered as external
trade, but more resembles the traffic between town and coun-
try, and is amenable to the principles of the home trade.
The rate of profit in the colonies will be regulated by English
profits: the expectation of profit must be about the same as
in England, with the addition of compensation for the disad-
vantages attending the more distant and hazardous employ-
ment: and after allowance is made for those disadvantages,
the value and price of West India produce in the English
market must be regulated, (or rather must have been regu-
lated formerly,) like that of any English commodity, by the
cost of production. For the last ten or twelve years this
principle has been in abeyance: the price was first kept up
beyond the ratio of the cost of production by deficient sup-
ples, which could not, owing to deficiency of labour, be
increased ; and more recently the admission of foreign com-
petition has introduced another element, and the West Indies
are undersold, not so much because wages are higher than in
Cuba and Brazil, as because they are higher than in England:
for were they not so, Jamaica could sell her sugars at Cuban
prices, and still obtain, though not a Cuban, an English rate
of profit.

It is worth while also to notice another class of small, but
in this case mostly independent communities, which have
supported and enriched themselves almost without any pro-
ductions of their own, (except ships and marine equipments,)
by a mere carrying trade, and commerce of entrepot; by
buying the produce of one country, to sell it at a profit in
another. Such were Venice, and the Hanse Towns. The
case of these communities is very simple. They made them-
selves and their capital the instruments, not of production,
but of accomplishing exchanges between the productions of
other countries. ‘These exchanges were attended with an
advantage to those countries—an increase of the aggregate
returns to imdustry—part of which went to indemnify the


230 BOOK III, CHAPTER XXv. § 5.


2


agents, for the necessary expenses of transport, and another
part to remunerate the use of their capital and mercantile
skill. The countries themselves had not capital disposable
for the operation. When the Venetians became the agents
of the general commerce of Southern Europe, they had
scarcely any competitors: the thing would not have been
done at all without them, and there was really no limit
to their profits except the limit to what the ignorant feudal
nobility would give for the unknown luxuries then first pre-
sented to their sight. At a later period competition arose, and
the profit of this operation, like that of others, became
amenable to natural laws. The carrying trade was taken up
by Holland, a country with productions of its own anda
large accumulated capital. The other nations of Europe also
had now capital to spare, and were capable of conducting
their foreign trade for themselves: but Holland, having, from
a variety of circumstances, a lower rate of profit at home,
could afford to carry for other countries at a smaller advance
on the original cost of the goods, than would have been
required by their own capitalists; and Holland, therefore,
engrossed the greatest part of the carrying trade of all those
countries which did not keep it to themselves by Navigation
Laws, constructed, like those of England, for the express
purpose.


CHAPTER XXVI.


OF DISTRIBUTION, AS AFFECTED BY EXCHANGE.


§1. We have now completed, as far as is compatible
with the purposes and limits of this treatise, the exposition
of the machinery through which the produce of a country is
apportioned among the different classes of its inhabitants;
which is no other than the machinery of Exchange, and has
for the exponents of its operation, the laws of Value and of
Price. We shall now avail ourselves of the light thus
acquired, to cast a retrospective glance at the subject of
Distribution. The division of the produce among the three
classes, Labourers, Capitalists, and Landlords, when con-
sidered without any reference to Exchange, appeared to
depend on certain general laws. It is fit that we should now
consider whether these same laws still operate, when the
distribution takes place through the complex mechanism of
exchange and money; or whether the properties of the
mechanism interfere with and modify the presiding prin-
ciples.

The primary division of the produce of human exertion
and frugality is, as we have seen, into three shares, wages,
profits, and rent; and these shares are portioned out to the
persons entitled to them, in the form of money, and by a
process of exchange; or rather, the capitalist, with whom
in the usual arrangements of society the produce remains,
pays in money, to the other two sharers, the market value of
their labour and land. If we examine, on what the pecu-
niary value of labour, and the pecuniary value of the use of
lard, depend, we shall find that it is on the very same causes
by which we found that wages and rent would be reculated
if there were no money and no exchange of commodities.


232 BOOK III. CHAPTER xxvi. $1.


It is evident, in the first place, that the law of Wages is
not affected by the existence or non-existence of Exchange
or Money. Wages depend on the ratio between population
and capital; and would do so if all the capital in the world
were the property of one association, or if the capitalists
among whom it is shared maintained each an establishment
for the production of every article consumed in the com-
munity, exchange of commodities having no existence. AAs
the ratio between capital and population, everywhere but in
new colonies, depends on the strength of the checks by which
the too rapid increase of population is restrained, it may be
said, popularly speaking, that wages depend on the checks to
population; that when the check is not death, by starvation
or disease, wages depend on the prudence of the labouring
people; and that wages in any country are habitually at the
lowest rate, to which in that country the labourers will suffer
them to be depressed rather than put a restraint upon mul-
tiplication.

What is here meant, however, by wages, is the Jabourer’s
real scale of comfort; the quantity he obtains of the things
which nature or habit has made necessary or agreeable to
him: wages in the sense in which they are of importance to
the receiver. In the sense in which they are of importance
to the payer, they do not depend exclusively on such simple
principles. Wages in the first sense, the wages on which
the labourer’s comfort depends, we shall call real wages, oF
wages in kind. Wages in the second sense, we ™may be
permitted to call, for the present, money wages; assuming, as
it is allowable to do, that money remains for the time an
invariable standard, no alteration taking place in the con-
ditions under which the circulating medium itself is produced
or obtained. If money itself undergoes no variation in Cost,
the money price of labour is an exact measure of the Cost of
Labour, and may be made use of as a convenient symbol to
express it.


The money wages of labour are a compound result of two


DISTRIBUTION AS AFFECTED BY EXCHANGE. 233


elements: first, real wages, or wages in kind, or in other
words, the quantity which the labourer obtains of the ordinary
articles of consumption ; and secondly, the money prices of
those articles. In all old countries—all countries in which
the increase of population is in any degree checked by the
difficulty of obtaining subsistence—the habitual money price
of labour is that which will just enable the labourers, one
with another, to purchase the commodities without which
they will not consent to continue the race. Their standard
of comfort being given, (and by the standard of comfort in a
labouring class, is meant that, rather than forego which, they
will abstain from multiplication) money wages depend on
the money price, and therefore on the cost of production, of
the various articles which the labourers habitually consume:
because if their wages cannot procure them a given quantity
of these, their increase will slacken and their wages rise. Of
these articles, food and other agricultural produce are so
much the principal, as to leave little influence to anything
else.

It is at this point that we are enabled to invoke the aid
of the principles which have been laid down in this Third
Part. The cost of production of food and agricultural pro-
duce has been analyzed in a preceding chapter. It depends
on the productiveness of the least fertile land, or of the least
productively employed portion of capital, which the neces-
Sities of society have as yet put in requisition for agricultural
purposes. The cost of production of the food grown in
these least advantageous circumstances, determines, as we
have seen, the exchange value and money price of the whole.
In any given state, therefore, of the labourer’s habits, his
money wages depend on the productiveness of the least fertile
land, or least productive agricultural capital; on the point
which cultivation has reached in its downward progress—in
its encroachments on the barren lands, and its gradually
increased strain upon the powers of the more fertile. Now,
the force which urges on cultivation in this downward course,


234 BOOK Ill. CHAPTER XXvi. § 2.


is the increase of people; while the counter-force which
checks the descent, is the improvement of agricultural science
and practice, enabling the same soil to yield to the same
labour more ample returns. The costliness of the most
costly part of the produce of cultivation, is an exact expres-
sion of the state, at any given moment, of the race which
population and agricultural skill are always running against
each other.


§ 2. It is well said by Dr. Chalmers, that many of the
most important lessons in political economy are to be learnt
at the extreme margin of cultivation, the last point which
the culture of the soil has reached in its contest with the
spontaneous agencies of nature. The degree of productive-
ness of this extreme margin, is an index to the existing state
of the distribution of the produce among the three classes, ot
labourers, capitalists, and landlords. é

When the demand of an increasing population for more
food cannot be satisfied without extending cultivation to less
fertile land, or incurring additional outlay, with a less pro-
portional return, on land already in cultivation, it is a neces-
sary condition of this increase of agricultural produce, that
the value and price of that produce must first rise- But as
soon as the price has risen sufficiently to give to the addi-
tional outlay of capital the ordinary profit, the rise will not
go on still further for the purpose of enabling the new land,
or the new expenditure on old land, to yield rent as well as
profit. The land or capital last put in requisition, and occu-
pying what Dr. Chalmers calls the margin of cultivation,
will yield, and continue to yield, no rent. But if this yields
no rent, the rent afforded by all other land or agricultural
capital will be exactly so much as it produces more than this,
The price of food will always on the average be such, that
the worst land, and the least productive instalment of the
capital employed on the better lands, shall just replace the
expenses with the ordinary profit. If the least favoured


DISTRIBUTION AS AFFECTED BY EXCHANGE. 235


land and capital just do thus much, all other land and capital
will yield an extra profit, equal to the proceeds of the extra
produce due to their superior productiveness; and this extra
profit becomes, by competition, the prize of the landlords.
Exchange, and money, therefore, make no difference in the
law of rent; it is the same as we originally found it. Rent
is the extra return made to agricultural capital when em-
ployed with peculiar advantages; the exact equivalent of
what those advantages enable the producers to economize in
the cost of production: the value and price of the produce
beg regulated by the cost of production to those producers
who haye no advantages; by the return to that portion of
agricultural capital, the circumstances of which are the least
favourable.


§ 3. Wages,and Rent, being thus regulated by the same
principles when paid in money, as they would be if appor-
tioned in kind, it follows that Profits are so likewise. For
the surplus, after replacing wages and paying rent, con-
stitutes Profits.

We found in the last chapter of the Second Book, that
the advances of the capitalist, when analyzed to their ultimate
elements, consist either in the purchase or maintenance of
labour, or in the profits of former capitalists; and that there-
fore “profits, in the last resort, depend upon the Cost of
Labour, falling as that rises, and rising as it falls. Let us
endeavour to trace more minutely the operation of this law.

There are two modes in which the Cost of Labour, which
is correctly represented (money being supposed invariable)
by the money wages of the labourer, may be increased. The
labourer may obtain greater comforts ; wages in kind—real
wages—may rise. Or the progress of population may force
down cultivation to inferior soils, and more costly processes ;
thus raising the cost of production, the value, and the price,


of the chief articles of the labourer’s consumption. On


either of these suppositions, the rate of profit will fall.


936 BOOK Ill. CHAPTER XXVI. $ 3.


If the labourer obtains more abundant commodities, only
by reason of their greater cheapness; if he obtains a greater
quantity, but not on the whole a greater cost ; his real wages
will be increased, but not his money wages, and there will be
nothing to affect the rate of profit. But if he obtams a
greater quantity of commodities of which the cost of pro-
duction is not lowered, he obtains a greater cost; his money
wages are higher. The expense of these increased money
wages falls wholly on the capitalist. There are no conceivable
means by which he can shake it off. It may be said—tt used
formerly to be said—that he will get rid of it by raising his
price. But this opinion we have already, and more than
once, fully refuted*.

The doctrine, indeed, that a rise of wages causes an ¢qu-
valent rise of prices, is, as we formerly observed, self-contra-
dictory: for if it did so, it would not be a rise of wages} the
labourer would get no more of any commodity than he had
before, let his money wages rise ever so much: a rise of real
wages would be an impossibility. This being equally con-
trary to reason and to fact, it is evident that a rise of money
wages does not raise prices; that high wages are not a cause
of high prices. A rise of general wages falls on profits
There is no possible alternative.

Having disposed of the case in which the increase of
money wages, and of the Cost of Labour, arises from the
labourer’s obtaining more ample wages in kind, let us now
suppose it to arise from the increased cost of production of
the things which he consumes ; owing to an increase of popu:
lation, unaccompanied by an equivalent increase of agricul-
tural skill. The augmented supply required by the popula-
tion would not be obtained, unless the price of food rose
sufficiently to remunerate the farmer for the increased ¢os
of production. The farmer, however, in this case sustains a
twofold disadvantage. He has to carry on his cultivation

ee ENO e ie) 6).
* Supra, vol, i. p. 543, and vol. ii, p- 226.


DISTRIBUTION AS AFFECTED BY EXCHANGE, 7


under less favourable conditions of productiveness than
before. For this, as it isa disadvantage belonging to him
only as a farmer, and not shared by other employers, he will,
on the general principles of value, be compensated by a rise
of the price of his commodity: indeed, until this rise has
taken place, he will not bring to market the required increase
of produce. But this very rise of price involves him in
another necessity, for which he is not compensated. He
must pay higher money wages to his labourers. This neces-
sity, being common to him with all other capitalists, forms
no ground for a rise of price. The price will rise, until it has
placed him in as good a situation in respect of profits, as
other employers of labour: it will rise so as to indemnify
him for the increased labour which he must now employ in
order to produce a given quantity of food: but the increased
wages of that labour are a burthen common to all, and for
which no one can be indemnified. It will be paid wholly
from Profits.

Thus we see that increased wages, when common to all
descriptions of productive labourers, and when really repre-
senting a greater Cost of Labour, are always and necessarily
at the expense of profits. And by reversing the cases, we
should find in like manner that diminished wages, when
representing a really diminished Cost of Labour, are equiva-
lent to a rise of profits. But the opposition of pecuniary
interest thus indicated between the class of capitalists and
that of labourers, is toa great extent only apparent. Real
Wages are a very different thing from the Cost of Labour, and
are generally highest at the times and places where, from the
easy terms on which the land yields all the produce as yet
required from it, the value and price of food being low, the
cost of labour to the employer, notwithstanding its ample
remuneration, is comparatively cheap, and the rate of profit
consequently high; as at present in the United States. We
thus obtain a full confirmation of our original theorem that
Frofits depend on the Cost of Labour: or, to express the


238 BOOK Ill. CHAPTER xxvi. 9$ 3.


meaning with still greater accuracy, the rate of profit and the
cost of labour vary inversely as one another, and are joint
effects of the same agencies or causes.

But does not this proposition require to be slightly modi-
fied, by making allowance for that portion (though compara-
tively small) of the expenses of the capitalist, which does not
consist in wages paid by himself or reimbursed to previous
capitalists, but in the profits of those previous capitalists?
Suppose, for example, an invention in the manufacture of
leather, the advantage of which should consist in rendering it
unnecessary that the hides should remain for so greata length
of time in the tan-pit. Shoemakers, saddlers, and other
workers in leather, would save a part of that portion of the
cost of their material which consists of the tanner’s profits
during the time his capital is locked up; and this saving, it
may be ‘said, is a source from which they might derive an
increase of profit, though wages and the Cost of Labour
remained exactly thesame. Inthe case here supposed, how-
ever, the consumer alone would benefit, since the prices of
shoes, harness, and all other articles into which leather enters
would fall, until the profits of the producers were reduced to
the general level. To obviate this objection, let us suppose
that a similar saving of expenses takes place in all depart-
ments of production at once. In that case, since values and
prices would not be affected, profits would probably be
raised ; but if we look more closely into the case we shall
find, that it is because the cost of labour would be lowered.
In this as in any other case of increase in the general
productiveness of labour, if the labourer obtained only the
same real wages, profits would be raised: but the same real
wages would imply a smaller Cost of Labour; the cost of
production of all things having been, by the supposition,
diminished. Tf, on the other hand, the real wages of labour
rose proportionally, and the Cost of Labour to the employer
remained the same, the advances of the capitalist would bear
the same ratio to his returns as before, and the rate of profit


DISTRIBUTION AS AFFECTED BY EXCHANGE. 239


would be unaltered. The reader who may wish for a more
minute examination of this point, will find it in the volume
of separate Essays to which reference has before been made*.
The question is too intricate in comparison with its import-
ance, to be further entered into in a work like the present;
and I will merely say, that it seems to result from the consi-
derations adduced in the Essay, that there is nothing in the
case In question to affect the integrity of the theory which
affirms an exact correspondence, in an inverse direction,
between the rate of profit and the Cost of Labour.


* Hssay LY. on Profits and Interest.


[


BOOK EY:


INFLUENCE OF THE PROGRESS OF SOCIETY
ON PRODUCTION AND DISTRIBUTION.


VOlnemts R


—————


DOO SVE


INFLUENCE OF THE PROGRESS OF SOCIETY ON
PRODUCTION AND DISTRIBUTION.


CHAPTER I.


GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS OF A PROGRESSIVE STATE
OF WEALTH.


§1. Tur three preceding Parts include as detailed a
view as the limits of this Treatise permit, of what, by a
happy generalization of a mathematical phrase, has been
called the Statics of the subject. We have surveyed the
field of economical facts, and have examined how they stand
related to one another as causes and effects ; what circum-
stances determine the amount of production, of employment
for labour, of capital and population; what laws regulate
rent, profits, and wages; under what conditions and in what
proportions commodities are interchanged between indi-
viduals and between countries. We have thus obtained a
collective view of the economical phenomena of society, con-
sidered as existing simultaneously. We have ascertained, to
a certain extent, the principles of their interdependence ; and
when the state of some of the elements is known, we should
now be able to infer, in a general way, the contemporaneous

R 2


244 BOOK Iv. CHAPTER I. § 2.


state of most of the others. All this, however, has only put
us in possession of the economical laws of a stationary and
unchanging society. We have still to consider the econo-
mical condition of mankind as liable to change, and indeed
(in the more advanced portions of the race, and in all regions
to which their influence reaches) as at all times undergoing
progressive changes. We have to consider what these
changes are, what are their laws, and what their ultimate
tendencies; thereby adding a theory of motion to our theory
of equilibrium—the Dynamics of political economy to the
Statics.

In this inquiry, it is natural to commence by tracing the
operation of known and acknowledged agencies. Whatever
may be the other changes which the economy of society is
destined to undergo, there is one actually in progress, Con-
cerning which there can be no dispute. In the leading

“countries of the world, and in all others as they come within
the influence of those leading countries, there is at least one
progressive movement which continues with little imterrup-
tion from year to year and from generation to generation ; a
progress in wealth; an advancement in what is called mate-
rial prosperity. All the nations which we are accustomed to
call civilized, increase gradually in production and in popula-
tion: and there is no reason to doubt, that not only these
nations will for some time continue so to increase, but that
most of the other nations of the world, including some not
yet founded, will successively enter upon the same career.
It will, therefore, be our first object to examine the nature
and consequences of this progressive change; the elements
which constitute it, and the effects it produces 0? the
various economical facts of which we have been tracing the


laws, and especially on wages, profits, rents, values, and
prices.


§ 2. Of the features which characterize this progressive
economical movement of civilized nations, that which fst


PROGRESSIVE STATE OF WEALTH. 245


excites attention, through its intimate connexion with the
phenomena of Production, is the perpetual, and so far as
human foresight can extend, the unlimited, growth of man’s
power over nature. Our knowledge of the properties and
laws of physical objects shows no sign of approaching its
ultimate boundaries: it is advancing more rapidly, and in a
greater number of directions at once, than in any previous
age or generation, and affording such frequent glimpses of
tmexplored fields beyond, as to justify the belief that our
acquaintance with nature is still almost in its infancy. This
increasing physical knowledge is now, too, more rapidly than
at any former period, converted, by practical Ingenuity, into
physical power. The most marvellous of modern inventions,
one which realizes the imaginary feats of the magician, not
metaphorically but literally—the electro-magnetic telegraph—
sprung into existence but a few years after the establishment
of the scientific theory which it realizes and exemplifies,
Lastly, the manual part of these great scientific operations
is NOW never wanting to the intellectual: there is no difficulty
in finding or forming, in a sufficient number of the working
hands of the community, the requisite skill, combined with
the requisite intelligence, for executing the most delicate
processes of the application of science to practical uses.
From this union of conditions, it is impossible not to look
forward to a vast multiplication and long succession of con-
trivances for economizing labour and incfeasing its produce ;
and to an ever wider diffusion of the use and benefit of those
contrivances.

Another change, which has always hitherto characterized,
and will assuredly continue to characterize, the progress of
civilized society, is a continual increase of the security of
person and property. The people of every country in
Europe, the most backward as well as the most advanced,
are, in each generation, better protected against the violence
and rapacity of one another, both by a more efficient judica-
ture and police for the suppression of private crime, and by


246 BOOK IV. CHAPTER I. § 2.


the decay and destruction of those mischievous privileges
which enabled certain classes of the community to prey with
impunity upon the rest. They are also, in every generation,
better protected, either by institutions or by manners and
opinion, against the arbitrary exercise of the power of
government. yen in semibarbarous Russia, acts of spoli-
ation directed against individuals, who have not made them-
selves politically obnoxious, are not now so frequent as
much to affect any person’s feelings of security. Taxation,
in all European countries, grows less arbitrary and oppres-
sive, both in itself and in the manner of levying it. Wars,
and the destruction they cause, are now confined, in almost
every country, to those distant and outlying possessions at
which it comes into contact with savages. Even the yicissi-
tudes of fortune which arise from inevitable natural calamities,
are more and more softened to those on whom they fall, by
the continual extension of the salutary practice of insurance.

Of this increased security, one of the most unfailing
effects is a great increase both of production and of accumula-
tion. Industry and frugality cannot exist, where there 1s not
a preponderant probability that those who labour and spare
will be permitted to enjoy. And the nearer this probability
approaches to a certainty, the more do industry and fru-
gality become pervading qualities in a people. Experience
has shown that a large proportion of the results of labour
and abstinence may be taken away by fixed taxation, without
impairing, and sometimes even with the effect of stimulating,
the qualities from which a great production and an abundant
capital take their rise. But those qualities are not proof
against a high degree of uncertainty. You may carry off a
part ; but there must be assurance that you will not interfere,
nor suffer any one to interfere, with the remainder.

One of the changes which most infallibly attend the pt0
gress of modern society, is an improvement in the business
capacities of the general mass of mankind. I do not mean
that the practical sagacity of an individual human being is


PROGRESSIVE STATE OF WEALTH. 247


greater than formerly. I am inclined to believe that econo-
mical progress has hitherto had even a contrary effect. A
person of good natural endowments, in a rude state of society,
can do a greater number of things well, has a greater power of
adapting means to ends, is more capable of extricating him-
self and others from an unforeseen embarrassment, than
ninety-nine in a hundred of those who haye known only the
eivilized form of life. How far these points of inferiority of
faculties are compensated, and by what means they might be
compensated still more completely, to the civilized man as
an mdividual being, is a question belonging to a different
inquiry from the present. But to civilized human beings
collectively considered, the compensation is ample. What is
lost in the separate bodily and mental efficiency of each, is
far more than made up by their greater capacity of united
action. In exact proportion as they put off the qualities of
the savage, they become amenable to discipline; capable of
adhering to plans concerted beforehand, and about which
they may not have been consulted; of subordinating their
individual caprice to a preconceived determination, and per-
forming severally the parts allotted to them in a combined
undertaking. Works of all sorts, impracticable to the sayage
or the half-civilized, are daily accomplished by ervilized na-
tions, not by any greatness of faculties in the actual agents,
but through the simple fact, that each is able to rely with
certainty on the others for the portion of the work which
they respectively undertake. The peculiar characteristic, in
short, of civilized beings, is the capacity of co-operation ;
and this, like other faculties, tends to improve by practice,
and becomes capable of assuming a constantly wider sphere
of action.

Accordingly there is no more certain incident of the pro-
gressive change taking place in society, than the continual
growth of the principle and practice of co-operation. Associa-
tions of individuals voluntarily combining their small contri-
butions, now perform works, both of an industrial and of many


tants alll e —as


248 BOOK 1V. CHAPTER I. § 2.


persons are rich enough to accomplish, or for the performance
of which the few persons capable of accomplishing them were
formerly enabled to exact the most inordinate remuneration.
As wealth increases and business capacity improves, we may
look forward to a great extension of establishments, both for
industrial and other purposes, formed by the collective con-
tributions of large numbers; establishments like those known
by the technical name of joint-stock companies, or the
associations less formally constituted, which are so nume-
rous in England, to raise funds for public or philanthropic
objects.

The progress which is to be expected in the physical
sciences and arts, combined with the greater security of pro-
perty, and greater freedom in disposing of it, which are
obvious features in the civilization of modern nations, and
with the more extensive and more skilful employment of the
joint-stock principle, afford space and scope for an indefinite
increase of capital and production, and for the increase of
population which is its ordinary accompaniment. That the
growth of population will overpass the increase of production,
there is not much reason to apprehend; and that it should
even keep pace with it, is inconsistent with the supposition
of any real improvement in the poorest classes of the peo-
ple. It is however quite possible that there might be a great
progress in industrial improvement, and in the signs of what
is commonly called national prosperity; a great increase of
aggregate wealth, and even, in some respects, a better dis-
tribution of it; that not only the rich might grow richer, but
many of the poor might grow rich, that the intermediate
classes might become more numerous and powerful, and the
means of enjoyable existence be more and more largely dif-
fused, while yet the great class at the base of the whole
might increase in numbers only, and not in comfort nor in
cultivation. We must, therefore, in considering the effects
of the progress of industry, admit as a supposition, however


other characters, which no one person or small number of


PROGRESSIVE STATE OF WEALTH. 249


greatly we deprecate as a fact, an increase of population as
long-continued, as indefinite, and possibly even as rapid, as
the increase of production and accumulation.

With these preliminary observations on the causes of
change at work in a society which is in a state of economical


progress, I proceed to a more detailed examination of the
changes themselves.


CHAPTER II.


INFLUENCE OF THE PROGRESS OF INDUSTRY AND POPU-
LATION, ON VALUES AND PRICES.


§ 1. Tux changes which the progress of industry causes
or presupposes in the circumstances of production, are NECES:
sarily attended with changes in the values of commodities.

The permanent values of all things which are neither
under a natural nor under an artificial monopoly, depend, as
we have seen, on their cost of production. But the increas-
ing power which mankind are constantly acquiring over
nature, increases more and more the efficiency of human
exertion, or, in other words, diminishes cost of production.
All inventions by which a greater quantity of any commodity
can be produced with the same labour, or the same quantly
with less labour, or which abridge the process, so that the
capital employed needs not be advanced for so long a time,
lessen the cost of production of the commodity. As, how-
ever, value is relative; if inventions and improvements i
production were made in all commodities, and all in the same
degree, there would be no alteration in values. Things
would continue to exchange for each other at the same rates
as before; and mankind would obtain a greater quantity of
all things in return for their labour and abstinence, without
having that greater abundance measured and declared (as it
is when it affects only one thing) by the diminished exchange
value of the commodity.

As for prices, in these circumstances they would be
affected or not, according as the improvements in production
did or did not extend to the precious metals. If the mate-
rials of money were an exception to the general diminution
of cost of production, the values of all other things would


INFLUENCE OF INDUSTRIAL PROGRESS ON PRICES. 251


fall in relation to money, that is, there would be a fall of
general prices throughout the world. But if money, like
other things, and in the same degree as other things, were
obtamed in greater abundance and cheapness, prices would
be no more affected than values would; and there would be
no visible sign, in the state of the markets, of any of the
changes which had taken place; except that there would be
(if people continued to labour as much as before) a greater
quantity of all sorts of commodities, circulated at. the same
prices by a greater quantity of money.

Improvements in production are not the only circum-
stance accompanying the progress of industry, which tends
to diminish the cost of producing, or at least of obtaining,
commodities. Another circumstance is the increase of inter-
course between different parts of the world. As commerce
extends, and the ignorant attempts to restrain it by tariffs
become obsolete, commodities tend more and more to be
produced in the places in which their production can be car-
nied on at the least expense of labour and capital to mankind.
As civilization spreads, and security of person and property
becomes established, in parts of the world which have not
hitherto had that advantage, the productive capabilities of
those places are called into fuller activity, for the benefit both
of their own inhabitants and of foreigners. The ignorance
and misgoyernment in which many of the regions most
favoured by nature are still grovelling, afford work probably
for many generations before those countries can be raised
even to the present level of the most civilized parts of
Europe. Much will also depend on the increasing migration
of labour and capital to unoccupied parts of the earth, of
which the soil, climate, and situation are found, by the ample
means of exploration now possessed, to promise not only a
large return to industry, but great facilities of producing
commodities suited to the markets of old countries. Much
as the collective industry of the earth is likely to be increased
in efficiency by the extension of science and of the industrial


252 BOOK IV. CHAPTER II. § 2.


arts, a still more active source of increased cheapness of pro-
duction will be found, probably, for some time to come, in the
gradually unfolding consequences of Free Trade, and in the
increasing scale on which Emigration and Colonization will
be carried on.

From the causes now enumerated, unless counteracted
by others, the progress of things enables a country to obtain
at less and less of real cost, not only its own productions but
those of foreign countries. Indeed, whatever diminishes the
cost of its own productions, when of an exportable character,
enables it, as we have already seen, to obtain its imports at
less real cost.


§ 2. But is it the fact, that these tendencies are not
counteracted? Has the progress of wealth and industry no
effect in regard to cost of production, but to diminish itt
Are no causes of an opposite character brought into opera-
tion by the same progress, sufficient in some cases not only
to neutralize but to overcome the former, and convert the
descending movement of cost of production into an ascend-
ing movement? We are already aware that there are such
causes, and that, in the case of the most important classes of
commodities, food and materials, there is a tendency diame-
trically opposite to that of which we have been speaking.
The cost of production of these commodities tends to i-
crease.

This is not a property inherent in the commodities them-
Selves. If population were Stationary, and the produce of
the earth never needed to be augmented in quantity, there
would be no cause for greater cost of production. Mankind
would, on the contrary, have the full benefit of all improve-
ments in agriculture, or in the arts subsidiary to it, and there
would be no difference, in this respect, between the products
of agriculture and those of manufactures. The former;
indeed, so far as present foresight can extend, does not seem
to be susceptible of improved processes to so great a degree


INFLUENCE OF INDUSTRIAL PROGRESS ON PRICES. 253


as some branches of manufacture; but inventions may be in
reserve for the future, which may inyert this relation. The
only products of industry which, if population did not in-
crease, would be liable to a real increase of cost of produc-
tion, are those which, depending on a material which is not
renewed, are either wholly or partially exhaustible: such
as coal, and most if not all metals; for even iron, the
most abundant as well as most useful of metallic products,
which forms an ingredient of most minerals and of almost
all rocks, is susceptible of exhaustion so far as regards its
richest and most tractable ores.

When, however, population increases, as it has never yet
failed to do when the increase of industry and of the means
of subsistence makes room for it, the demand for most of
the productions of the earth, and particularly for food, in-
creases in a corresponding proportion. And then comes
into effect that fundamental law of production from the soil,
on which we have so frequently had occasion to expatiate ;
the law, that increased labour, in any given state of agricul-
tural skill, is attended with a less than proportional increase
of produce. The cost of production of the fruits of the earth
increases, ceteris paribus, with every increase of the demand.

No tendency of a like kind exists with respect to manu-
factured articles. The tendency is in the contrary direction.
The larger the scale on which manufacturing operations are
carried on, the more cheaply they can in general be per-
formed. Mr. Senior has gone the length of enunciating as
an inherent law of manufacturing industry, that in it in-
creased production takes place at a smaller cost, while in
agricultural industry increased production takes place at a
greater cost. I cannot think, however, that even in manu-
factures, increased cheapness follows increased production by
anything amounting to a law. It is a probable and usual,
but not a necessary, consequence.

As manufactures, however, depend for their materials
either upon agriculture, or mining, or the spontaneous pro-


254 BOOK IVY. CHAPTER II. § 3.


duce of the earth, manufacturing industry is subject, in
respect of one of its essentials, to the same law as agricul-
ture. But the crude material generally forms so small a
portion of the total cost, that any tendency which may exist
to a progressive increase in that single item, is much oyer-
balanced by the diminution continually taking place in all
the other elements; to which diminution it is impossible at
present to assign any limit.

The tendency, then, being to a perpetual increase of the
productive power of labour in manufactures, while in agricul-
ture and mining there is a conflict between two tendencies,
the one towards an increase of productive power, the other
towards a diminution of it, the cost of production being
lessened by every improvement in the process, and alg
mented by every addition to population ; it follows that the
exchange values of manufactured articles, compared with
the products of agriculture and of mines, have, as population
and industry advance, a certain and decided tendency to fall.
Money being a product of mines, it may also be laid down as
arule, that manufactured articles tend, as society advances,
to fall in money price. The industrial history of modem
nations, especially during the last hundred years, fully bears
out this assertion.


§ 3. Whether agricultural produce increases in absolute,
as well as comparative cost of production, depends on the
conflict of the two antagonist agencies, increase of popula-
tion, and improvement in agricultural skill. In some, pel
haps in most, states of society (looking at the whole surface
of the earth) both agricultural skill and population are either
Stationary, or increase very slowly, and the cost of production
of food, therefore, is nearly stationary. In a society which 1s
advancing in wealth, population generally increases faster than
agricultural skill, and food consequently tends to become
more costly: but there are times when a strong impulse sets
in towards agricultural improvement. Such sat impulse has


INFLUENCE OF INDUSTRIAL PROGRESS ON PRICES. 255


shewn itself in Great Britain during the last fifteen or twenty
years. In England and Scotland agricultural skill has of late
increased considerably faster than population, insomuch that
food and other agricultural produce, notwithstanding the
increase of people, can be grown at less cost than they were
thirty years ago: and the abolition of the Corn Laws has
given an additional stimulus to the spirit of improvement.
In some other countries, and particularly in France, the im-
provement of agriculture gains ground still more decidedly
upon population, because, though agriculture, except in a few
provinces, advances slowly, population advances still more
slowly, and even with increasing slowness; its growth being
kept down, not by poverty, which is diminishing, but by pru-
dence.

Which of the two conflicting agencies is gaining upon the
other at any particular time, might be conjectured with
tolerable accuracy from the money price of agricultural pro-
duce (supposing bullion not to vary materially in value), pro-
vided a sufficient number of years could be taken, to form an
average independent of the fluctuations of seasons. This
however, is hardly practicable, since Mr. Tooke has shewn that
even so long a period as half a century may include a much
greater proportion of abundant and a smaller of deficient
Seasons, than is properly due to it. A mere average, there-
fore, might lead to conclusions only the more misleading, for
their deceptive semblance of accuracy. There would be less
danger of error in taking the average of only a small number
of years, and correcting it by a conjectural allowance for the
character of the seasons, than in trusting to a longer average
without any such correction. It is hardly necessary to add,
that in founding conclusions on quoted prices, allowance must
also be made as far as possible for any changes in the general
exchange value of the precious metals.


§4. Thus far, of the effect of the progress of society on
the permanent or average values and prices of commodities.


e

t

i

ae
i


256 BOOK IV. CHAPTER II. § 4,


It remains to be considered, in what manner the same pro-
gress affects their fluctuations. Concerning the answer to this
question there can be no doubt. It tends in a very high
degree to diminish them. .

In poor and backward societies, as in the East, and in
Europe during the middle ages, extraordinary differences in
the price of the same commodity might exist in places not
very distant from each other, because the want of roads and
canals, the imperfection of marine navigation, and the insecu-
rity of communications generally, prevented things from being
transported from the places where they were cheap to those
where they were dear. The things most liable to fluctuations
im value, those directly influenced by the seasons, and espe-
cially food, were seldom carried to any great distances.
Each locality depended, as a general rule, on its own pro-
duce and that of its immediate neighbourhood. In most
years, accordingly, there was, in some part or other of any
large country, a real dearth. Almost every season must he
unpropitious to some among the many soils and climates to
be found in an extensive tract of country; but as the same
season is also in general more than ordinarily favourable to
others, it is only occasionally that the aggregate produce of
the whole country is deficient, and even then in a less degree
than that of many separate portions; while a deficiency; at
all considerable, extending to the whole world, is a thing
almost unknown. In modern times, therefore, there 1s only
dearth where there formerly would have been famine, and
sufficiency everywhere when anciently there would have been
Scarcity in some places and superfluity in others.

The same change has taken place with respect to all
other articles of commerce. The safety and cheapness of
communications, which enable a deficiency in one place t0
be supplied from the surplus of another, at a moderate or
even a small advance on the ordinary price, render the fluc-
tuations of prices much less extreme than formerly. This
effect is much promoted by the existence of large capitals,


INFLUENCE OF INDUSTRIAL PROGRESS ON PRICES. 257


belonging to what are called speculative merchants, whose
business it is to buy goods in order to resell them at a profit.
These dealers naturally buying things when they are cheapest,
and storing them up to be brought again into the market
when the price has become unusually high; the tendency of
their operations is to equalize price, or at least to moderate
its inequalities, The prices of things are neither so much
depressed at one time, nor so much raised at another, as they
would be if speculative dealers did not exist.

Speculators, therefore, have a highly useful office in the
€conomy of society; and (contrary to common opinion) the
most useful portion of the class are those who speculate in
commodities affected by the vicissitudes of seasons. If there
were no corn dealers, not only would the price of corn be
hable to variations much more extreme than at present, but
in a deficient season the necessary supplies might not be
forthcoming at all. Unless there were speculators in corn,
or unless, in default of dealers, the farmers became speculators,
the price in a season of abundance would fall without any
limit or check, except the wasteful consumption that would
invariably follow. That any part of the surplus of one year
remains to supply the deficiency of another, is owing either
to farmers who withhold corm from the market, or to dealers
who buy it when at the cheapest and lay it up in store.


§ 5. Among persons who have not much considered the
Subject, there is a notion that the gains of speculators are
often made by causing an artificial scarcity ; that they create
a high price by their own purchases, and then profit by it.
This may easily be shown to be fallacious. If a corn-dealer
makes purchases on speculation, and produces a rise, when
there is neither at the time nor afterwards any cause for a rise
of price except his own proceedings; he no doubt appears to
grow richer as long as his purchases continue, because he is
a holder of an article which is quoted ata higher and higher
price: but this apparent gain only seems within his reach so

VOL. It. Ss


258 BOOK Ivy. CHAPTER Il. § 5.


“


long as he does not attempt to realize it. If he has bought,
for instance, a million of quarters, and by withholding them
from the market, has raised the price ten shillings a quarter;
just so much as the price has been raised by withdrawing a
million quarters, will it be lowered by bringing them back,
and the best that he can hope is that he will lose nothing
except interest and his expenses. If bya gradual and cautious
sale he is able to realize, on some portion of his stores, a part
of the increased price, so also he will undoubtedly have had
to pay that price on some portion of his purchases. He runs
considerable risk of incurring a still greater loss; for the
temporary high price is very likely to have tempted others,
who had no share in causing it, and who might otherwise not
have found their way to this market at all, to bring their com
there, and intercept a part of the advantage. So that instead
of profiting by a scarcity caused by himself, he is by no means
unlikely, after buying in an average market, to be forced to
sell in a superabundant one.

As an individual speculator cannot gain by a rise of p
solely of his own creating, so neither can a number of specu-
lators gain collectively by a rise, which their operations have
artificially produced. Some among a number of speculators
may gain, by superior judgment in selecting the time for
realising. but they make this gain at the expense, not of the
consumer, but of the other speculators who are less judicious.
They, in fact, convert to their own benefit the high price
produced by the speculations of the others, leaving to these
the loss resulting from the recoil. It is not to be denied,
therefore, that speculators may enrich themselves by other
people’s loss. But it is by the losses of other speculators.
As much must have been lost by one set of dealers as is
gained by another set.

When a speculation in a commodity proves profitable to
the speculators as a body, it is because in the interval between
their buying and reselling, the price rises from some cause
independent of them, their only connexion with it consisting


rice


INFLUENCE OF INDUSTRIAL PROGRESS ON PRICES. 259


in having foreseen it. In this case, their purchases make the
price begin to rise sooner than it otherwise would do, thus
spreading the privation of the consumers over a longer period,
but mitigating it at the time of its greatest height: evidently
to the general advantage. In this, however, it is assumed
that they have not overrated the rise which they looked
forward to. For it often happens that speculative purchases
are made in the expectation of some increase of demand, or
deficiency of supply, which after all does not occur, or not to
the extent which the speculator expected. In that case the
speculation, instead of moderating fluctuations, has caused a
fluctuation of price which otherwise would not have hap-
pened, or aggravated one which would. But in that case the
speculation is a losing one, to the speculators collectively,
however much some individuals may gain by it. All that
part of the rise of price by which it exceeds what there are
independent grounds for, cannot give to the speculators as a
body any benefit, since the price is as much depressed by
their sales as it was raised by their purchases; and while
they gain nothing by it, they lose, not only their trouble
and expenses, but almost always much more, through the
effects incident to the artificial rise of price, in checking con-
sumption, and bringing forward supplies from unforeseen
quarters. The operations, therefore, of speculative dealers,
are useful to the public whenever profitable to themselves ;
and though they are sometimes injurious to the public, by
heightening the fluctuations which their more usual office is to
alleviate, yet whenever this happens the speculators are the
greatest losers. The interest, in short, of the speculators as
a body, coincides with the interest of the public; and as
they can only fail to serve the public interest in proportion as
they miss their own, the best way to promote the one is to
leave them to pursue the other in perfect freedom.

I do not deny that speculators may aggravate a local
scarcity. In collecting corn from the villages to supply the
towns, they make the dearth penetrate into nooks and cor-


s 2


“


260 BOOK Iv. CHAPTER II. $§ 5.


ners which might otherwise have escaped from bearing their
share of it. To buy and resell in the same place, tends to
alleviate scarcity: to buy in one place and resell in another,
may increase it in the former of the two places, but relieves
it in the latter, where the price is higher, and which there-
fore, by the very supposition, is likely to be suffering more.
And these sufferings always fall hardest on the poorest con-
sumers, since the rich, by outbidding, can obtain their accus-
tomed ration undiminished if they choose. To no persons,
therefore, are the operations of corn-dealers on the whole so
beneficial as to the poor. Accidentally and exceptionally,
the poor may suffer from them: it might sometimes be more
advantageous to the rural poor to have corn cheap in winter,
when they are entirely dependent on it, even if the const-
quence were a dearth in spring, when they can perhaps ob-
tain partial substitutes. But there are no substitutes, Pre-
curable at that season, which serve in any great degree to
replace bread-corn as the chief article of food: if there were,
its price would fall in the spring, instead of continuing, as 1
always does, to rise till the approach of harvest.

There is an opposition of immediate interest, @
moment of sale, between the dealer in corn and the con-
sumer, as there always is between the seller and the buyer
and a time of dearth being that in which the speculator
makes his largest profits, he is an object of dislike and ies
lousy at that time, to those who are suffering while he ls
gaining. It is an error, however, to suppose that the corm-
dealer’s business affords him any extraordinary profit : he
makes his gains not constantly, but at-particular times, and
they must therefore occasionally be great, but the chances
of profit in a business in which there is so much competition,
cannot on the whole be greater than in other employments.
A year of scarcity, in which great gains are made by ©0™-
dealers, rarely comes to an end without a recoil which places
many of them in the list of bankrupts. There have been
few more promising seasons for corn-dealers than the ye"


t the


INFLUENCE OF INDUSTRIAL PROGRESS ON PRICES. 261


1847, and seldom was there a greater break-up among the
speculators than in the autumn of that year. The chances
of failure, in this most precarious trade, are a set-off against
great occasional profits. If the corn-dealer were to sell his
stores, during a dearth, at a lower price than that which the
competition of the consumers assigns to him, he would make
a sacrifice, to charity or philanthropy, of the fair profits of
his employment, which may be quite as reasonably required
from any other person of equal means. His business being
a useful one, it is the interest of the public that the ordinary
motives should exist for carrying it on, and that neither law
nor opinion should prevent an operation beneficial to the
public from being attended with as much private advantage
as is compatible with full and free competition.

It appears, then, that the fluctuations of values and prices
arising from variations of supply, or from alterations in real
(as distinguished from speculative) demand, may be expected
to become more moderate as society advances. With regard
to those which arise from miscalculation, and especially from
the alternations of undue expansion and excessive contrac-
tion of credit, which occupy so conspicuous a place among
commercial phenomena, the same thing cannot be affirmed
with equal confidence. Such vicissitudes, beginning with
irrational speculation and ending with a commercial crisis,
have not hitherto become either less frequent or less violent
with the growth of capital and extension of industry.
Rather they may be said to have become more so: in conse-
quence, as is often said, of increased competition; but, as I
prefer to say, of a low rate of profits and interest, which
makes capitalists dissatisfied with the ordinary course of safe
mercantile gains. ‘The connexion of this low rate of profit
with the advance of population and accumulation, is one of
the points to be illustrated in the ensuing chapters.


CHAPTER III.


INFLUENCE OF THE PROGRESS OF INDUSTRY AND
POPULATION, ON RENTS, PROFITS, AND WAGES.


§1. Continuine the inquiry into the nature of the
economical changes taking place in a society which is ina
state of industrial progress, we shall next consider what is
the effect of that progress on the distribution of the produce
among the various classes which share in it. We may con-
fine our attention to the system of distribution which is the
most complex, and which virtually includes all others—that
in which the produce of manufactures is shared between two
classes, labourers and capitalists, and the produce of agricul-
ture among three, labourers, capitalists, and landlords.

The characteristic features of what is commonly meant
by industrial progress, resolve themselves mainly into three,
increase of capital, increase of population, and improve-
ments in production; understanding the last expression in its
widest sense, to include the process of procuring commodities
from a distance, as well as that of producing them. The
other changes which take place are chiefly consequences of
these; as, for example, the tendency to a progressive increase
of the cost of production of food; which arises from an in-
creased demand, occasioned either by increased population,
or by an increase of capital and wages, enabling the poorer
classes to increase their consumption. It will be conyenient
to set out by considering each of the three causes, as operat-
mats separately ; after which we can suppose them combined
im any manner we think fit.

Let us first suppose that population increases, capital and
the arts of production remaining stationary. One of the
effects of this change of circumstances is sufficiently obvious:


INFLUENCE OF PROGRESS ON RENTS, PROFITS, &c. 263


wages will fall; the labouring class will be reduced to an
inferior condition. The state of the capitalist, on the con-
trary, will be improved. With the same capital, he can pur-
chase more labour, and obtain more produce. His rate of
profit is increased. The dependence of the rate of profits on
the cost of labour is here verified; for the labourer obtaining
a diminished quantity of commodities, and no alteration being
Supposed in the circumstances of their production, the dimi-
nished quantity represents a diminished cost. The labourer
obtains not only a smaller real reward, but the product of a
smaller quantity of labour. The first circumstance is the
important one to himself, the last to his employer.

Nothing has occurred, thus far, to affect in any way the
value of any commodity; and no reason, therefore, has yet
shown itself, why rent should be either raised or lowered.
But if we look forward another stage in the series of effects,
we may see our way to such a consequence. The labourers
have increased in numbers: their condition is reduced in the
Same proportion ; the increased numbers divide among them
only the produce of the same amount of labour as before.
But they may economize in their other comforts, and not in
their food: each may consume as much food, and of as
costly a quality, as previously; or they may submit to a
reduction, but not in proportion to the increase of numbers.
On this supposition, notwithstanding the diminution of real
wages, the increased population will require an increased
quantity of food. But since industrial skill and knowledge
are supposed to be stationary, more food can only be ob-
tained by resorting to worse land, or to methods of cultiva-
tion which are less productive in proportion to the outlay.
Capital for this extension of agriculture will not be wanting;
for although, by hypothesis, no addition takes place to the
capital in existence, a sufficient amount can be spared from
the industry which previously supplied the other and less
pressing wants which the labourers have been obliged to
curtail. The additional supply of food, therefore, will be


264 BOOK IV. CHAPTER 111. § J].


produced, but produced at a greater cost; and the exchange
value of agricultural produce must rise. It may be objected,
that profits having risen, the extra cost of producing food
can be defrayed from profits, without any increase of price.
It could, undoubtedly, but it will not. Why? Because if
it did, the agriculturist would be placed in an inferior posi-
tion to other capitalists. The increase of profits, being the
effect of diminished wages, is common to all employers of
labour. The increased expenses, arising from the necessity
of a more costly cultivation, affect the agriculturist alone.
For this peculiar burthen he must be peculiarly compen-
sated, whether the general rate of profit be high or low.
He will not submit indefinitely to a deduction from his pro-
fits, to which other capitalists are not subject. He will not
extend his cultivation by laying out fresh capital, unless for
a return sufficient to yield him as high a profit as could be
obtained by the same capital in other investments. The
value, therefore, of his commodity will rise, and rise in pro-
portion to the inereased cost. The farmer will thus ‘be
indemnified for the burthen which is peculiar to himself, and
will also enjoy the augmented rate of profit which is common
to all capitalists.

It follows, from principles with which we are already fami-
liar, that in these circumstances rent willrise. Any land can
afford to pay, and under free competition will pay, arent equal
to the excess of its produce above the return to an equal capital
on the worst land, or under the least favourable conditions.
Whenever, therefore, agriculture is driven to descend to
worse land, or more onerous processes, rent rises. Its’ rise
will be twofold, for, in the first place, rent in kind, or corn
rent, will rise; and in the second, since the value of agricul-
tural produce has also risen, rent, estimated in manufactured
or foreign commodities (which is represented ceteris paribus
by money rent), will rise still more.

The steps of the process (if, after what has been formerly


said, it is necessary to retrace them) are as follows. Corn


INFLUENCE OF PROGRESS ON RENTS, PROFITS, &c. 265


rises in price, to repay with the ordinary profit the capital
required for producing additional corn on worse land or by
more costly processes. So far as regards this additional corn,
the increased price is but an equivalent for the additional
expense; but the rise, extending to all corn, affords on all,
except the last produced, an extra profit. If the farmer was
accustomed to produce 100 quarters of wheat at 40s., and 120
quarters are now required, of which the last twenty cannot be
produced under 45s., he obtains the extra five shillings on the
entire 120 quarters, and not on the last twenty alone. He
has thus an extra 25/. beyond the ordinary profits, and this,
in a state of free competition, he will not be able to retain.
He cannot however be compelled to give it up to the consu-
mer, since a less price than 45s. would be inconsistent with
the production of the last twenty quarters. The price, then,
will remain at 45s., and the 25/, will be transferred by compe-
tition not to the consumer but to the landlord. A rise of rent
is therefore inevitably consequent on an increased demand for
agricultural produce, when unaccompanied by increased facili-
ties for its production. A truth which, after this final illus-
tration, I may be permitted henceforth to take for granted.
The new element now introduced—an increased demand for
food—besides occasioning an increase of rent, still further
disturbs the distribution of the produce between capitalists and
labourers. The increase of population will have diminished
the reward of labour; and if its cost was diminished as
greatly as its real remuneration, profits will be increased by
the full amount. If however the increase of population
leads to an increased production of food, which cannot be sup-
plied but at an enhanced cost of production, the cost of labour
will not be so much diminished as the real reward of it, and
profits, therefore, will not be so much raised. It is even
possible that they might not be raised at all. The labourers
may previously have been so well provided for, that the whole
of what they now lose may be struck off from their other
indulgences, and they may not, either by necessity or choice,


266 BOOK IV. CHAPTER III. § 2.


undergo any reduction in the quantity or quality of their
food. To produce the food for the increased number may
be attended with such an increase of expense, that wages,
though reduced in quantity, may represent as great a cost,
may be the product of as much labour, as before, and the
capitalist may not be at all benefited. On this supposition
the loss to the labourer is partly absorbed in the additional
labour required for producing the last instalment of agricul-
tural produce; and the remainder is gained by the landlord,
the only sharer who always benefits by an increase of popu-
lation.


§ 2. Let us now reverse our hypothesis, and, instead
of supposing capital stationary and population advancing,
let us suppose capital advancing and population stationary 5
the facilities of production, both natural and acquired, being,
as before, unaltered. The real wages of labour, instead of
falling, will now rise; and since the cost of production of the
things consumed by the labourer is not diminished, this mse
of wages implies an equivalent increase of the cost of labour,
and diminution of profits. To state the same deduction m
other terms; the labourers not being more numerous, and
the productive power of their labour being only the same as
before, there is no increase of the produce; the increase of
wages, therefore, must be at the charge of the capitalists.
It is not impossible that the cost of labour might be increased
in even a greater ratio than its real remuneration. The
improved condition of the labourers may increase the demand
for food. The labourers may have been so ill off before; 28
not to have food enough; and may now consume more: OF
they may choose to expend their increased means partly or
wholly in a more costly quality of food, requiring more labour
and more land; wheat, for example, instead of oats oF
potatoes. This extension of agriculture implies, as usual, a
greater cost of production and a higher price, so that, be-


sides the increase of the cost of labour arising from the in-


INFLUENCE OF PROGRESS ON RENTS, PROFITS, &c. 267


crease of its reward, there will be a further increase (and an
additional fall of profits) from the increased costliness of the
commodities of which that reward consists. The same causes
will produce a rise of rent. What the capitalists lose, above
what the labourers gain, is partly transferred to the landlord,
and partly swallowed up in the cost of growing food on worse
land or by a less productive process.


§3. Having disposed of the two simple cases, an increas-
ing population and stationary capital, and an increasing
capital and stationary population, we are prepared to take
into consideration the mixed case, in which the two elements
of expansion are combined, both population and capital in-
creasing. If either element increases faster than the other,
the case is so far assimilated with one or other of the two
preceding: we shall suppose them, therefore, to increase
with equal rapidity; the test of equality being, that each
labourer obtains the same commodities as before, and the
same quantity of those commodities. Let us examine what
will be the effect, on rent and profits, of this double progress.

Population having increased, without any falling off in
the labourers’ condition, there is of course a demand for more
food. The arts of production being supposed stationary,
this food must be produced at an increased cost. To com-
pensate for this greater cost of the additional food, the price
of agricultural produce must rise. The rise extending over
the whole amount of food produced, though the increased
expenses only apply to a part, there is a greatly increased
extra profit, which, by competition, is transferred to the
landlord. Rent will rise, both in quantity of produce and
in cost ; while wages, being supposed to be the same in quan-
tity, will be greater in cost, The labourer obtaining the
same amount of necessaries, money wages have risen; and
as the rise is common to all branches of production, the
capitalist cannot indemnify himself by changing his employ-
ment, and the loss must be borne by profits.


268 BOOK IV. CHAPTER 111. § 4.


It appears, then, that the tendency of an increase of capital
and population is to add to rent at the expense of profits:
though rent does not gain all that profits lose, a part being ab-
sorbed in increased expenses of production, that is, in hiring
or feeding a greater number of labourers to obtain a given
amount of agricultural produce. By profits, must of course
be understood the rate of profit; for a lower rate of profit
on a larger capital may yield a larger gross profit, considered
absolutely, though a smaller in proportion to the entire
produce.

This tendency of profits to fall, is from time to time
counteracted by improvements in production: whether aris-
ing from increase of knowledge, or from an increased use of
the knowledge already possessed. This is the third of the
three elements, the effects of which on the distribution of
the produce we undertook to investigate; and the investiga-
tion will be facilitated by supposing, as in the case of the
other two elements, that it operates, in the first instance,
alone.


§ 4. Let us then suppose capital and population sta-
tionary, and a sudden improvement made in the arts of pro-
duction ; by the invention of more efficient machines, oF
less costly processes, or by obtaining access to cheaper Com
modities through foreign trade.

The improvement may either be in some of the necessa-
ries or indulgences which enter into the habitual consumption
of the labouring class ; or it may be applicable only to luxuries
consumed exclusively by richer people. Very few, however,
of the great industrial improvements are altogether of this
last description. Agricultural improvements, except such
as specially relate to some of the rarer and more peculiar
products, act directly upon the principal objects of the
labourer’s expenditure. The steam-engine, and every other
invention which affords a manageable power, are applicable
to all things, and of course to those consumed by the la-


INFLUENCE OF PROGRESS ON RENTS, PROFITS, &c. 269


bourer. Even the power-loom and the spinning-jenny,
though applied to the most delicate fabrics, are available no
less for the coarse cottons and woollens worn by the labour-
ing class. All improvements in locomotion cheapen the
transport of necessaries as well as of luxuries. Seldom is a
new branch of trade opened, without, either directly or in
some indirect way, causing some of the articles which the
mass of the people consume to be either produced or im-
ported at smaller cost. It may safely be affirmed, therefore,
that improvements in production generally tend to cheapen
the commodities on which the wages of the labouring class
are expended.

In so far as the commodities affected by an improvement
are those which the labourers generally do not consume, the
improvement has no effect in altering the distribution of the
produce. Those particular commodities, indeed, are cheap-
ened; being produced at less cost, they fall in value and in
price, and all who consume them, whether landlords, capi-
talists, or skilled and privileged labourers, obtain increased
means of enjoyment. The rate of profits, however, is not
raised. There is a larger gross profit, reckoned in quantity
of commodities. But the capital also, if estimated in those
commodities, has risen in value. The profit is the same
percentage on the capital that it was before. The capitalists
are not benefitted as capitalists, but as consumers. The
landlords, and the privileged class of labourers, if they are
consumers of the same commodities, share the same benefit.

The case is different with improvements which diminish
the cost of production of the necessaries of life, or of com-
modities which enter habitually into the consumption of the
great mass of labourers. The play of the different forces
being here rather complex, it is necessary to analyze it with
some minuteness.

As formerly observed*, there are two kinds of agricultural


* Supra, vol. i. p. 218.


270 BOOK IV. CHAPTER It. § 4.


improvements. Some consist in a mere saving of labour,
and enable a given quantity of food to be produced at less
cost, but not on a smaller surface of land than before.
Others enable a given extent of land to yield, not only the
same produce with less labour, but a greater produce; so
that if no greater produce is required, a part of the land
already under culture may be dispensed with. As the part
rejected will be the least productive portion, the market will
thenceforth be regulated by a better description of land than
what was previously the worst under cultivation.

To place the effect of the improvement in a clear light,
we must suppose it to take place suddenly, so as to leave no
time, during its introduction, for any increase of capital or
of population. Its first effect will be a fall of the value and
price of agricultural produce. This is a necessary conse-
quence of either kind of improvement, but especially of the
last.

An improvement of the first kind, not increasing the pro-
duce, does not dispense with any portion of the land: the
margin of cultivation (as Dr. Chalmers terms it,) remains
where it was; agriculture does not recede, either n extent of
cultivated land, or in elaborateness of methods; and the pmce
continues to be regulated by the same land, and by the same
capital, as before. But since that land or capital, and all
other land or capital which produces food, now yields its pro-
duce at smaller cost, the price of food will fall proportionally.
If one-tenth of the expense of production has been saved, the
price of produce will fall one-tenth.

But suppose the improvement to be of the second kind ;
enabling the land to produce, not only the same corn with
one-tenth less labour, but a tenth more corn with the same
labour. Here the effect is still more decided. Cultivation
can now be contracted, and the market supplied from @
smaller quantity of land. Even if this smaller surface ©
land were of the same average quality as the larger surface,
the price would fall one-tenth, because the same produce


INFLUENCE OF PROGRESS ON PROFITS, RENTS, &c. 271


would be obtained with a tenth less labour. But since the
portion of land abandoned will be the least fertile portion,
the price of produce will thenceforth be regulated by a better
quality of land than before. In addition, therefore, to the
original diminution of one-tenth in the cost of production,
there will be a further diminution, corresponding with the
recession of the “margin” of agriculture to land of greater
fertility. There will thus be a twofold fall of price.

Let us now examine the effect of the improvements, thus
suddenly made, on the division of the produce; and in the
first place, on rent. By the former of the two kinds of im-
provement, rent would be diminished. By the second, it
would be diminished still more.

Suppose that the demand for food requires the cultivation
of three qualities of land, yielding, on an equal surface, and
at an equal expense, 100, 80, and 60 bushels of wheat. The
price of wheat will, on the average, be just sufficient to
enable the third quality to be cultivated with the ordinary
profit. The first quality therefore will yield forty and the
second twenty bushels of extra profit, constituting the rent
of the landlord. And first, let an improvement be made,
which, without enabling more corn to be grown, enables the
same corn to be grown with one-fourth less labour. The
price of wheat will fall one-fourth, and 80 bushels will be
sold for the price for which 60 were sold before. But the
produce of the land which produces 60 bushels is still re-
quired, and the expenses being as much reduced as the price,
that land can still be cultivated with the ordinary profit.
The first and second qualities will therefore continue to yield
a surplus of 40 and 20 bushels, and corn rent will remain
the same as before. But corn having fallen in price one-
fourth, the same corn rent is equivalent to a fourth less of
money and of all other commodities. So far, therefore, as
the landlord expends his income in manufactured or foreign
products, he is one-fourth worse off than before. Hisincome
as landlord is reduced to three-quarters of its amount: it is
only as a consumer of corn that he is as well off.


272 BOOK IV. CHAPTER III. § 4.


If the improvement is of the other kind, rent will fall in
a still greater ratio. Suppose that the amount of produce
which the market requires, can be grown not only with a
fourth less labour, but on a fourth less of land. If all the
land already in cultivation continued to be cultivated, it
would yield a produce much larger than necessary. Land,
equivalent to a fourth of the produce, must now be aban-
doned; and as the third quality yielded exactly one-fourth,
(being 60 out of 240,) that quality will go out of cultivation.
The 240 bushels can now be grown on land of the first and
second qualities only ; being, on the first, 100 bushels plus
one-third, or 1334 bushels; on the second, 80 bushels plus
one-third, or 1063 bushels ; together 240. The second qua-
lity of land, instead of the third, is now the lowest, and
regulates the price. Instead of 60, it is sufficient if 1063
bushels repay the capital with the ordinary profit. The
price of wheat will consequently fall, not in the ratio of 60
to 80, as in the other case, but in the ratio of 60 to 1065.
Even this gives an insufficient idea of the degree in which
rent will be affected. The whole produce of the second qua-
lity of land will now be required to repay the expenses of
production. That land, being the worst in cultivation, will
pay norent. And the first quality will only yield the differ-
ence between 1334 bushels and 1062, being 26% bushels
instead of 40. The landlords collectively will have lost 335
out of 60 bushels in corn rent alone, while the value and
price of what is left will have been diminished in the ratio of
60 to 1062.

It thus appears, that the interest of the landlord is
decidedly hostile to the sudden and general introduction of
agricultural improvements. This assertion has been called a
paradox, and made a ground for accusing its first promul-
gator, Ricardo, of great intellectual perverseness, fo say
nothing worse. I cannot discern in what the paradox con-
sists; and the obliquity of vision seems to me to be on the
side of his assailants. The opinion is only made to appear


INFLUENCE OF PROGRESS ON PROFITS, RENTS, &c. 273


“


absurd by stating it unfairly. If the assertion were that a
landlord is injured by the improvement of his estate, it would
certainly be indefensible; but what is asserted is, that he is
injured by the improvement of the estates of other people,
although his own is included. Nobody doubts that he would
gain greatly by the improvement if he could keep it to him-
self, and unite the benefits, of an increased produce from his
own land, and a price as high as before. But if the increase
of produce took place simultaneously on all lands, the price
would not be as high as before; and there is nothing un-
reasonable in supposing that the landlords would be, not
benefited, but injured. It is admitted that whatever per-
manently reduces the price of produce diminishes rent; and
it is quite in accordance with common notions to suppose
that if, by the increased productiveness of land, less land
were required for cultivation, its value, like that of any other
article for which the demand had diminished, would fall.

I am quite willing to admit that rents have not really
been lowered by the progress of agricultural improvement ;
but why? Because improvement has never in reality been
sudden, but always slow; at no time much outstripping, and
often falling far short of, the growth of capital and population,
which tends as much to raise rent, as the other to lower it,
and which is enabled, as we shall presently see, to raise it
much higher by means of the additional margin afforded by
improvements in agriculture. First, however, we must
examine in what manner the sudden cheapening of agricul-
tural produce would affect profits and wages.

In the beginning, money wages would probably remain
the same as before, and the labourers would have the full
benefit of the cheapness. They would be enabled to increase
their consumption either of food or of other articles, and
would receive the same cost, and a greater quantity. So long
as this was the case, profits would be unaffected. But the
permanent remuneration of the labourers essentially depends
on what we have called their habitual standard; the extent

VOL. II. a


274 BOOK IV. CHAPTER 111. § 4.


of the requirements which, as a class, they insist on satisfying
before they choose to have children. If their tastes and
requirements receive a durable impress from the sudden
improvement in their condition, the benefit to the class will
be permanent. But the same cause which enables them to
purchase greater comforts and indulgences with the same
wages, would enable them to purchase the same amount of
comforts and indulgences with lower wages; and a greater
population may now exist, without reducing the labourers
below the condition to which they are accustomed. Hitherto
this and no other has been the use which the labourers have
commonly made of any increase of their means of living; they
have treated it simply as convertible into food for a greater
number of children. Itis probable, therefore, that population
would be stimulated, and that after the lapse of a generation
the real wages of labour would be no higher than before the
improvement: the reduction being partly brought about by
a fall of money wages, and partly through the price of food,
the cost of which, from the demand occasioned by the increase
of population, would be again increased. To’ the extent to
which money wages fell, profits would rise; the capitalist
obtaining a greater quantity of equally efficient labour by
the same outlay of capital. We thus see that a diminution
of the cost of living, whether arising from agricultural im-
provements or from the importation of foreign produce, if
the habits and requirements of the labourers are not raised,
lowers money wages and rent, and raises the general rate of
profit.

What is true of improvements which cheapen the pro-
duction of food, is true also of the substitution of a cheapet
for a more costly variety of it. The same land yields to the
same labour a much greater quantity of human nutriment in
the form of maize or potatoes, than in the form of wheat.
If the labourers were to give up bread, and feed only on those
cheaper products, taking as their compensation not a greater
quantity of other consumable commodities, but earlier mat-


INFLUENCE OF PROGRESS ON PROFITS, RENTS, &c. 275


miages and larger families, the cost of labour would be much
diminished, and if labour continued equally efficient, profits
would rise; while rent would be much lowered, since food
for the whole population could be raised on half or a third
part of the land now sown with corn. At the same time, it
being evident that land too barren to be cultivated for wheat
might be made in case of necessity to yield potatoes sufficient
to support the little labour necessary for producing them,
cultivation might ultimately descend lower, and rent even-
tually rise higher, on a potato or maize system, than on a
corn system; because the land would be capable of feeding a


much larger population before reaching the limit of its
powers.


If the improvement, which we suppose to take place, is
not in the production of food, but of some manufactured
article consumed by the labouring class, the effect on wages
and profits will be the same; but the effect on rent, very


different. Instead of being lowered, it will, if the ultimate
effect of the improvement is an increase of population, be
raised. The reasons are too evident to require statement.


§ 5. We have considered, on the one hand, the manner
m which the distribution of the produce into rent, profits,
and wages, is affected by the ordinary increase of population
and capital, and on the other, how it is affected by improye-
ments in production, and more especially in agriculture. We
have found that the former cause lowers profits, and raises
rent and the cost of labour: while the tendency of agricul-
tural improvements is to diminish rent; and all improvements
which cheapen any article of the labourer’s consumption,
tend to diminish the cost of labour and to raise profits. The
tendency of each cause in its separate state being thus ascer-
tained, it is easy to determine the tendency of the actual
course of things, in which the two movements are going on
simultaneously, capital and population increasing with tole-
rable steadiness, while improvements im agriculture are made
T 2


976 BOOK Lvs CHAPTER TL. $5.


from time to time, and the knowledge and practice of im-
proved methods diffuses itself gradually through the com-
munity.

The habits and requirements of the labouring classes
being given, (which determine their real wages), rent, profits,
and money wages at any given time, are the result of the
composition of these rival forces. If during any period
agricultural improvement advances faster than population,
rent and money wages during that period will tend down-
ward, and profits upward. If population advances more
rapidly than agricultural improvement, either the labourers
will submit to a reduction in the quantity or quality of their
food, or if not, rent and money wages will progressively rise,
and profits will fall.

Agricultural skill and knowledge are of slow growth, and
still slower diffusion. Inventions and discoveries, too, occur
only occasionally, while the increase of population and capital
are continuous agencies. It therefore seldom happens that
improvement, even during a short time, has so much the
start of population and capital as actually to lower rent, or
raise the rate of profits. There are many countries in which
the growth of population and capital are not rapid, but in
these agricultural improvement is less active still. Popula-
tion everywhere treads close on the heels of agricultural
improvement, and effaces its effects as fast as they are pro-
duced.

The reason why agricultural improvement seldom lowers
rent, is that it seldom cheapens food, but only prevents it
from growing dearer; and seldom, if ever, throws land out of
cultivation, but only enables worse and worse land to be
taken in. What is sometimes called the natural state of a
country which is but half cultivated, namely, that the land is
eee ee food obtained in great abundance by

abour, y true of unoccupied countries colonized
by a civilized people. In the United States the worst land
in cultivation is of a high quality; and even if no further im-


INFLUENCE OF PROGRESS ON PROFITS, RENTS, &c. 277
provements were made in agriculture or locomotion, cultiva-
tion would have many steps yet to descend, before the increase
of population and capital would be brought to a stand: but
in Europe five hundred years ago, though so thinly peopled
in comparison to the present population, it is probable that
the worst land under the plough was, from the rude state of
agriculture, quite as unproductive as the worst land now cul-
tivated; and that cultivation had approached as near to the
ultimate limit of profitable tillage, in those times as in the
present. What the agricultural improvements since made
have really done is, by increasing the capacity of produc-
tion of land in general, to enable tillage to extend downwards
to a much worse natural quality of land than the worst which
at that time would have admitted of profitable cultivation 5
thus rendering a much greater increase of capital and popula-
tion possible, and removing always a little and a little further
off the barrier which restrains them; population meanwhile
always pressing so hard against the barrier, that there is
never any visible margin left for it to seize, every inch of
ground made vacant for it by improvement being at once
filled up by its advancing columns. Agricultural improve-
ment may thus be considered to be not so much a counterforce
conflicting with increase of population, as a partial relaxation
of the bonds which confine that increase.

The effects produced on the division of the produce by an
increase of production, under the joint influence, of increase of
population and capital, and improvements of agriculture, are
very different from those deduced from the hypothetical cases
previously discussed. In particular, the effect on rent is most
materially different. We remarked that—while a great agri-
cultural improvement made suddenly and universally would
in the first instance inevitably lower rent—such improvements
enable rent, in the progress of society, to rise gradually toa
much higher limit than it could otherwise attain, since they
enable a much lower quality of land to be ultimately culti-
vated. But in the case we are now supposing, which nearly


278 BOOK IV. CHAPTER Ill. § 5.


corresponds to the usual course of things, this ultimate effect


becomes the immediate effect. Suppose cultivation to have
reached, or almost reached, the utmost limit permitted by the
state of the industrial arts, and rent, therefore, to have attained
nearly the highest point to which it can be carried by the pro-
gress of population and capital, with the existing amount of
skill and knowledge. If a great agricultural improvement
were suddenly introduced, it might throw back rent for a con-
siderable space, leaving it to regain its lost ground by the
progress of population and capital, and afterwards to go on
further. But, taking place, as such improvement always does,
very gradually, it causes no retrograde movement of either
rent or cultivation; it merely enables the one to §° ee
rising and the other extending, long after they must otherwise
have stopped. It would do this even without the necessity of
resorting to a worse quality of land; simply by enabling the
lands already in cultivation to yield a greater produce, with
no increase of the proportional cost. If by improvements of
agriculture all the lands in cultivation could be made, even
with double labour and capital, to yield a double produce,
(supposing that in the meantime population increased so as
to require this double quantity) all rents would be doubled.

To illustrate the point, let us revert to the numerical ex-
ample in a former page. Three qualities of land yield
respectively 100, 80, and 60 bushels to the same outlay on
the same extent of surface. If No. 1 could be made to yield
200, No. 2, 160, and No. 3, 120 bushels, at only double the
expense, and therefore without any increase of the cost of
production, and if the population, having doubled, required
all this increased quantity, the rent of No. 1 would be
80 bushels instead of 40, and of No. 2, 40 instead of 20,
ae the price and value per bushel would be the same as
eee oe i rent and money rent would both be
ee, ae aren noe out the difference between this
= ae eee lave shown would take place if there were

EAP. production without the accompaniment of
an increased demand for food.


INFLUENCE OF PROGRESS ON PROFITS, RENTS, &c. 279


Agricultural improvement, then, is always ultimately, and
in the manner in which it generally takes place, also imme-
diately, beneficial to the landlord. We may add, that when
it takes place in that manner, it is beneficial to no one else.
When the demand for produce fully keeps pace with the in-
creased capacity of production, food is not cheapened; the
labourers are not, even temporarily, benefited; the cost of
labour is not diminished, nor profits raised. There is a
greater aggregate production, a greater produce divided among
the labourers, and a larger gross profit; but the wages being
shared among a larger population, and the profit spread over
a larger capital, no labourer is better off, nor does any
capitalist derive from the same amount of capital a larger
income.


The result of this long investigation may be summed up
as follows. The economical progress of a society constituted
of landlords, capitalists, and labourers, tends to the progres-


sive enrichment of the landlord class; while the cost of the
labourer’s subsistence tends on the whole to increase, and
profits to fall. Agricultural improvements are a counteracting
force to these last effects; but the first, though a case is con-
ceivable in which it would be temporarily checked, is ulti-
mately in a high degree promoted by those improvements ;
and the increase of population tends to transfer all the bene-
fits derived from agricultural improvement to the landlords
alone. What other consequences, in addition to these, or in
modification of them, arise from the industrial progress of a
society thus constituted, I shall endeayour to shew in the
succeeding chapter.


CHAPTER IV.


OF THE TENDENCY OF PROFITS TO A MINIMUM.


§ 1. Tue tendency of profits to fall as society advances,
which has been brought to notice in the preceding chapter,
was early recognized by writers on industry and commerce};
but the laws which govern profits not being then understood,
the phenomenon was ascribed to a wrong cause. Adam
Smith considered profits to be determined by what he called
the competition of capital; and concluded, that when capital
increased, this competition must likewise increase, and pro-
fits must fall. It is not quite certain what sort of competition
Adam Smith had here in view. His words in the chapter on
Profits of Stock* are, “ When the stocks of many rich mer-
chants are turned into the same trade, their mutual competi-
tion naturally tends to lower its profit; and when there is a
like increase of stock in all the different trades carried on in
the same society, the same competition must produce the
same effect in them all.” This passage would lead us to
infer that, in Adam Smith’s opinion, the manner in which
the competition of capital lowers profits is by lowering
prices; that being the mode in which an increased invest-
ment of capital in any particular trade, usually lowers the
profits of that trade. But if this was his meaning, he over-
looked the circumstance, that the fall of price, which if con-
fined to one commodity really does lower the profits of the
producer, ceases to have that effect as soon as it extends to
all commodities ; because, when all things have fallen, n0-
thing has really fallen, except nominally ; and even computed
in money, the expenses of every producer have diminished


* Wealth of Nations, book i. ch. 9,


TENDENCY OF PROFITS TO A MINIMUM. 281


a


as much as his returns. Unless indeed labour be the one F|
commodity which has not fallen in money price, when all Hi
other things have: if so, what has really taken place is a rise #
of wages; and it is that, and not the fall of prices, which has
lowered the profits of capital. There is another thing which
escaped the notice of Adam Smith; that the supposed uni-
versal fall of prices, through increased competition of capitals,
is a thing which cannot take place. Prices-are not determined
by the competition of the sellers only, but also by that of the
buyers; by demand as well as supply. The demand which i
affects money prices consists of all the money in the hands
of the community, destined to be laid out in commodities ;
and as long as the proportion of this to the commodities is
not diminished, there is no fall of general prices. Now,
howsoever capital may increase, and give rise to an increased
production of commodities, a full share of the capital will be
drawn to the business of producing or importing money, and
the quantity of money will be augmented in an equal ratio
with the quantity of commodities. For if this were not the
case, and if money, therefore, were, as the theory supposes,
perpetually acquiring increased purchasing power, those who
produced or imported it would obtain constantly-increasing
profits; and this could not happen without attracting capital
to that occupation from all other employments. If a general
fall of prices, and increased value of money, were really to
occur, it could only be as the consequence of increased cost
of production, from the gradual exhaustion of the mines.

It is not tenable, therefore, in theory, that the increase of
capital produces, or tends to produce, a general decline of i
money prices. Neither is it true, that any such general de-
cline of prices, as capital increased, has manifested itself in
fact. The only things observed to fall in price with the
progress of society, are those in which there have been im- i
provements in production greater than have taken place in Ht
the production of the precious metals; as for example, all
spun and woven fabrics. Other things again, instead of


i
'
:
}
i


282 BOOK Iv. CHAPTER Ivy. $§ 2.


falling, have risen in price, because their cost of production,
compared with that of gold and silver, has increased. Among
these are all kinds of food, comparison being made with a
much earlier period of history. The doctrine, therefore, that
competition of capital lowers profits by lowering prices, is
incorrect in fact, as well as unsound in principle.

But it is not certain that Adam Smith really held that
doctrine; for his language on the subject is wavering and
unsteady, denoting the absence of a definite and well-digested
opinion. Occasionally he seems to think that the mode in
which the competition of capital lowers profits, is by raising
wages. And when speaking of the rate of profit in new
colonies, he seems on the very verge of grasping the com-
plete theory of the subject. “As the colony increases, the
profits of stock gradually diminish. When the most fertile
and best situated lands have been all occupied, less profit
can be made by the cultivation of what is inferior both m
soil and situation.” Had Adam Smith meditated longer on
the subject, and systematized his view of it by harmonizing
with each other the various glimpses which he caught of it
from different points, he would have perceived that this last
is the true cause of the fall of profits usually consequent upon
increase of capital.


§ 2. Mr. Wakefield, in his “ England and America”
and his Commentary on Adam Smith, takes a much clearer
view of the subject, and arrives, through a substantially
correct series of deductions, at practical conclusions which
appear to me just and important; but he is not equally happy
in Incorporating his valuable speculations with the results of
previous thought, and reconciling them with other truths.
Some of the theories of Dr. Chalmers, in his chapter “On
the Increase and Limit of Capital,” and the two chapters
which follow it, coincide in their tendency and spirit with
those of Mr. Wakefield; but Dr. Chalmers’ ideas, though
delivered, as is his wont, with a most attractive semblance of


TENDENCY OF PROFITS TO A MINIMUM. 283


clearness, are really on this subject much more confused than
even those of Adam Smith, and more decidedly infected with
the often refuted notion that the competition of capital
lowers general prices; the subject of Money apparently not
being included among the parts of Political Economy which
this acute and vigorous writer had carefully studied.

Mr. Wakefield’s explanation of the fall of profits: is
briefly this. Production is limited not solely by the quantity
of capital and of labour, but also by the extent of the “field
of employment.” The field of employment for capital is
twofold; the land of the country, and the capacity of foreign
markets to take its manufactured commodities. Ona limited
extent of land, only a limited quantity of capital can find
employment at a profit. As the quantity of capital ap-
proaches this limit, profit falls; when the limit is attained,
profit is annihilated; and can only be restored through an
extension of the field of employment, either by the acquisi-
tion of fertile land, or by opening new markets in foreign
countries, from which food and materials can be purchased
with the products of domestic capital. These propositions
are in my opinion substantially true; and, even to the phraseo-
logy in which they are expressed, considered as adapted to
popular and practical rather than scientific uses, I have
nothing to object. The error which seems to me imputable
to Mr. Wakefield, is that of supposing his doctrines to be in
contradiction to the principles of the best school of preceding
political economists, instead of being, .as they really are,
corollaries from those principles; though corollaries which,
perhaps, would not always have been admitted by those poli-
tical economists themselves.

The most scientific treatment of the subject which I have
met with, is in an essay on the effects of Machinery, by
Mr William Ellis*; which was doubtless unknown to Mr.
Wakefield, but which had preceded him, though by a different


* Published in the Westminster Review for January 1826.


}
ii


284 BOOK IV. CHAPTER Iv. $§ 3.


path, in several of his leading conclusions. This essay excited
little notice, partly from being published anonymously ina
periodical, and partly because it was much in advance of the
state of political economy at the time. In Mr. Ellis’s view
of the subject, the questions and difficulties raised by Mr.
Wakefield’s speculations and by those of Dr. Chalmers, find
a solution consistent with the principles of political economy
laid down in the present treatise.


§ 3. There is at every time and place some particular
rate of profit, which is the lowest that will induce the people
of that country and time to accumulate savings, and to employ
those savings productively. This minimum rate of profit
varies according to circumstances. It depends on two
elements. One is, the strength of the effective desire of
accumulation; the comparative estimate made by the people
of that place and era, of future interests when weighed
against present. This element chiefly affects the inclination
to save. The other element, which affects not so much the
willingness to save as the disposition to employ savings plo:
ductively, is the degree of security of capital engaged in
industrial operations. A state of general insecurity, no doubt
affects also the disposition to save. A hoard may be a source
of additional danger to its reputed possessor. But as it may
also be a powerful means of averting dangers, the effects in
this respect may perhaps be looked upon as balanced. But
in employing any funds which a person may possess as capital
on his own account, or in lending it to others to be so em-
ployed, there is always some additional risk, over and above
that incurred by keeping it idle in his own custody. This
extra risk is great, in proportion as the general state of society
1s Insecure: it may be equivalent to twenty, thirty, or fifty
per cent, or to no more than one or two ; something, howeve!,
it must always be: and for this, the expectation of profit
must be sufficient to compensate.

There would be adequate motives for a certain amount of


“=


TENDENCY OF PROFITS TO A MINIMUM. 285


saving, even if capital yielded no profit. There would be an
inducement to lay by in good times a provision for bad; to
reserve something for sickness and infirmity, or as a means of
leisure and independence in the latter part of life, or a help
to children in the outset of it. Savings, however, which
have only these ends in view, have not much tendency to
increase the amount of capital permanently in existence. i
These motives only prompt each person to save at one period m4
of life what he purposes to consume at another, or what will f
be consumed by his children before they can completely pro- i
vide for themselves. The savings by which an addition is
made to the national capital, usually emanate from the desire
of persons to improve what is termed their condition in life, ‘|
or to make a provision for children or others, independent of
their exertions. Now, to the strength of these inclinations it
makes a very material difference, how much of the desired
object can be effected by a given amount and duration of
self-denial; which again depends on the rate of profit. And
there is in every country some rate of profit, below which
persons in general will not find sufficient motive to save for }
the mere purpose of growing richer, or of leaving others i
better off than themselves. Any accumulation, therefore, by iy
which the general capital is increased, requires as its neces- ;
sary condition a certain rate of profit: arate which an average j
person will deem to be an equivalent for abstinence, with the
addition of a sufficient insurance against risk. There are .
always some persons in whom the effective desire of accumu- 1"
lation is above the average, and to whom less than this rate
of profit is a sufficient inducement to save; but these merely ‘
step into the place of others whose taste for expense and
indulgence is beyond the average, and who, instead of saving,
perhaps even dissipate what they have received. }
I have already observed that this minimum rate of profit, ;
less than which is not consistent with the further increase hill
of capital, is lower in some states of society than in others 5 i
and I may add, that the kind of social progress characteristic hy


286 BOOK IV. CHAPTER Iv. $§ 3.


of our present civilization, tends to diminish it. In the first
place, one of the acknowledged effects of that progress is an
increase of general security. Destruction by wars, and spo-
liation by private or public violence, are less and less to be
apprehended; and the improvements which may be looked
for in education and in the administration of justice, or, in
their default, increased regard for opinion, afford a growing
protection against fraud and reckless mismanagement. The
risks attending the investment of savings in productive em-
ployment, require therefore a smaller rate of profit to com-
pensate for them than was required a century ago, and will
hereafter require less than at present. In the second place,
it is also one of the consequences of civilization that man-
kind become less the slaves of the moment, and more habi-
tuated to carry their desires and purposes forward into a
distant future. This increase of providence is a natural
result of the increased assurance with which futurity can be
looked forward to; and is, besides, favoured by most of the
influences which an industrial life exercises over the passions
and inclinations of human nature. In proportion as life has
fewer vicissitudes, as habits become more fixed, and great
prizes are less and less to be hoped for by any other means
than long perseverance, mankind become more willing to
sacrifice present indulgence for future objects. This increased
capacity of forethought and self-control may assuredly find
other things to exercise itself upon than increase of riches,
and some considerations connected with this topic will shortly
be touched upon. The present kind of social progress, how-
ever, decidedly tends, though not perhaps to increase the
desire of accumulation, yet to weaken the obstacles to it, and
to diminish the amount of profit which people absolutely
require as an inducement to save andaccumulate. For these
two reasons, diminution of risk and increase of providence, a
profit or interest of three or four per cent is as sufficient a
motive to the imcrease of capital in England at the present
day, as thirty or forty per cent in the Burmese Empire, oF


TENDENCY OF: PROFITS TO A MINIMUM. 287


in England at the time of King John. In Holland during
the last century a return of two per cent, on government
security, was consistent with an undiminished, if not with an
increasing capital. But though the minimum rate of profit
is thus liable to vary, and though to specify exactly what it is
would at any given time be impossible, such a minimum
always exists ; and whether it be high or low, when once it is
reached, no further increase of capital can for the present
take place. The country has then attained what is known


to political economists under the name of the Stationary
state.


§ 4. We now, therefore, arrive at the fundamental pro-
position which this chapter is intended to mculcate. When
a country has long possessed a large production, and a large
net income to make savings from, and when, therefore, the
means have long existed of making a great annual addition to
capital ; (the country not having, like America, a large reserve
of fertile land still unused ;) it is one of the characteristics of
such a country, that the rate of profit is habitually within, as
it were, a hand’s breadth of the minimum, and the country
therefore on the very verge of the stationary state. By this
I do not mean that this state is likely, in any of the great
countries of Europe, to be soon actually reached, or that
capital does not still yield a profit considerably greater than
what is barely sufficient to induce the people of those coun-
tries to save and accumulate. My meaning is, that it would
require but a short time to reduce profits to the minimum, if
capital continued to increase at its present rate, and no cir-
cumstances having a tendency to raise the rate of profit
occurred in the meantime. The expansion of capital would
soon reach its ultimate boundary, if the boundary itself did
not continually open and leave more space.

In England, the ordinary rate of interest on government
securities, in which the risk is next to nothing, may be esti-
mated at a little more than three per cent: in all other invest-


it
an
i
|


‘ . . =
a ee


288 BOOK IV. CHAPTER Iv. § 4.


ments, therefore, the interest or profit calculated upon (ex-
clusively of what is properly a remuneration for talent or
exertion) must be as much more than this amount, as 18
equivalent to the degree of risk to which the capital is thought
to be exposed. Let us suppose that in England even so
small a net profit as one per cent, exclusive of imsurance
against risk, would constitute a sufficient inducement to
save, but that less than this would not be a sufficient in-
ducement. I now say, that the mere continuance of the
present annual increase of capital, if no circumstance occurred
to counteract its effect, would suffice in a small number of
years to reduce the rate of net profit to one per cent.

To fulfil the conditions of the hypothesis, we must Sus
pose an entire cessation of the exportation of capital a
foreign investment. No more capital sent abroad for rail-
ways, or loans; no more emigrants, taking capital with them,
to the colonies, or to other countries; no fresh advances
made, or credits given, by bankers or merchants to their
foreign correspondents. We must also assume that there
are no fresh loans for unproductive expenditure by the
government, or on mortgage, or otherwise; and none of the
waste of capital which now takes place by the failure of
undertakings which people are tempted to engage in by the
hope of a better income than can be obtained in safe paths
at the present habitual low rate of profit. We must suppose
the entire savings of the community to be annually invested
in really productive employment within the country itself;
and no new channels opened by industrial inventions, or by
amore extensive substitution of the best known processes
for inferior ones.

Few persons would hesitate to say, that there would be
great difficulty in finding remunerative employment every
year for so much new capital, and most would conclude that
there would be what used to be termed a general glut; that
commodities would be produced, and remain unsold, or be
sold only at a loss. But the full examination which we have


TENDENCY OF PROFITS TO A MINIMUM. 289


already given to this question*, has shown that this is not
the mode in which the inconvenience would be experienced.
The difficulty would not consist in any want of a market.
If the new capital were duly shared among many varieties of
employment, it would raise up a demand for its own pro-
duce, and there would be no cause why any part of that pro-
duce should remain longer on hand than formerly. What
would really be, not merely difficult, but impossible, would be
to employ this capital ‘without submitting to a rapid reduc-
tion of the rate of profit.

As capital increased, population either would also in-
crease, or it would not. If it did not, wages would rise, and
a greater capital would be distributed in wages among the
same number of labourers. There being no more labour
than before, and no improvements to render the labour more
efficient, there would not be any increase of the produce ;
and as the capital, however largely increased, would only
obtain the same gross return, the whole savings of each year
would be exactly so much subtracted from the profits of the
next and of every following year. It is hardly necessary to
say that in such circumstances profits would very soon fall
to the point at which further increase of capital would cease.
An augmentation of capital, much more rapid than that of
population, must soon reach its extreme limit, unless accom-
panied by increased efficiency of labour (through inventions
and discoveries, or improved mental and physical education),
or unless some of the idle people, or of the unproductive
labourers, became productive.

If population did increase with the increase of capital,
and in proportion to it, the fall of profits would still be ine-
vitable. Increased population implies increased demand for
agricultural produce. In the absence of industrial improve-
ments, this demand can only be supplied at an increased
cost of production, either by cultivating worse land, or by a


* Book iii. ch. 14.
VO male U


Ho Sr


gr eres Ww


290 BOOK IV. CHAPTER Iv. § 5.


more elaborate and costly cultivation of the land already
under tillage. The cost of the labourer’s subsistence is there-
fore increased; and unless the labourer submits to a deterio-
ration of his condition, profits must fall. In an old country
like England, if, in addition to supposing all improvement in
domestic agriculture suspended, we suppose that there is no


increased production in foreign countries for the English


market, the fall of profits would be very rapid. If both these
avenues to an increased supply of food were closed, and
population continued to increase, as it is said to do, at the
rate of a thousand a day, all waste land which admits of cul-
tivation in the existing state of knowledge would soon be
cultivated, and the cost of production and price of food would


be so increased, that, if the labourer received the increased
e for his increased eX-


money wages necessary to compensat
The


penses, profits would very soon reach the minimum.
fall of profits would be retarded if money wages did not rise,
or rose in a less degree ; but the margin which can be gained
by a deterioration of the labourer’s condition is a very nate
row one: in general he cannot bear much reduction: when
he can, he has also a higher standard of necessary require-
ments, and will not. On the whole, therefore, we may
assume that in such a country as England, if the present
annual amount of savings were to continue, without any of
the counteracting circumstances which now keep in check
the natural influence of those savings in reducing profit,
the rate of profit would speedily attain the minimum,
all further accumulation of capital would for the present
cease.


an


§ 5. What, then, are these counteracting circumstances,
which, in the existing state of things, maintain a tolerably
equal struggle against the downward tendency of profits, and
prevent the great annual savings which take place in this
country from depressing the rate of profit much nearer to
that lowest point to which it is always tending, and which,


TENDENCY OF PROFITS TO’ A MINIMUM. 29}


left to itself, it would so promptly attain? The resisting
agencies are of several kinds.

First among them, we may notice one which is so simple
and so conspicuous, that some political economists, especially
M. de Sismondi and Dr. Chalmers, have attended to it almost
to the exclusion of all others. his is, the waste of capital
in periods of over-trading and rash speculation, and in the
commercial revulsions by which such times are always fol-
lowed. It is true that a great part of what is lost at such
periods is not destroyed, but merely transferred, like a gam-
bler’s losses, to more successful speculators. But even of
these mere transfers, a large portion is always to foreigners,
by the hasty purchase of unusual quantities of foreign goods
at advanced prices. And much also is absolutely wasted.
Mines are opened, railways or bridges made, and many other
works of uncertain profit commenced, and in these enter-
prises much capital is sunk which yields either no return, or
none adequate to the outlay. Factories are built and ma-
chinery erected beyond what the market requires or can keep
in employment. Even if they are kept in employment, the
capital is no less sunk; it has been converted from circulating
into fixed capital, and has ceased to have any influence on
wages or profits. Besides this, there is a great unproductive
consumption of capital, during the stagnation which follows
a period of general over-trading. Establishments are shut
up, or kept working without any profit, hands are discharged,
and numbers of persons in all ranks, being deprived of their
income, and thrown for support on their savings, find them-
selves, after the crisis has passed away, in a condition of more
or less impoverishment. Such are the effects of a com-
mercial revulsion: and that such revulsions are almost pe-
riodical, is a consequence of the very tendency of profits
which we are considering. By the time a few years have
passed over without a crisis, so much additional capital has
been accumulated, that it is no longer possible to invest it
at the accustomed profit: all public securities rise to a high


u 2


292 BOOK ly. CHAPTER Iv. § 6.


price, the rate of interest on the best mercantile security
falls very low, and the complaint is general among persons 1n
business that no money is to be made. Does not this
demonstrate how speedily profit would be at the minimum,
and the stationary condition of capital would be attained, if
these accumulations went on without any counteracting prin-
ciple? But the diminished scale of all safe gains, inclines
persons to give a ready ear to any projects which hold ow
though at the risk of loss, the hope of a higher rate of profit;
and speculations ensue, which, with the subsequent 1 ee
destroy, or transfer to foreigners, a considerable a
capital, produce a temporary rise of interest and profit, make
room for fresh accumulations, and the same round is recom-
menced.

This, doubtless, is one considerable cause which arrests
profits in their descent to the minimum, by sweepimg away
from time to time a part of the accumulated mass by which
they are forced down. But this is not, as might be inferred
from the language of some writers, the principal cause. If
it were, the capital of the country would not increase; but
in England it does increase greatly and rapidly. This 1s
shown by the increasing productiveness of almost all taxes,
by the continual growth of all the signs of national wealth,
and by the rapid increase of population, while the condition
of the labourers certainly is not on the whole declining:
These things prove that each commercial revulsion, however
disastrous, is very far from destroying all the capital which
has been added to the accumulations of the country since
the last revulsion preceding it, and that, invariably, room 1s
either found or made for the profitable employment of a
perpetually increasing capital, consistently with not forcing
down profits to a lower rate.


§6. This brings us to the second of the counter-
agencies, namely, improvements in production. I am not
sure whether these have been formally included by Mr.


TENDENCY OF PROFITS TO A MINIMUM. 293


Wakefield among the modes of extending what he terms the
field of employment. But they evidently have that effect,
that is, they enable a greater amount of capital to be accu-
mulated and employed without depressing the rate of profit :
provided always that they do not raise, to a proportional
extent, the habits and requirements of the labourer. If the
labouring class gain the full advantage of the increased cheap-
ness, in other words, if money wages do not fall, profits
are not raised, nor their fall retarded. But if the class
people up to the improvement in their condition, and so
relapse to their previous state, profits will rise. All inven-
tions which cheapen any of the things consumed by the
labourer, unless his requirements are raised in an equivalent
degree, in time lower money wages; and by doing so, enable
a greater capital to be accumulated and employed, before
profits fall back to what they were previously.

Improvements which only affect thmgs consumed exclu-
sively by the richer classes, do not operate precisely in the
Same manner. The cheapening of lace or velvet has no
effect in diminishing the cost of labour; and no mode can
be pointed out in which it can raise the rate of profit, so as
to make room for a larger capital before the minimum is
attained. It, however, produces an effect which is virtually
equivalent; it lowers, or tends to lower, the minimum itself.
In the first place, the cheapness of articles of consumption
promotes the inclination to save, by affording to all con-
Sumers a surplus which they may lay by, consistently with
their accustomed manner of living; and unless they were
before suffering actual hardships, it will require little self-
denial to save some part at least of this surplus. In the
next place, whatever enables people to live equally well upon
a smaller income, inclines them to lay by capital for a lower
rate of profit. If people can live on an independence of
500/. a year in the same manner as they formerly could on
one of 1000/., some persons will be induced to save in hopes
of the one, who would have been deterred by the more


SS


:


|
5
i]
if
f
Ai
i
i
(i


294 BOOK IV. CHAPTER Iv. § 7.


remote prospect of the other. All improvements, therefore,
in the production of almost any commodity, tend in some
degree to widen the interval which has to be passed before
arriving at the stationary state: but this effect belongs in a
much greater degree to the improvements which affect the
articles consumed by the labourer, since these conduce to it
in two ways; they induce people to accumulate for a lower
profit, and they also raise the rate of profit itself.


§ 7. Equivalent in effect to improvements in production,
is the acquisition of any new power of obtaining cheap com-
modities from foreign countries. If necessaries are cheap-
ened, whether they are so by improvements at home or
importation from abroad, is exactly the same thing to wages
and profits. Unless the labourer obtains, and by an im-
provement of his habitual standard, keeps, the whole benefit,
the cost of labour is lowered, and the rate of profit raised.
As long as food can continue to be imported for an increasing
population without any diminution of cheapness, so long the
declension of profits through the increase of population and
capital is arrested, and accumulation may go on without
making the rate of profit draw nearer to the minimum.
And on this ground it is believed by some, that the repeal of
the corn laws has opened to this country a long era of rapid
increase of capital with an undiminished rate of profit.

Before inquiring whether this expectation is reasonable,
one remark must be made, which is much at variance with
commonly received notions. Foreign trade does not meces-
sarily increase the field of employment for capital. It is not
the mere opening of a market for British productions, that
tends to raise the rate of profits. If nothing were obtained
im exchange for those productions but the luxuries of the
rich, the expenses of no capitalist would be diminished ;
profits would not be at all raised, nor room made for the
accumulation of more capital without submitting to a reduc-
tion of profits: and if the attainment of the stationary state


TENDENCY OF PROFITS TO A MINIMUM. 295


were at all retarded, it would only be because the diminished
cost at which a certain degree of luxury could be enjoyed,
might induce people, in that prospect, to continue saving for
a lower profit than they formerly were willing to do. When
foreign trade makes room for more capital at the same profit,
it is by enabling the necessaries of life, or the habitual
articles of the labourer’s consumption, to be obtained at
smaller cost. It may do this in two ways; either by the
importation of those commodities themselves, or of the
means and appliances for producing them, Cheap iron has,
in a certain measure, the same effect on profits and the cost
of labour as cheap corn, because cheap iron makes cheap
tools for agriculture and cheap machinery for clothing. But
a foreign trade which neither directly, nor by any indirect
consequence, increases the cheapness of anything consumed
by the labourers, does not, any more than an inyention or
discovery in the like case, tend to raise profits or retard
their fall; it merely substitutes the production of goods for
foreign markets, in the room of the home production of
luxuries, leaving the employment for capital neither greater
nor less than before. It is true, that there is scarcely any
export trade which, in a country that already imports neces-
saries or materials, comes within these conditions ; for every
increase of exports enables the country to obtain all its im-
ports on cheaper terms than before.

A country which admits food of all kinds, and all neces-
saries and the materials of necessaries, to be freely imported
from all parts of the world (which is now very nearly, and
will soon be entirely, our own case) no longer depends on
the fertility of her own soil to keep up her rate of profits,
but on the soil of the whole world. It remains to consider
how far this resource can be counted upon for making head
during a very long period against the tendency of profits to
decline as capital mereases.

It must, of course, be supposed that with the increase of
capital, population also increases; for if did not, the conse-


i
if
i
i}


296 BOOK IV. CHAPTER Iv. § 8.


quent rise of wages would bring down profits, in spite of any
cheapness of corn. Suppose then that the population of
Great Britain goes on increasing at its present rate, and
demands every year a supply of imported food considerably
beyond that of the year preceding. This annual increase im
the food demanded from the exporting countries, can only be
obtained either by great improvements in their agriculture,
or by the application of a great additional capital to the
growth of food. The former is likely to be a very slow pro-
cess, from the rudeness and ignorance of the agricultural
classes in the food-exporting countries of Europe, while the
British colonies and the United States are already in posses-
sion of most of the improvements yet made, so far as suitable
to their circumstances. There remains as a resource, the
extension of cultivation. And on this it is to be remarked,
that the capital by which any such extension can take place,
is mostly still to be created. In Poland, Southern Russia,
Hungary, Spain, the increase of capital is extremely slow.
In America it is rapid, but not more rapid than the popula-
tion. The principal fund at present available for supplying
this country with a yearly increasing importation of food, is
that portion of the annual savings of America which has
hitherto been applied to increasing the manufacturing estab-
lishments of the United States, and which may now possibly
be diverted from that purpose te growing food for our market.
This limited source of supply, unless great improvements
take place in agriculture, cannot be expected to keep pace
with the growing demand of so rapidly increasing a popula-
tion as that of Great Britain; and if our population and
capital continue to increase with their present rapidity, the
only mode in which food can continue to be supplied cheaply
to the one, is by sending the other abroad to produce it.


8 8. This brings us to the last of the counter-forces
which check the downward tendency of profits in a country
whose capital increases faster than that of its neighbours,


TENDENCY OF PROFITS TO A MINIMUM. 297


and whose profits are therefore nearer tothe minimum. This
is, the perpetual overflow of capital into colonies or foreign
countries to seek higher profits than can be obtained at home.
I believe this to have been for many years one of the principal
causes by which the decline of profits in England has been
arrested. It has a twofold operation. In the first place, it
does what a fire, or an inundation, or a commercial crisis
would have done: it carries off a part of the increase of
capital, from which the reduction of profits proceeds. Se-
condly, the capital so carried off is not lost, but is chiefly
employed either in founding cclonies, which become large
exporters of cheap agricultural produce, or in extending and
perhaps improving the agriculture of older communities. It
is to the emigration of English capital, that we have chiefly
to look for keeping up a supply of cheap food and cheap
materials of clothing, proportional to the increase of our
population: thus enabling an increasing capital to find em-
ployment in the country, without reduction of profit, in pro-
ducing manufactured articles with which to pay for this
supply of raw produce. Thus, the exportation of capital is
an agent of great efficacy in extending the field of employ-
ment for that which remains: and it may be said truly that,
up to a certain point, the more capital we send away, the
more we shall possess and be able to retain at home.

In countries which are further advanced in industry and
population, and have therefore a lower rate of profit, than
others, there is always, long before the actual minimum is
reached, a practical minimum, viz. when profits have fallen
so much below what they are elsewhere, that, were they to
fall lower, all further accumulations would go abroad. In the
present state of the industry of the world, when it is neces-
sary, In any rich and improving country, to take the minimum
of profits at all into consideration for practical purposes, it
is only this practical minimum that needs be considered.
As long as there are old countries where capital increases
very rapidly, and new countries where profit is still high,


298 BOOK IV. CHAPTER Iv. § 8.


profits in the old countries will not sink to the rate which
would put a stop to accumulation; the fall is stopped at the
point which sends capital abroad. It is only, however, by
improvements in production, and even in the production of
things consumed by labourers, that the capital of a country
like England is prevented from speedily reaching that degree
of lowness of profit, which would cause all further sayings to
be sent to find employment in the colonies or in foreign


countries.


CHAPTER V.


CONSEQUENCES OF THE TENDENCY OF PROFITS TO i
A MINIMUM. i


§ 1. Tus theory of the effect of accumulation on profits, i,
laid down in the preceding chapter, materially alters many |
of the practical conclusions which might otherwise be sup- i
posed to follow from the general principles of Political Eco- il


nomy, and which were, indeed, long admitted as true by the
highest authorities on the subject.

It must greatly abate, or rather, altogether destroy, in coun-
tries where profits are low, the immense importance which used
to be attached by political economists to the effects which an
event or a measure of government might have, in adding to,
or subtracting from, the capital of the country. We have
now seen that the lowness of profits is a proof that the spirit il
of accumulation is so active, and that the increase of capital : H
has proceeded at so rapid a rate, as to outstrip the two :
counter-agencies, improvements in production, and increased f
supply of cheap necessaries from abroad: and that unless a Hy
considerable portion of the annual increase of capital were i
either periodically destroyed, or exported for foreign invest- ;
ment, the country would speedily attain the point at which i
further accumulation would cease, or at least spontaneously
slacken, so as no longer to overpass the march of invention
in the arts which produce the necessaries of life. In such a
state of things as this, a sudden addition to the capital of the
country, unaccompanied by any increase of productive power,
would be but of transitory duration; since by depressing
profits and interest, it would either diminish by a correspond- \
ing amount the sayings which would be made from income | y
in the year or two following, or it would cause an equivalent


300 BOOK IV. CHAPTER v. § 1.


amount to be sent abroad, or to be wasted in rash specula-
tions. Neither, on the other hand, would a.sudden abstrac-
tion of capital, unless of inordinate amount, have any i
effect in impoverishing the country. After a few ee
or years, there would exist in the country just as much capita
as if none had been taken away, The abstraction, by raising
profits and interest, would give a fresh stimulus to the accu-
mulative principle, which would speedily fill up the he
Probably, indeed, the only effect that would ensue, would be
that for some time afterwards less capital would be exported,
and less thrown away in hazardous speculation.

In the first place, then, this view of things eo
weakens, in a wealthy and industrious country, the force :
the economical argument against the expenditure of public
money for really valuable, even though industrially ae
productive, purposes. If for any great object of ae
or philanthropic policy, such as_ the industrial regenera 10
of Ireland, or a comprehensive measure of colonization
or of public education, it were proposed to raise a a
sum by way of loan, politicians need not demur to the
abstraction of so much capital, as tending to dry up the
permanent sources of the country’s wealth, and diminish the
fund which supplies the subsistence of the labouring popula-
tion. The utmost expense which could be requisite for any
of these purposes, would not in all probability deprive one
labourer of employment, or diminish the next year’s produc-
tion by one ell of cloth or one bushel of grain. In ee
countries, the capital of the country requires the legislators
sedulous care ; he is bound to be most cautious of encroach-
ing upon it, and should fayour to the utmost its accumulation
at home, and its introduction from abroad. But in rich,
populous, and highly cultivated countries, it is not capital
which is the deficient element, but fertile land; and what the
legislator should desire and promote, is not a greater aggregate
saving, but a greater return to savings, either by improved cul-
tivation, or by access to the produce of more fertile lands in


eS


7 at al


TENDENCY OF PROFITS TO A MINIMUM. 301


other parts of the globe. In such countries, the government
may take any moderate portion of the capital of the country
and convert it into revenue, without affecting the national
wealth: the whole being either drawn from that portion of
the annual savings which would otherwise be sent abroad, or
bemg subtracted from the unproductive expenditure of indi-
viduals for the next year or two, since every million spent
makes room for another million to be saved before reaching
the overflowing point. When the object in view is worth the
sacrifice of such an amount of the expenditure that furnishes
the daily enjoyments of. the people, the only well grounded
economical objection against taking the necessary funds
directly from capital, consists of the inconveniences attend-
ing the process of raising a revenue by taxation, to pay the
interest of a debt.

The same considerations enable us to throw aside as
unworthy of regard, one of the common arguments against
emigration asa means of relief for the labouring class. Emi-
gration, it is said, can do no good to the labourers, if, in
order to defray the cost, as much must be taken away from
the capital of the country as-from its population. That
anything like this proportion could require to be abstracted
from capital for the purpose even of the most extensive
colonization, few, I should think, would now assert: but
even on that untenable supposition, it is an error to suppose
that no benefit would be conferred on the labouring class.
If one-tenth of the labouring people of England were trans-
ferred to the colonies, and along with them one-tenth of the
circulating capital of the country, either wages, or profits, or
both, would be greatly benefited, by the diminished pressure
of capital and population upon the fertility of the land.
There would be a reduced demand for food: the inferior
arable lands would be thrown out of cultivation, and would
become pasture ; the superior would be cultivated less highly,
but with a greater proportional return ; food would be lowered
in price, and though money wages would not rise, every


—_—_—_—_—S SS SS


PE anne na era


*.


Se


302 BOOK IV. CHAPTER v. § 2.


labourer would be considerably improved in circumstances ;
an improvement which, if no increased stimulus to popula-
tion and fall of wages ensued, would be permanent; while if
there did, profits would rise, and accumulation start forward
so as to repair the loss of capital. The landlords alone would
sustain some loss of income; and even they, only if coloniza-
tion went to the length of actually diminishing capital and
population, but not if it merely carried off the annual
increase.


§ 2. From the same principles we are now able to arrive
at a final conclusion respecting the effects which machinery,
and generally the sinking of capital for a productive purpose,
produce upon the immediate and ultimate interests of the
labouring class. The characteristic property of this class of
industrial improvements is the conversion of circulating capi-
tal into fixed: and it was shown in the First Book*, that in
a country where capital accumulates slowly, the introduction
of machinery, permanent improvements of land, and the like,
may be, for the time, extremely injurious; since the capital
so employed may be directly taken from the wages fund, the
subsistence of the people and the employment for labour cur-
tailed, and the gross annual produce of the country actually
diminished. But in a country of great annual savings and
low profits, no such effects need be apprehended. Since even
the emigration of capital, or its unproductive expenditure, or
its absolute waste, do not in such a country, if confined
within any moderate bounds, at all diminish the ageregate
amount of the wages fund—still less can the mere conversion
of a like sum into fixed capital, which continues to be pro-
ductive, have that effect. It merely draws off at one orifice
what was already flowing out at another; or if not, the greater
vacant space left in the reservoir does but cause a greater
quantity to flow in. Accordingly, in spite of the mischievous


* Supra, vol. i. p. 113.


—


TENDENCY OF PROFITS TO A MINIMUM. 303


derangements of the money-market which have been occa-
sioned by the great sums in process of being sunk in
railways, I cannot agree with those who apprehend any mis-
chief, from this source, to the productive resources of the
country. My dissent does not rest on the absurd ground
(which to any one acquainted with the elements of the
subject needs no confutation) that railway expenditure is a
mere transfer of capital from hand to hand, by which
nothing is lost or destroyed. This is true of what is spent
in the purchase of the land; a portion too of what is paid
to parliamentary agents, counsel, engineers, and surveyors, is
saved by those who receive it, and becomes capital again: but
what is laid out in the dond fide construction of the railway
itself, is lost and gone ; when once expended, it is incapable
of ever being paid in wages or applied to the maintenance of
labourers again; as a matter of account, the result is that so
much food and clothing and tools have been consumed, and the
country has got a railway instead. But what I would urge
is, that the sums so applied are mostly a mere appropriation
of the annual overflowing which would otherwise have gone
abroad, or been thrown away unprofitably, leaving neither a
railway nor any other tangible result. The railway gambling
of 1844 and 1845 probably saved the country from a depres-
sion of profits and interest, and a rise of all public and
private securities, which would have engendered still wilder
speculations, and when the effects came afterwards to be com-
plicated by the scarcity of food, would have ended in a still
more formidable crisis than has recently been experienced.
In the poorer countries of Europe, the rage for railway con-
struction might have had worse consequences than in England,
were it not that in those countries such enterprises are in a
great measure carried on by foreign capital. The railway
operations of the various nations of the world may be looked
upon as a sort of competition for the overflowing capital of
the countries where profit is low and capital abundant, as
England and Holland. The English railway speculations are


304 BOOK Iv. CHAPTER v. § 2.


a struggle to keep our annual increase of capital at home;
those of foreign countries are an effort to obtain it.

It already appears from these considerations, that the
conversion of circulating capital into fixed, whether by rail-
ways, or factories, or ships, or machinery, or canals, or
mines, or works of drainage and irrigation, is not likely, in
any rich country, to diminish the gross produce or the
amount of employment for labour. How much then is the
case strengthened, when we consider that these transforma-
tions of capital are of the nature of improvements in produc-
tion, which, instead of ultimately diminishing circulating
capital, are the necessary conditions of its increase, since
they alone enable a country to possess a constantly augment-
ing capital, without reducing profits to the rate which would
cause accumulation to stop. There is hardly any increase of
fixed capital which does not enable the country to contain
eventually a larger circulating capital, than it otherwise could
possess and employ within its own limits: for there is hardly
any creation of fixed capital which, when it proves success-
ful, does not cheapen the articles on which wages are habitu-
ally expended. All capital sunk in the permanent improve-
ment of land lessens the cost of food and materials; almost
all improvements in machinery cheapen the labourer’s clo-
thing or lodging, or the tools with which these are made;
improvements in locomotion, such as railways, cheapen to
the consumer all things which are brought from a distance.
All these improvements make the labourers better off with
the same money wages, better off if they do not increase their
rate of multiplication. But if they do, and wages conse-
quently fall, at least profits rise, and, while accumulation
receives an immediate stimulus, room is made for a greater
amount of capital before a sufficient motive arises for send-
ing it abroad. Even the improvements which do not cheapen
the things consumed by the labourer, and which, therefore,
do not raise profits nor retain capital in the country, never-
theless, as we have seen, by lowering the minimum of profit


TENDENCY OF PROFITS TO A MINIMUM. 305


for which people will ultimately consent to save, leave an
ampler margin than previously for eventual accumulation,
before arriving at the stationary state.

We may conclude, then, that improvements in produc-
tion, and emigration of capital to the more fertile soils and
unworked mines of the uninhabited or thinly peopled parts
of the globe, do not, as it appears to a superficial view,
diminish the gross produce and the demand for labour at
home, but, on the contrary, are what we have chiefly to de-
pend on for increasing both, and are even the necessary con-
ditions of any great or prolonged augmentation of either.
Nor is it any exaggeration to say, that within certain, and not
very narrow, limits, the more capital a country hke England
expends in these two ways, the more she will have left.


x
VOL, Il.


CHAPTER VI.


OF THE STATIONARY STATE.


§ 1. Tue preceding chapters comprise the general theory
of the economical progress of society, in the sense in which
those terms are commonly understood; the progress of capi-
tal, of population, and of the productive arts. But in con-
templating any progressive movement, not in its nature unli-
mited, the mind is not satisfied with merely tracing the laws
of the movement; it cannot but ask the further question, to
what goal? Towards what ultimate point is society tending
by its industrial progress? When the progress ceases,
what condition are we to expect that it will leave mankind?

It must always have been seen, more or less distinctly,
by political economists, that the increase of wealth is not
boundless; that at the end of what they term the progres-
sive state lies the stationary state, that all progress in wealth is
but a postponement of this, and that each step in advance is
an approach to it. We have now been led to recognize that
this ultimate goal is at all times near enough to be fully in
view; that we are always on the verge of it, and that if we
have not reached it long ago, it is because the goal itself
flies before us. The richest and most prosperous countries
would very soon attain the stationary state, if no further im-
provements were made in the productive arts, and if there
were a suspension of the overflow of capital from those coun-
tries into the uncultivated or ill-cultivated regions of the
earth.

This impossibility of ultimately avoiding the stationary
state—this irresistible necessity that the stream of human
industry should finally spread itself out into an apparently
stagnant sea—must haye been, to the political economists of


THE STATIONARY STATE. 307


the last two generations, an unpleasing and discouraging
prospect; for the tone and tendency of their speculations
goes completely to identify all that is economically desirable
with the progressive state, and with that alone. With Mr.
M‘Culloch, for example, prosperity does not mean a large
production and a good distribution of wealth, but a rapid
increase of it; his test of prosperity is high profits; and as
the tendency of that very increase of wealth, which he calls
prosperity, is towards low profits, economical progress,
according to him, must tend to the extinction of prosperity.
Adam Smith always assumes that the condition of the mass
of the people, though it may not be positively distressed,
must be pinched and stinted in a stationary condition of
wealth, and can only be satisfactory in a progressive state.
The doctrine that, to however distant a time incessant strug-
gling may put off our doom, the progress of society must
“end in shallows and in miseries,” far from being, as many
people still believe, a wicked invention of Mr. Malthus, was
either expressly or tacitly affirmed by his most distinguished
predecessors, and can only be successfully combated on his
principles. Before attention had been directed to the prin-
ciple of population as the active force in determining the
remuneration of labour, the increase of mankind was virtu-
ally treated as a constant quantity; it was, at all events,
assumed that in the natural and normal state of human affairs
population must constantly increase, from which it followed
that a constant increase of the means of support was essen-
tial to the physical comfort of the mass of mankind. The
publication of Mr. Malthus’ Essay is the era from which
better views of this subject must be dated; and notwith-
standing the acknowledged errors of his first edition, few
writers have done more than himself, in the subsequent edi-
tions, to promote these juster and more hopeful anticipations.

Even in a progressive state of capital, in old countries, a
conscientious or prudential restraint on population is indis-
pensable, to prevent the increase of numbers from out-
x 2


308 BOOK IV. CHAPTER VI. § 2.


stripping the increase of capital, and the condition of the
classes who are at the bottom of society from being deterio-
rated. Where there is not, in the people, or in some very
large proportion of them, a resolute resistance to this dete-
rioration—a determination to preserve an established stand-
ard of comfort—the condition of the poorest class sinks, even
in a progressive state, to the lowest point which they will
consent to endure. The same determination would be equally
effectual to keep up their condition in the stationary state,
and would be quite as likely to exist. Indeed, even now, the
countries in which the greatest prudence 1s manifested in the
regulating of population, are often those in which capital in-
creases least rapidly. Where there is an indefinite prospect
of employment for increased numbers, there is apt to appear
less necessity for prudential restraint. If it were evident
that a new hand could not obtain employment but by dis-
placing, or succeeding to, one already employed, the combined
influences of prudence and public opinion might generally be
relied on for restricting the coming generation within the
numbers necessary for replacing the present.


§ 2. I cannot, therefore, regard the stationary state of
capital and wealth with the unaffected aversion so generally
manifested towards it by political economists of the old
school. I am inclined to believe that it would be, on the
whole, a very considerable improvement on our present con=
dition. I confess I am not charmed with the ideal of lite
held out by those who think that the normal state of human
beings is that of struggling to get on; that the trampling,
erushing, elbowing, and treading on each other’s heels, which
form the existing type of social life, are the most desirable
lot of human kind, or anything but the disagreeable symp-
toms of one of the phases of industrial progress. The northern
and middle states of America are a specimen of this stage
of civilization in very fayourable circumstances ; haying; ap-
parently, got rid of all social injustices and inequalities,


THE STATIONARY STATE. 309


that affect persons of Caucasian race and of the male sex,
while the proportion of population to capital and land is
such as to ensure abundance to every able-bodied member
of the community who does not forfeit it by misconduct.
They haye the six points of Chartism, and they have no
poverty: and all that these advantages do for them is that
the life of the whole of one sex is deyoted to dollar-hunting,
and of the other to breeding dollar-hunters. This is not a
kind of social perfection which philanthropists to come will
feel any very eager desire to assist in realizing. Most fitting,
indeed, is it, that while riches are power, and to grow as rich
as possible the universal object of ambition, the path to its
attainment should be open to all, without fayour or par-
tiality. But the best state for human nature is that in which,
while no one is poor, no one desires to be richer, nor has
any reason to fear being thrust back, by the efforts of others
to push themselves forward.

That the energies of mankind should be kept in employ-
ment by the struggle for riches, as they were formerly by the
struggle of war, until the better minds succeed in educating
the others into better things, is undoubtedly more desirable
than that they should rust and stagnate. While minds are
coarse they require coarse stimuli, and let them have them. In
the mean time, those who do not accept the present very early
stage of human improvement as its ultimate type, may be
excused for bemg comparatively indifferent to the kind of
economical progress which usually excites the congratulations
of politicians; the mere increase of production and accumu-
lation. For the safety of national independence it is essential
that a country should not fall much behind its neighbours in
these things. But in themselves they are of little importance,
so long as either the increase of population or anything else
prevents the mass of the people from reaping any part of the
benefit of them. Iknownot why it should be matter of con-
gratulation that persons who are already richer than any one
needs to be, should have doubled their means of consuming


310 BOOK IV. CHAPTER VI. § 2.


things which give little or no pleasure except as representative
of wealth; or that numbers of individuals should pass over,
every year, from the middle classes into a richer class, or
from the class of the occupied rich to that of the unoccupied.
It is only in the backward countries of the world that in-
creased production is still an important object: im those most


‘advanced, what is economically needed is a better distribu-


tion, of which an indispensable means is a stricter restraint
on population. Levelling institutions, either of a just or of
an unjust kind, cannot alone accomplish it; they may lower
the heights of society, but they cannot raise the depths.

On the other hand, we may suppose this better distri-
bution of property attained, by the joint effect of the pru-
dence and frugality of individuals, and of a system of legis-
lation favouring equality of fortunes, so far as is consistent
with the just claim of the individual to the fruits, whether great
or small, of his or her own industry. We may suppose, for
instance, (according to the suggestion thrown out in a former
chapter*,) a limitation of the sum which any one person may
acquire by gift or inheritance, to the amount sufficient to
constitute a moderate independence. Under this twofold
influence, society would exhibit these leading features:
well paid and affluent body of labourers; no enormous for-
tunes, except what were earned and accumulated during a
single lifetime; but a much larger body of persons than at pre-
sent, not only exempt from the coarser toils, but with sufficient
leisure, both physical and mental, from mechanical details, to
cultivate freely the graces of life, and afford examples of them
to the classes less favourably circumstanced for their growth.
This state of things, which seems, economically considered,
to be the most desirable condition of society, is not only
perfectly compatible with the stationary state, but, it
would seem, more naturally allied with that state than with
any other.


* Supra, vol. i. pp. 266-8,


THE STATIONARY STATE. 311


There is room in the world, no doubt, and even in old
countries, for an immense increase of population, supposing
the arts of life to go on improving, and capital to increase.
But, although it may be innocuous, I confess I see very little
reason for desiring it. The density of population necessary
to enable mankind to obtain, in the greatest degree, all the
advantages both of co-operation and of social intercourse, has,
in all the more populous countries, been attained. A popu-
lation may be too crowded, though all be amply supplied
with food and raiment. It is not good for man to be kept
perforce at all times in the presence of his species. A world
from which solitude is extirpated, is a very poor ideal.
Solitude, in the sense of being often alone, is essential to
any depth of meditation or of character; and solitude in the
presence of natural beauty and grandeur, is the cradle of
thoughts and aspirations which are not only good for the
individual, but which society could ill do without. Nor is
there much satisfaction in contemplating the world with no-
thing left to the spontaneous activity of nature; with every
rood of land brought into cultivation which is capable of
growing food for human beings; every flowery waste or
natural pasture ploughed up, all quadrupeds or birds which
are not domesticated for man’s use exterminated as his rivals
for food, every hedgerow or superfluous tree rooted out, and
scarcely a place left where a wild shrub or flower could grow


without being eradicated as a weed in the name of improved.


agriculture. If the earth must lose that great portion of its
pleasantness which it owes to things that the unlimited in-
crease of wealth and population would extirpate from it, for
the mere purpose of enabling it to support a larger, but not
a better or a happier population, I sincerely hope, for the
sake of posterity, that they will be content to be stationary,
long before necessity compels them to it.

It is scarcely necessary to remark that a stationary con-
dition of capital and population implies no stationary state
of human improvement. There would be as much scope as


Hy
|
i
i


312 BOOK IV. CHAPTER VI. § 2.


ever for all kinds of mental culture, and moral and social
progress; as much room for improving the Art of Living,
and much more likelihood of its being improved, when minds
ceased to be engrossed by the art of getting on. Even the
industrial arts might be as earnestly and as successfully cul-
tivated, with this sole difference, that instead of serving n0
purpose but the increase of wealth, industrial improvements
would produce their legitimate effect, that of abridging
labour. Hitherto it is questionable if all the mechanical
inventions yet made have lightened the day’s toil of any
human being. They have enabled a greater population to
live the same life of drudgery and imprisonment, and an
increased number of manufacturers and others to make large
fortunes. They have increased the comforts of the middle
classes. But they have not yet begun to effect those great
changes in human destiny, which it is in their nature and in
their futurity to accomplish. Only when, in addition to
just institutions, the increase of mankind shall be under the
deliberate guidance of a judicious foresight, can the conquests
made from the powers of nature by the intellect and energy
of scientific discoverers, become the common property of


the species, and the means of improving and elevating the
universal lot.


CHAPTER VII.


ON THE PROBABLE FUTURITY OF THE LABOURING


CLASSES.


§ 1. Tue observations in the preceding chapter had for
their principal object to deprecate a false ideal of human
society. Their applicability to the practical purposes of
present times, consists in moderating the inordinate import-
ance attached to the mere increase of production, and fixing
attention upon improved distribution, and a large remunera-
tion of labour, as the true desiderata. Whether the aggregate
produce increases absolutely or not, is a thing in which, after
a certain amount has been obtained, neither the legislator
nor the philanthropist need feel any strong interest: but,
that it should increase relatively to the number of those who
share in it, is of the utmost possible importance; and this,
(whether the wealth of mankind be stationary, or increasing
at the most rapid rate ever known in an old country,) must
depend on the opinions and habits of the most numerous
class, the class of manual labourers.

The economic condition of that class, and along with it
of all society, depends therefore essentially on its moral and
intellectual, and that again on its social, condition. In the
details of political economy, general views of society and
politics are out of place; but in the more comprehensive
Inquiries it is impossible to exclude them; since the various
leading departments of human life do not develope them-
selves separately, but each depends on all, or is profoundly
modified by them. To obtain any light on the great eco-
nomic question of the future, which gives the chief interest
to the phenomena of the present—the physical condition
of the labouring classes—we must consider it, not sepa-


314 BOOK IV. CHAPTER VII. § I.


rately, but in conjunction with all other points of their
condition.

Considered in its moral and social aspect, the state of the
labouring people has latterly been a subject of much more ;
speculation and discussion than formerly; and the opinion,
that it is not now what it ought to be, has become very
general. The suggestions which have been promulgated, and
the controversies which have been excited, on detached points
rather than on the foundations of the subject, have put in
evidence the existence of two conflicting theories, respecting
the social position desirable for manual labourers. The one
may be called the theory of dependence and protection, the
other that of selfdependence. :

According to the former theory, the lot of the poor, m
all things which affect them collectively, should be regulated
for them, not dy them. They should not be required or
encouraged to think for themselves, or give to their own
reflection or forecast an influential voice in the determination
of their destiny. It is the duty of the higher classes to think
for them, and to take the responsibility of their lot, as the
commander and officers of an army take that of the soldiers
composing it. This function the higher classes should pre-
pare themselves to perform conscientiously, and their whole
demeanour should impress the poor with a reliance on it, In
order that, while yielding passive and active obedience to the
rules prescribed for them, they may resign themselves in all
other respects to a trustful imsouciance, and repose under the
shadow of their protectors. The relation between rich and
poor should be only partially authoritative; it should be
amiable, moral, and sentimental : affectionate tutelage on the
one side, respectful and grateful deference on the other. The
rich should be in loco parentis to the poor, guiding and
restraining them like children. Of spontaneous action on
their part there should be no need. They should be called
on for nothing but to do their day’s work, and to be moral and
religious. Their morality and religion should be provided


PROBABLE FUTURE OF THE LABOURING CLASSES. 315


for them by their superiors, who should see them properly
taught it, and should do all that is necessary to ensure their
being, in return for labour and attachment, properly fed,
clothed, housed, spiritually edified, and innocently amused.

This is the ideal of the future, in the minds of those
whose dissatisfaction with the Present assumes the form of
affection and regret towards the Past. Like other ideals, it
exercises an unconscious influence on the opinions and senti-
ments of numbers who never consciously guide themselves
by any ideal. It has also this in common with other ideals,
that it has never been historically realized. It makes its
appeal to our imaginative sympathies in the character of a
restoration of the good times of our forefathers. But no
times can be pointed out in which the higher classes of this
or any other country performed a part even distantly resemb-
ling the one assigned to them in this theory. It is an ideali-
zation, grounded on the conduct and character of here and
there an individual. All privileged and powerful classes, as
such, have used their power im the interest of their own sel-
fishness, and have indulged their self-importance in despising,
and not im lovingly caring for, those who were, in their esti-
mation, degraded by inferiority. That what has always been
must always be, or that human improvement does not tend
more and more to correct the intensely selfish feelings engen-
dered by power, I should be sorry to affirm. This, however,
seems to me undeniable, that long before the superior classes
could be sufficiently improved to govern in the tutelary man-
ner supposed, the inferior classes would be too much im-
proved to be so governed.

I am quite sensible of all that is seductive in the picture
of society which this theory presents. Though the facts of
it have no prototype in the past, the feelings have. In them
lies all that there is of reality in the conception. As the idea
is essentially repulsive of a society only held together by
bought services, and by the relations and feelings arising out
of pecuniary interests, so there is something naturally attrac-


316 BOOK 1V: CHAPTER VII. § I.


tive in a form of society abounding in strong personal
attachments and disinterested self-deyotion. Of such feel-
ings it must be admitted that the relation of protector
and protected has hitherto been the richest source. The
strongest attachments of human beings in general are to-
wards the things or the persons that stand between them
and some dreaded evil. Hence, in an age of lawless violence
and insecurity, and general hardness and roughness of man-
ners, in which life is beset with dangers and sufferings at
every step, to those who have neither a commanding position
of their own, nor a claim on the protection of some one who
has—a generous giving of protection, and a grateful receiving
of it, are the strongest ties which connect human beings; the
feelings arising from that relation are their warmest feelings ;
all the enthusiasm and tenderness of the most sensitive
natures gather round it; loyalty on the one part and chivalry
on the other are principles exalted into passions. I do not
desire to depreciate these virtues. That the most beautiful
developements of feeling and character often grow out of the
most painful, and in many other respects the most hardening
and corrupting, circumstances of our condition, is now, and
probably will long be, one of the chief stumbling-blocks both
in the theory and in the practice of morals and education.
The error in the present case lies in not perceiving, that these
virtues and sentiments, like the clanship and the hospitality
of the wandering Arab, belong emphatically to a rude and
imperfect state of the social union, and that the feelings
between protector and protected can no longer have this
beautiful and endearing character where there are no longer
any serious dangers from which to protect. What is there in
the present state of society to make it natural that human
beings, of ordinary Strength and courage, should glow with
the warmest gratitude and deyotion in return for protection ?
The laws: protect them: where laws do not reach, manners
and opinion shield them. To be under the power of some
one, instead of being as formerly the sole condition of safety,


PROBABLE FUTURE OF THE LABOURING CLASSES. 317


is now, speaking generally, the only situation which exposes
to grievous wrong; and wrong against which laws and opinion
are neither able, nor very seriously attempt, to afford effectual
protection. We have entered into a state of civilization in
which the bond that attaches human beings to one another,
must be disinterested admiration and sympathy for personal
qualities, or gratitude for unselfish services, and not the
emotions of protectors towards dependents, or of dependents
towards protectors. The arrangements of society are now
such that no man or woman who either possesses or is able
to earn a livelihood, requires any other protection than
that of the law. This being the case, it argues great igno-
rance of human nature to continue taking for granted that
relations founded on protection must always subsist, and not
to see that the assumption of the part of protector, and of the
power which belongs to it, without any of the necessities
which justify it, must engender feelings opposite to loyalty.
Of the working classes of Western Europe at least it may
be pronounced certain, that the patriarchal or paternal system
of government is one to which they will not again be subject.
That question has been several times decided. It was
decided when they were taught to read, and allowed access to
newspapers and political tracts. It was decided when dis-
senting preachers were suffered to go among them, and appeal
to their faculties and feelings in opposition to the creeds pro-
fessed and countenanced by their superiors. It was decided
when they were brought together in numbers, to work socially
under the same roof. It was decided when railways enabled
them to shift from place to place, and change their patrons
and employers as easily as their coats. The working classes
have taken their interests into their own hands, and are perpe-
tually shewing that they think the interests of their employers
not identical with their own but opposite to them. Some
among the higher classes flatter themselves that these tenden-
cies may be counteracted by moral and religious education ;
but they have let the time go by for giving an education which


t
t}
f
{


i
iy


SSS


318 BOOK Ivy. CHAPTER Vil. § 2.

can serve their purpose. The principles of the Reformation
have reached as low down in society as reading and writing, and
the poor will no longer accept morals and religion of other
people’s prescribing. I speak more particularly of our own
country, especially the town population, and the districts of the
most scientific agriculture and highest wages, Scotland and the
north of England. Among the more inert and less modernized
agricultural population of the southern counties, it might be
possible for the gentry to retain for some time longer some-
thing of the ancient deference and submission of the poor, by
bribing them with high wages and constant employment ; by
ensuring them support, and never requiring them to do any-
thing which they do not like. But these are two conditions
which never have been combined, and never can be, for long
together. A guarantee of subsistence can only be practically
kept up, when work is enforced, and superfluous m ultiplication
restrained, by at least a moral compulsion. It is then, that
the would-be revivers of old times which they do not under-
stand, would feel practically in how hopeless a task they were
engaged. The whole fabric of patriarchal or seignorial
influence, attempted to be raised on the foundation of caressing
the poor, would be shattered against the necessity of enfore-
ing a stringent Poor-law.


§ 2. It is on a far other basis that the well-being and
well-doing of the labouring people must henceforth rest.
The poor have come out of leading-strings, and cannot any
longer be governed or treated like children. To their own
qualities must now be commended the care of their destiny-
Modern nations will have to learn the lesson, that the well-
being of a people must exist by means of the justice and
self-government, the dccavocuyn and cwppocuyn, of the indi-
vidual citizens. The theory of dependence attempts to dis-
pense with the necessity of these qualities in the dependent
mee eh Sinemet

, eir minds less and less acqul-


PROBABLE FUTURE OF THE LABOURING CLASSES. 319


escent in the degree of dependence which remains, the
virtues of independence are those which they stand in need
of. These virtues it is still in the power of governments
and of the higher classes greatly to promote; and they can
hardly do anything which does not, by its own effects or
those of its example, either assist or impede that object.
But whatever advice, exhortation, or guidance is held out
to the labouring classes, must henceforth be tendered to
them as equals, and accepted with their eyes open. The
prospect of the future depends on the degree in which they
can be made rational beings.

There is no reason to believe that prospect other than
hopeful. The progress indeed must always be slow. But
there is a spontaneous education going on im the minds of
the multitude, which may be greatly accelerated and im-
proved by artificial aids. The instruction obtained from
newspapers and political tracts is not the best sort of in-
struction, but it is vastly superior to none at all. The
institutions for lectures and discussion, the collective deli-
berations on questions of common interest, the trades unions,
the political agitation, all serve to awaken public spirit, to
diffuse variety of ideas among the mass, and to excite real
thought and reflection in a few of the more intelligent, who
become the leaders and instructors of the rest. Although
the too early attainment of political franchises by the least
educated class might retard, instead of promoting, their im-
provement, there can be little doubt that it is greatly stimu-
lated by the attempt to acquire those franchises. It is of
little importance that some of them may, at a certain stage
of their progress, adopt mistaken opinions. Communists
are already numerous, and are likely to increase in number;
but nothing tends more to the mental developement of the
working classes than that all the questions which Commu-
nism raises should be largely and freely discussed by them;
nothing could be more instructive than that some should
actually form communities, and try practically what it is to


320 BOOK IV. CHAPTER vil. § 2.


live without the institution of property. In the meantime,
the working classes are now part of the public; in all dis-
cussions on matters of general interest they, or a portion of
them, are now partakers; all who use the press as an instru-
ment may, if it so chances, have them for an audience}; the
avenues of instruction through which the middle classes
acquire most of the ideas which they have, are accessible to, at
least, the operatives in the towns. With these resources, it
cannot be doubted that they will increase in intelligence, even
by their own unaided efforts; while there is every reason to
hope that great improvements both in the quality and quan-
tity of school education, will be speedily effected by the
exertions of government and of individuals, and that the
progress of the mass of the people in mental cultivation,
and in the virtues which are dependent on it, will take place
more rapidly, and with fewer intermittences and aberrations,
than if left to itself.

From this increase of intelligence, several effects may be
confidently anticipated. First: that they will become even
less willing than at present to be led and governed, and
directed into the way they should go, by the mere authority
and préstige of superiors. If they have not now, still less
will they have hereafter, any deferential awe, or religious
principle of obedience, holding them in mental subjection to
a class above them. The theory of dependence and protec-
tion will be more and more intolerable to them, and they
will require that their conduct and condition shall be essen-
tially self-governed. It is, at the same time, quite possible
that they may demand, in many cases, the intervention of
the legislature in their affairs, and the regulation by law of
various things which concern them, often under very mis-
taken ideas of their interest, Still, it is their own will, their
own ideas and Suggestions, to which they will demand that
effect should be given, and not rules laid down for them by
other people. It is quite consistent with this, that they
should feel real respect for superiority of intellect and know-


PROBABLE FUTURE OF THE LABOURING CLASSES. 321


ledge, and defer much to the opinions, on any subject, of
those whom they think well acquainted with it. Such
deference is deeply grounded in human nature ; but they will


judge for themselves of the persons who are and are not
entitled to it.


§ 3. Itappears to me impossible but that the increase of
intelligence, of education, and of the love of independence
among the working classes, must be attended with a corre-
sponding growth of the good sense which manifests itself in
provident habits of conduct, and that population, therefore,
will bear a gradually diminishing ratio to capital and employ-
ment. This most desirable result would be much accele-
rated by another change, which lies in the direct line of the
best tendencies of the time, the opening of industrial occu-
pations freely to both sexes. The same reasons which make
it no longer necessary that the poor should depend on the
rich, make it equally unnecessary that women should depend
on men, and the least which justice requires is that law and
custom should not enforce dependence (when the correlative
protection has become superfluous) by ordaining that a
woman, who does not happen to have a provision by inherit-
ance, shall have scarcely any means open to her of gaining a
livelihood, except as a wife and mother. Let women who
prefer that occupation, adopt it; but that there should be no
option, no other carriére possible for the great majority of
Women, except in the humbler departments of life, is one of
those social injustices which call loudest for remedy. Among
the salutary consequences of correcting it, one of the most
probable would be, a great diminution of the evil of over-
population. It is by devoting one-half of the human species
to that exclusive function, by making it fill the entire life of
one sex, and interweave itself with almost all the objects of
the other, that the instinct in question is nursed into the
disproportionate preponderance which it has hitherto exer-
cised in human life.

VOL. Il. Y


322 BOOK IV. CHAPTER vil. § 4.


§ 4. The political consequences of the increasing power
and importance of the operative classes, and of the growing
ascendancy of numbers, which even under the present insti-
tutions is rapidly giving to the will of the majority at least a
negative voice in the acts of government, are too wide a sub-
ject to be discussed in this place. But, confining ourselves
to economical considerations, and notwithstanding the effect
which improved intelligence in the working classes, together
with just laws, may have in altering the distribution of the
produce to their advantage, I cannot think it probable that
they will be permanently contented with the condition of
labouring for wages as their ultimate state. To work at the
bidding and for the profit of another, without any interest in
the work—the price of their labour being adjusted by hostile
competition, one side demanding as much and the other
paying as little as possible—is not, even when wages are high,
a satisfactory state to human beings of educated intelligence,
who have ceased to think themselves naturally inferior to
those whom they serve. They may be willing to pass through
the class of servants in their way to that of employers; but
not to remain in it all their lives. To beginas hired labourers,
then after a few years to work on their own account, and
finally employ others, is the normal condition of labourers
in a new country, rapidly increasing in wealth and population,
like America or Australia. But something else is required
when wealth increases slowly, or has reached the stationary
state, when positions, instead of being more mobile, would
tend to be much more permanent than at present, and the
condition of any portion of mankind could only be desirable,
if made desirable from the first.

The opinion expressed in a former part of this treatise
respecting small landed properties and peasant proprietors,
may have made the reader anticipate that a wide diffusion of
property in land is the resource on which I rely for exempting
at least the agricultural labourers from exclusive dependence
on labour for hire. Such, howeyer, is not my opinion.


PROBABLE FUTURE OF THE LABOURING CLASSES. 323


indeed deem that form of agricultural economy to be most
groundlessly decried, and to be greatly preferable, in its agere-
gate effects on human happiness, to hired labour in any form
in which it exists at present, because the prudential check to
population acts more directly, and is shown by experience
to be more efficacious; and because, in point of security, of
independence, of exercise for the moral faculties and for the
intellect, the state of a peasant proprietor is far nearer to
what the state of the labourers should be, than the condition
of an agriculturist in this or any other country of hired labour.
Where the former system already exists, and works on the
whole satisfactorily, I should regret, in the present state of
human intelligence, to see it abolished in order to make way
for the other, under a pedantic notion of agricultural improve-
ment as a thing necessarily the same in every diversity of
circumstances. In a backward state of industrial improve-
ment, as in Ireland, I should urge its introduction, in prefer-
ence to an exclusive system of hired labour; as a more
powerful instrument for raising a population from semi-savage
listlessness and recklessness, to habits of persevering industry
and prudent calculation.

But a people who have once adopted the large system of
production, either in manufactures or in agriculture, are not
likely to recede from it; nor, when population is kept in due
proportion to the means of support, is there any sufficient
teason why they should. Labour is unquestionably more
productive on the system of large industrial enterprises; the
produce, if not greater absolutely, is greater in proportion to
the labour employed: the same number of persons can be
Supported equally well with less toil and greater leisure ;
which will be wholly an advantage, as soon as civilization and
improvement have so far advanced that what is a benefit to
the whole shall be a benefit to each individual composing it.
The problem is, to obtain the efficiency and economy of pro-
duction on a large scale, without dividing the producers into
two parties with hostile interests, employers and employed,


y 2


ee wea


1
}
|
/
I


324 BOOK IV. CHAPTER vil. § 5.


the many who do the work being mere servants under the
command of the one who supplies the funds, and having no
interest of their own in the enterprise, except to fulfil their
contract and earn their wages.


§ 5. A solution of this problem is afforded by the ex-
tension and developement of which the co-operative or joint-
stock principle is susceptible. That principle supplies means
by which every one who contributes to the work, whether
by labour or by pecuniary resources, may have a partner's
interest in it proportionally to the value of his contribution.
It is already a common practice to remunerate those in
whom peculiar trust is reposed by means of a percentage on
the profits; and cases exist in which the principle is, with
the most excellent success, carried down to the class of mere
manual labourers.

In the American ships trading to China, it has long been
the custom for every sailor to have an interest in the profits
of the voyage; and to this has been ascribed the general
good conduct of those seamen, and the extreme rarity of any
collision between them and the government or people of the
country. An instance in England itself, not so well known
as it deserves to be, is that of the Cornish miners. “In
Cornwall the mines are worked strictly on the system of
joint adventure ; gangs of miners contracting with the agent,
who represents the owner of the mine, to execute a certain
portion of a vein, and fit the ore for market, at the price of
so much in the pound of the sum for which the ore is sold.
These contracts are put up at certain regular periods, gene-
rally every two months, and taken by a voluntary partnership
of men accustomed to the mine. This system has its disad-
vantages, in consequence of the uncertainty and irregularity
of the earnings, and consequent necessity of living for long
periods on credit; but it has advantages which more than
counterbalance these drawbacks. It produces a degree of
intelligence, independence, and moral elevation, which raise


PROBABLE FUTURE OF THE LABOURING CLASSES. 325


the condition and character of the Cornish miner far above
that of the generality of the labouring class. We are told
by Dr. Barham, that ‘they are not only, as a class, intelligent
for labourers, but men of considerable knowledge.” Also,
that ‘they have a character of independence, something
American, the system by which the contracts are let giving
the takers entire freedom to make arrangements among them-
selves; so that each man feels, as a partner in his little firm,
that he meets his employers on nearly equal terms? . . .
With this basis of intelligence and independence in their
character, we are not surprised when we hear that ‘a very
great number of miners are now located on possessions of
their own, leased for three lives or ninety-nine years, on
which they have built houses ;? or that ‘281,541/. are depo-
sited in savings banks in Cornwall, of which two-thirds are
estimated to belong to miners*, ”

Mr. Babbage, who also gives an account of this system,
observes} that the payment to the crews of whaling ships is
governed by a similar principle ; and that “the profits aris-
ing from fishing with nets on the south coast of England are
thus divided: one-half the produce belongs to the owner of
the boat and net; the other half is divided in equal portions
between the persons using it, who are also bound to assist in
repairing the net when required.” Mr, Babbage has the
great merit of having pointed out the practicability, and the
advantage, of extending the principle to manufacturing indus-
try generally. I venture to quote the principal part of his
observations on the subject.

“The general principles on which the proposed system is
founded, are—Ilst. That a considerable part of the wages
received by each person employed, should depend on the


* This passage is from the Prize Essay on the Causes and Remedies of
National Distress, by Mr. Samuel Laing. The extracts which it includes
are from the Appendix to the Report of the Children’s Employment Com-
mission. 2

+ Economy of Machinery and Manufactures, 3rd edition, ch. 26.


Tia RICH tea niin


326 BOOK Ty. CHAPTER vil. $§ 5.


profits made by the establishment ; and 2nd. That every
person connected with it should derive more advantage from
applying any improvement he might discover, to the factory
in which he is employed, than he could by any other course.

“Tt would be difficult to prevail on the large capitalist to
enter upon any system, which would change the division of
the profits arising from the employment of his capital in
setting skill and labour in action; any alteration, therefore,
must be expected rather from the small capitalist, or from
the higher class of workmen, who combine the two charac-
ters; and to these latter classes, whose welfare will be first
affected, the change is most important. I shall therefore first
point out the course to be pursued in making the experi-
ment; and then, taking a particular branch of trade as an
illustration, I shall examine the merits and defects of the
proposed system as applied to it.

«“ Let us suppose, in some large manufacturing town, ten
or twelve of the most intelligent and skilful workmen to
unite, whose characters for sobriety and steadiness are good,
and are well known among their class. Such persons will
each possess some small portion of capital; and let them
join with one or two others who have raised themselves into
the class of small master-manufacturers, and therefore possess
rather a larger portion of capital. Let these persons, after
well considering the subject, agree to establish a manufactory
of fire-irons and fenders; and let us suppose that each of
the ten workmen can command forty pounds, and each of
the small capitalists possesses two hundred pounds: thus
they have a capital of 800/., with which to. commence busi-
ness, and for the sake of simplifying, let us further suppose
the labour of each of these twelve persons to be worth two
pounds a week. One portion of their capital will be ex-
pended in procuring the tools necessary for their trade,
which we shall take at 400/., and this must be considered as
their fixed capital. The remaining 400/. must be employed
as circulating capital, in purchasing the iron with which their


PROBABLE FUTURE OF THE LABOURING CLASSES. 327


articles are made, in paying the rent of their workshops,
and in supporting themselves and their families until some
portion of it is replaced by the sale of the goods pro-
duced.

“Now the first question to be settled is, what proportion
of the profit should be allowed for the use of capital, and
what for skill and labour? It does not seem possible to
decide this question by any abstract reasoning : if the capital
supplied by each partner is equal, all difficulty will be removed;
if otherwise, the proportion must be left to find its level,
and will be discovered by experience ; and it is probable that
it will not fluctuate much. Suppose it to be agreed that the
capital of 800/. shall receive the wages of one workman. At
the end of each week, every workman is to receive one pound
as wages, and one pound is to be divided amongst the
owners of the capital. After a few weeks the returns will
begin to come in; and they will soon become nearly uniform.
Accurate accounts should be kept of every expense and of
all the sales; and at the end of each week the profit should
be divided. A certain portion should be laid aside as a
reseryed fund, another portion for repair of the tools, and
the remainder being divided into thirteen parts, one of these
parts would be divided amongst the capitalists and one
belong to each workman. Thus each man would, in ordinary
circumstances, make up his usual wages of tivo pounds
weekly, If the factory went on prosperously, the wages of
the men would increase; if the sales fell off, they would be
diminished. It is important that every person employed in
the establishment, whatever might be the amount paid for
his seryices, whether he act as labourer or porter, or as the
clerk who keeps the accounts, or as book-keeper employed
for a few hours once a week to superintend them, should
receive one-half of what his service is worth in fixed salary,
the other part varying with the success of the undertaking.

“The result of such arrangements in a factory would


be,


a aa aera a


—"


328 BOOK IV. GHAPTER vil. § 5.


“J, That every person engaged in it would have a
direct interest in its prosperity; since the effect of any
success, or falling off, would almost immediately produce a
corresponding change in his own weekly receipts.

“2, Every person concerned in the factory would have
an immediate interest in preventing any waste or mismanage-
ment in all the departments.

<3, The talents of all connected with it would be
strongly directed to improvement in every department.

“4, None but workmen of high character and qualifica-
tions could obtain admission into such establishments, because
when any additional hands were required, it would be the
common interest of all to admit only the most respectable
and skilful, and it would be far less easy to impose upon a
dozen workmen than upon the single proprietor of a
factory.

“5. When any circumstance produced a glut in the
market, more skill would be directed to diminishing the cost
of production; and a portion of the time of the men might
then be occupied in repairing and improving their tools, for
which a reserved fund would pay, thus checking present, and
at the same time facilitating future production.

“6. Another advantage, of no small importance, would
be the total removal of all real or imaginary causes for com-
binations. The workmen and the capitalist would so shade
into each other—would so evidently have a common interest,
and their difficulties and distresses would be mutually so well
understood, that instead of combining to oppress one ano-
ther, the only combination which could exist would be a most
powerful union between both parties to overcome their
common difficulties.

“One of the difficulties attending such a system 1s, that
capitalists would at first fear to embark in it, imagining that
the workmen would receive too large’ a share of the profits :
and it is quite true that the workmen would have a larger
share than at present: but at the same time, it is presumed


PROBABLE FUTURE OF THE LABOURING CLASSES. 329


r4


the effect of the whole system would be, that the total
profits of the establishment being much increased, the
smaller proportion allowed to capital under this system
would yet be greater in actual amount, than that which
results to it from the larger share in the system now existing.

“A difficulty would occur also in discharging workmen
who behaved ill, or who were not competent to their work ;
this would arise from their having a certain interest in the
reserved fund, and perhaps from their possessing a certain
portion of the capital employed; but without entering into
detail, it may be observed, that such cases might be deter-
mined on by meetings of the whole establishment 3 and that
if the policy of the laws favoured such establishments, it
would scarcely be more difficult to enforce just regulations
than it now is to enforce some which are unjust, by means of
combinations either amongst the masters or the men.”

In this imaginary case, it is supposed that each labourer
brings some small portion of capital into the concern: but
the principle is equally applicable to the ordinary case, in
which the whole capital belongs to an individual capitalist.
An application of it to such a case is actually in progress, by
a Paris tradesman, a house-painter, M. Leclaire*. The intel-
ligent author of this meritorious experiment, published a
pamphlet in the year 1842, descriptive of his system of opera-
tions; to which attention was first directed by M. Duyeyrier,
in his Lettres Politiques, and a full abstract of which has
been published in Chambers’ Journal+. M. Leclaire employs
on an average two hundred workmen, whom he pays in the
usual manner, by fixed wages or salaries. He assigns to
himself, besides interest for his capital, a fixed allowance for
his labour and responsibility as manager. At the end of the
year, the surplus profits are divided among the whole body,
himself included, in the proportion of their fixed salaries.


* Elis establishment is (or was) 11, Rue Saint Georges.
+ For September 27, 1845,


Lain Sata Rede ies)


330 BOOK IV.’ CHAPTER vil. § 5.


The reasons by which M. Leclaire was led to adopt this
system are interesting and instructive. Finding the conduct
of his workmen unsatisfactory, he first tried the effect of
giving higher wages, and by this he managed to obtain a
body of excellent workmen, who would not quit his service
for any other. “Having thus succeeded” (I quote from the
abstract in Chambers’ J ournal,) “in producing some sort of
stability in the arrangements of his establishment, M. ee
expected, he says, to enjoy greater peace of mind. In this,
however, he was disappointed. So long as he was able _
superintend everything himself, from the general concerns 0
his business down to its minutest details, he did enjoy a
certain satisfaction; but from the moment that, owing to the
increase of his business, he found that he could be nothing
more than the centre from which orders were issued, and to
which reports were brought in, his former anxiety and dis-
comfort returned upon him.” He speaks lightly of the other
Sources of anxiety to which a tradesman is subject, bus
describes as an incessant cause of vexation the losses arising
from the misconduct of workmen. An employer “ will find
workmen whose indifference to his interests is such that they
do not perform two-thirds of the amount of work which they
are capable of; hence the continual fretting of masters, who,
seeing their interests neglected, believe themselves entitled
to suppose that workmen are constantly conspiring to nue
those from whom they derive-their livelihood. If the jou
neyman were sure of constant employment, his position
would in some respects be more enviable than that of ied
master, because he is assured of a certain amount of day s
wages, which he will get whether he works much or little.
He runs no risk, and has no other motive to stimulate him
to do his best than his own sense of duty. The master,
on the other hand, depends greatly on chance for his returns:
his position is one of continual irritation and anxiety. This
would no longer be the case to the same extent, if the
interests of the master and those of the workmen were


PROBABLE FUTURE OF THE LABOURING CLASSES. 321


bound up with each other, connected by some bond of mutual
security, such as that which would be obtained by the plan
of a yearly division of profits.”

It is to be regretted that we are only in possession of the
result of M. Leclaire’s experiment in the first year during
which it was in complete operation. Already, however, the
success had been remarkable. Not one of his journeymen
who worked as many as three hundred days, earned im that
year less than 1500 francs, and some considerably more. His
highest rate of daily wages being four francs, or 1200 francs
for 300 days, the remaining 300 francs or 12/. must have
been the smallest amount which any journeyman, who worked
that number of days, obtained as his proportion of the sur-
plus profit. M. Leclaire describes in strong terms the im-
provement which was already manifest im the habits and
demeanour of his workmen, not merely when at work, and
in their relations with their employer, but at other times
and in other relations, showing increased respect both for
others and for themselves.

Under this system, as well as under that recommended
by Mr. Babbage, the labourers are, in reality, taken into
partnership with their employer. Bringing nothing into the
common concern but their labour, while he brings not only
his labour of direction and superintendence but his capital
also, they have justly a smaller share of the profits; this,
however, is a matter of private arrangement in all partner-
ships: one partner has a large, another a small share, accord-
ing to their agreement, grounded on the equivalent which is
given by each. The essence, however, of a partnership is
obtained, since each benefits by all things that are beneficial
to the concern, and loses by all which are injurious. It is,
in the fullest sense, the common concern of all.


§ 6. To this principle, in whatever form embodied, it
seems to me that futurity has to look for obtaining the
benefits of co-operation, without constituting the numerical


332 BOOK IV. CHAPTER vil. § 6.


majority of the co-operators an inferior caste. The objec-
tions that apply to a “co-operative society,” in the Commu-
nist or Owenite sense, in which, by force of giving to every
member of the body a share in the common interest, no one
has a greater share in it than another, are not applicable to
what is now suggested. It is expedient that those, whose
performance of the part assigned to them is the most essen-
tial to the common end, should have a greater amount of
personal interest in the issue of the enterprise. If those
who supply the funds, and incur the whole risk of the under-
taking, obtained no greater reward or more influential voice
than the rest, few would practise the abstinence through
which those funds are acquired and kept in existence. Up
to a certain point, however, the principle of giving to every
person concerned an interest in the profits is an actual
benefit to the capitalist, not only (as M. Leclaire has testi-
fied) in point of ease and comfort, but even in pecuniary
advantage. And after the point of greatest benefit to the em-
ployers has been attained, the participation of the labourers
may be carried somewhat further without any material abate-
ment from that maximum of benefit. At what point, in each
employment of capital, this ultimatum is to be found, will
one day be known and understood from experience ; and up
to that point it is not unreasonable to expect that the part-
nership principle will be, at no very distant time, extended.
The value of this “ organization of industry,” for healing
the widening and embittering feud between the class of
labourers and the class of capitalists, must, I think, impress
itself by degreés on all who habitually reflect on the condi-
tion and tendencies of modern society. I cannot conceive
how any such person can persuade himself that the majority
of the community will for ever, or even for much longer;
consent to hew wood and draw water all their lives in the
Service and for the benefit of others; or can doubt, that they
will be less and less willing to co-operate as subordinate
agents in any work, when they have no interest in the result,


PROBABLE FUTURE OF THE LABOURING CLASSS&S. 333


and that it will be more and more difficult to obtain the best
work-people, or the best services of any work-people, except
on conditions similar in principle to those of M. Leclaire.
Although, therefore, arrangements of this sort are now in
their infancy, their multiplication and growth, when once
they enter into the general domain of popular discussion, are
among the things which may most confidently be expected.


BOOK WE.


ON THE INFLUENCE OF GOVERNMENT.


BOOK V.


OF THE INFLUENCE OF GOVERNMENT.


CHAPTER I,


OF THE FUNCTIONS OF GOVERNMENT IN GENERAL.


§ 1. Ovnz of the most disputed questions both in poli-
tical science and in practical statesmanship at this particular
period, relates to the proper limits of the functions and
agency of governments. At other times it has been a subject
of controversy how governments should be constituted, and
according to what principles and rules they should exercise
their authority; but it is now almost equally a question, to
what departments of human affairs that authority should
extend. And when the tide sets so strongly towards changes
in government and legislation, as a means of improving the
condition of mankind, this discussion is more likely to in-
crease than to diminish in interest. On the one hand,
impatient reformers, thinking it easier and shorter to get
possession of the government than of the intellects and dis-
positions of the public, are under a constant temptation to
stretch the province of government beyond due bounds:
while, on the other, mankind have been so much accustomed
by their rulers to interference for purposes other than the

VOL. It. Z


i
{i


SEE aaES SS


=


i
#


338 BOOK V. CHAPTER I. § 2.


public good, or under an erroneous conception of what that
good requires, and so many rash propositions are made by
sincere lovers of improvement, for attempting, by compulsory
regulation, the attainment of objects which can only be effec-
tually or only usefully compassed by opinion and discussion,
that there has grown up a spirit of resistance in imine to the
interference of government, merely as such, and a disposition
to restrict its sphere of action within the narrowest bounds.
From differences in the historical developement of different
nations, not necessary to be here dwelt upon, the former
excess, that of exaggerating the province of government,
prevails most, both in theory and in practice, among the Con-
tinental nations, while in England the contrary spirit is
decidedly predominant.

The general principles of the question, in so far as it is a
question of principle, I shall make an attempt to determine
in a later chapter of this Book; after first considering the
effects produced by the conduct of government in the exercise
of the functions universally acknowledged to belong to it.
For this purpose, there must be a specification of the func-
tions which are either inseparable from the idea of a govern-
ment, or are exercised habitually and without objection by
all governments; as distinguished from those respecting
which it has been considered questionable whether govern-
ments should exercise them or not. The former may be
termed the necessary, the latter the optional, functions of
government.


§ 2. In attempting to enumerate the necessary functions
of government, we find them to be considerably more multi-
farious than most people are at first aware of, and not capable
of being circumscribed by those very definite lines of demar-
cation, which, in the inconsiderateness of popular discussion,
it is often attempted to draw round them. We sometimes,
for example, hear it said that governments ought to confine
themselves to affording protection against force and fraud :


FUNCTIONS OF GOVERNMENT IN GENERAL. 339


that, these two things apart, people should be free agents,
able to take care of themselves, and that so long as a person
practises no violence or deception, to the injury of others in
person or property, he has a claim to do as he likes, without
being molested or restricted by judges and legislators. But
why should people be protected by their government, that
is, by their own collective strength, against violence and
fraud, and not against other evils, except that the expe-
diency is more obvious? If nothing, but what people cannot
possibly do for themselves, can be fit to be done for them by
government, people might be required to protect themselves,
by their skill and courage, even against force, or to beg or
buy protection against it, as they actually do where the
government is not capable of protecting them: and against
fraud every one has the protection of his own wits. But
without further anticipating the discussion of principles, it
is sufficient on the present occasion to consider facts.

Under which of these heads, the repression of force or of
fraud, are we to place the operation, for example, of the laws
of inheritance? Some such laws must exist in all societies.
It may be said, perhaps, that in this matter government has
merely to give effect to the disposition which an individual
makes of his own property by will. This, however, is at
least extremely disputable; there is probably no country by
whose laws the power of testamentary disposition is perfectly
absolute. And suppose the very common case of there being
no will: does not the law, that is, the government, decide
on principles of general expediency, who shall take the suc-
cession? and in case the successor is in any manner incom-
petent, does it not appoint persons, frequently officers of its
own, to collect the property and apply it to his benefit?
There are many other cases in which the government under-
takes the administration of property, because the public
interest, or perhaps only that of the particular persons con-
cerned, is thought to require it. This is often done in cases
of litigated property; and in cases of judicially declared

Z2


paren


anaes. <a)


340. BOOK V. CHAPTER I. § 2.


insolvency. It has never been contended that in doing these
things, a government exceeds its province.

Nor is the function of the law in defining property itself,
so simple a thing as may be supposed. It may be imagined,
perhaps, that the law has only to declare and protect the right
of every one to what he has himself produced, or acquired
by the voluntary consent, fairly obtained, of those who pro-
duced it. But is there nothing recognized as property
except what has been produced? Is there not the earth
itself, its forests and waters, and all other natural riches,
above and below the surface? These are the inheritance of
the human race, and there must be regulations for the com-
mon enjoyment of it. What rights, and under what con-
ditions, a person shall be allowed to exercise over any portion
of this common inheritance, cannot be left undecided. No
function of government is less optional than the regulation
of these things, or more completely involved in the idea of
civilized society.

Again, the legitimacy is conceded of repressing violence
or treachery ; but under which of these heads are we to place
the obligation imposed on people to perform their contracts ?
Non-performance does not necessarily imply fraud; the
person who entered into the contract may have sincerely in-
tended to fulfil it; his mind, or his circumstances, may have
altered; or not even that, since the omission to perform may
be a mere case of neglect. Is it no part of the duty of
governments to enforce contracts? Here the doctrine of
non-interference would no doubt be stretched a little, and it
would be said, that enforcing contracts is not regulating the
affairs of imdiyiduals at the pleasure of government, but
giving effect to their own expressed desire. Let us acquiesce
in this enlargement of the restrictive theory, and take it for
what it is worth. But governments do not limit their con-
cern with contracts, toa simple enforcement. They take upon
themselves to determine what contracts are fit to be enforced.
It is not enough that one person, not being either cheated or


FUNCTIONS OF GOVERNMENT IN GENERAL. 341


compelled, makes a promise to another. There are promises
by which it is not for the public good that persons should
have the power of binding themselves. To say nothing of
engagements to do something contrary to law, there are
engagements which the law refuses to enforce, for reasons
connected with the interest of the promisor, or with the
general policy of the state. A contract by which a person
sells himself to another as a slave, would be declared void by
the tribunals of this and of most other European countries.
There are few nations whose laws would enforce a contract
for what was looked upon as prostitution, or any matrimonial
engagement of which the conditions varied in any respect
from those which the law had thought fit to prescribe. But
when once it is admitted that there are any engagements
which for reasons of expediency the law ought not to enforce,
the same question is necessarily opened with respect to all
engagements. Whether, for example, the law should enforce
a contract to labour, when the wages are too low, or the
hours of work too severe: whether it should enforce a
contract by which a person binds himself to remain, for
more than a very limited period, in the service of a given
individual: whether a contract of marriage, entered into for
life, should continue to be enforced against the deliberate will
of the persons, or of either of the persons, who entered into
it. Every question which can possibly arise as to the policy
of contracts, and of the relations which they establish among
human beings, is a question for the legislator; and one which
he cannot escape from considering, and in some way or other
deciding.

Again, the prevention and suppression of force and fraud
afford appropriate employment for soldiers, policemen, and
criminal judges; but there are also civil tribunals. The
punishment of wrong is one business of an administration of
justice, but is not the decision of disputes another? Innu-
merable disputes arise between persons, without mala fides
on either side, through misconception of their legal rights, or


=


bf


{i
it
iit
|
}

vy
ig


342 BOOK y. CHAPTER I. § 2.


from not being agreed about the facts, on the proof of which
those rights are legally dependent. Is it not for the general
interest that the state should appoint persons to clear up
these uncertainties and terminate these disputes? It cannot
be said to be a case of absolute necessity. People might
appoint an arbitrator, and engage to submit to his decision,
and they do so where there are no courts of justice, or where
the courts are not trusted, or where their delays and expenses,
or the irrationality of their rules of evidence, deter people
from resorting to them. Still, it is universally thought
right that the state should establish civil tribunals; and if
their defects often drive people to have recourse to substitutes,
even then the power held in reserve of carrying the case
before a legally constituted court, gives to the substitutes
their principal efficacy.

Not only does the state undertake to decide disputes, it
takes precautions beforehand that disputes may not arise.
The laws of most countries lay down rules for determining
many things, not because it is of much consequence in what
way they are determined, but in order that they may be
determined somehow, and there may be no question on the
subject. The law prescribes forms of words for many kinds
of contract, in order that no dispute or misunderstanding
may arise about their meaning: it makes provision that if a
dispute does arise, evidence shall be procurable for deciding
it, by requiring that the document be attested by witnesses
and executed with certain formalities. The law preserves
authentic evidence of facts to which legal consequences are
attached, by keeping a registry of such facts; as of births,
deaths, and marriages, of wills and contracts, and of judi-
cial proceedings. In doing these things, it has never been
alleged that government oversteps the proper limits of its
functions.

Again, however wide a scope we may allow to the doctrine
that individuals are the proper guardians of their own interests,
and that government owes nothing to them but to save them


FUNCTIONS OF GOVERNMENT IN GENERAL. 343


from being interfered with by other people, the doctrine can
never be applicable to any persons but those who are capable
of acting in their own behalf. The individual may be an
infant, or a lunatic, or fallen into imbecility. The law
surely must look after the interests of such persons. It does
not necessarily do this through officers of its own. It may
devolve the trust upon some relative or connexion. But in
doing so is its duty ended? Can it make over the interests
of one person to the control of another, and be excused from
supervision, or from holding the person thus trusted, re-
sponsible for the discharge of the trust ?

There is a multitude of cases in which governments, with
general approbation, assume powers and execute functions for
which no reason can be assigned except the simple one, that
they conduce to general convenience. We may take as an
example, the power (which is a monopoly too) of coining
money. This is assumed for no more recondite purpose
than that of saving to individuals the trouble, delay, and
expense of weighing and assaying. No one, however, even
of those most jealous of state interference, has objected to
this as an improper exercise of the powers of government.
Prescribing a set of standard weights and measures is ano-
ther instance. Paving, lighting, and cleansing the streets
and thoroughfares, is another; whether done by the general
government, or, as is more usual, and generally more ad-
visable, by a municipal authority. Making or improving
harbours, building lighthouses, making surveys in order to
have accurate maps and charts, raising dykes to keep the
sea out, and embankments to keep rivers in, are cases in
point.

Examples might be indefinitely multiplied without intrud-
ing on any disputed ground. But enough has been said to
shew that the admitted functions of government embrace a
much wider field than can easily be included within the
ring-fence of any restrictive definition, and that it is hardly
possible to find any ground of justification common to them


344 BOOK V. CHAPTER I. § 3.


all, except the comprehensive one of general expediency;
nor to limit the interference of government by any universal
rule, save the simple and vague one that it should never be
admitted but when the ease of expediency is strong.


§ 3. Some observations, however, may be usefully be-
stowed on the nature of the considerations on which the
question of government interference is most likely to turn,
and on the mode of estimating the comparative magnitude of
the expediencies involved. This will form the last of the
three parts into which our discussion of the principles and
effects of government interference may conveniently be
divided. The following will be our division of the subject.

We shall first consider the economical effects arising
from the manner in which governments perform their neces-
sary and acknowledged functions.

We shall then pass to certain governmental interferences
of what I have termed the optional kind (#.e. overstepping the
boundaries of the universally acknowledged functions) which
have heretofore taken place, and in some cases still take place,
under the influence of false general theories.

It will lastly remain to inquire whether, independently
of any false theory, and consistently with a correct view of
the laws which regulate human affairs, there be any cases of
the optional class in which governmental interference is really
advisable, and what are those cases.

The first of these divisions is of an extremely miscel-
laneous character: since the necessary functions of govern-
ment, and those which are so manifestly expedient that they
have never or very rarely been objected to, are, as already
pointed out, too various to be brought under any very simple
classification. Those, however, which are of principal im-
portance, which alone it is necessary here to consider, may
be reduced to the following general heads.

First, the means adopted by governments to raise the
revenue which is the condition of their existence.


FUNCTIONS OF GOVERNMENT IN GENERAL. 345


Secondly, the nature of the laws which they prescribe on
the two great subjects of Property and Contracts.

Thirdly, the excellences or defects of the system of means
by which they enforce generally the execution of their laws,
namely, their judicature and police.


We commence with the first head, that is with the theory
of Taxation.


CHAPTER II.


OF THE GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF TAXATION.


§ 1. Tue qualities desirable, economically speaking, in
a system of taxation, have been embodied by Adam Smith
in four maxims or principles, which having been generally
concurred in by subsequent writers, may be said to have
become classical, and this chapter cannot be better com-
menced than by quoting them”.

“1. The subjects of every state ought to contribute to
the support of the government, as nearly as possible in pro-
portion to their respective abilities; that is, in proportion to
the revenue which they respectively enjoy under the pro-
tection of the state. In the observation or neglect of this
maxim consists what is called the equality or inequality of
taxation.

“9. The tax which each individual is bound to pay ought
to be certain, and not arbitrary. The time of payment, the
manner of payment, the quantity to be paid, ought all to be
clear and plain to the contributor and to every other person.
Where it is otherwise, every person subject to the tax is
put more or less in the power of the taxgatherer, who can
either aggravate the tax upon any obnoxious contributor,
or extort by the terror of such aggravation, some present or
perquisite to himself. The uncertainty of taxation encou-
rages the insolence and favours the corruption of an order of
men who are naturally unpopular, even when they are neither
insolent nor corrupt. The certainty of what each individual
ought to pay is, in taxation, a matter of so great importance,
that a very considerable degree of inequality, it appears, I


* Wealth of Nations, book v. ch. ii.


GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF TAXATION. 347


believe, from the experience of all nations, is not near so
great an evil as a very small degree of uncertainty.

“3. Every tax ought to be levied at the time, or in the
manner, in which it is most likely to be convenient for the
contributor to pay it. A tax upon the rent of land or of
houses, payable at the same term at which such rents are
usually paid, is levied at the time when it is most likely to
be convenient for the contributor to pay; or when he is most
likely to have wherewithal to pay. Taxes upon such con-
sumable goods as are articles of luxury, are all finally paid
by the consumer, and generally in a manner that is very
convenient to him. He pays them by little and little, as he
has occasion to buy the goods. As he is at liberty, too,
either to buy or not to buy, as he pleases, it must be his
own fault if he ever suffers any considerable inconvenience
from such taxes.

“4, Every tax ought to be so contrived as both to take
out and to keep out of the pockets of the people as little as
possible over and above what it brings into the public trea-
sury of the state. A tax may either take out or keep out of
the pockets of the people a great deal more than it brings
into the public treasury, in the four following ways. | First,
the levying of it may require a great number of officers,
whose salaries may eat up the greater part of the produce of
the tax, and whose perquisites may impose another additional
tax upon the people.” Secondly, it may divert a portion of
the labour and capital of the community from a more to a
less productive employment. “ Thirdly, by the forfeitures
and other penalties which those unfortunate individuals incur
who attempt unsuccessfully to evade the tax, it may fre-
quently ruin them, and thereby put an end to the benefit
which the community might have derived from the employ-
ment of their capitals. An injudicious tax offers a great
temptation to smuggling. Fourthly, by subjecting the
people to the frequent visits and the odious examination of
the taxgatherers, it may expose them to much unnecessary


nnn TT


Sa


—


fit
Wii
Ay
it
HW
itl
i| |
tl
iH
ue


348 BOOK V. CHAPTER Il. § 2.


trouble, vexation, and oppression :”’ to which may be added, that
the restrictive regulations to which trades and manufactures
are often subjected to prevent evasion of a tax, are not only in
themselves troublesome and expensive, but often oppose insu-
perable obstacles to making any improvement in the process.

The last three of these four maxims require little other
explanation or illustration than is contained in the passage
itself. How far any given tax conforms to, or conflicts with
them, is a matter to be considered in the discussion of par-
ticular taxes. But the first of the four points, equality of
taxation, requires to be more fully examined, being a thing
often imperfectly understood, and on which many false
notions have become to a certain degree accredited, through
the absence of any definite principles of judgment in the
popular mind.


§ 2. For what reason ought equality to be the rule in
matters of taxation? For the reason, that it ought to be so
in all affairs of government. As a government ought to
make no distinction of persons or classes in the strength of
their claims on it, whatever sacrifices it requires from them
should be made to bear as nearly as possible with the same
pressure upon all, which, it must be observed, is the mode
by which least sacrifice is occasioned on the whole. If any
one bears less than his fair share of the burthen, some other
person must suffer more than his share, and the alleviation
to the one is not, ceteris paribus, so great a good to him, as
the increased pressure upon the other is an eyil. Equality
of taxation, therefore, as a maxim of politics, means equality
of sacrifice. It means, apportioning the contribution of each
person towards the expenses of government, so that he shall
feel neither more nor less inconvenience from his share of
the payment than every other person experiences from his.
This standard, like other standards of perfection, cannot be
completely realized; but the first object in every practical
discussion should be, to know what perfection is.


GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF TAXATION. 349


There are persons, however, who are not content with
the general principles of justice as a basis to ground a rule
of finance upon, but must have something, as they think,
more specifically appropriate to the subject. What best
pleases them is, to regard the taxes paid by each member of
the community as an equivalent for value received, in the
shape of service to himself; and they prefer to rest the
justice of making each contribute in proportion to his means,
upon the ground, that he who has twice as much property
to be protected, receives, on an accurate calculation, twice as
much protection, and ought, on the principles of bargain and
sale, to pay twice as much for it. Since, however, the
assumption that government exists solely for the protection
of property, is not one to be deliberately adhered to; some
consistent adherents of the guid pro quo principle go on to
observe, that protection being required for person as well as
property, and everybody’s person receiving the same amount
of protection, a poll-tax of a fixed sum per head is a proper
equivalent for this part of the benefits of government, while
the remaining part, protection to property, should be paid
for in proportion to property. There is in this adjustment
a false air of nice adaptation, very acceptable to some minds.
But in the first place, it is not admissible that the protection
of person and property are the sole purposes of government.
The ends of government are as comprehensive as those of
the social union. They consist of all the good, and all the
immunity from evil, which the existence of government can
be made either directly or indirectly to bestow. In the
second place, the practice of setting definite values on things
essentially indefinite, and making them a ground of practical
conclusions, is peculiarly fertile in false views’ of social
questions. It cannot be admitted, that to be protected in
the ownership of ten times as much property, is to be ten
times as much protected. Whether the labour and expense
of the protection, or the feelings of the protected person, or
any other definite thing be made the standard, there is no


——— Poeroney:


it
i


RE
poles


——


350 BOOK V. CHAPTER II. § 3.


such proportion as the one supposed, nor any other definable
proportion. If we wanted to estimate the degrees of benefit
which different persons derive from the protection of govern-
ment, we should have to consider who would suffer most
if that protection were withdrawn: to which question if
any answer could be made, it must be, that those would
suffer most who were weakest in mind or body, either by
nature or by position. Indeed, such persons would almost
infallibly be slaves. If there were any justice, therefore, in
the theory of justice now under consideration, those who are
least capable of helping or defending themselves, being those
to whom the protection of government is the most indis-
pensable, ought to pay the greatest share of its price: the
reverse of the true idea of distributive justice, which consists
not in imitating but in redressing the inequalities and wrongs
of nature.

Government must be regarded as so pre-eminently a con-
cern of all, that to determine who is most interested in it 1s
of no real importance. If a person or class of persons receive
so small a share of the benefit as makes it necessary to raise
the question, there is something else than taxation which is
amiss, and the thing to be done is to remedy the defect, not
to recognize it and make it a ground for demanding less taxes.
As, in a case of voluntary subscription for a purpose in which
all are interested, all are thought to have done their part
fairly when each has contributed according to his means, that
is, has made an equal sacrifice for the common object ; in like
manner should this be the principle of compulsory contribu-
tions, and it is superfluous to look for a more ingenious Or
recondite ground to rest the principle upon.


§ 3. Setting out, then, from the maxim that equal sacri-
fices ought to be demanded from all, we have next to inquire
whether this is in fact done, by making each contribute the
same percentage on his pecuniary means. Many persons
maintain the negative, saying that a tenth part taken from 4


GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF TAXATION. 351


small income is a heavier burthen than the same fraction
deducted from one much larger: and on this is grounded the
very popular scheme of what is called a graduated property
tax, viz., an income tax in which the percentage rises with
the amount of the income.

On the best consideration I am able to give to this
question, it appears to me that the portion of truth which the
doctrine contains, arises principally from the difference be-
tween a tax which can be saved from luxuries, and one which
trenches, in ever so small a degree, upon the necessaries of
life. To take a thousand a year from the possessor of ten
thousand, would not deprive him of anything really conducive
either to the support or to the comfort of existence; and if
such would be the effect of taking five pounds from one
whosé income is fifty, the sacrifice required from the last is
not only greater than, but entirely incommensurable with,
that imposed upon the first. The mode of adjusting these
inequalities of pressure which seems to be the most equitable,
is that recommended by Bentham, of leaving a certain mini-
mum of income, sufficient to provide the necessaries of life,
untaxed. Suppose 50/. a year to be an income ordinarily
sufficient to provide a moderately numerous labouring family
with the requisites of life and health, and with protection
against habitual bodily suffering, but not with any indul-
gences. This then should be made the minimum, and
incomes exceeding it should pay taxes not upon their whole
amount, but upon the surplus. If the tax be ten per cent,
an income of 60/. should be considered as a net income of
10/., and charged with 1/. a year, while an income of 10007.
should be charged as one of 9501. Each would then pay a
fixed proportion, not of his whole means, but of his super-
fluities. An income not exceeding 50/. should not be taxed
at all, either directly or by taxes on necessaries : for as by
supposition this is the smallest income which a labouring
family ought to have, the government ought not to be a party
to making it smaller. This arrangement however would


eee


Hi
ii
4
i
i]


en neccee


I:


352 BOOK V. CHAPTER Il. § 3.


constitute a reason, in addition to others which might be
stated, for maintaining indirect taxes on articles of luxury
consumed by the poor. The immunity extended to the
income required for necessaries, should depend on its being
actually expended for that purpose; and the poor who, not
having more than enough for necessaries, divert any part of
it to indulgences, should like other people contribute their
quota out of those indulgences to the expenses of the
state.

The exemption in favour of the smaller incomes should
not, I think, be stretched further than to the amount of
income needful for life, health, and immunity from bodily
pain. .An income of 100/. a year would, as it seems to me;
obtain all the relief it is entitled to, compared with one of
1000/., by being taxed only on 50/. of its amount. It may
be said, indeed, that to take 1007. from 1000/. (even giving
back five pounds) is a heavier impost than 1000/. taken
from 10,000J. (giving back the same five pounds). But this
doctrine seems to me too disputable altogether, and even if
true at all, not true to a sufficient extent, to be made the
foundation of any rule of taxation. To tax all encomes in an
equal ratio, would be unjust to those, the greater part of
whose income is required for necessaries; but I can see n°
fairer standard of real equality than to take from all persons,
whatever may be their amount of fortune, the same arith-
metical proportion of their superfluities.

Some indeed contend that this rule of taxation bears
harder upon the moderate than upon the large incomes;
because the same proportional payment has more tendency
in the former case than in the latter, to reduce the payer t0
a lower grade of social rank. The fact appears to me more
ore questionable. But even admitting it, I object to its
ee ee incumbent on government to shape ats
that sacl fe 2 eee ee Sas see thee
of etpenteiennet Grune pecans ae

: ernment ought to set an example of


GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF TAXATION. 353


rating all things at their true value, and riches, therefore,
at the worth, for comfort or pleasure, of the things which
they will buy: and ought not to sanction the vulgarity of
prizing them for the pitiful vanity of being known to pos-
sess them, or the still more paltry shame of being suspected
to be without them, the presiding motives of three-fourths of
the expenditure of the middle classes. The sacrifices of real
comfort or indulgence which government requires, it 1s
bound to apportion among all persons with as much equality
as possible; but their sacrifices of the imaginary dignity depen-
dent on expense, it may spare itself the trouble of esti-
mating.

Both in Nngland and on the Continent a graduated pro-
perty-tax (l’impdét progressif) has been advocated, on the
avowed ground that the state should use the instrument of
taxation as a. means of mitigating the inequalities of wealth.
I am as desirous as any one, that means should be taken to
diminish those inequalities, but not so as to impair the
motives on which society depends for keeping up (not to say
increasing) the produce of its labour and capital. To tax the
larger incomes at a higher percentage than the smaller, is to
lay a tax on industry and economy; to impose a penalty on
people for having worked harder and sayed more than their
neighbours. It is partial taxation, which is a mild form of
robbery. A just and wise legislation would scrupulously
abstain from opposing obstacles to the acquisition of even
the largest fortune by honest exertion. Its impartiality
between competitors would consist in endeavouring that
they should all start fair, and not that, whether they were
swift or slow, all should reach the goal at once. Many, in-
deed, fail with greater efforts than those with which others
succeed, not from difference of merits, but difference of
opportunities ; and it is the part of a good government to
provide, that, as far as more paramount considerations
permit, the inequality of opportunities shall be remedied.
When all kinds of useful instruction shall be as accessible

VOL. Il. 2A


354 BOOK VY. CHAPTER Il. Se


as they might be made, and when the cultivated intelligence
of the poorer classes, aided so far as necessary by the euid-
ance and co-operation of the state, shall obviate, as it might
so well do, the major part of the disabilities attendant on
poverty, the inequalities of fortune arising from people’s own
earnings could not justly give umbrage. With respect to
the large fortunes acquired by gift or inheritance, the power
of bequeathing is as much a part of the right of property as
the power of using: that is not in the fullest sense a per-
son’s own, which he is not free to bestow on others. But
this is one of those privileges of property which are fit
subjects for regulation on grounds of general expediency ;
and I have already suggested*, as the most eligible mode
of restraining the accumulation of large fortunes in the
hands of those who have not earned them by exertion,
a limitation of the amount which any one person should
be permitted to acquire by gift, bequest, or inheritance.
Apart from this, and from the proposal of Bentham (also
discussed in a former chapter) that collateral inheritance
ab intestato should cease, and the property escheat to the
state, I conceive that inheritances and legacies, exceeding
a certain amount, are highly proper subjects for taxation;
and that the revenue from them should be as great as if can
be made without giving rise to evasions, by donation iter
vivos or concealment of property, such as it would be impos-
sible adequately to check. The principle of graduation (as
it is called), that is, of levying a larger percentage on @ larger
sum, though its application to general taxation would bea
violation of first principles, is quite unobjectionable as ap-
plied to legacy and inheritance duties.

The objection to a graduated property tax applies in an
aggravated degree to the proposition of an exclusive tax on
what is called “realized property,” that is, property not form-
ing a part of any capital engaged in business, or (it should


* Supra, book ii. ch. 1.


GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF TAXATION. 355


rather be said) in business on the owner’s account: as land, the
public funds, money lent on mortgage, and shares (I presume)
in joint-stock companies. Except the proposal of applying
a sponge to the national debt, no such palpable violation of
common honesty has found sufficient support in this country
during the present generation, to be regarded as within the
domain of discussion. It has not the palliation of a graduated
property tax, that of laying the burthen on those best able to
bear it; for “realized property” includes almost every provision
made for those who are unable to work, and consists, in great
part, of extremely small fractions. 1 can hardly conceive a
more shameless pretension, than that the major part of the
property of the country, that of merchants, manufacturers,
farmers, and shopkeepers, should be exempted from its share
of taxation; that these classes should only begin to pay
their proportion after retiring from business, and if they never
retire should be excused from it altogether. But even this
does not give an adequate idea of the injustice of the propo-
sition. The burthen thus exclusively thrown on the owners
of the smaller portion of the wealth of the community,
would not even be a burthen on that class of persons in per-
petual succession, but would fall exclusively on those who
happened to compose it when the tax was laid on. As land
and those particular securities would yield a smaller net
income, relatively to the general interest of capital and to
the profits of trade; the balance would rectify itself by a
permanent depreciation of those kinds of property. Future
buyers would acquire land and securities at a reduction of
price, equivalent to the peculiar tax, which tax they would,

therefore, escape from paying, while the original possessors

would remain burthened with it even after parting with the

property, since they would have sold their land or securities

at a loss of value equivalent to the fee-simple of the tax.

Its imposition would thus be tantamount to the confiscation

for public uses of a percentage of their property, equal to


the percentage laid on their income by the tax. That such
i Nae


a


356 BOOK Vv. CHAPTER I. § 4.


a proposition should find any favour, is a striking instance of
the want of conscience in matters of taxation, resulting from
the absence of any fixed principles in the public mind, and
of any indication of a sense of justice on the subject in the
general conduct of governments. Should the scheme ever
enlist a large party in its support, the fact would indicate a
laxity of pecuniary integrity in national affairs, scarcely infe-


rior to American repudiation.


§ 4. Whether the profits of trade may not rightfully be
taxed at a somewhat lower rate than incomes derived from
interest or rent, is part of the more comprehensive question,
so often mooted on the occasion of the present income tax,
whether life incomes should be subjected to the same rate of
taxation as perpetual incomes: whether salaries, for example,
or annuities, or the gains of professions, should pay the same
percentage as the income from inheritable property.

The existing tax treats all kinds of incomes exactly alike,
taking sevenpence in the pound as well from the person
whose income dies with him, as from the landowner, stock-
holder, or mortgagee, who can transmit his fortune undimi-
nished to his descendants. This isa visible injustice; yet it
does not arithmetically violate the rule that taxation ought to
be in proportion to means. When itis said that a temporary
income ought to be taxed less than a permanent one, the
reply is irresistible, that it is taxed less ; for the income which
lasts only. ten years pays the tax only ten years, while that
which lasts for ever pays for ever. But almost every one
feels that this answer does not touch the real grievance ; for
in spite of the nominal equality of income, A, an annuitant
of 1000/. a year, cannot so well afford to pay 100/. out of
it, as B who derives the same annual sum from heritable
PESREHUYS A having usually a demand on his income
which B has not, namely to provide by saving for children
or others ; to which in the case of salaries or professional
gains, must generally be added a provision for his own


GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF TAXATION. 357


later years; while B may expend his whole income without
injury to his old age, and still have it all to bestow on others
after his death. If A, in order to meet these exigencies,
must lay by 300/. of his income, to take 100/. from him as
income tax is taking 100/. from 700/., since it must be
tetrenched from that part only of his means which he can
afford to spend on his own consumption. Were he to throw
it rateably on what he spends and on what he saves, abating
701. from his consumption and 30/. from his annual saving,
then indeed his immediate sacrifice would be proportionally
the same as B’s: but then his children or his old age would
be worse provided for im consequence of the tax: and the
plea ordinarily urged in vindication of its justice, that when
the income ceases the tax ceases, would no longer be
maintainable.

The principle, therefore, of equality of taxation, inter-
preted in its only just sense, equality of sacrifice, requires
that a person who has no means of providing for old age,
or for those in whom he is interested, except by saving
from his income, should have the tax remitted on all that part
of his income which is really and bond fide applied to that
purpose. I say really applied, because (as before remarked in
the case of an income not more than sufficient for subsistence)
an exemption grounded on an assumed necessity, ought not
to be claimable by any one who practically emancipates him-
self from the necessity. One expedient might be, that the
Income-Tax Commissioners should allow, as a deduction
from income, all dond fide payments for insurance on life.
This, however, would not provide for the case which most of
all deserves consideration, that of persons whose lives are not
insurable; nor would it include the case of savings made as
a provision for age. The latter case might, perhaps, be met
by allowing as a deduction from income all payments made
in the purchase of deferred annuities; and the former by
remitting income-tax on sums actually settled, and on sums
paid into the hands of a public officer, to be invested in


358 BOOK V. CHAPTER Il. § 4.


securities, and repaid only to the executor or administrator :


the tax so remitted, with interest from the date of deposit,


being retained (for the prevention of fraud) as a first debt
chargeable on the deposit itself, before other debts could be
paid out of it; but not demanded if satisfactory proof were
given that all debts had been paid from other resources.
I throw out these suggestions for the consideration of those
whose experience renders them adequate judges of practical
difficulties. It is highly probable that there may be better
modes of attaining the object. If no plan be found practi-
cable by which the exemption can be confined to the portion
of income actually saved, there still remains the rough ex-
pedient of two different rates of assessment. There would
be great difficulty in taking into account differences of dura-
tion between one terminable income and another; and in
the most frequent case, that of incomes dependent on life,
differences of age and health would constitute such extreme
diversity as it would be impossible to take proper cogni-
zance of. It would probably be necessary to be content
with one uniform rate for all incomes of inheritance, and
another uniform rate for all those which necessarily ter-
minate with the life of the individual. In fixing the pro-
portion between the two rates, there must inevitably be
something arbitrary; perhaps a deduction of one-fourth in
favour of life-incomes would be as little objectionable as any
which could be made, it being thus assumed that one-fourth
of a life-income is, on the average of all ages and states of
health, a suitable proportion to be laid by as a provision for
successors and for old age*.


* Several writers on the subject, including Mr. Mill in his Elements of
Political Economy, and Mr. M‘Culloch in his work on Taxation, have
contended that as much should be deducted as would be sufficient to insure
the possessor’s life for a sum which would give to his successors for ever an
income equal to what he reserves for himself; since this is what the pos-
ae of heritable property can do without saving at all: in other words,

hat temporary incomes should be converted into perpetual incomes of equal


GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF TAXATION. 359


Of the net profits of persons in business, one-half, per-
haps, may be considered as interest on capital, and of a per-
petual character, and the other half as remuneration for the
skill and labour of superintendence; depending therefore on
the life of the individual, and even on his continuance in
business. For profits, therefore, an intermediate rate might
be adopted, one-half of the net income being taxed on the
higher scale, and the other half on the lower.

These are the chief cases, of ordinary occurrence, in
which any difficulty arises in interpreting the maxim of
equality of taxation. The proper sense to be put upon it,
as we have seen in the preceding example, is, that people
should be taxed, not in proportion to what they have, but to
what they can afford to spend. It is no objection to this
principle that we cannot apply it consistently to all cases.
A person with a life income and precarious health, or who
has many persons depending on his exertions, must, if he
wishes to provide for them after his death, be more rigidly
economical than one who has a life income of equal amount
with a strong constitution and few claims upon him; and
since taxation cannot accommodate itself to these distinc-


present value, and taxed as such. But this surely is fayouring them too
much. Owners of life incomes are not bound to forego the enjoyment of
them for the sake of leaving to a perpetual line of successors an inde-
pendent provision equal to their own temporary one ; and no one eyer
dreams of doing so. Least of all is it to be required or expected from those
whose incomes are the fruits of personal exertion, that they should leave
to their posterity for ever, without any necessity for exertion, the same in-
comes which they allow to themselves. All they are bound to do, even for
their children, independently of any expectation they may themselves have
raised, is to place them in circumstances in which they will have favourable
chances of earning their own living. To give, thowever; either to ehildren
or to others, by bequest, being a legitimate inclination, which these per sons
cannot indulge without laying by a part of their income, while the owners of
heritable property can; this real inequality in cases where the incomes
themselves are equal, should be considered, to a reasonable degree, in the
adjustment of taxation, so as to require from both, as nearly as practicable,


an equal sacrifice.


360 BOOK V. CHAPTER II. § 5.


tions, it is argued that there is no use in attending to any
distinctions, where the absolute amount of income is the
same. But the impossibility of doing perfect justice, is no
reason against doing as much as we can. Though it may be
a hardship to an annuitant whose life is only worth five years
purchase, to be allowed no greater abatement than is granted
to one whose life is worth twenty, it is better for him even
so, than if neither of them were allowed any abatement at all.


§ 5. Before leaving the subject of Equality of Taxa-
tion, I must remark that there are cases in which exceptions
may be made to it, consistently with that equal justice which
is the groundwork of the rule. Suppose that there is a kind
of income which constantly tends to increase, without any
exertion or sacrifice on the part of the owners: those owners
constituting a class in the community, whom the natural
course of things progressively enriches, consistently with
complete passiveness on their own part. In such a case, it
would be no violation of the principles on which private
property is grounded, if the state should appropriate this
increase of wealth, or part of it, as it arises. This would
not properly be taking anything from anybody; it would
merely be applying an accession of wealth, created by cir-
cumstances, to the benefit of society, instead of allowing it
to become an unearned appendage to the riches of a particu-
lar class.

Now this is actually the case with rent. The ordinary
progress of a society which increases in wealth, is at all
times tending to augment the incomes of landlords; to give
them both a greater amount and a greater proportion of the
wealth of the community, independently of any trouble or
outlay incurred by themselves. They grow richer, as it were
in their sleep, without working, risking, or economizing.
What claim have they, on the general principles of social
Justice, to this accession of riches? In what would they
have been wronged if society had, from the beginning,


GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF TAXATION. 361


reserved a right of taxing the spontaneous increase of rent,
to the highest amount required by financial exigencies? I
admit that it would be unjust to come upon each individual
estate, and lay hold of the increase which might be found to
have taken place in its rental; because there would be no
possibility of distinguishing in individual cases, between an
increase owing solely to the general circumstances of society,
and one which was the effect of skill and expenditure on the
part of the proprietor. The only admissible mode of pro-
ceeding would be by a general measure. The first step
should be a valuation of all the land in the country. The
present value of all land should be exempt from the tax;
but after an interval had elapsed, during which society had
increased in population and capital, a rough estimate might
be made of the Spontaneous increase which had accrued to
rent since the valuation was made. Of this the average
price of produce would be some criterion: if that had risen,
it would be certain that rent had increased, and (as already
shown,) even in a greater ratio than the rise of price. On this
and other data, an approximative estimate might be made, how
much value had been added to the land of the country by
natural causes; and in laying on a general land-tax, which
for fear of miscalculation should be considerably within the
amount thus indicated, there would be an assurance of not
touching any increase of income which might be the result
of capital expended or industry exerted by the proprietor.
But although there could be no question as to the justice
of taxing the increase of rent, if society had ayowedly re-
served the right, has not society waved that right by not
exercising it? In England, for example, have not all who
bought land for the last century or more, given value not
only for the existing income, but for the prospects of in-
crease, under an implied assurance of being only taxed in
the same proportion with other imcomes? This objection,
in so far as valid, has a different degree of validity in dif
ferent countries; depending on the degree of desuetude into


era


362 BOOK V. CHAPTER II. § 6.


which society has allowed a right to fall, which, as no one
can doubt, it once fully possessed. In most countries of
Europe, the right to take by taxation, as exigency might
require, an indefinite portion of the rent of land, has never
been allowed to slumber. In several parts of the Continent
the land-tax forms a large proportion of the public revenues,
and has always been confessedly liable to be raised or lowered
without reference to other taxes. In these countries no one
can pretend to have become the owner of land on the faith
of never being called upon to pay an increased land-tax. In
England the land-tax has not varied since the early part of
the last century. The last act of the legislature in relation
to its amount, was to diminish it: and although the sub-
sequent increase in the rental of the country has been im-
mense, not only from agriculture, but from the erowth of
towns and the increase of buildings, the ascendancy of land-
holders in the legislature has prevented any tax from being
imposed, as it so justly might, upon the very large portion of
this increase which was unearned, and, as it were, accidental.
For the expectations thus raised, it appears to me that an
amply sufficient allowance is made, if the whole increase of
income which has accrued during this long period from a
mere natural law, without exertion or sacrifice, is held sacred
from any peculiar taxation. From the present date, or any
subsequent time at which the legislature may think fit to
assert the principle, I see no objection to declaring that the
future increment of rent should be liable to special taxation ;
in doing which every shadow of injustice to the landlords
would be obviated, if the present market-price of their land
were secured to them; since that includes the present yalue
of all future expectations. With reference to such a tax,
perhaps a safer criterion than either a rise of rents or 4 rise
of the price of corn, would be a general rise in the price of
land. It would be easy to keep the tax within the amount
which would reduce the market-value of land below the or-
ginal valuation: and up to that point, whatever the amount


GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF TAXATION. 363


of the tax might be, no injustice would be done to the pro-
prietors.


§ 6. But whatever may be thought of the legitimacy of
making the state a sharer in all future increase of rent from
natural causes, the existing land-tax (which in this country
unfortunately is very small) ought not to be regarded as a
tax, but as a rent-charge in favour of the public; a portion of
the rent, reserved from time immemorial by the state, which
has never belonged to or formed part of the income of the
landlords, and should not therefore be counted to them as
part of their taxation, so as to exempt them from their fair
share of every other tax. As well might the tithe be re-
garded as a tax on the landlords: as well, in Bengal, where
the state, originally entitled to the whole rent of the land,
gave away one-tenth of it to individuals, retaining the other
nine-tenths, might those nine-tenths be considered as an un-
equal and unjust tax on the grantees of the tenth. That a
person owns part of the rent, does not make the rest of it
his just right, injuriously withheld from him. The landlords
originally held their estates subject to feudal burthens, for
which the present land-tax is an exceedingly small equiva-
lent, and for their relief from which they should have been
required to pay a much higher price. All who have bought
land since the tax existed have bought it subject to the tax.
There is not the smallest pretence for looking upon it as a
payment exacted from the existing race of landlords.

These observations are applicable to a land-tax, only in
so far as it is a peculiar tax, and not when it is merely a
mode of levying from the landlords the equivalent of what is
taken from other classes. In France, for example, there are
peculiar taxes on other kinds of property and income (the
mobilier and the patente), and supposing the land-tax to be
not more than equivalent to these, there would be no ground
for contending that the state had reserved to itself a rent-
charge on the land. But wherever and in so far as income


SE ea ene NN a
sate en = a =


oes nen


364 BOOK V. CHAPTER II. § 7.


*
derived from land is prescriptively subject to a deduction for
public purposes, beyond the rate of taxation levied on other
incomes, the surplus is not properly taxation, but a share of
the property in the soil, reserved by the state. In this
country there are no peculiar taxes on other classes, corre-
sponding to, or intended to countervail, the land-tax. The
whole of it, therefore, is not taxation but a rent-charge, and
is as if the state had retained, not a portion of the rent, but a
portion of the land. It is no more a burden on the land-
lord, than the share of one joint tenant is a burden on the
other. The landlords are entitled to no compensation for it,
nor have they any claim to its being allowed for, as part of
their taxes. Its continuance on the existing footing is no
infringement of the principle of Equal Taxation.

We shall hereafter consider, in treating of Indirect
Taxation, how far, and with what modifications, the rule of
equality is applicable to that department.


§ 7. In addition to the preceding rules, another general
rule of taxation is sometimes laid down, namely, that it
should fall on income, and not on capital. That taxation
should not encroach upon the amount of the national capital,
is indeed of the greatest importance; but this encroachment,
when it occurs, is not so much a consequence of any particular
mode of taxation, as of its excessive amount. Over-taxation,
carried to a sufficient extent, is quite capable of ruining the
most industrious community, especially when it is in any
degree arbitrary, so that the payer is never certain how much
or how little he shall be allowed to keep ; or when it is so laid
on as to render industry and economy a bad calculation. But
if these errors be avoided, and the amount of taxation be
not greater than it is at present even in the most heavily
taxed country of Europe, there is no danger lest it should
deprive the country of a portion of its capital.

To provide that taxation shall fall entirely on income, and
not at all on capital, is beyond the power of any system of


GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF TAXATION. 365


fiscal arrangements. There is no tax which is not partly
paid from what would otherwise have been saved; no tax, the
amount of which, if remitted, would be wholly employed in
increased expenditure, and no part whatever laid by as an
addition to capital. All taxes, therefore, are in some sense
partly paid out of capital; and in a poor country it is im-
possible to impose any tax which will not impede the
increase of the national wealth. But in a country where
capital abounds, and the spirit of accumulation is strong,
this effect of taxation is scarcely felt. Capital having reached
the stage in which, were it not for a perpetual succession of
improvements in production, any further increase would soon
be stopped—and having so strong a tendency even to outrun
those improvements, that profits are only kept above the
minimum by emigration of capital, or by a periodical sweep
called a commercial crisis; to take from capital by taxation
what emigration would remove, or a commercial crisis destroy,
is only to do what either of those causes would have done,
namely, to make a clear space for further saving.

I cannot, therefore, attach any importance, in a wealthy
country, to the objection made against taxes on legacies and
inheritances, that they are taxes on capital. It is perfectly
true that they are so. As Ricardo observes, if 100/. are
taken from any one in a tax on houses or on wine, he
will probably save it, or a part of it, by living in a cheaper
house, consuming less wine, or retrenching from some other
of his expenses: but if the same sum be taken from him
because he has received a legacy of 1000/., he considers the
legacy as only 900/., and feels no more inducement than at
any other time (probably feels rather less inducement) to
economize in his expenditure. ‘The tax, therefore, is wholly
paid out-of capital ; and there are countries in which this
would be a serious objection. But in the first place, the
argument cannot apply to any country which has a national
debt, and devotes any portion of revenue to paying it off; since
the produce of the tax, thus applied, still remains capital, and


— =


j
a


it
7 if
i


366 BOOK V. CHAPTER II. § 7.


is merely transferred from the tax-payer to the fundholder.
But the objection is never applicable in a country which
increases rapidly in wealth. The amount which would be
derived, even from a very high legacy duty, in each year, is
but a small fraction of the annual increase of capital in such
a country; and its abstraction would but make room for
saving to an equivalent amount: while the effect of not taking
it, is to prevent that amount of saving, or cause the sayings
when made, to be sent abroad for investment. A country
which, like England, accumulates capital not only for itself
but for half the world, may be said to defray the whole of
its public expenses from its overflowings; and its wealth is
probably at this moment as great as if it had no taxes at all.
What its taxes really dois, to subtract from its means, not of
production but of enjoyment; since whatever any one pays
in taxes, he could, if it were not taken for that purpose, employ
in indulging his ease, or in gratifying some want or taste which
at present remains unsatisfied.


CHAPTER III.


OF DIRECT TAXES.


§1. Taxes are either direct or indirect. A direct tax
is one which is demanded from the very persons who, it is
intended or desired, should pay it. Indirect taxes are those
which are demanded from one person in the expectation and
intention that he shall indemnify himself at the expense of
another: such as the excise or customs. The producer or
importer of a commodity is called upon to pay a tax on it,
not with the intention to levy a peculiar contribution upon
him, but to tax through him the consumers of the commo-
dity, from whom it is supposed that he will recover the
amount by means of an advance in price.

Direct taxes are either on income, or on expenditure.
Most taxes on expenditure are indirect, but some are direct,
being imposed, not on the producer or seller of an article,
but immediately on the consumer. A house tax, for example,
1s a direct tax on expenditure, if levied, as it usually is, on
the occupier of the house. If levied on the builder or owner,
it would be an indirect tax. ‘The window tax is a direct tax
On expenditure ; so are the taxes on horses and carriages, and
the rest of what are called the assessed taxes.

The sources of income are rent, profits, and wages. This
includes every source of income, except gift or plunder.
Taxes may be laid on any one of the three kinds of income,
or an uniform tax on all of them. We will consider these in
their order.


§ 2. A tax’on rent falls wholly on the landlord. There
are no means by which he can shift the burthen upon any
one else. It does not affect the value or price of agricultural


ye


Fem e


Pr neem


ern haere aeemmeeetinn


368 BOOK V. CHAPTER Ill. § 2.


produce, for this is determined by the cost of production in
the most unfavourable circumstances, and in those circum-
stances, as we have so often demonstrated, no rent is paid.
A tax on rent therefore has no effect, other than its obvious
one. It merely takes so much from the landlord, and trans-
fers it to the state.

This, however, is, in strict exactness, only true of the
rent which is the result either of natural causes, or of im-
provements made by tenants. When the landlord makes
improvements which increase the productive power of his
land, he is remunerated for them by an extra payment from
the tenant; and this payment, which to the landlord is pro-
perly a profit on capital, is blended and confounded with
rent; which indeed it really is, to the tenant, and in respect of
the economical laws which determine its amount. A tax on
rent, if extending to this portion of it, would discourage land-
lords from making improvements: but it does not follow that
it would raise the price of agricultural produce. ‘The same
improvements might be made with the tenant’s capital, or
even with the landlord’s if lent by him to the tenant; provided
he is willing to give the tenant so long a lease as will enable
him to indemnify himself before it expires. But whatever
hinders improvements from being made in the manner in
which people prefer to make them, will often prevent them
from being made at all: and on this account a tax on rent
would be inexpedient, unless some means could be devised of
excluding from its operation that portion of the nominal rent
which may be regarded as landlord’s profit. This argument,
however, is not needed for the condemnation of such a tax.
A peculiar tax on the income of any class, not balanced by
taxes on other classes, is a violation of justice, and amounts
to a partial confiscation. I have already shown grounds for
excepting from this censure a tax which, sparing existing
rents, should content itself with appropriating a portion of
any future increase arising from the mere action of natural
causes. But even this could not be justly done, without


DIRECT TAXES. 369


offering as an alternative the market price of the land, In
the case of a tax on rent which is not peculiar, but accom-
panied by an equivalent tax on other incomes, the objection
grounded on its reaching the profit arising from improve-
ments, does not apply: since, profits being taxed as well as


rent, the profit which assumes the form of rent merely pays
its just share.


§ 3. A tax on profits, like a tax on rent, must, at least
in its immediate operation, fall wholly on the payer. All
profits being alike affected, no relief can be obtained by a
change of employment. If a tax were laid on the profits of any
one branch of productive employment, the tax would be vir-
tually an increase of the cost of production, and the value and
price of the article would rise accordingly; by which the tax
would be thrown upon the consumers of the commodity, and
would not affect profits. . But a general and equal tax on all
profits would not affect general prices, and would fall, at least
in the first instance, on capitalists alone.

There is, however, an ulterior effect, which, in a rich and
prosperous country, requires to be taken into account. When
the capital accumulated is so great, and the rate of annual
accumulation so rapid, that the country is only kept from
attaining the stationary state by the emigration of capital, or
by continual improvements in production; any circumstance
which virtually lowers the rate of profit, cannot be without a
decided influence on these phenomena. It may operate in
different ways. The curtailment of profit, and the conse-
quent increased difficulty of making a fortune or obtaining
a subsistence by the employment of capital, may act as a
stimulus to inventions, and to the use of them when made.
If improvements in production are much accelerated, and if
these improvements cheapen, directly or indirectly, any of
the things habitually consumed by the labourer, profits may
rise, and fise sufficiently to make up for all that is taken
from them by the tax. In that case the tax will have been


9
WO Tees =n


ane
PSTN: Sila
SSH a


5S apn occas: aaa


Mrs
oper


oe


aires


en


me
\
\


ee a ee


370 BOOK Vv. CHAPTER Ill. § 3.


realized without loss to any one, the produce of the country
being increased by an equal, or what would in that case be a
far greater, amount. The tax, however, must even in this
case be considered as paid from profits, because the receivers
of profits are those who would be benefited if it were taken
off.

But although the artificial abstraction of a portion of
profits would have a real tendency to accelerate improvements
in production, no considerable improvements might actually
result, or only of such a kind as not to raise general profits
at all, or not to raise them so much as the tax had diminished
them. If so, the rate of profit would be brought closer to
that practical minimum, to which it is constantly approaching:
and this diminished return to capital would either give a
decided check to further accumulation, or would cause a
greater proportion than before of the annual increase to be
sent abroad, or wasted in unprofitable speculations. At its
first imposition the tax falls wholly on profits: but the amount
of increase of capital, which the tax prevents, would, if it had
been allowed to continue, have tended to reduce profits to the
same level; and at every period of ten or twenty years there
will be found less difference between profits as they are, and
profits as they would in that case have been: until at last
there is no difference, and the tax is thrown either upon the
labourer or upon the landlord. The real effect of a tax on
profits is to make the country possess, at any given period, a
smaller capital and a smaller aggregate production, and to
make the stationary state be attained earlier, and with a
smaller sum of national wealth. It is possible that a tax on
profits might even diminish the existing capital of the coun-
try. If the rate of profit is already at the practical minimum,
that is, at the point at which all that portion of the annual
increment which would tend to reduce profits is carried off
either by exportation or by speculations; then if a tax is
imposed which reduces profits still lower, the same causes
which previously carried off the increase would probably


DIRECT TAXES. Bw


carry off a portion of the existing capital. A tax on profits
is thus, in a state of capital and accumulation lke that in
England, extremely detrimental to the national wealth. And
this effect is not confined to the case of a peculiar, and there-
fore intrinsically unjust, tax on profits. The mere fact that
profits have to bear their share of a heavy general taxation,
tends, in the same manner as a peculiar tax, to drive capital
abroad, to stimulate imprudent speculations by diminishing
safe gains, to discourage further accumulation, and to accele-
rate the attainment of the stationary state. This is thought
to have been the principal cause of the decline of Holland,
or rather of her having ceased to make progress.

Even in countries which do not accumulate so fast as to
be always within a short interval of the stationary state, it
seems impossible that, if capital is accumulating at all, its
accumulation should not be in some degree retarded by the
abstraction of a portion of its profit; and unless the effect
in stimulating improvements be a full counterbalance, it is
inevitable that a part of the burthen will be thrown off the
capitalist, upon the labourer or the landlord. One or other
of these is always the loser by a diminished rate of accumu-
lation. If population continues to Imerease as before, the
labourer suffers: if not, cultivation is checked in its advance,
and the landlords lose the accession of rent which would
have accrued tothemse> The only countries in which a tax on
profits seems likely to be permanently a burthen on capitalists
exclusively, are those in which capital is stationary, because
there is no new accumulation. In such countries the tax
might not prevent the old capital from being kept up, through
habit, or from unwillingness to submit to impoverish ment, and
so the capitalist might continue to bear the whole of the tax.
It is seen from these considerations that the effects of a tax
on profits are much more complex, more various, and in some


n wr


points more uncertain tha sters on the subject have com-


monly supposed.


Ay 372 BOOK V. CHAPTER Ill. § 4.


§ 4. We turn now to Taxes on Wages. The incidence
of these is very different, according as the wages taxed are
those of ordinary unskilled labour, or are the remuneration of
such skilled or privileged employments, whether manual or
intellectual, as are taken out of the sphere of competition by
a natural or a conferred monopoly.
I have already remarked, that in the present low state of
a popular education, all the higher grades of mental or edu-


Te cated labour are at a monopoly price; exceeding the wages of
My i common workmen in a degree very far beyond that which is
a it due to the expense, trouble, and loss of time required in

4 qualifying for the employment. Any tax levied on these


| gains, which still leaves them above (or not below) their just
t proportion, falls on those who pay it; they have no means
| of relieving themselves at the expense of any other class.
The same thing is true of ordinary wages, in cases like that
i of the United States or of a new colony, where, capital in-
creasing as rapidly as population can increase, wages are
kept up by the increase of capital, and not by the adherence
4 of the labourers to a fixed standard of comforts. In such a
case, some deterioration of their condition, whether by a tax
# or otherwise, might possibly take place without checking the
i j increase of population. The tax would in that case fall on
: the labourers themselves, and would reduce them prematurely
to that lower state to which, on the same supposition with
regard to their habits, they would in any case have been
reduced ultimately, by the inevitable diminution in the rate
of increase of capital, through the occupation.of all the fer-
tile land.
) Some will object that, even in this case, a tax on wages
cannot be detrimental to the labourers, since the money
; raised by it, being expended in the country, comes back to
| the labourers again through the demand for labour. The
eeu ‘ this docpripe has been so completely
rst Book*, that I need do little more than


sa eS A Se ee re


* Supra, vol. i. pp. 97-103.


DIRECT TAXES. 373


refer to that exposition. It was there shown that funds ex-
pended unproductively have no tendency to raise or keep up
wages, unless when expended in the direct purchase of
labour. If the government took a tax of a shilling a week
from every labourer, and laid it all out in hiring labourers
for military service, public works, or the like, it would, no
doubt, indemnify the labourers as a class for all that the tax
took from them. That would really be “spending the money
among the people.” But if it expended the whole in buy-
ing goods, or in adding to the salaries of employés who
bought goods with it, this would not increase the demand
for labour, or tend to raise wages, Without reverting to the
proofs formerly given, we may rely on an obvious reductio
ad absurdum. If to take money from the labourers and
spend it in commodities is giving it back to the labourers, then,
to take money from other classes, and spend it in the same
manner, must be giving it to the labourers; consequently
the more a government takes in taxes, the greater will be
the demand for labour, and the more opulent the condition
of the labourers. A proposition the absurdity of which no
One can fail to see.

In the condition of most communities, wages are regu-
lated by the habitual standard of living to which the la-
bourers adhere, and on less than which they will not
multiply. Where there exists such a standard, a tax on
wages will indeed for a time be borne by the labourers
themselves; but unless this temporary depression has the
effect of lowering the standard itself, the increase of popu-
lation will receive a check, which will raise Wages, and
restore the labourers to their previous condition. On whom,
in this case, will the tax fall? According to Adam Smith,
on the community generally, in their character of consumers;
since the rise of wages, he thought, would raise general
prices. We have seen, however, that general prices depend
on other causes, and are never raised by any circumstance
which affects all kinds of productive employment in the


374 BOOK V. CHAPTER lt. § 5.


same manner and degree. A rise of wages occasioned by a tax,
must, like any other increase of the cost of labour, be defrayed
from profits. To attempt to tax day-labourers, in an old
country, is merely to impose an extra tax upon all employers
of common labour; unless the tax has the much worse effect
of permanently lowering the standard of comfortable subsis-
tence in the minds of the poorest class.

We find in the preceding considerations an additional
argument for the opinion already expressed, that direct tax-
ation should stop short of the class of incomes which do not
exceed what is necessary for healthful existence. Almost
all these very small incomes are derived from manual labour;
and, as we now see, any tax imposed on these, either per-
manently degrades the habits of the labouring class, or falls
on profits, and burthens capitalists with an indirect tax, in
addition to their share of the direct taxes ; which is doubly
objectionable, both as a violation of the fundamental rule of
equality, and for the reasons which, as already shewn, render
a peculiar tax on profits detrimental to the public wealth, and
consequently to the means which society possesses of paying
any taxes whatever.


§ 5. We now pass, from taxes on the separate kinds of
income, to a tax attempted to be assessed fairly upon all
kinds; in other words, an Income Tax. The discussion of
the conditions necessary for making this tax consistent with
justice, has been anticipated in the last chapter. We shall
suppose, therefore, that those conditions are complied with.
They are, first, that incomes below a certain amount should
be altogether untaxed. This minimum should not be higher
than the amount which suffices for the necessaries of a la-
bouring family of moderate numbers. The exemption from
the present income-tax, of all incomes under 150/. a year, is
only defensible on the ground that some taxes on necessaries
are still kept up, and that almost all the existing taxes on
indulgences press more heavily on incomes between 50/. and


DIRECT TAXES. 375


150/. than on any others whatever. The second condition
is, that mcomes above the limit should be taxed only in pro-
portion to the surplus by which they exceed the limit.
Thirdly, that life incomes should be less heavily taxed than
inheritable incomes, in a degree as nearly as possible equiva-
lent to the increased need of economy arising’ from their
termmable character. Fourthly, that incomes which are
jointly the result of capital and of personal exertion, should
be taxed intermediately between the rate for inheritable and
that for life incomes.

An income-tax, fairly assessed on these principles, would
be, in point of justice, the least exceptionable of all taxes.
The objection to it, which, with much regret, I cannot help
regarding as insuperable, is the impossibility of ascertaining
the real incomes of the contributors. The supposed hard-
ship of compelling people to disclose the amount of their
incomes, ought not, in my opinion, to count for much. One
of the social evils of this country is the practice, amounting
to a custom, of maintaining, or attempting to maintain, the
appearance to the world of a larger income than is possessed;
and it would be far better for the interests of those who
yield to this weakness, if the extent of their means were
universally and exactly known, and the temptation removed
to expending more than they can afford, or stinting real
wants in order to make a false show externally. At the same
time, the reason of the case, even on this point, is not so
exclusively on one side of the argument as is sometimes
supposed. So long as the vulgar of any country are in the
debased state of mind which this national habit presupposes—
so long as their respect (if such a word can be applied to it)
is proportioned to what they suppose to be each person’s
pecuniary means—it may be doubted whether anything which
would remove all doubt as to that point, would not consider-
ably increase the presumption and arrogance of the vulgar
rich, and their insolence towards those above them in mind
and character, but below them in circumstances.


PH
i i
\

* fh
a
;


376 BOOK V. CHAPTER Itt. § 5.


Notwithstanding, too, what is called the inquisitorial
nature of the tax, no amount of inquisitorial power which
would be tolerated by a people the most disposed to submit
to it, could enable the revenue officers to assess the tax
from actual knowledge of the circumstances of contributors.
Rents, salaries, annuities, and all fixed incomes, can be exactly
ascertained. But the variable gains of professions, and still
more the profits of business, which the person interested
cannot always himself exactly ascertain, can still less be esti-
mated with any approach to fairness by a tax-collector. The
main reliance must be placed, and always has been placed,
on the returns made by the person himself. No production
of accounts is of much avail, except against the more flagrant
cases of falsehood; and even against these the check is very
imperfect, for if fraud is intended, false accounts can gene-
rally be framed which it will baffle any means of inquiry
possessed by the revenue officers to detect: the easy resource
of omitting entries on the credit side, being often sufficient
without the aid of fictitious debts or disbursements. The
tax, therefore, on whatever principles of equality it may be
imposed, is in practice unequal in one of the worst ways;
falling heaviest on the most conscientious. The unscru-
pulous succeed in evading a great proportion of what they
should pay; even persons of integrity in their ordinary trans-
actions are tempted to palter with their consciences, at least
to the extent of deciding in their own favour all points on
which the smallest doubt or discussion could arise: while
the strictly veracious are often made to pay more than the
state intended, by the powers of arbitrary assessment neces-
sarily intrusted to the Commissioners as a last defence against
the tax-payer’s power of concealment.

It is to be feared, therefore, that the fairness which
belongs to the principle of an income-tax, can never be made
o ae at = Dee a oa this tax, while apparently
more unjust tit ane eee en Be

y others which are primd facie more


DIRECT TAXES. 377


objectionable. This consideration would lead us to concur
in the opinion which, until of late, has usually prevailed—
that direct taxes on income should be reserved as an extra-
ordinary resource for great national emergencies, in which
the necessity of a large additional revenue overrules all minor
objections.

The difficulties of a fair income-tax have lately elicited a
proposition for a direct tax of so much per cent, not on
income but on expenditure; the aggregate amount of each
person’s expenditure being ascertained, as the amount of
Income now is, from statements furnished by the contributors
themselves. The author of this suggestion, Mr. Revans, in
a clever pamphlet on the subject*, contends that the returns
which persons would furnish of their expenditure would be
more trustworthy than those which they now make of their
income, inasmuch as expenditure is in its own nature more
public than income, and false representations of if more easily
detected. He cannot, I think, have sufficiently considered,
how few of the items in the annual expenditure of most fami-
lies can be judged of with any approximation to correctness
from the external signs. The only security would still be
the veracity of individuals, and there is no reason for suppos-
ing that their statements would be more trustworthy on the
subject of their expenses than on that of their revenues;
especially as, the expenditure of most persons being composed
of many more items than their income, there would be more
scope for concealment and suppression in the detail of
expenses than even of receipts. :

The taxes on expenditure at present in force, either in
this or in other countries, fall only on particular kinds of ex-
penditure, and differ no otherwise from taxes on commodities
than in being paid directly by the person who consumes or


. estic Ex diture to supply the whole of
* « A Percentage Tax on Domestic Expen j
the Public erene® By John Revans. Published by Hatchard m


1847.


Bie
hatee
it ad

|
t :

v

i

ie
are}
Rid
iba
birt
ee
hy
Rue
a ‘
habia


378 BOOK VY. CHAPTER Ill. $6.


uses the article, instead of being advanced by the producer
or seller, and reimbursed in the price. The taxes on horses
and carriages, on dogs, on servants, are of this nature. They
evidently fall on the persons from whom they are levied—
those who use the commodity taxed. A tax of a similar
description, and more important, is a house tax : which must
be considered at somewhat greater length.


§ 6. The rent of a house consists of two parts, the
ground-rent, and what Adam Smith calls the building-rent.
The first is determined by the ordinary principles of rent.
It is the remuneration given for the use of the portion of
land occupied by the house and its appurtenances ; and varies
from a mere equivalent for the rent which the ground would
afford in agriculture, to the monopoly rents paid for advan-
tageous situations in populous thoroughfares. The rent of the
house itself, as distinguished from the ground, is the equiva-
lent given for the labour and capital expended on the building.
The fact of its being received in quarterly or half-yearly pay-
ments, makes no difference in the principles by which it 1s
regulated. It comprises the ordinary profit on the builder’s
capital, and an annuity, sufficient at the current rate of
interest, after paying for all repairs chargeable on the pro-
prietor, to replace the original capital by the time the house
is worn out, or by the expiration of the usual term of a
building lease.

A tax of so much per cent on the gross rent, falls on both
these portions alike. The more highly a house is rented, the
more it pays to the tax, whether the quality of the situation
or that of the house itself is the cause. The incidence, how-
ever, of these two portions of the tax must be considered
separately. :

As much of it as is a tax on building-rent, must ultimately
fall on the consumer, in other words the occupier. For as
the profits of building are already not above the ordinary rate,
they would, if the tax fell on the owner and not on the oceu-


DIRECT TAXES. 379


pier, become lower than the profits of untaxed employments,
and houses would not be built. It is probable however that
for some time after the tax was first imposed, a great part of
it would fall, not on the renter, but on the owner of the house.
A large proportion of the consumers either could not afford,
or would not choose, to pay their former rent with the tax in
addition, but would content themselves with a lower scale of
accommodation. Houses therefore would be for a time im
excess of the demand. The consequence of such excess,
in the case of most other articles, would be an almost im-
mediate diminution of the supply : but so durable a commo-
dity as houses does not rapidly diminish in amount. New
buildings indeed (at least of the more expensive class) would
cease to be erected, except for special reasons; but in the
meantime the temporary superfluity would lower rents, and


the consumers would obtain, perhaps, nearly the same aceom-


modation as formerly, for the same aggregate payment, rent
and tax together. By. degrees, however, as the existing
houses wore out, or as increase of population demanded a
greater supply, rents would again rise; until it became pro-
fitable to recommence building, which w ould not be until
the tax was wholly thrown upon the occupier. In the end,
therefore, the occupier bears that portion of a tax on rent,
which falls on the payment made for the house itself, exclu-
sively of the ground it stands on.

At first sight one would be inclined to suppose the case
to be Gigeren with the portion which is a tax on ground-
rent. As taxes on rent, properly so called, fall on the land-
lord, a tax on ground-rent, one would suppose, must fall on
the ground laaalend: at least after the expiration of the
building lease. And such would really be the case, if with
the tax on ground-rent there were combined an equivalent
tax on Secltineal rent; but not otherwise. The lowest rent
of land let for building is very little above the rent which the
same ground would yield in agriculture: since it is reasonable
~ to suppose that land, unless in case of exceptional circum-


5 SNR ae pele nde gi ito


FONE RA GR GD EPS


eee


380 BOOK V. CHAPTER III. § 6.


stances, is let or sold for building, as soon as it is decidedly
worth more for that purpose than for agriculture. If, there-
fore, a tax were laid on ground-rents without being also laid on
agricultural rents, it would, unless of quite trifling amount,
reduce the return from the lowest ground-rents below the
ordinary return from land, and would put a stop to further
building quite as effectually as if it were a tax on building-
rents, until either the increased demand of a growing popula-
tion, or a diminution of supply by wearing out, had raised
the rent by a full equivalent for the tax. But whatever raises -
the lowest ground-rents, raises all others, since each exceeds
the lowest by precisely the market value of its peculiar
advantages. There is thus no difference between the two
component elements of house-rent, in respect to the inci-
dence of the tax. Both alike fall ultimately on the occupier:
while, in both alike, if the occupier in consequence reduces
his demand by contenting himself with inferior accommoda-
tion, that is, if he prefers saving his tax from house-rent to
Saving it from other parts of his expenditure, he indirectly
lowers ground-rent, or retards its increase; just as a dimi-
nished consumption of agricultural produce, by making cul-
tivation retrograde, would lower ordinary rent.

A house-tax, if justly proportioned to the value of the
house, is one of the fairest and most unobjectionable of all
taxes. No part of a person’s expenditure is a better criterion
of his means, or bears, on the whole, more nearly the same
proportion to them. A house-tax is a nearer approach toa
fair income-tax, than a direct assessment on income can easily
be; having the great advantage, that it makes spontaneously
all the allowances which it is so difficult to make, and so
impracticable to make exactly, in assessing an income-tax:
for if what a person pays in house-rent is a test of anything;.
it 1s a test not of what he possesses, but of what he thinks he
can afford to spend. To the equality of this tax, there are
but two decided objections. The first is, that a miser may
escape it. This objection applies to all taxes on expenditure:


DIRECT TAXES. 381


nothing but a direct tax on income can reach a miser. But
this, though a real, is nota great defect; for there are few
misers; and as they do not now hoard their treasure, but
invest it in employments in which it feeds productive la-
bourers, and adds to the national wealth, and consequently
to the general means of paying taxes, the inconvenience of
its paying no taxes of its own is in some degree compensated
for. The second objection is that a person may require a
larger and more expensive house, not from having greater
means, but from having a larger family. Of this, however,
he is not entitled to complain; since haying a large family is
at a person’s own choice: and, so far as concerns the public
interest, is a thing rather to be discouraged than promoted*.
Though the house-tax which formerly existed°in this
country has been repealed, a large portion of the taxation of
the country is still raised by a house-tax; the parochial taxa-
tion of the towns entirely, and of the rural districts partially,
consisting of an assessment on house-rent. The window-tax
is also a house-tax, but of a bad kind, operating as a tax on
light, and a cause of deformity in building. It would be a
most advantageous exchange to abolish the window-tax, and
the present income-tax, and replace them by a house-tax of
equivalent amount. In doing so, it would be necessary to
avoid the unjust principle on which the old house-tax was
assessed, and which contributed quite as much as the selfish-
hess of the middle classes to produce the outcry against the


* It has been also objected that house rent in the rural districts is much
lower than in towns, and lower in some towns and in some rural districts
than in others: so that a tax proportioned to it would have a correspond-
ing inequality of pressure. To this, however, it may be answered, that in
places where house rent is low, persons of the same amount of income
usually live in larger and better houses, and thus expend in house Tent
more nearly the same proportion of their incomes than might at first sight
appear. Or if not, the probability will be, that many of them live in those
places precisely because they are too poor to live elsewhere, and have
therefore the strongest claim to be taxed lightly. In some cases, it is pre-
cisely because the people are poor, that house rent remains low.


382 BOOK V. CHAPTER Il. § 6.


tax in 1834. The public were justly scandalized on learning
that residences like Chatsworth or Belvoir were only rated
on an imaginary rent of perhaps 200/. a-year, under the pre-
text that owing to the great expense of keeping them up,
they could not be let for more. Probably, indeed, they could
not be let even for that, and if the argument were a fair one,
they ought not to have been taxed at all. But a house-tax is
not intended as a tax on incomes derived from houses, but on
expenditure incurred for them. The thing which it is wished
to ascertain is, what a house costs to the person who lives in
it, not what it would bring in if let to some one else. When
the occupier is not the owner, the rent he pays is the measure
of what it costs him: when he is the owner, some other mea-
sure must be sought. A valuation should be made of the
house, not at what it would sell for, but at what would be the
cost of rebuilding it, and this valuation might be corrected
each year by an allowance for what it had lost in value by
time, or gained by repairs and improvements. The amount
of the amended valuation would form a principal sum, the
interest of which, at the current price of the public funds,
would form the annual value at which the building should
be assessed to the tax.

As incomes below a certain amount ought to be exempt
from income-tax, so ought houses below a certain value, from
house-tax, on the universal principle of sparing from all
taxation the absolute necessaries of healthful existence. In
order that the occupiers of lodgings, as well as of houses,
might benefit, as in justice they ought, by this exemption, it
might be optional with the owners to have every portion of
a house which is occupied by a separate tenant, valued and
es separately, as is now usually the case with cham-

ers.


CHAPTER IV.


OF TAXES ON COMMODITIES.


§1. By taxes on commodities are commonly meant
those which are levied either on the producers, or on the
carriers or dealers who intervene between them and the final
purchasers for consumption. Taxes imposed directly on the
consumers of particular commodities, such as a house-tax, or


-the tax in this country on horses and carriages, might be


called taxes on commodities, but are not; the phrase being,
by custom, confined to indirect taxes—those which are ad-
vanced by one person, to be, as is expected and intended,
reimbursed by another. Taxes on commodities are either
on production within the country, or on importation into it,
or on conveyance or sale within it; and are classed respec-
tively as excise, ‘customs, or tolls and transit duties. To
whichever class they belong, and at whatever stage in the
progress of the commodity they may be imposed, they are
equivalent to an increase of the cost of production; using
that term in its most enlarged sense, which includes the cost
of transport and distribution, or, in common phrase, of bring-
ing the commodity to market.

When the cost of production is increased artificially by
a tax, the effect is the same as when it is increased by natural
causes. If only one or a few commodities are affected, their
value and price rise, so as to compensate the producer or
dealer for the peculiar burthen ; but if there were a tax on
all commodities, exactly proportioned to their value, no such
compensation would be obtained: there would neither be a
general rise of values, which is an absurdity, nor of prices,
which depend on causes entirely different. There would,


however, as Mr. M‘Culloch has pointed out, be a disturb-
ver, €


SSE ws mw ae ee


384 BOOK V. CHAPTER Iv. § 2.


ance of values, some falling, others rising, owing to a circum-
stance, the effect of which on values and prices we formerly
discussed ; the different durability of the capital employed in
different occupations. The gross produce of industry con-
sists of two parts ; one portion serving to replace the capital
consumed, while the other portion is profit. Now equal
capitals in two branches of production must haye equal
expectations of profit; but if a greater portion of the one
than of the other is fixed capital, or if that fixed capital 1s
more durable, there will be a less consumption of capital in
the year, and less will be required to replace it, so that
the profit, to be absolutely the same, must form a greater
proportion of the annual returns. To derive froma capital
of 10007. a profit of 100/., the one producer may have to
sell produce to the value of 1100/., the other only to the
value of 5007. If on these two branches of industry a tax
be imposed of five per cent ad valorem, the last will be
charged only with 25/., the first with 55/.; leaving to the one
751. profit, to the other only 45/. To equalize, therefore, their
expectation of profit, the one commodity must rise in price,
or the other must fall, or both: commodities made chiefly
by immediate labour must rise in value, as compared with
those which are chiefly made by machinery. It is unneces-
sary to prosecute this branch of the inquiry any further.


§ 2. A tax on any one commodity, whether laid on its
production, its importation, its carriage from place to place;
or its sale, and whether the tax be a fixed sum of money for
a given quantity of the commodity, or an ad valorem duty,
will, as a general rule, raise the value and price of the com-
modity by at least the amount of the tax. There are few
cases in which it does not raise them by more than that
amount. In the first place, there are few taxes on produc-
tion on account of which it is not found or deemed neces-
sary to impose restrictive regulations on the manufacturers OF
dealers, in order to check eyasions of the tax. These regu-


TAXES ON COMMODITIES. 385


lations are always sources of trouble and annoyance, and
generally of expense, for all of which, being peculiar dis-
advantages, the producers or dealers must have compensation
in the price of their commodity. These restrictions also
frequently interfere with the processes of manufacture, re-
quiring the producer to carry on his operations in the way
most convenient to the revenue, though not the cheapest,
or most efficient for purposes of production. Any regula-
tions whatever, enforced by law, make it difficult for the
producer to adopt new and improved processes. Further,
the necessity of advancing the tax obliges producers and
dealers to carry on their business with larger capitals than
would otherwise be necessary, on the whole of which they
must receive the ordinary rate of profit, although a part only
1s employed in defraying the real expenses of production or
importation. The price of the article must be such as to
afford a profit on more than its natural value, mstead of a
profit on only its natural value. A part of the capital of the
country, in short, is not employed in production, but in ad-
vances to the state, repaid in the price of goods; and the
consumers must give an indemnity to the sellers, equal to
the profit which they could have made on the same capital
if really employed in production. Neither ought it to be
forgotten, that whatever renders a larger capital necessary in
any trade or business, limits the competition in that business ;
and by giving something like a monopoly to a few dealers,
enables them either to keep up-the price beyond what would
afford the ordinary rate of profit, or to obtain the ordinary
ss degree of exertion for improving and
cheapening their commodity. In these several modes, taxes
on commodities often cost to the consumer, through the in-
creased price of the article, much more than they bring into
the treasury of the state. There is still another consideration,


The rise of price occasioned by the tax, almost always checks


the demand for the commodity ; and since there are many
to make them practi-


improvements in production which, i
ONG


rate of profit witha le


VOL. LE.


ps penser veaeses


oe


iabaienenaee rea ae
Ssaneemseeenedecerane


SS


Rear
fie tA
ee
‘iA
Bilt ty
Bet
Mies
wat


386 BOOK V. CHAPTER Iv. § 3.


cable, require a certain extent of demand, such improvements
are obstructed, and many of them prevented altogether. It
is a well-known fact, that the branches of production m
which fewest improvements are made, are those with which
the revenue officer interferes; and that nothing, in general,
gives a greater impulse to improvements in the production
of a commodity, than taking off a tax which narrowed the


market for it.


§ 3. Such are the effects of taxes on commodities, con-
sidered generally : but as there are some commodities (those
composing the necessaries of the labourer) of which the
values have an influence on the distribution of wealth among
different classes of the community, it is requisite to trace
the effects of taxes on those particular articles somewhat
farther. If a tax be laid, say on corn, and the price rises
in proportion to the tax, the rise of price may operate in
two ways. First: it may lower the condition of the labour-
ing classes; temporarily indeed it can scarcely fail to do so.
If it diminishes their consumption of the produce of the
earth, or reduces them toa food which the soil produces more
abundantly, and therefore more cheaply, it to that extent
contributes to throw back agriculture upon more fertile lands
or less costly processes, and to lower the yalue and price of corn;
which therefore ultimately settle at a price, increased not by
the whole amount of the tax, but by onlya part of its amount.
Secondly, however; it may happen that the dearness of the
taxed food does not lower the habitual standard of the
labourer’s requirements, but that wages on the contrary;
through an action on population, rise, in a shorter or longer
period, so as to compensate the labourers for their portion of
the tax ; the compensation being of course at the expense of
profits. Taxes on necessaries must thus have one of two
effects. Hither they lower the condition of the labouring
classes ; or they exact from the owners of capital, in addition
to the amount due to the state on their own necessaries, the


TAXES ON COMMODITIBS, 387


amount due on those consumed by the labourers. In the last
case, the tax on necessaries, like a tax on wages, is equiva-
lent to a peculiar tax on profits; which is, like all other
partial taxation, unjust, and is specially prejudicial to the
increase of the national wealth.

It remains to speak of the effect on rent. Assuming
(what is usually the fact,) that the consumption of food is
not diminished, the same cultivation as before will be neces-
Sary to supply the wants of the community; the margin of
cultivation, to use Dr. Chalmers’ expression, remains where
it was; and the same land or capital which, as the least pro-
ductive, already regulated the value and price of the whole
produce, will continue to regulate them. The effect which a
tax on agricultural produce will have on rent, depends on its
affecting or not affecting the difference between the return
to this least productive land or capital, and the returns to
other lands and capitals. Now this depends on the manner


im which the tax is imposed. If it is an ad valorem tax, or


what is the same thing, a fixed proportion of the produce,
such as tithe for example, it evidently lowers corn-rents.
For it takes more corn from the better lands than from the
Worse; and exactly in the degree in which they are better ;
land of twice the fertility paying twice as much to the tithe.
Whatever takes more from the greater of two quantities than
from the less, diminishes the difference between them. The
imposition of a tithe on corn would take a tithe also from
corn-rent: for if you reduce a series of numbers by a
tenth each, the differences between them are reduced one-
tenth.

For example, let there be five qualities of land, which
severally yield, on the same extent of ground and with the
same expenditure, 100, 90, 80, 70, and 60 bushels of wheat ;
the last of these being the lowest quality which the demand
for food renders it necessary to cultivate. The rent of these


lands will be as follows :—
Po


An ee aapinkin


Geiline tein ea at epee
Sa Se peatnn er om


ee


=~


a
ne arintarentenenrenemna ae


“| 388 BOOK V. CHAPTER Iv. § 3.


The land will yield .
producing 10° bushels i" ent oe \ 100 — 60, or 40 bushels.


That producing 90 ,, 2 90 —60,or30 4


. 80 S 80 —60,0or20  ,,
» 70 ” 2” 70 — 60, or 10 ”
‘ » 60 5; 53 no rent.


Now let a tithe be imposed, which takes from these five
pieces of land 10, 9, 8, 7, and 6 bushels respectively, the
fifth quality still being the one which regulates the price, but
returning to the farmer, after payment of tithe, no more than
54 bushels:


Setniiiemnsion sei pong soonmiatine tg Sook os we


lng Unsaul will yield
eae 100 bushels, reduced to 90,4 ayant OF 90 — 54, or 36 bushels.


£44] That j
ecter 81 » Sl SBS OEP x
a 80» ” 72 ” 72 —54,or18 5,
» ORs » 63) Py, 2163 S5aior oe


a and that producing 60 bushels, reduced to 54, will yield, as
iy before, no rent. So that the rent of the first quality of land
aa has lost four bushels; of the second, three; of the third,
al two; and of the fourth, one: that is, each has lost exactly
bigs one-tenth. A tax, therefore, of a fixed proportion of the
i i produce, lowers, in the same proportion, corn-rent.
‘a ; But it is only corn-rent that is lowered, and not rent
i estimated in money, or in any other commodity. For, in the
same proportion as corn-rent is reduced in quantity, the corn
composing it is raised in value. Under the tithe, 54 bushels
will be worth in the market what 60 were before; and nine-
tenths will in all cases sell for as much as the whole ten-
tenths previously sold for. The landlords will therefore be
compensated in value and price for what they lose in quan-
tity ; and will suffer only so far as they consume their rent
in kind, or, after receiving it in money, expend it in agricul-
By tural produce: that is, they only suffer as consumers of
fel] agricultural produce, and in common with all other con-
f sumers. Considered as landlords, they have the same income
as before; the tithe, therefore, falls on the consumer and not
on the landlord,


TAXES ON COMMODITIES. 389


The same effect would be produced on rent, if the tax,
instead of being a fixed proportion of the produce, were a
fixed sum per quarter or per bushel. A tax which takes a
shilling for every bushel, takes more shillings from one field
than from another just in proportion as it produces more
bushels; and operates exactly like tithe, except that tithe is
not only the same proportion on all lands, but is also the
same proportion at all times, while a fixed sum of money
per bushel will amount to a greater or less proportion, accord-
ing as corn is cheap or dear.

’ There are other modes of taxing agriculture, which would
affect rent differently. A tax proportioned to the rent would
fall wholly on the rent, and would not at all raise the price
of corn, which is regulated by the portion of the produce
that pays no rent. A fixed tax of so much per cultivated
acre, without distinction of value, would have effects directly
the reverse. Taking no more from the best qualities of land
than from the worst, it would leave the differences the same
as before, and consequently the same corn-rents, and the
landlords would profit to the full extent of the rise of price.
To put the thing in another manner; the price must rise, to
enable the worst land to pay the tax: thus enabling all lands
which produce more than the worst, to pay not only the tax,
but also an increased rent to the landlords. These, however,
are not sO much taxes on the produce of land, as taxes on
the land itself. Taxes on the produce, properly so called,
whether fixed or ad valorem, do not affect rent, but fall on
the consumer : profits, however, generally bearing either the
whole or the greatest part of the portion which is levied on
the consumption of the labouring classes.


§ 4. The preceding is, I apprehend, a correct statement
of the manner in which taxes on agricultural produce operate
when first laid on. When, however, they are of old standing,
their effect may be different, as was first pointed out, I
believe, by Mr. Senior. It is, as we have seen, an almost


4
i 4

i
# i
A


—
<yeatmer vent


srt Mie
en


oo Ne aes a tet ee


ae


1.1
bh
‘i ‘
Heed
ie
Ki I
ae
Riis
ae
t EK a
es ae
aes 2
PE
ie
" ai
444} )


390 BOOK V. CHAPTER Iv. § 4.


infallible consequence of any reduction of profits, to retard
the rate of accumulation. Now the effect of accumulation,
when attended by its usual accompaniment, an increase of
population, is to increase the value and price of food, to raise
rent, and to lower profits: that is, to do precisely what is
done by a tax on agricultural produce, except that this does
not raise rent. The tax, therefore, merely anticipates the
rise of price, and fall of profits, which would have taken
place ultimately through the mere progress of accumulation ;
while it at the same time prevents, or at least retards, that
progress. If the rate of profit was such, previous to the
imposition of a tithe, that the effect of the tithe reduces it
to the practical minimum, the tithe will put a stop to all
further accumulation, or cause it to take place out of the
country; and the only effect which the tithe will then have
had on the consumer, is to make him pay earlier the price
which he would have had to pay somewhat later—part of
which, indeed, in the gradual progress of wealth and popu-
lation, he would have almost immediately begun to pay-
After a lapse of time which would have admitted of a rise
of one-tenth from the natural progress of wealth, the con-
sumer will be paying no more than he would have paid if the
tithe had never existed; he will have ceased to pay any por-
tion of it, and the person who will really pay it is the land-
lord, whom it deprives of the increase of rent which would
by that time have accrued to him. At every successive point
in this interval of time, less of the burden will rest on the
consumer, and more of it on the landlord: and in the ultimate
result, the minimum of profits will be reached with a smaller
capital and population, and a lower rental, than if the course
of things had not been disturbed by the imposition of the
tax. If, on the other hand, the tithe, or other tax on agri-
cultural produce, does not reduce profits to the minimum,
but to something above the minimum, accumulation will
not be stopped, but only slackened: and if population also
iereases, the two-fold increase will continue to produce its


TAXES ON COMMODITIES. 391


effects—a rise of the price of corn, and an increase of rent.
These consequences, however, will not take place with the
same rapidity as if the higher rate of profit had continued.
At the end of twenty years the country will have a smaller
population and capital, than, but for the tax, it would by that
time have had; the landlords will have a smaller rent; and
the price of corn, haying increased less rapidly than it would
otherwise have done, will no longer be a tenth higher than
what, if there had been no tax, it would by that time have
risen to. A part of the tax, therefore, will already have
ceased to fall on the consumer, and devolved upon the land-
lord; and the proportion will become greater and greater by
lapse of time.

Mr. Senior illustrates his view of the subject by hkening
the effects of tithes, or other taxes on agricultural produce,
to those of natural sterility of soil. If the land of a country
were suddenly smitten with a permanent deterioration of
quality, to an extent which would make a tenth more labour
necessary to raise the existing produce, the price of corn
would undoubtedly rise one-tenth. But it cannot hence be
inferred that if the soil of the country had from the begin-
ning been one-tenth worse than it is, corn would at present
have been one-tenth dearer than we find it. It is far more
probable, that the smaller return to labour and capital, ever
since the first settlement of the country, would have caused
in each successive generation a less rapid imcrease than has
taken place; that the country would now have contained less
capital, and maintained a smaller population, so that not-
withstanding the inferiority of the soil, the price of corn
would not have been higher, nor profits lower, than at
present ; rent alone would certainly have been lower. We
may suppose two islands, which, being alike in extent, in
natural fertility, and industrial advancement, have up to a
certain time been equal in population and capital, and have


had equal rentals, and the same price of corn. Let us ima-
gine a tithe imposed in one of these islands, but not in the


PRE NE ESE Oe


392 BOOK V. CHAPTER Iv. § 4.


other. here will be immediately a difference in the price of
corn, and therefore probably in profits. While profits are
not tending downwards in either country, that is, while im-
provements in the production of necessaries fully keep pace
with the increase of population, this difference of prices and
profits between the islands may continue. But if, in the
untithed island, capital increases, and population along with
it, more than enough to counterbalance any improvements
which take place, the price of corn will gradually rise, profits
fall, and rent will increase; while in the tithed island capital
and population will either not increase, (beyond what is
balanced by the improvements,) or if they do, will increase
in a less degree; so that rent and the price of corn will
either not tise at all, or rise more slowly. Rent, therefore,
will soon be higher in the untithed, t in the tithed island,
and profits not so much higher, nor corn so much cheaper,
as they were on the first imposition of the tithe. These
effects will be progressive. At the end of every ten years
there will be a greater difference between the rentals and
between the aggregate wealth and population of the two is-
lands, and a less difference in profits and in the price of corn.

At what point will these last differences entirely cease, and
the temporary effect of taxes on agricultural produce, in raising
the price, have entirely given place to their ultimate effect, that
of limiting the total produce of the country? Although the
untithed island is always verging towards the point at which
the price of food would overtake that in the tithed island, its
progress towards that point naturally slackens as it draws
nearer to attaiming it ; since—the difference between the two
islands in the rapidity of accumulation, depending upon the
difference in the rates of profit—in proportion as these ap-
proximate, the movement which draws them closer together,
abates of its force. The one may not actually overtake the other,
until both islands reach the minimum of profits: up to that
point, the tithed island may continue more or less ahead of the
untithed island in the price of corn: considerably ahead if it


TAXES ON COMMODITIES. 393


is far from the minimum, and is therefore accumulating
rapidly; very little ahead if it is near the minimum, and
accumulating slowly.

But whatever is true of the tithed and untithed islands
in our hypothetical case, is true of any country having a
tithe, compared with the same country if it had never had a
tithe.

In England the great emigration of capital, and the almost
periodical occurrence of commercial crises through the specu-
lations occasioned by the habitually low rate of profit, are
indications that profit has attained the practical, though not
the ultimate, minimum, and that all the savings which take
place (beyond what improvements, tending to the cheapening
of necessaries, make room for) are either sent abroad for
investment, or periodically swept away. There can there-
fore, I think, be little doubt that if England had never had a
tithe, or any tax on agricultural produce, the price of corn
would have been by this time as high, and the rate of profits
as low, as at present. Independently of the more rapid
accumulation which would have taken place if profits had
not been prematurely lowered by these imposts, the mere
Saving of a part of the capital which has been wasted in
unsuccessful speculations, and the keeping at home a part of
that which has been sent abroad, would have been quite suffi-
cient to produce the effect. I think, therefore, with Mr.
Senior, that the tithe, even before its commutation, had
ceased to be a cause of high prices or low profits, and had
become a mere deduction from rent; its other effects being,
that it caused the country to have no greater capital, no
larger production, and no more numerous population than if
it had been one-tenth less fertile than it is; or let us rather
say one twentieth, (considering how great a portion of the
land of Great Britain was tithe-free.)

But although tithes and other taxes on agricultural pro-
duce, when of long standing, do not raise the price of food
or lower profits at all, or if at all, not in proportion to the


ee eee


é
Et
$i


bse feist 0


ae


394 BOOK V. CHAPTER Iv. § 4.


tax, yet the abrogation of such taxes, when they exist, does
not the less diminish price, and, in general, raise the rate of
profit. The abolition of a tithe takes one-tenth from the cost
of production and consequently from the price of all agri-
cultural produce ; and unless it permanently raises the la-
bourer’s requirements, it lowers the cost of labour, and raises
profits. Rent, estimated in money or in commodities, gene-
rally remains as before ; estimated in agricultural produce,
itis raised. The country adds as much by the repeal of a
tithe, to the margin which intervenes between it and the
stationary state, as was cut off from that margin by the tithe
when first imposed. Accumulation is greatly accelerated 5
and if population also increases, the price of corn immediately
begins to recover itself, and rent to rise; thus gradually
transferring the benefit of the remission, from the consumer
to the landlord.

The effects which thus result from abolishing tithe,
result equally from what has been done by the arrangements
under the late Commutation Act for converting it into a rent
charge. When the tax, instead of being levied on the whole
produce of the soil, is levied only from the portions which
pay rent, and does not touch any fresh extension of culti-
vation, the tax no longer forms any part of the cost of
production of the portion of the produce which regulates
the price of all the rest. The land or capital which pays no
rent, can now send its produce to market one-tenth cheaper.
The commutation of tithe ought therefore to have produced
a considerable fall in the average price of corn. If it had
not come so gradually into operation, and if the price
of corm had not during the same period been under the
influence of several other causes of change, the effect would
probably have been markedly conspicuous. As it is, there
can be no doubt that this circumstance has had its share in
the fall which has taken place in the cost of production, and
in the price, of home-grown produce; though the effects of
the great agricultural improvements which have been simul-


TAXES ON COMMODITIES. 395


taneously advancing, have masked those of the other cause.
This fall of price would not in itself have any tendency
injurious to the landlord, since corn-rents are increased in
the same ratio in which the price of corn is diminished. But
neither does it in any way tend to increase his income. The
rent-charge, therefore, which is substituted for tithe, isa dead
loss to him; and the commutation of tithe was not a mere
alteration in the mode in which the landlord bore an existing
burthen, but the imposition of a new one; relief being
afforded to the consumer at the expense of the landlord, who
however, begins immediately to receive progressive indemni-
fication at the consumer’s expense, by the impulse given to
accumulation and population.


§5. We have hitherto inquired into the effects of taxes
on commodities, on the assumption that they are levied
impartially on every mode in which the commodity can be
produced or brought to market. Another class of considera-


tions is opened, if we suppose that this impartiality is not


maintained, and that the tax is imposed, not on the commo-


dity, but on some particular mode of obtaining it.

Suppose that a commodity is capable of being made by
two different processes; as 4 manufactured commodity may
be produced either by hand or by steam-power; sugar may
be made either from the sugar-cane or from beetroot, cattle
fattened either on hay and green crops, oF on oil-cake and the
It is the interest of the community,
that of the two methods, producers should adopt that which
t article at the lowest price. This being also
the interest of the producers, unless protected against com pe-
shielded from the penalties of sears the
process most advantageous to the eas oe W els
if left to themselves, they generally find it to their ac vantage
Suppose however that a tax 1s laid on one of the
all, or one of smaller amount, on the
ess is the one which the producers


refuse of breweries.
produces the bes
tition, and
to adopt.


processes, and no tax at
other. If the taxed proe


Tae ae


“=


>


reoenes


Sessross


i
fi


oe tee


eR T  O Sa =a
Se seer ere


eRe TTS TR GS QE TS EE


ES eae ae ee Tagg


396 BOOK V. CHAPTER Ivy. $ 5.


would not have adopted, the measure is simply nugatory.
But if the tax falls, as it is of course intended to do, upon the
one which they would have adopted, it creates an artificial
motive for preferring the untaxed process, although the infe-
rior of the two. If, therefore, it has any effect at all, it
causes the commodity to be produced of worse quality, or at
a greater expense of labour; it causes so much of the labour
of the community to be wasted, and the capital employed in
supporting and remunerating that labour to be expended as
uselessly, as if it were spent in hiring men to dig holes and
fill them up again. This waste of labour and capital consti-
tutes an addition to the cost of production of the commodity,
which raises its value and price in a corresponding ratio, and
thus the owners of the capital are indemnified. The loss
falls on the consumers; though the capital of the country is
also eventually diminished, by the diminution of their means
of saving, and in some degree, of their inducements to
save.

The kind of tax, therefore, which comes under the general
denomination of a discriminating duty, transgresses the rule
that taxes should take as little as possible from the tax-payer
beyond what they bring into the treasury of the state. A
discriminating duty makes the consumer pay two distinct
taxes, only one of which is paid to the government, and that
frequently the less onerous of the two. If a tax were laid
on sugar produced from the cane, leaving the sugar from
beet-root untaxed, then in so far as cane sugar continued to
be used, the tax on it would be paid to the treasury, and
might be as unobjectionable as any other tax; but if cane
sugar, haying previously been cheaper than beet-root sugar,
was now dearer, and beet-root sugar was te any consider-
able amount substituted for it, and fields laid out and manu-
factories established in consequence, the government would
gain no revenue from the beet-root sugar, while the consumers
of it would pay a real tax. They would pay for beet-root
sugar more than they had previously paid for cane sugar, and


TAXES ON COMMODITIES. 397


the difference would go to indemnify producers for a portion
of the labour of the country actually thrown away, in pro-
ducing by the labour of (say) three hundred men, what
could be obtained by the other process with the labour of
two hundred.

One of the commonest cases of discriminating duties, is
that of a tax on the importation of a commodity capable of
being produced at home, unaccompanied by an equivalent:
tax on the home production. A commodity is never perma-
nently imported, unless it can be obtained from abroad ata
smaller cost of labour and capital on the whole, than is necessary
for producing it. If, therefore, by a duty on the importation,
it is rendered cheaper to produce the article than to import
it, an extra quantity of labour and capital is expended, with-
out any extra result. The labour is useless, and the capital
is spent in paying people for laboriously domg nothing. All
custom-duties which operate as an encouragement to the
home production of the taxed article, are thus an eminently
wasteful mode of raising a revenue.

This character belongs in a peculiar degree to custom-
duties on the produce of land, unless countervailed by excise
duties on the home production. Such taxes bring less into
the public treasury, compared with what they take from the
consumers, than any other imposts to which civilized nations
Aral necustomedis CoMsubroitem met the wheat produced in a
ns of quarters, and the consumption
llion being annually imported, and
Fon Ge ioelihom a Glmay is lens! which raises the price ten
shillings per quarter, the price which is raised is not that of
the million only, but of the whole twenty-one millions.
Taking the most favourable, but extremely auc
supposition, that the importation 1s not at all checked, nor
the home production enlarged, the state gains a revenue of

hile the consumers are taxed ten mil-


only half a million, W 2 : Sia
lions and a half: the ten millions being a contribution to the
who are forced by competition to resign it all


country is twenty millio
twenty-one millions, a m1


home growers,


cage lent erties : ae
oan enatannenttonn ise nen


be


398 BOOK V. CHAPTER Iv. § 5.


to the landlords. The consumer thus pays to the owners of
land an additional tax, equal to twenty times that which he
pays to the state. Let us now suppose that the tax really
checks importation. Suppose importation stopped altogether
in ordinary years; it being found that the million of quarters
can be obtained, by a more elaborate cultivation, or by break-
ing up inferior land, at a less advance than ten shillings upon
the previous price—say, for instance, five shillings a quarter.
The revenue now obtains nothing, except from the extraordi-
nary imports which may happen to take place in a season of
scarcity. But the consumers pay every year a tax of five
shillings on the whole twenty-one millions of quarters,
amounting to 5} millions sterling. Of this, the odd 250,000).
goes to compensate the growers of the last million of quarters
for the labour and capital wasted under the compulsion of
the law. The remaining five millions go to enrich the land-
lords as before.

Such is the operation of what are technically termed
Cor Laws, when first laid on; and such continues to be
their operation, so long as they have any effect at all in
raising the price of corn. But I am by no means of opinion
that in the long run they keep up either. prices or rents in
the degree which these considerations might lead us to sup-
pose. What we have said respecting the effect of tithes and
other taxes on agricultural produce, applies in a great degree
to corn laws: they anticipate artificially a rise of price and
of rent, which would at all events have taken place through
the increase of population and of production. The differ-
ence between a country without corn laws, and a country
which has long had corn laws, is not so much that the last
has a higher price or a larger rental, but that it has the same
price and the same rental with a smaller aggregate capital
and a smaller population. The imposition of corn laws
raises rents, but retards that progress of accumulation which
would in no long period have raised them fully as much.
The repeal of corn laws tends to lower rents, but it unchains


TAXES ON COMMODITIES. 399


a force which, in a progressive state of capital and popu-
lation, restores and even increases the former amount. There
is every reason to expect that under the virtually free im-
portation of agricultural produce, recently extorted from the
ruling powers of this country, the price of food, if popula-
tion goes on increasing at its present rate, will gradually but
steadily rise; though this effect may for a time be postponed
by the strong current which in this country has set in (and
the impulse may extend itself to other countries) towards the
extension of agricultural science, and its increased application
to practice.

What we have said of duties on importation generally,
is equally applicable to discriminating duties which fayour im-
portation from one place or in one particular manner, in con-
tradistinction to others: such as the preference given to the
produce of a colony, or of a country with which there is a
commercial treaty: or the higher duties imposed by our
nayigation laws on goods imported in other than British
shipping. Whatever else may be alleged in favour of such
distinctions, whenever they are not nugatory, they are econo-
mically wasteful. They induce a resort to a more costly
mode of obtaining a commodity, in lieu of one less costly,
and thus cause a portion of the labour which the country
employs in providing itself with foreign commodities, to be


sacrificed without return.


§ 6. There is one more point, relating to the operation
of faxes on commodities conveyed from one country to
another, which requires notice: the influence which they
exert on international exchanges. Every tax on a com-
modity tends to raise its price; and consequently to lessen


the demand for it in the market in which it is sold. All


taxes on international trade tend, therefore, to produce a


disturbance and a re-adjustment of what we have termed the


Equation of International Demand. This consideration leads
U 1
: r curious consequences, which have been pointed


to some rathe


HU 400 BOOK V. CHAPTER Iv. § 6.


out in the separate essay on International Commerce, already
several times referred to in this treatise.

Taxes on foreign trade are of two kinds—taxes on im-
f ports, and on exports. On the first aspect of the matter it
would seem that both these taxes are paid by the consumers
of the commodity; that taxes on exports consequently fall
entirely on foreigners, taxes on imports wholly on the home
consumer. The true state of the case, however, is much
more complicated.

“By taxing exports we may, in certain circumstances,
produce a division of the advantage of the trade more favour-
able to ourselves. In some cases we may draw into our
Ma coffers, at the expense of foreigners, not only the whole tax,
eI but more than the tax: in other cases, we should gain exactly

; the tax; in others, less than the tax. In this last case, a
part of the tax is borne by ourselves: possibly the whole,
possibly even, as we shall show, more than the whole.”


ri Reverting to the supposititious case employed in the

ay Essay, of a trade between Germany and England in broad cloth
i 1 and linen, “suppose that England taxes her export of cloth,
Hi Tal the tax not being supposed high enough to induce Germany
hi wh to produce cloth for herself. The price at which cloth can
i ts be sold in Germany is augmented by the tax. This will
i lane probably diminish the quantity consumed. It may diminish
ae it so much that, even at the increased price, there will not
wy H be required so great a money-value as before. Or it may
TBS Ee not diminish it at all, or so little, that in consequence of the


higher price, a greater money-value will be purchased than
before. In this last case, England will gain, at the expense
Bh, of Germany, not only the whole amount of the duty, but
ts more; for, the money-value of her exports to Germany
being increased, while her imports remain the same, money
q will flow into England from Germany. The price of cloth
eae will rise in England, and consequently in Germany ; but the |
price of linen will fall in Germany, and consequently in Eng-
land. We shall export less cloth, and import more linen, till


TAXES ON COMMODITIES. 401


the equilibrium is restored. It thus appears (what is at first
sight somewhat remarkable) that by taxing her exports,
England would, in some conceivable circumstances, not only
gain from her foreign customers the whole amount of the
tax, but would also get her imports cheaper. She would get
them cheaper in two ways; for she would obtain them for
less money, and would have more money to purchase them
with, Germany, on the other hand, would suffer doubly:
she would haye to pay for her cloth a price increased not
only by the duty, but by the influx of money into Eng-
land, while the same change in the distribution of the cir-
culating medium would leave her less money to purchase it
with.

“This, however, is only one of three possible cases. If,
after the imposition of the duty, Germany requires so dimi-
nished a quantity of cloth, that its total value is exactly the
same as before, the balance of trade will be undisturbed ;
England will gain the duty, Germany will lose it, and no-
thing more. If, again, the imposition of the duty occasions
such a falling off in the demand that Germany requires a
less pecuniary value than before, our exports will no longer
pay for our imports; money must pass from England into
Germany ; and Germany’s share of the advantage of the
trade will be increased. By the change in the distribution
of money, cloth will fall in England; and therefore it will, of
course, fall in Germany. Thus Germany will not pay the
whole of the tax. From the same cause, linen will rise in
Germany, and consequently in England. When this altera-
tion of prices has so adjusted the demand, that the cloth and
the linen again pay for one another, the result is, that Ger-
many has paid only a part of the tax, and the remainder of
what has been received into our treasury has come indirectly
out of the pockets of our own consumers of linen, who pay a
higher price for that imported commodity in consequence of

while at the same time they, in con-


the tax on our exports, 1 the fall of pr I
7 0} prices 1ave
efflux of money and the ta ;
sequence of the 2D


VOL. It.


rs


w Soe Noa oeas naka gu


ere Rta fe yes
aa See ee cela ome Ser


eee.
ee eee oa


402 BOOK VY. CHAPTER Iv. § 6.


smaller money-incomes wherewith to pay for the linen at
that advanced price.

“It is not an impossible supposition that by taxing our
exports we might not only gain nothing from the foreigner,
the tax being paid out of our own pockets, but might even
compel our own people to pay a second tax to the foreigner.
Suppose, as before, that the demand of Germany for cloth
falls off so much on the imposition of the duty, that she
requires a smaller money value than before, but that the case
is so different with linen in England, that when the price
rises the demand either does not fall off at all, or so little
that the money value required is greater than before. The
first effect of laying on the duty is, as before, that the cloth
exported will no longer pay for the linen imported. Money
will therefore flow out of England into Germany. One
effect is to raise the price of linen in Germany, and conse-
quently in England. But this, by the supposition, instead of
stopping the efflux of money, only makes it greater, because
the higher the price, the greater the money-value of the
linen consumed. The balance, therefore, can only be restored
by the other effect, which is going on at the same time,
namely, the fall of cloth in the English and consequently in
the German market. Even when cloth has fallen so low that
its price with the duty is only equal to what its price without
the duty was at first, it is not a necessary consequence that
the fall will stop; for the same amount of exportation as
before will not now suffice to pay the increased money value
of the imports; and although the German consumers have
now not only cloth at the old price, but likewise increased
money incomes, it is not certain. that they will be inclined
to employ the increase of their incomes in increasing their
purchases of cloth. The price of cloth, therefore, must
perhaps fall, to restore the equilibrium, more than the whole
amount of the duty; Germany may be enabled to import
cloth at a lower price when it is taxed, than when it was
untaxed: and this gain she will acquire at the expense of the


TAXES ON COMMODITIES. 403


H
English consumers of linen, who, in addition, will be the if
real payers of the whole of what is received at their own “t
custom-house under the name of duties on the export of i
cloth.”
It is almost unnecessary to remark that cloth and linen |
are here merely representatives of exports and imports in
general; and that the effect which a tax on exports might o |
have in increasing the cost of imports, would affect the i
imports from all countries, and not peculiarly the articles ;
which might be imported from the particular country to which H
the taxed exports. were sent.

“Such are the extremely various effects which may result i
to ourselves and to our customers from the imposition of
taxes on our exports; and the determining circumstances are
of a nature so imperfectly ascertainable, that it must be i
almost impossible to decide with any certainty, even after the
tax has been imposed, whether we have been gainers by it or
losers.” In general however there could be little doubt that
@ country which imposed such taxes would succeed in making
foreign countries contribute something to its revenue; but
unless the taxed article be one for which their demand is
extremely urgent, they will seldom pay the whole of the
amount which the tax brings in*. “In any case, whatever we
gain is lost by somebody else, and there is the expense of the
collection besides: if international morality, therefore, were
rightly understood and acted upon, such taxes, as being con-
trary to the universal weal, would not exist.”

Thus far of duties on exports. We now proceed to the
More ordinary case of duties on imports. “ We have had an
example of a tax on exports, that is, on foreigners, falling in


as.


ET seh mn


ee


pace tee


;

— . 1 a

* Probably the strongest known instance of a lar ge revenue raised from :

foreigners by a tax on exports, is the opium trade with China. The high {|

price of the article under the Government monopoly (which is equivalent it

; toa high export duty) has so little effect in discouraging its consumption, :
that it is said to have been occasionally sold in China for as much as its |
Weight in silver. if

: 2p 2 {


i
i
|

|


404 BOOK V. CHAPTER Iv. § 6.


part on ourselves. We shall therefore, not be surprised if we
find a tax on imports, that is, on ourselves, partly falling upon
foreigners.

“ Instead of taxing the cloth which we export, suppose that
we tax the linen which we import. The duty which we are
now supposing must not be what is termed a protecting duty,
that is, a duty sufficiently high to induce us to produce the
article at home. If it had this effect, it would destroy en-
tirely the trade both in cloth and in linen, and both countries
would lose the whole of the advantage which they previously
gained by exchanging those commodities with one another.
We suppose a duty which might diminish the consumption
of the article, but which would not prevent us from con-
tinuing to import, as before, whatever linen we did
consume.

“The equilibrium of trade would be disturbed if the impo-
sition of the tax diminished, in the slightest degree, the
quantity of linen consumed. For, as the tax is levied at our
own custom-house, the German exporter only receives the
same price as formerly, though the English consumer pays #
higher one. If, therefore, there be any diminution of the
quantity bought, although a larger sum of money may be
actually laid out in the article, a smaller one will be due from
England to Germany: this sum will no longer be an equiva-
lent for the sum due from Germany to England for cloth, the
balance therefore must be paid in money. Prices will fall in
Germany and rise in England; linen will fall in the German
market ; cloth will rise in the English. The Germans will
pay a higher price for cloth, and will have smaller money
incomes to buy it with; while the English will obtain linen
cheaper, that is, its price will exceed what it previously was
by less than the amount of the duty, while their means of

purchasing it will be increased by the increase of their money
incomes.

“Tf the imposition of the tax does not diminish the

demand, it will leave the trade exactly as it was before. We


TAXES ON COMMODITIES. 405


shall import as much, and export as much; the whole of the
tax will be paid out of our own pockets.

“But the imposition of a tax on a commodity almost
always diminishes the demand more or less ; and it can never,
or scarcely ever, increase the demand. It may, therefore, be
laid down as a principle, that a tax on imported commodities,
when it really operates as a tax, and not as a prohibition
either total or partial, almost always falls in part upon the
foreigners who consume our goods ; and that this is a mode
in which a nation may appropriate to itself, at the expense of
foreigners, a larger share than would otherwise belong to it
of the increase in the general productiveness of the labour


and capital of the world, which results from the interchange
of commodities among nations.”


Those are, therefore, in the right who maintain that taxes
on imports are partly paid by foreigners; but they are mis-
taken when they say, that it is by the foreign producer. It


is not on the person from whom we buy, but on all those
who buy from us, that a portion of our custom duties spon-
taneously falls. It is the foreign consumer of our exported
commodities, who is obliged to pay a higher price for them
because we maintain revenue duties on foreign goods.

There are but two cases in which duties on commodities
can in any degree, or in any manner, fall on the producer.
One is, when the article is a strict monopoly, and at a scarcity
price. The price in this case being only limited by the desires
of the buyer; the sum obtained for the restricted supply
being the utmost which the buyers would consent to give
rather than go without it; if the treasury intercepts a part of
this, the price cannot be further raised to compensate for the
tax, and it must be paid from the monopoly profits. A tax
on rare and high priced wines will fall wholly on the growers,
or rather, on the owners of the vineyards. The second case
in which the producer sometimes bears a portion of the tax,
is more important: the case of duties on the produce of land
or of mines. These might be so high as to diminish mate-


Daa 406 BOOK Vv. CHAPTER Iv. § 6.


rially the demand for the produce, and compel the abandon-
: ment of some of the inferior qualities of land or mimes.
4 Supposing this to be the effect, the consumers, both in the
ae country itself and in those which dealt with it, would obtain
fie Be the produce at smaller cost; and a part only, instead of the
t : whole, of the duty would fall on the purchaser, who would
1 be indemnified chiefly at the expense of the landowners or
ee mine-owners in the producing country.
del Duties on importation may, then, be divided “ into two
iy classes: those which have the effect of encouraging some
ide particular branch of domestic industry, and those which have
; not. The former are purely mischievous, both to the country
f imposing them, and to those with whom it trades. They
irs prevent a saving of labour and capital, which, if permitted to
hake be made, would be divided in some proportion or other
between the importing country and the countries which buy
what that country does or might export.


iy “The other class of duties are those which do not encou-

cil rage one mode of procuring an article at the expense of

ihe another, but allow interchange to take place just as if the
Riis duty did not exist, and to produce the saving of labour which
ees constitutes the motive to international, as to all other com-
ene merce. Of this kind are duties on the importation of any
Vie ge commodity which could not by any possibility be produced


at home; and duties not sufficiently high to counterbalance
eh td the difference of expense between the production of the
ht article at home and its importation. Of the money which is
brought into the treasury of any country by taxes of this
last description, a part only is paid by the people of that

i country; the remainder by the foreign consumers of their
goods.

“ Neyertheless, this latter kind of taxes are in principle
| as ineligible as the former, although not precisely on the
ti same ground. A protecting duty can never be a cause of

gain, but always and necessarily of loss, to the country im-
posing it, just so far as it is efficacious to its end. A non-


TAXES ON COMMODITIES. 407


protecting duty, on the contrary, would in most cases be a
source of gain to the country imposing it, in so far as throw-
ing part of the weight of its taxes upon other people is a
gain; but it would be a means which it could seldom be
advisable to adopt, being so easily counteracted by a precisely
similar proceeding on the other side.

“If England, in the case already supposed, sought to
obtain for herself more than her natural share of the advan-
tage of the trade with Germany, by imposing a duty upon
linen, Germany would only have to impose a duty upon cloth,
sufficient to diminish the demand for that article about as
much as the demand for linen had been diminished in England
by the tax. Things would then be as before, and each
country would pay its own tax. Unless, indeed, the sum of
the two duties exceeded the entire advantage of the trade;
for in that case the trade, and its advantage, would cease
entirely.

“There would be no advantage, therefore, in imposing
duties of this kind, with a view to gain by them in the man-
ner which has been pointed out. But when any part of the
revenue is derived from taxes on commodities, these may
often be as little objectionable as the rest. It is evident, too,
that considerations of reciprocity, which are quite unessential
when the matter in debate is a protecting duty, are of mate-
rial importance when the repeal of duties of this other


description is discussed. A country cannot be expected to
foreigners, unless foreigners


renounce the power of taxing
me forbearance.


will in return practise towards itself the sa
The only mode in which a country can save itself from being
uties imposed by other countries on
pose corresponding revenue duties


on theirs. Only it must take care that those duties be not


so high as to exceed all that remains of the advantage of the


trade, and put an end to importation altogether, causing the
or imported from


article to be either produced at home,
another and a dearer market.”


a loser by the revenue d
its commodities, is to im


arth ceremanen nti tment ates eer nite i


|


F
1
i
!


vind anigieetonale


FAI


z


CHAPTER V.


OF SOME OTHER TAXES.


§ 1. Brsrpes direct taxes on income, and taxes on con-
sumption, the financial systems of most countries comprise 2
yariety of miscellaneous imposts, not strictly included in
either class. The modern European systems retain many
such taxes, though in much less number and variety than
those semi-barbarous governments which European influence
has not yet reached. In some of these, scarcely any incident
of life has escaped being made an excuse for some fiscal
exaction; hardly any act, not belonging to daily routine, can
be performed by any one, without obtaining leave from
some agent of government, which is only granted in conside-
ration of a payment: especially when the act requires the aid
or the peculiar guarantee of a public authority. In the
present Treatise we may confine our attention to such taxes
as lately existed, or still exist, in countries usually classed as
civilized.

In almost all nations a considerable revenue is drawn
from taxes on contracts. These are imposed in various forms.
One expedient is that of taxing the legal instrument which
serves as evidence of the contract, and which is commonly the
only evidence legally admissible. In England, scarcely any con-
tract is binding unless executed on stamped paper, which has
paid a tax to government; and when the contract relates to
property the tax rises, though in an irregular manner, with
the pecuniary value of the property. There are also stamp
duties on the legal instruments which are evidence of the
fulfilment of contracts; such as acknowledgments of
receipts, and deeds of release. Taxes on contracts are not
always levied by means of stamps. The duty on sales by


MISCELLANEOUS TAXES. 409


auction, abrogated by Sir Robert Peel, was an instance in
point. The taxes on transfers of landed property, in France,
are another: in England these are stamp-duties. In some
countries, contracts of many kinds are not valid unless regis-
tered, and their registration is made an occasion for a tax.
Of taxes on contracts, the most important are those on
the transfer of property; chiefly on purchases and sales.
Taxes on the sale of consumable commodities are simply
taxes on those commodities. If they affect only some par-
ticular commodities, they raise the prices of those commodities,
and are paid by the consumer. If the attempt were made to
tax all purchases and sales, which, however absurd, was for
centuries the law of Spain, the tax, if it could be enforced,
would be equivalent to a tax on all commodities, and would
not affect prices: if levied from the sellers, it would be a tax
on profits, if from the buyers, a tax on consumption; and
neither class could throw the burthen upon the other. If
confined to some one mode of sale, as for example by auction,
it discourages recourse to that mode, and if of any material
amount, prevents it from being adopted at all, unless in a
case of emergency; in which case as the seller is under a
necessity to sell, but the buyer under no necessity to buy, the
tax falls on the seller; and this was the strongest of the
objections to the auction duty: it almost always fell ona
necessitous person, and in the very crisis of his neces-
Sities.

Taxes on the purchase and sale of land are, in most
countries, liable to the same objection. Landed property in
old countries is seldom parted with, except from reduced cir-
cumstances, or some urgent need: the seller, therefore, must
take what he can get, while the buyer, whose object is an
investment, makes his calculations on the interest which he
can obtain for his money in other ways, and will not buy if
he is charged with a government tax on the transaction. It
has indeed been objected, that this argument would not apply


=."


eR ES eS he Soe


ee en ee ee


410 BOOK V. CHAPTER v. § 1.


if all modes of permanent investment, such as the purchase
of government securities, shares in joint-stock companies,
mortgages, and the like, were subject to the same tax. But
even then, if paid by the buyer, it would be equivalent toa
tax on interest: if sufficiently heavy to be of any importance,
it would disturb the established relation between interest and
profit ; and the disturbance would redress itself by a rise in
the rate of interest, and a fall of the price of land and of all
securities. It appears to me, therefore, that the seller is
the person by whom such taxes, unless under peculiar cir-
cumstances, will always be borne.

All taxes must be condemned which throw obstacles in
the way of the sale of land, or other instruments of produc-
tion. Such sales tend naturally to render the property more
productive. The seller, whether moved by necessity or
choice, is probably some one who is either without the
means, or without the capacity, to make the most advan-
tageous use of the property for productive purposes; while
the buyer, on the other hand, is at any rate not needy; and
is probably a person both inclined and able to improve the
property, since, as it is worth more to such a person than to
any Other, he is likely to offer the highest price for it. All
taxes, therefore, and all difficulties and expenses, annexed to
such contracts, are decidedly detrimental ; especially in the
case of land, the source of subsistence, and the original foun-
dation of all wealth, on the improvement of which, therefore,
so much depends. Too great facilities cannot be given to
enable land to pass into the hands, and assume the modes
of aggregation or division, most conducive to its productive-
ness. If landed properties are too large, alienation should
be free, in order that they may be subdivided; if too small, in
order that they may be united. All taxes on the transfer of
landed property should be abolished; but, as the landlords
have no claim to be relieved from any reservation which the
state has hitherto made in its own favour from the amount


MISCELLANEOUS TAXES. 4\1


of their rent, an annual impost equivalent to the average pro-
duce of these taxes should be distributed over the land
generally, in the form of a land tax*.

Some of the taxes on contracts are very pernicious, im-
posing a virtual penalty upon transactions which it ought to
be the policy of the legislator to encourage. Of this sort is
the stamp duty on leases, which in a country of large pro-


“In our own country, the taxes on contracts are the more objectionable,
because, with that tendency to spare the rich which pervades our financial
system, they are proportionally much heavier on the smaller transactions.
Many stamp duties do not profess to be ad valorem, but are fixed charges,
whether the amount of the transaction be great or small. With respect to
those which do pretend to be ad valorem; “of the stamps on conveyances,
the lowest, which attaches where the purchase money does not amount to
20/., is 10s. ; where the purchase money amounts to 20/7. and not to 50/., 1/.;
where 50/., and not amounting to 150/., 17. 10s. ; and there are twenty-three
other enumerated stamps, rising in amount by unequal steps, the highest
being 1000/., where the purchase money is 100,000/., beyond which, how-
ever high the purchase money may rise, the tax does not imcrease. . . ,
In the case of a 207, purchase of freehold, the duty is 27., or 10 per cent on
the value ; while on the 200,000/. or 300,000/. purchase (as on all conveyances
of 1507, and upwards), the stamp is only 17. l5s.; a fraction of the value too
inconsiderable to deserve notice. It often happens also in conveyances of
properties of small amount, that besides this conveyance, other deeds are re-
quired, as assignments or surrenders of terms, and covenants for the pro-
duction of title deeds: and the stamps on these deeds are the same whether
the purchase is 20/7. or 20,0007.” In the stamp duties on bonds and mortgages,
the inequality is still more glaring ; the rate ad valorem being “ eighty times
as great on the security for 50/. ason that for 100,000/.”—M*Culloch on Tax-
ation, pp.277-80. And in another place, “ The stamp duties in their present
form wholly want that compensating quality which has often been ascribed
to them (and with which they might be endowed) of giving increased secu-
rity to transactions. On the contrary, one would think they had been in-
tended to serve as decoys with which to entrap parties, and force them into
the courts, The difficulty which they create of determining what is and
what is not a proper stamp, 1s itself a most ima he SONGS of uncertainty,
and consequently of litigation and expenses? @. 276). We may well add,
with the same writer, (p- 281) “it will be curious to see how long the pre-

7 i rmitted to continue.”
be ag ae te fact, that while the sale of land is taxed, its settle-
ment, which prevents it from being sold, is one of the few legal transactions


which are not liable to any tax.


SL SS,


een


412 BOOK V. CHAPTER v. § 2.


perties are an essential condition of good agriculture; and
the tax on insurances, a direct discouragement to prudence
and forethought. In the case of fire insurances, the tax is
exactly double the amount of the premium of insurance on
common risks; so that the person insuring is obliged by the
government to pay for the insurance just three times the
value of the risk. If this tax existed in France, we should
not see, as we do in some of her provinces, the plate of an
insurance company on almost every cottage or hovel. This,
indeed, must be ascribed to the provident and calculating
habits produced by the dissemination of property through
the labouring class: but a tax of so extravagant an amount
would be a heavy drag upon any habits of providence.


§ 2. Nearly allied to the taxes on contracts, are those
on communication. The principal of these is the postage
tax; to which may be added the tax on advertisements, and
that on newspapers, which are taxes on the communication
of information.

The common mode of levying a tax on the conveyance
of letters, is by making the government the sole authorized
carrier of them, and demanding a monopoly price. When
this price is so moderate as it is in this country under the
uniform penny postage, scarcely if at all exceeding what
would be charged under the freest competition by any private
company, it can hardly be considered as taxation, but rather
as the profits of a business; whatever excess there is above
the ordinary profits of stock being a fair result of the saving
of expense, caused by having only one establishment and
one set of arrangements for the whole country, instead of
many competing ones. The business, too, being one
which both can and ought to be conducted on fixed rules,
is one of the very few businesses which it is not unsuit-
able to a government to conduct. The post office, there-
fore, is at present one of the best of the sources from
which this country derives its revenue. But a postage much


MISCELLANEOUS TAXES. 413


exceeding what would be paid for the same service in a
system of freedom, is not a desirable tax. Its chief weight
falls on letters of business, and increases the expense of
mercantile relations between distant places. It is like an
attempt to raise a large revenue by heavy tolls: it obstructs
all operations by which goods are conveyed from place to
place, and discourages the production of commodities in one
place for consumption in another; which is not only in itself
one of the greatest sources of economy of labour, but is a
necessary condition of almost all improvements in production,
and one of the strongest stimulants to industry.

A tax on advertisements is not free from the same objec-
tion, since in whatever degree advertisements are useful to
business, by facilitating the coming together of the dealer or
producer and the consumer, in that same degree, if the tax
be high enough to be a serious discouragement to advertising,
it prolongs the period during which goods remain unsold, and
capital locked up in idleness. In this country the amount
of the duty is moderate, and the abuse of advertising, which
is quite as conspicuous as the use, renders the abolition of
the tax, though right in principle, a matter of less urgency
than it might otherwise be deemed.

A tax on newspapers is objectionable, not so much where
it does fall as where it does not, that is, where it prevents
newspapers from being used. To the generality of those
who now buy them, newspapers are a luxury, which they
can as well afford to pay for as any other indulgence, and
which is as unexceptionable a source of revenue. But to
that large part of the community who have been taught to
read, but have received little other intellectual education,
newspapers are the source of nearly all the general informa-
tion which they possess, and of nearly all their acquaintance
with the ideas and topics current among mankind ; and an
interest is more easily excited in newspapers, than in books,
or other more recondite sources of instruction. Newspapers
do so little, and generally attempt so little, in the origination


SR OT


414 BOOK V. CHAPTER Vv. § 4.


of useful ideas, that many persons undervalue the importance
of their office in disseminating those ideas ; in correcting many
prejudices and superstitions, and keeping up that habit of
discussion, and interest in public concerns, the absence of
which is a great cause of the stagnation of mind usually found
in the lower and middle, if not in all, ranks, of those countries
where newspapers of an important or interesting character
do not exist. There ought to be no taxes which render this
great diffuser of ideas, of mental excitement, and mental
exercise, less accessible to that portion of the public which
most needs to be carried, as it were, out of itself, into a region
of ideas and interests beyond its own limited horizon.


§ 3. In the enumeration of bad taxes, a conspicuous
place must be assigned to law taxes; which extract a revenue
for the state from the various operations involved in an ap-
plication to the tribunals. Like all needless expenses attached
to law proceedings, they are a tax on redress, and therefore
a premium on injury. Although such taxes have been abo-
lished in this country as a general source of revenue, they
still exist in the form of fees of court, for defraying the ex-
pense of the courts of justice; under the idea, apparently,
that those may fairly be required to bear the expenses of the
administration of justice, who reap the benefit of it. The
fallacy of this doctrine was powerfully exposed by Bentham.
As he remarked, those who are under the necessity of gong
to law, are those who benefit least, not most, by the law and
its administration. To them the protection which the law
affords has not been complete, since they have been obliged
to resort to a court of justice to ascertain their rights, or
maintain those rights against infringement: while the re-
mainder of the public have enjoyed the immunity from injury
conferred by the law and the tribunals, without the inconve-
nience of an appeal to them.


§ 4. Besides the general taxes of the State, there are in


MISCELLANEOUS TAXES. 415


all or most countries local taxes, to defray any expenses of
a public nature which it is thought best to place under the
control or management of a local authority. Some of these
expenses are incurred for purposes in which the particular
locality is solely or chiefly interested; as the paving, cleans-
ing, and lighting of the streets; or the making and repairing
of roads and bridges, which may be important to people
from any part of the country, but only in so far as they, or
goods belonging to them, pass along the roads or over the
bridges. In other cases again, the expenses are of a kind
as nationally important as any others, but are defrayed
locally, because supposed more likely to be well administered
by local bodies: as, in England, the relief of the poor and
the support of gaols, and in some other countries, of schools.
To decide for what public objects local superintendence is
best suited, and what are those which should be kept imme-
diately under the central government, or under a mixed sys-
tem of local management and central superintendence, is a
question not of political economy but of administration. It
is an important principle, however, that taxes imposed by a
local authority, being less amenable to publicity and discussion
than the acts of the government, should always be special—laid
on for some definite service, and not exceeding the expense
actually incurred in rendering the service. Thus limited, it
is desirable, whenever practicable, that the burthen should fall
on those to whom the service is rendered; that the expense,
for instance, of roads and bridges, should be defrayed by a
toll on passengers and goods conveyed by them, thus divi-
ding the cost between these who use them for pleasure or
convenience, and the consumers of the goods which they
enable to be brought to and from the market at a diminished
expense. When, however, the tolls have repaid with inte-
rest the whole of the expenditure, the road or bridge should
be thrown open free of toll, that it may be used also by
those to whom, unless open gratuitously, it would be value-
less; provision being made for repairs either from the funds


Seana


416 BOOK V. CHAPTER y. § 4.


of the state, or by a rate levied on the localities which reap
the principal benefit.

In England, almost all local taxes are direct, (the coal duty
of the City of London, and a few similar imposts, being the
chief exceptions,) although the greatest part of the taxation
for general purposes is indirect. On the contrary, in France,
Austria, and other countries where direct taxation is much
more largely employed by the state, the local expenses of
towns are principally defrayed by taxes levied on commodi-
ties when entering them. ‘These indirect taxes are much
more objectionable in towns than on the frontier, because the
things which the country supplies to the towns are chiefly
the necessaries of life and the materials of manufacture,
while, of what a country imports from foreign countries, the
greater part usually consists of luxuries. An octroi cannot
produce a large revenue, without pressing severely upon the
labouring classes of the towns; unless their wages rise pro-
portionally, in which case the tax falls in a great measure
on the consumers of town produce, whether residing in town
or country, since capital will not remain in the towns if its
profits fall beyond their ordinary proportion as compared with
the rural districts.


CHAPTER VI.


COMPARISON BETWEEN DIRECT AND INDIRECT
TAXATION.


§1. Axe direct or indirect taxes the most eligible?
This question, at all times interesting, has of late excited a
considerable amount of discussion. In England there is a
popular feeling, of old standing, in favour of indirect, or it
should rather be said in opposition to direct, taxation. The
feeling is not grounded on the merits of the case, and is of a
rather puerile kind. An Englishman detests, not so much
the payment as the act of paying. He dislikes seeing the
face of the tax collector, and being subjected to his peremp-
tory demand. Perhaps, too, the money which he is required
to pay directly out of his pocket is the only taxation which
he is quite sure that he pays at all. That a tax of two shil-
lings per pound on tea, or of three shillings per bottle on
wine, raises the price of each pound of tea and bottle of
wine which he consumes, by that and more than that amount,
cannot indeed be denied; it is the fact, and is intended to
be so, and he himself, at times, is perfectly aware of it;
but it makes hardly any impression on his practical feelings
and associations, serving to illustrate the distinction between
what is merely known to be true and what is felt to be so.
The “ignorant impatience” of direct taxation, contrasted
with the easy manner in which the public consent to let
themselves be fleeced in the prices of commodities, has gene-
rated in many friends of improvement a directly opposite
mode of thinking to the foregoing. They contend that the
very reason which makes direct taxation disagreeable, makes
it preferable. Under it, every one knows how much he
really pays; and if he votes for a war, or any other expensive


Qn
VOL. Il. : =


ee


Siiaseunre neice


Snenemembenal a nie


it
a


gee oie ee Fae


sos


Pag a


418 BOOK V. CHAPTER vi. § 1.


national luxury, he does so with his eyes open to what it
costs him. If all taxes were direct, taxation would be much
more odious than at present; and there would be a security
which now there is not, for economy in the public expen-
diture.

Although this argument is not without force, too much-
stress, I cannot but think, is laid on it: for, in the first place,
its weight is likely to be constantly diminishing. The real
incidence of indirect taxation is every day more generally
understood and more familiarly recognized: and whatever
else may be said of the progressive changes which are taking
place in the tendencies of the human mind, it can scarcely, I
think, be denied, that things are more and more estimated
according to their calculated value, and less according to their
non-essential accompaniments. The mere distinction, there-
fore, between paying money directly to the tax-collector, and
contributing the same sum through the intervention of the
tea-dealer or the wine-merchant, will not continue to make
the whole difference between dislike or opposition, and pas-
sive acquiescence. But further, while this infirmity of the
popular mind subsists, the argument grounded on it tells
partly on the other side of the question. If our present
revenue of above fifty millions were all raised by direct taxes,
an intense dissatisfaction would certainly arise at having to
pay so much ; but while men’s minds are so little guided by
reason, as such a change of feeling from so irrelevant a cause
would imply, it may be doubted if so great an aversion t0
taxation would not produce more evil than good. Of the
fifty millions in question, nearly thirty are pledged, under
the most binding obligations, to those whose capital has
been borrowed and spent by the state: and while this debt
remains unredeemed, a greatly increased impatience of taxa-
tion would inyolve no little danger of a breach of faith,
similar to that which, in the defaulting states of America, has
been produced, and in some of them still continues, from the
same cause. That part, indeed, of the public expenditure


DIRECT AND INDIRECT TAXES COMPARED. 419


which is devoted to the maintenance of civil and military
establishments, is still, in many cases, unnecessarily profuse,
but though many of the items will bear great reduction,
others certainly require increase. There is hardly any public
reform or improvement of the first rank, proposed of late
years, and still remaining to be effected, which would not
probably require, at least for a time, an increased instead of
a diminished appropriation of public money. Whether the
object be popular education; emigration and colonization; a
more efficient and accessible administration of justice; a
More judicious treatment of criminals ; improvement in the
condition of soldiers and sailors; a more effective police ;
reforms of any kind which, like the Slave Emancipation,
require compensation to individual interests; or, finally,
what is as important as any of these, the entertainment of a
sufficient staff of able and highly-educated public servants,
to conduct in a better than the present awkward manner the
business of legislation and administration; every one of these
things implies considerable expense, and many of them have
again and again been prevented by the reluctance which
exists to apply to Parliament for an increased grant of public
money, though the cost would be repaid, often a hundred-
fold, in mere pecuniary advantage to the community gene-
rally. I fear that we should have to wait long for most of
these things, if taxation were as odious as it probably would
be if it were exclusively direct.

There is, however, a frequent plea in support of indirect
taxation, which must be altogether rejected, as grounded on
a fallacy. We are often told that taxes on commodities are
less burdensome than other taxes, because the contributor
can escape from them by ceasing to use the taxed commodity.
He certainly can, if that be his object, deprive the govern-
ment of the money; but he does so by a sacrifice of his own
indulgences, which (if he chose to undergo it) would equally
make up to him for the same amount taken from him by


Suppose a tax laid on wine, sufficient to
252


direct taxation.


(
i
;
i
4
i


420 BOOK V. CHAPTER vi. § 1.


add five pounds to the price of the quantity of wine which
he consumes in a year. He has only (we are told) to
diminish his consumption of wine by 5/., and he escapes
the burden. True: but if the 5/., instead of being laid on
wine, had been taken from him by an income-tax, he could,
by expending 5/. less in wine, equally save the amount of the
tax, so that the difference between the two cases is really
illusory. If the government takes from the contributor five
pounds a year, whether in one way or another, exactly that
amount must be retrenched from his consumption to leave
him as well off as before; and in either way the same amount
of sacrifice, neither more nor less, is imposed on him.

On the other hand, it is a real advantage on the side of
indirect taxes, that what they exact from the contributor 1s
taken at a time, and in a manner, likely to be convenient
to him. It is paid at a time when he has at any rate a pay-
ment to make; it causes, therefore, no additional trouble,
nor any inconvenience but what is inseparable from the pay-
ment of the amount. He can also, except in the case of
very perishable articles, select his own time for laying in a
stock of the commodity, and consequently for payment of
the tax. The producer or dealer who advances these taxes,
is, indeed, sometimes subjected to inconvenience; but, in
the case of imported goods, this inconvenience is reduced to
a minimum by what is called the Warehousing System, under
which, instead of paying the duty at the time of importation,
he is only required to do so when he takes out the goods for
consumption, which is seldom done until he has either actually
found, or has the prospect of immediately finding, a pur-
chaser.

The decisive objection, however, to raising the whole or
the greater part of a large revenue by direct taxes, is the
impossibility of assessing them fairly. In the case of an
income-tax, I have pointed out that the burthen can never
be apportioned with any tolerable approach to fairness upon
those whose incomes are derived from a business or profession;


DIRECT AND INDIRECT TAXES COMPARED. 421


and this is in fact admitted by most of the advocates of
direct taxation, who, I am afraid, generally get over the diffi-
culty by leaving those classes untaxed, and confining their
projected income-tax to “realized property,” in which form
it certainly has the merit of being a very easy form of


~plunder. But enough has been said in condemnation of this


expedient. We have seen, however, that a house-tax is a form
of direct taxation not liable to the same objections as an
income-tax, and indeed liable to as few objections of any kind
as perhaps any of our indirect taxes. But it would be im-
possible to raise, by a house-tax alone, the greatest part of the
revenue of Great Britain, without producing a very objec-
tionable over-crowding of the population, through the strong
Motive which all persons would haye to avoid the tax by
restricting their house accommodation. Besides, even a house-
tax has inequalities, and consequently injustices ; no tax is
exempt from them, and it is neither just nor politic to make
all the mequalities fall in the same places, by calling upon one
tax to defray the whole or the chief part of the public expen-
diture. So much of the local taxation, in this country, being
already in the form of a house-tax, it is probable that ten
millions a year would be fully as much as could beneficially
be levied, through this medium, for general purposes.

A certain amount of revenue may, as we have seen, be
obtained without injustice bya peculiar tax on rent. Besides
the present land-tax, and an equivalent for the revenue now
derived from stamp-duties on the conveyance of land, some
further taxation might, I have contended, at some future
period be imposed, to enable the state to participate in the
progressive increase of the incomes of landlords from natural
Causes. Legacies and inheritances, we have also seen, ought
to be subjected to taxation sufficient to yield a considerable
revenue. With these taxes, and a house-tax of suitable
amount, we should, I think, have reached the prudent limits
of direct taxation, save in a national emergency so urgent as
to justify the government in disregarding the inequality and


a


tS


_——


i
i
i


i '
a


422 BOOK V. CHAPTER vi. § 2


Ae


unfairness inseparable from every practicable form of income-
tax. The remainder of the revenue would have to be pro-


vided by taxes on consumption, and the question is, which of
these are the least objectionable.


§ 2. There are some forms of indirect taxation which
must be peremptorily excluded. Taxes on commodities, for
revenue purposes, must not operate as protecting duties, but
must be levied impartially on every mode in which the
articles can be obtained, whether produced in the country
itself, or imported. An exclusion must also be put upon all
taxes on the necessaries of life, or on the materials or instru-
ments employed in producing those necessaries. Such taxes
are always liable to encroach on what should be left untaxed,
the incomes barely sufficient for healthful existence: and on
the most favourable supposition, namely, that wages rise to com-
pensate the labourers for the tax, it operates as a peculiar tax
on profits, which is at once unjust, and detrimental to national
wealth*. What remain are taxes on luxuries. And these
have some properties which strongly recommend them. In
the first place, they can never, by any possibility, touch
those whose whole income is expended on necessaries 5 while
they do reach those by whom what is required for neces-
saries, is expended on indulgences. In the next place, they
operate in some cases as an useful, and the only useful, kind
of sumptuary law. I disclaim all asceticism, and by no means
wish to see discouraged, either by law or opinion, any indul-


* Some argue that the materials and instruments of all production
should be exempt from taxation; but these, when they do not enter into
the production of necessaries, seem as proper subjects of taxation as the
finished article. It is chiefly with reference to foreign trade, that such
taxes have been considered injurious. Internationally speaking, they M®y
be looked upon as export duties, and, unless in cases in which an export
duty is advisable, they should be accompanied with an equivalent draw-
back on exportation. But there is no reason against taxing the materials


and instruments used in the production of any thing which is itself a fit
object of taxation. ;


DIRECT AND INDIRECT TAXES COMPARED. 423


gence (consistent with the means and obligations of the
person using it) which is sought from a genuine inclination
for, and enjoyment of, the thing itself; buta great portion of
the expense of the higher and middle classes in most coun-
tries, and the greatest in this, is not incurred for the sake of
the pleasure afforded by the things on which the money is
spent, but from regard to opinion, and an idea that certain
expenses are expected from them, as an appendage of station;
and I cannot but think that expenditure of this sort is a
most desirable subject of taxation. If taxation discourages
it, some good is done, and if not, no harm; for in so far as
taxes are levied on things which are desired and possessed
from motives of this description, nobody is the worse for
them. Whena thing is bought not for its use but for its
costliness, cheapness is no recommendation. As Sismondi
remarks, the consequence of cheapening articles of vanity, is
not that less is expended on such things, but that the buyers
substitute for the cheapened article some other which is more
costly, or a more elaborate quality of the same thing; and
as the inferior quality answered the purpose of vanity equally


well when it was equally expensive, a tax on the article would
really be paid by nobody: it would be a creation of public
revenue by which nobody would lose*.


* “Were we to suppose that diamonds could only be procured from one
particular and distant country, and pearls from another, and were the pro-
duce of the mines in the former, and of the fishery in the latter, from the
operation of natural causes, to become doubly difficult to procure, the effect
would merely be that in time half the quantity of diamonds and pearls
would be sufficient to mark a certain opulence and rank, that it had before
been necessary to employ for that purpose. The same quantity of gold, or
some commodity reducible at last to labour, would be required to produce
the now reduced amount, as the former larger amount. Were the difficulty
interposed by the regulations of Jegislators . . . . it could make no.
difference to the fitness of these articles to serve the purposes of vanity.”
Suppose that means were discovered whereby the physiological process
which generates the pearl might be induced ad libitum, the result being that
the amount of labour expended in procuring each pearl, came to be only
the five hundredth part of what it was before. “The ultimate effect of


nO REE PIS TELE


424 BOOK V. CHAPTER vi. § 3.


§ 3. In order to reduce as muchas possible the inconve-
niences, and increase the advantages, incident to taxes on
commodities, the following are the practical rules which sug-
gest themselves. Ist. To raise as large a revenue as conve-
niently may be, from those classes of luxuries which have
most connexion with vanity, and least with positive enjoy-
ment; such as the more costly qualities of all kinds of per-
sonal equipment and ornament. 2ndly. Whenever possible,
to demand the tax, not from the producer, but directly from
the consumer, since when levied on the producer it raises
the price always by more, and often by much more, than the
mere amount of the tax. Most of the minor assessed taxes
in this country are recommended by both these considera-
tions. But with regard to horses and carriages, as there are
many persons to whom, from health or constitution, these
are not so much luxuries as necessaries, the tax paid by those
who have but one riding horse, or but one carriage, especially
of the cheaper descriptions, should be low; while taxation
should rise very rapidly with the number of horses and car-
riages, and with their costliness. 3dly. But as the only
indirect taxes which yield a large revenue are those which


such a change would depend on whether the fishery were free or not.
Were it free to all, as pearls could be got simply for the labour of fishing
for them, a string of them might be had for a few pence. The very poorest
class of society could therefore afford to decorate their persons with them.
They would thus soon become extremely vulgar and unfashionable, and so
i at last valueless. If however we suppose that instead of the fishery being
EY free, the legislator owns and has complete command of the place, where
alone pearls are to be procured ; as the progress of discovery advanced, he
lhe might impose a duty on them equal to the diminution of labour necessary
to procure them. They would then be as much esteemed as they were
before. What simple beauty they have would remain unchanged. The
difficulty to be surmounted in order to obtain them would be caverens but
ete equally great, and they would therefore equally serve to mark the opulence
| Seen 9 of those who possessed them.” The net revenue obtained b h a tax
; ; “would not cost the societ i Ba ef ne i ‘ i
; would be a clear additi Pairs a ome ae ape
addition ofso much to the resources of the community.”—


Rae, New Principles of Political Economy, pp. 369-71


DIRECT AND INDIRECT TAXES COMPARED. 425


fall on articles of universal or very general consumption, and
as it is therefore necessary to have some taxes on real luxu-
ries, that is, on things which afford pleasure in themselves,
and are valued on that account rather than for their cost;
these taxes should, if possible, be so adjusted as to fall with
the same proportional weight on small, on moderate, and on
large incomes. ‘This is not an easy matter; since the things
which are the subjects of the more productive taxes, are in
proportion more largely consumed by the poorer members of
the community than by the rich. Tea, coffee, sugar, tobacco,
fermented drinks, can hardly be so taxed that the poor shall
not bear more than their due share of the burthen. Some-
thing might be done by making the duty on the superior
qualities, which are used by the richer consumers, much
higher in proportion to the value, (instead of much lower,
as is almost universally the practice under the present English
system) ; but in some cases the difficulty of at all adjusting
the duty to the value, so as to prevent evasion, is said, with
what truth I know not, to be insuperable; so that it is thought
necessary to levy the same fixed duty on all the qualities
alike: a flagrant injustice to the poorer class of contributors,
unless compensated by the existence of other taxes from
which, as from the present mcome-tax, they are altogether
exempt. 4thly. As far as is consistent with the preceding
tules, taxation should rather be concentrated on a few articles
than diffused over many, in order that the expenses of collec-
tion may be smaller, and that as few employments BS possible
may be burthensomely and vexatiously interfer ed with.

5thly. Among luxuries of general consumption, 5 ete

should by preference attach itself to See ae

these, alhguehim themselves as legitimate and as ane

indulgences as any others, are more liable than mos others

to be used in excess, so that the check to consumption, natu-

ee ; ss on the whole better applied to
rally arising from taxation, 18 i eer ee
them than to other things. 6thly. As far as other conside


tions permit, taxation should be confined to imported articles,
; , tar


Se


426 BOOK V. CHAPTER vI. § 3.


since these can be taxed with a less degree of vexatious
interference, and with fewer incidental bad effects, than when
a tax is levied on the field or on the workshop. Custom
duties are, ceteris paribus, much less objectionable than
excise: but they must be laid only on things which either
cannot, or at least will not, be produced in the country itself;
or else their production there must be prohibited (as in Eng-
land is the case with tobacco,) or subjected to an excise duty
of equivalent amount. 7thly. No tax ought to be kept so
high as to furnish a motive to its evasion, too strong to be
counteracted by ordinary means of prevention: and espe-
cially no commodity should be taxed so highly as to raise up
a class of lawless characters, smugglers, illicit distillers, and
the hike.

Among the excise and custom duties now existing in this
country, some must, on the principles we have laid down, be
altogether condemned. Among these are all duties on ordi-
nary articles of food, whether for human beings or for cattle ;
those on bricks and timber, the former as being vexatious,
and both as falling on the materials of lodging, which is one
of the necessaries of life; all duties on the metals, and on
implements made of them; the tax on soap, which is a
necessary of cleanliness, and on tallow, the material both of
that and of other necessaries ; the tax on paper, an indispen-
sable instrument of almost all business and of most kinds of
instruction: but ornamental paper, for hangings, and similar
purposes, might continue to be taxed. The duties which
yield the greatest part of the customs and excise revenue,
those on sugar, coffee, tea, wine, beer, spirits, and tobacco,
are in themselves, where a large amount of revenue is neces-
sary, extremely proper taxes; but at present grossly unjust,
from the disproportionate weight with which they press 0m
the poorer classes; and some of them (those on spirits and
tobacco,) are so high as to cause an enormous amount of
smuggling. It is probable that most of these taxes would
bear a great reduction without any material loss of revenue.


DIRECT AND INDIRECT TAXES COMPARED. 427


In what manner the finer articles of manufacture, consumed
by the rich, might most advantageously be taxed, I must
leave to be decided by those who have the requisite practical
knowledge. The difficulty would be, to effect it without an
inadmissible degree of interference with production. In
countries which, like the United States, import the principal
part of the finer manufactures which they consume, there is
little difficulty in the matter: and even where nothing is
imported but the raw material, that may be taxed, especially
the qualities of itwhich are exclusively employed for the fabrics
used by the richer class of consumers. Thus, in England a
high custom duty on raw silk would be consistent with prin-
ciple; and it might perhaps be practicable to tax the finer
qualities of cotton or linen yarn, whether spun in the country
itself or imported.


TT


CHAPTER VII.


OF A NATIONAL DEBT.


§ 1. TE question must now be considered, how far it
is right or expedient to raise money for the purposes of
government, not by laying on taxes to the amount required,
but by taking a portion of the capital of the country in the
form of a loan, and charging the public reyenue with only
the interest. Nothing needs be said about providing for
temporary wants by taking up money, for instance by an
issue of exchequer bills, destined to be paid off, at furthest
in a year or two, from the proceeds of the existing taxes.
This is a convenient expedient, and, when the government
does not possess a treasure or hoard, is often a necessary one,
on the occurrence of extraordinary expenses, or of a tempo-
rary failure in the ordinary sources of revenue. What we
have to discuss is the propriety of contracting a national
debt of a permanent character ; defraying the expenses of a
war, or of any season of difficulty, by loans, to be redeemed
either very gradually and at a distant period, or not at all.
This question has been already touched upon in the First
Book*. We there remarked, that if the capital taken in loans
is abstracted from funds either engaged in production, or
destined to be employed in it, their diversion from that put-
pose is equivalent to taking the amount from the wages of
the labouring classes. Borrowing, in this case, is not a sub-
stitute for raising the supplies within the year. A govern-
ment which borrows does actually take the amount within


the year, and that too by a tax exclusively on the labouring
classes; than which it could have done nothing worse, if it
had supphed its wants by avowed taxation; and in that case


* Supra, vol. i. pp. 94-7.


A NATIONAL DEBT. 429


the transaction, and its evils, would have ended with the
emergency ; while by the circuitous mode adopted, the value
exacted from the labourers is gained, not by the state, but by
the employers of labour, the state remaining charged with
the debt besides, and with its interest in perpetuity. The
system of public loans, in such circumstances, may be pro-
nounced the very worst which, in the present state of civiliza-
tion, is still included in the catalogue of financial expedients.

We however remarked that there are other circumstances
in which loans are not chargeable with these pernicious con-
Sequences: namely, first, when what is borrowed is foreign
capital, the overflowings of the general accumulation of the
world; or, secondly, when it is capital which either would
not have been saved at all unless this mode of investment
had been open to it, or, after being saved, would have been
wasted in unproductive enterprises, or sent to seek employ-
ment in foreign countries. When the progress of accumu-
lation has. reduced profits either to the ultimate or to the
practical minimum,—to the rate, less than which would
either put a stop to the imcrease of capital, or send the
whole of the new accumulations abroad; government may
annually intercept those new accumulations, without trench-
ing on the employment or wages of the labouring classes in
the country itself, or perhaps in any other country. To this
extent, therefore, the loan system may be carried, without
being liable to the utter and peremptory condemnation which
is due to it when it overpasses this limit. What is wanted
is an index to determine whether, in any given series of
years, as during the last war for example, the limit has been
exceeded or not.

Such an index exists, at once a certain and an obvious
one. Did the government, by its loan operations, augment
the rate of interest? If it only opened a channel for capital
which would not otherwise have been accumulated, or which,
if accumulated, would not have been employed within the
country ; this implies that the capital, which the government


a


ea


430 BOOK V. CHAPTER vil. § I.


took and expended, could not have found employment at the
existing rate of interest. So long as the loans do no more
than absorb this surplus, they prevent any tendency to a fall
of the rate of interest, but they cannot occasion any rise.
When they do raise the rate of interest, as they did in a
most extraordinary degree during the late war, this is posi-
tive proof that the government is a competitor for capital
with the ordinary channels of productive investment, and is
carrying off, not merely funds which would not, but funds
which would, have found productive employment within the
country. To the full extent, therefore, to which the loans of
government, during the last war, caused the rate of interest to
exceed what it was before, and what it has been since, those
loans cannot be relieved from the severest condemnation. If
it be objected that interest only rose because profits rose, I
reply that this does not weaken, but strengthens, the argu-
ment. If the government loans produced the rise of profits
by the great amount of capital which they absorbed, by what
means can they have had this effect, unless by lowering the
wages of labour? It will perhaps be said, that what kept
profits high during the war was not the drafts made on the
national capital by the loans, but the rapid progress of indus-
trial improvements. This, in a great measure, was the fact;
and it no doubt alleviated the hardship to the labouring
classes, and made the tnancial system which was pursued
less actively mischievous, but not at all less indefensible.
These very improvements in industry, made room for a larger
amount of capital; and the government, by draining away @
great part of the annual accumulations, did not indeed pre-
vent that capital from existing ultimately, (for it started into
existence with great rapidity after the peace,) but prevented
it from existing at the time, and subtracted just so much,
while the war lasted, from distribution among productive
labourers. If the government had abstained from taking this
capital by loan, and had allowed it to reach the labourers,
but had raised the supplies which it required by a direct


!
.


A NATIONAL DEBT. 431


tax on the labouring classes, it would have produced the
very same economical effects, in every respect, which it did
produce, except that we should not now have had the debt.
The course it actually took was therefore worse, by the whole
of that great fact, than the very worst mode which it could
possibly have adopted of raising the supplies within the
year.

When government loans are limited to the overflowings
of the national capital, or to those accumulations which would
not take place at all unless suffered to overflow, they are at
least not liable to this grave condemnation : they occasion no
privation to any one at the time, except by the payment of
the interest, and may even be beneficial to the labouring
class during the term of their expenditure, by employing in
the direct purchase of labour, as of soldiers, sailors, &e.,
funds which might otherwise have quitted the country alto-
gether. In this case therefore the question really is, what it
is commonly supposed to be in all cases, namely, a choice
between a great sacrifice at once, and a small one indefinitely
prolonged. On this matter it seems rational to think, that
the prudence of a nation will dictate the same conduct as the
prudence of an individual; to submit to as much of the pri-
vation immediately, as can easily be borne, and only when
any further burthen would distress or cripple them too much,
to provide for the remainder by mortgaging their future
income. It is an excellent maxim to make present resources
suffice for present wants; the future will have its own wants
to provide for. On the other hand, it may reasonably be
taken into consideration that in an improving country the
necessary expenses of government do not increase in the same
ratio as capital or population; any burthen, therefore, is always
less and less felt: and since those extraordinary expenses of
government which are fit to be incurred at all, are mostly
beneficial beyond the existing generation, there 1s NO injustice
in making posterity pay a part of the price, if the inconve-

nience would be extreme of defraying the whole of it by the


RNR Sos


§


432 BOOK V. CHAPTER VII. § 2.


exertions and sacrifices of the generation which first in-
curred it.


§ 2. When acountry, wisely or unwisely, has burthened
itself with a debt, is it expedient to take steps for redeeming
that debt? In principle itis impossible not to maintain the
affirmative. It is true that the payment of the interest, when
the creditors are members of the same community, is no
national loss, but a mere transfer. The transfer, however,
being compulsory, is a serious evil, and the raising a great
extra revenue by any system of taxation necessitates so much
expense, vexation, disturbance of the channels of industry,
and other mischiefs over and above the mere payment of the
money wanted by the government, that to get rid of the
necessity of such taxation is at all times wortha considerable
effort. The same amount of sacrifice which would have been
worth incurring to avoid contracting the debt, it 1s worth
while to incur, at any subsequent time, for the purpose of
extinguishing it.

Two modes have been contemplated of paying off a
national debt: either at once by a general contribution, Or
gradually by a surplus revenue. ‘The first would be incom-
parably the best, if it were practicable; and practicable it
would be, if it could justly be done by an assessment on
property alone. If property bore the whole interest of the
debt, property might, with great advantage to itself, pay it off ;
since this would be merely surrendering to a creditor the
principal sum, the whole annual proceeds of which were
already his by law; or would be equivalent to what a land-
owner does when he sells part of his estate, to free the re-
mainder from a mortgage. But property, it needs hardly be
said, does not pay, and cannot justly be required to pay, the
whole interest of the debt. Some indeed affirm that it can,
on the specious plea that the existing generation is only
bound WD 1SEAy the debts of its predecessors from the assets it
has received from them, and not from the produce of its own


A NATIONAL DEBT. 433


industry. But has no one received anything from previous
generations except those who have succeeded to property?
Is the whole difference between the earth as it is, with its
clearings and improvements, its roads and canals, its towns
and manufactories, and the earth as it was when the first
human being set foot on it, of no benefit to any but those
_ who are called the owners of the soil? Is the capital accu-

mulated by the labour and abstinence of all former genera-
tions of no advantage to any but those who have succeeded
to the legal ownership of part of it? And have we not
inherited a mass of acquired knowledge, both scientific and
empirical, due to the sagacity and industry of those who
preceded us, the benefits of which are the common wealth
of all? Those who are born to the ownership of property
have, in addition to these common benefits, a separate inherit-
ance, and to this difference it is right that advertence should
be had in regulating taxation. We are at liberty to assume
that the general financial system of the country takes due
account of this principle, and I have indicated, as in my
opinion a proper mode of taking account of it, a considerable
tax on legacies and inheritances. Let it be determined
directly and openly what is due from property to the state,
and from the state to property, and let the institutions of the
state be regulated accordingly; but let not principles, admitted
in theory, be wounded mortally by a back-handed blow.
Whatever is the fitting contribution from property to the
general expenses of the state, in the same, and in no greater
proportion should it contribute towards either the interest or
the repayment of the national debt.

This, however, if admitted, is fatal to any scheme for the
extinction of the debt by a general assessment on the com-
munity. Persons of property could pay their share of the
amount by a sacrifice of property, and have the same net
income as before; but if those who have no accumulations,
but only incomes, were required to make up by a single pay-
ment the equivalent of the annual charge laid on them by

VOL. Il. 2F


pt


ease
eee AONE


scaretaarnenspeieee simi stars


eee
eos ee


paid


434 BOOK V. CHAPTER vil. § 3.


the taxes maintained to pay the interest of the debt, they
could only do so by incurring a private debt equal to their
share of the public debt; while, from the insufficiency, in
most cases, of the security which they could give, the interest
would amount to a much larger annual sum than their share
of that now paid by the state. Besides, a collective debt


defrayed by taxes, has over the same debt parcelled out among .


individuals, the immense advantage, that it is virtually a
mutual insurance among the contributors. If the fortune of
a contributor diminishes, his taxes diminish; if he is ruined,
they cease altogether, and his portion of the debt is wholly
transferred to the solvent members of the community. If it
were laid on him as a private obligation, he would still be
liable to it even when penniless.

When the state possesses property, in Jand or otherwise,
which there are not strong reasons of public utility for its
retaining at its disposal, this should be employed, as far as 1t
will go, in extinguishing debt. Any casual gain, or godsend,
is naturally devoted to the same purpose. Beyond this, the
only mode which is both just and feasible, of extinguishing ot
reducing a national debt, is by means of a surplus revenue.


§ 3. The desirableness, per se, of maintaining a surplus
for this purpose, does not, I think, admit of a doubt. We
sometimes, indeed, hear it said that the amount should rather
be left to “fructify in the pockets of the people.” This is a
good argument, as far as it goes, against levying taxes unne-
cessarily for purposes of unproductive expenditure, but not
against paying off a national debt. For, what is meant by
the word fructify? If it means anything, it means produc-
tive employment; and as an argument against taxation, we
must understand it to assert, that if the amount were left
with the people they would save it, and convert it into capital.
It is probable, indeed, that they would save a part, but ex-
eal improbable that they would save the whole: while,
if taken by taxation, and employed .in paying off debt, the


A NATIONAL DEBT. 435


whole is saved, and made productive. To the fundholder
who receives the payment it is already capital, not revenue,
and he will make it “fructify,’’ that it may continue to
afford him an income. The objection, therefore, is not only
groundless, but the real argument is on the other side: the
amount is much more certain of fructifying if it is not “left
in the pockets of the people.”

It is not, however, advisable in all cases to maintain a
surplus revenue for the extinction of debt. The advantage
of paying off the national debt of Great Britain for instance,
1s that it would enable us to get rid of the worse half of our
present taxation. But of this worse half some portions must
be worse than others, and to get rid of those would be a
greater benefit proportionally than to get rid of the rest.
If renouncing a surplus revenue would enable us to dispense
with a tax, we ought to consider the very worst of all our
taxes as precisely the one which we are keeping up for the
sake of ultimately abolishing taxes not so bad as itself. In
a country advancing in wealth, whose increasing revenue
gives it the power of ridding itself from time to time of the
Most inconvenient portions of its taxation, I conceive that
the inerease of revenue should rather be disposed of by
taking off taxes, than by liquidating debt, as long as any
very objectionable imposts remain. In the present state of
England, therefore, I hold it to be good policy in the govern-
ment, when it has a surplus of an apparently permanent
character, to take off taxes, provided these are rightly
selected. Even when no taxes remain but such as are not
unfit to form part of a permanent system, it is wise to conti-


nue the same policy by experimental reductions of those


taxes, until the point is discovered at which a given amount
of revenue can be raised with the smallest pressure on the
contributors. After this, such surplus revenue as might
arise from any further increase of the produce of the taxes,
should not, I conceive, be remitted, but applied to the re-


demption of debt. Eventually, if might be expedient to
22


bib


[es
\ ie
F

t

fF


AR ae Wt ce
Sar Gr caeenaea heres ~
SS ee


436 BOOK V. CHAPTER VII. § 3.


appropriate the entire produce of particular taxes to this
purpose; since there would be more assurance that the liqui-
dation would be persisted in, if the fund destined to it
were kept apart, and not blended with the general revenues
of the state. The taxes on legacies and inheritances would
be peculiarly suited to such a purpose, since taxes paid as
they are, out of capital, would be better employed in reim-
bursing capital than in defraymg current expenditure. If
this separate appropriation were made, any surplus after-
wards arising from the increasing produce of the other taxes,
and from the saving of interest on the successive portions of
debt paid off, might form a ground for remission of taxa-
tion.

It has been contended that some amount of national
debt is desirable, and almost indispensable, as an investment
for the savings of the poorer or more inexperienced part of
the community. Its convenience in that respect 1s unde-
niable; but (besides that the progress of industry is gradu-
ally affording other modes of investment almost as safe and
untroublesome, such as the shares or obligations of great
public companies) the only real superiority of an investment
in the funds consists in the national guarantee, and this could
be afforded by other means than that of a public debt, m-
volving compulsory taxation. One mode which would answet
the purpose, would be a national bank of deposit and discount,
with ramifications throughout the country; which might re-
ceive any money confided to it, and either fund it at a fixed
rate of interest, or allow interest on a floating balance, like
the joint-stock banks; the interest given being of course
lower than the rate at which individuals can borrow, in pro-
portion to the greater security of a government investment;
and the expenses of the establishment being defrayed by the
difference between the interest which the bank would pay,
and that which it would obtain, by lending its deposits on
mercantile, landed, or other security. There are no insu-
perable objections in principle, and I should think none in


A NATIONAL DEBT, 437


practice, to an institution of this sort, as a means of sup-
plying the same convenient mode of investment now afforded
by the public funds. It would constitute the state a great
insurance company, to insure that part of the community
who live on the interest of their property, against the risk of
losing it by the bankruptcy of those to whom they might
otherwise be under the necessity of confiding it.


Say


CHAPTER VIII.


OF THE ORDINARY FUNCTIONS OF GOVERNMENT,
CONSIDERED AS TO THEIR ECONOMICAL EFFECTS.


§ 1. Berore we discuss the line of demarcation between
the things with which governments should, and those with
which they should not, directly interfere, it is necessary to
consider the economical effects, whether of a bad or of a
good complexion, arising from the manner in which they
acquit themselves of the duties which devolve on them in
all societies, and which no one denies to be incumbent on
them.

The first of these is the protection of person and pro-
perty. There is no need to expatiate on the influence exer-
cised over the economical interests of society by the degree
of completeness with which this duty of government is per-
formed. Insecurity of person and property, is as much as to
say, uncertainty of the connection between all human exertion
or sacrifice, and the attainment of the ends for the sake of
which they are undergone. It means, uncertainty whether
they who sow shall reap, whether they who produce shall
consume, and they who spare to-day shall enjoy to-morrow.
It means, not only that labour and frugality are not the road
to acquisition, but that violence is. When person and pro-
perty are to a certain degree insecure, all the possessions of the
weak are at the mercy of the strong. No one can keep what
he has produced, unless he is more capable of defending it,
than others who give no part of their time and exertions to
useful industry are of taking it from him. The productive
classes, therefore, when the insecurity surpasses a certain
point, being unequal to their own protection against the
predatory population, are obliged to place themselves indi-


ORDINARY FUNCTIONS OF GOVERNMENT. 439


vidually in a state of dependence on some member of the
predatory class, that it may be his interest to shield them
from all depredation except his own. In this manner, in the
middle ages, allodial property generally became feudal, and
numbers of the poorer freemen voluntarily made themselves
and their posterity serfs of some military lord.

Nevertheless, in attaching to this great requisite, security
of person and property, the importance which is justly due
to it, we must not forget that even for economical purposes
there are other things quite as indispensable, the presence
of which will often make up for a very considerable degree of
imperfection in the protective arrangements of government.
As was obseryed in a previous chapter*, the free cities of
Italy, Flanders, and the Hanseatic league, were habitually in
a state of such internal turbulence, varied by such destructive
external wars, that person and property enjoyed very imper-
fect protection ; yet during several centuries they increased
rapidly in wealth and prosperity, brought many of the indus-
trial arts to a high degree of advancement, carried on distant
and dangerous voyages of exploration and commerce with
extraordinary success, became an ovyermatch in power for
the greatest feudal lords, and could defend themselves even
against the sovereigns of Europe: because in the midst of
turmoil and violence, the citizens of those towns enjoyed a
certain rude freedom, under conditions of union and co-ope-
ration, which, taken together, made them a brave, energetic,
and high-spirited people, and fostered a great amount of
public spirit and patriotism. The prosperity of these and
other free states in a lawless age, shows that a certain degree
of insecurity, in some combinations of circumstances, has
good as well as bad effects, by making energy and practical
ability the conditions of safety. Insecurity paralyzes, only
when it is such in nature and in degree, that no energy, of
which mankind in general are capable, affords any tolerable


* Supra, vol. i. p. 139.


440 BOOK V. CHAPTER VIII. § 2.


means of self-protection. And this is a main reason why
oppression by the government, whose power is generally
irresistible by any efforts that can be made by individuals,
has so much more baneful an effect on the springs of national
prosperity, than almost any degree of lawlessness and tur-
bulence under free institutions. » Nations have acquired some
wealth, and made some progress in improvement, in states
of social union so imperfect as to border on anarchy: but no
countries in which the people were habitually exposed to
arbitrary exactions from the officers of government, ever yet
continued to have industry or wealth. A few generations of
such a government never fail to extinguish both. Some of
the fairest, and once the most prosperous, regions of the
earth, have, under the Roman and afterwards under the
Turkish dominion, been reduced to a desert, solely by that
cause. I say solely, because they would have recovered with
the utmost rapidity, as countries always do, from the devas-
tations of war, or any other temporary calamities. Difficulties
and hardships are often but an incentive to exertion: what is
fatal to it, is the belief that it will not be suffered to produce
its fruits.


§2. Simple over-taxation by government, though a great
evil, is not comparable in the economical part of its mischiefs
to exactions much more moderate in amount, but which either
subject the contributor to the arbitrary mandate of govern-
ment officers, or are so laid on as to place skill, industry, and
frugality, at a disadvantage. The burthen of taxation in our
own country is very great, yet as every one knows its
limit, and is seldom made to pay more than he expects and
calculates on, and as the modes of taxation are not of such a
kind as much to impair the motives to industry and economy,
the sources of prosperity are little diminished by the pressure
of taxation; they may even, as some think, be increased, by
the extra exertions made to compensate for the pressure of
the taxes. But in the barbarous despotisms of many coun-


ORDINARY FUNCTIONS OF GOVERNMENT. 44)


tries of the East, where taxation consists in fastening upon
those who have succeeded in acquiring something, in order
to confiscate it, unless the possessor buys its release by sub-
mitting to give some large sum as a compromise, we cannot
expect to find voluntary industry, or wealth derived from any
source but plunder. And even in comparatively civilized
countries, bad modes of raising a revenue have had effects
similar in kind, though in an inferior degree. French writers
before the Revolution represented the taille as a main cause
of the backward state of agriculture, and of the wretched
condition of the rural population; not from its amount, but
because, being proportioned to the visible capital of the cul-
tivator, it gave him a motive for appearing poor, which
sufficed to turn the scale in favour of indolence. The arbi-
trary powers also of fiscal officers, of intendants and subdé-
légués, were more destructive of prosperity than a far larger
amount of exactions, because they destroyed security: there
was a marked superiority in the condition of the pays d’états,
which were exempt from this scourge. The universal vena-
lity ascribed to Russian functionaries, must be an immense
drag on the capabilities of economical improvement possessed
so abundantly by the Russian empire: since the emoluments
of public officers must depend on the success with which they
can multiply vexations, for the purpose of being bought off
by bribes.

Yet mere excess of taxation, even when not aggravated
by uncertainty, is, independently of its injustice, a serious
economical evil. It may be carried so far as to discourage
industry by insufficiency of reward. Very long before it
reaches this point, it prevents or greatly checks accumu-
lation, or causes the capital accumulated to be sent for
investment to foreign countries. Taxes which fall on pro-
fits, even though that kind of income may not pay more
than its just share, necessarily diminish the motive to any
saying, except that which is made for investment in foreign
countries where profits are higher. Holland, for example,


Seer eRe SL a He


eterna ro


i
tf
Ih


ae


449 BOOK V. CHAPTER VIII. $3.


seems to have long since reached the practical minimum of
profits: already in the last century her wealthy capitalists had
a great part of their fortunes invested in the loans and joint-
stock speculations of other countries: and this low rate of
profit is ascribed to the heavy taxation, which had been ih
some measure forced on her by the circumstances of her posi-
tion and history. The taxes, indeed, besides their great
amount, were many of them on necessaries, a kind of tax


peculiarly injurious to industry and accumulation. But when’


the aggregate amount of taxation is very great, it is inevitable
that recourse must be had for part of it to taxes of an objec-
tionable character. And any taxes on consumption, when
heavy, even if not operating on profits, have something of
the same injurious effect, by driving persons of moderate
means to live abroad, often taking their capital with them.
Although I by no means join with those political economists
who think no state of national existence desirable in which
there is not a rapid increase of wealth, I cannot overlook
the many disadvantages to an independent nation from being
brought prematurely to a stationary state, while the neigh-
bouring countries continue advancing.


§ 3. The subject of protection to person and property,
considered as afforded by a government, ramifies widely, into
a number of indirect channels. It embraces, for example, the
whole subject of the perfection or inefficiency of the means
provided for the ascertainment of rights and the redress of
injuries. Person and property cannot be considered secure
where the administration of justice is imperfect, either from
defect of integrity or capacity in the tribunals, or because the
delay, vexation, and expense accompanying their operation
impose a heavy tax on those who appeal to them, and make it
preferable to submit to any endurable amount of the evils
which they are designed to remedy, In England there is no
fault to be found with the administration of justice, so far as
integrity 1s concerned ; a result which the progress of social


ORDINARY FUNCTIONS OF GOVERNMENT, 443


improvement may also be supposed to have brought about in
several other nations of Europe. But leg ] z d judici
imperfections of other kinds are ab oars poe
sonal) Bee abundant; and, in Eng-
RESPEC} Ys are a large abatement from the value of the
services which the government renders back to the peopl
= return oo our enormous taxation. In the first sie ne
cognoscibility (2 ; .
ae a AO ee ee ie law, and its
a resort to the cainevele often — - e f = b ae 2 ae
when, there being no dispute a ee Ne ae ee
eed. 2 see ee i 0 ioe no litigation ought
bunals is so replete with nae ue oe cana
the price at which justice 1 tart fa ee ee
RE justice is at last obtained is an evil out-
weighing a very considerable amount of injustice; and the
wrong side, even that which the law considers such, has many
chances of gaining its point, through the abandonment of
litigation by the other party for want of funds, or through a
compromise in which a sacrifice is made of just rights to
terminate the suit, or through some technical quirk, whereby
a decision is obtained on some other ground than the merits.
This last detestable incident often happens without blame to
the judge, under a system of law, of which a great part rests
OBER rational principles adapted to the present state of
society, but was originally founded partly on a kind of whims
and conceits, and partly on the principles and incidents of
feudal tenure, (which now survive only as legal fictions) ; and
has-only been very imperfectly adapted, as cases arose, to the
changes which had taken place in society. Of all parts of the
English legal system, the Court of Chancery; which has the
best substantive laws 1S incomparably the worst as to delay,
vexation, and expense; and this is the only tribunal for
most of the classes of cases which are in their nature the
most complicated, such of partnership; and the great


range and variety of cas the denomina-


tion of trust.
Fortunately for the prosperity of England, the greater


as cases
es which come under


444 BOOK V. CHAPTER vill. § 3.


part of the mercantile law is comparatively modern, and was
made by the tribunals, by the simple process of recognizing
and giving force of law to the usages which, from motives
of convenience, had grown up among merchants themselves:
so that this part of the law, at least, was substantially made
by those who were most interested in its goodness: while the
defects of the tribunals have been the less practically per-
nicious in reference to commercial transactions, because the
importance of credit, which depends on character, renders
the restraints of opinion (though, as daily experience proves,
an insufficient) yet a very powerful, protection against those
forms of mercantile dishonesty which are generally recognized
as such.

The imperfections of the law, both in its substance and in
its procedure, fall heaviest upon the interests connected with
what is technically called real property ; in the general Jan-
guage of European jurisprudence, immoveable property.
With respect to all this portion of the wealth of the commu-
nity, the law fails egregiously in the protection which it
undertakes to provide. It fails, first, by the uncertainty, and
the maze of technicalities, which make it impossible for any
one, at however great an expense, to possess a title to land
which he can positively know to be unassailable. It fails,
secondly, in omitting to provide due evidence of transactions,
by a proper registration of legal documents. It fails, thirdly,
by creating a necessity for operose and expensive instruments
and formalities (independently of fiscal burthens) on occasion
of the purchase and sale, or even the lease or mortgage, of im-
moveable property. And, fourthly, it fails by the intolerable
expense and delay of law proceedings, in almost all cases in
which real property is concerned. There is no doubt that
the greatest sufferers by the defects of the higher courts of
civil law are the landowners. Legal expenses, either those
of actual litigation, or of the preparation of legal instruments,
form, I apprehend, no inconsiderable item in the annual
expenditure of most persons of large landed property, and


ORDINARY FUNCTIONS OF GOVERNMENT. 445


the saleable value of their land is greatly impaired, by the
difficulty of giving to the buyer complete confidence in the
title; independently of the legal expenses which accompany
the transfer. Yet the landowners, though they have been
masters of the legislation of Hngland, to say the least, since
1688, have never made a single move in the direction of law
reform, and have been strenuous opponents of some of the
improvements of which they would more particularly reap
the benefit; especially that great one of a registration of con-
tracts affecting land, which when proposed by a Commission
of eminent real-property lawyers, and introduced into the
House of Commons by Lord Campbell, was so offensive to
the general body of landlords, and was rejected by so large a
majority, as to have discouraged any repetition of the attempt.
This irrational hostility to improvement, in a case in which
their own interest would be the most benefited by it, must
be ascribed to an intense timidity on the subject of their
titles, generated by the defects of the very law which they
refuse to alter; and to a conscious ignorance, and incapacity of
judgment, on all legal subjects, which makes them helplessly
defer to the opinion of their professional advisers, heedless
of the fact that every imperfection of the law, in proportion
as it is burthensome to them, brings gain to the lawyer.

Tn so far as the defects of legal arrangements are a mere
burthen on the landowner, they do not much affect the sources
of production: but the uncertainty of the titles under which
land is held, must often act as a great discouragement to the
expenditure of capital in its improvement ; and the expense
of making transfers, operates to prevent land from coming
into the hands of those who would use it to most advantage;
often amounting, in the case of small purchases, to more
than the price of the land, and tantamount, therefore, to a
prohibition of the purchase and sale of land in small por-
tions, unless in exceptional circumstances. Such purchases,
however, are almost everywhere extremely desirable, there
being hardly any country in which landed property is not


2


a


Se a bree
a eps


ladeesecihte “ :


R
|
}


SSE


(Se


=


446 BOOK V. CHAPTER VIII. $3.


either too much or too little subdivided, requiring either that
great estates should be broken down, or that small ones
should be bought up and consolidated. To make land as
easily transferable as stock, would be one of the greatest
economical improvements which could be bestowed on a
country; and has been shown, again and again, to have no
insuperable difficulty attending it.

Besides the excellences or defects that belong to the law
and judicature of a country as a system of arrangements for
attaining direct practical ends, much also depends, even im an
economical point of view, upon the moral influences of the
law. Enough has been said ina former place*, on the degree
in which both the industrial and all other combined opera-
tions of mankind depend for efficiency on their being able to
rely on one another for probity and fidelity to engagements ;
from which we see how greatly even the economical pros-
perity of a country is liable to be affected, by anything in its
institutions by which either integrity and trustworthiness, or
the contrary qualities, are encouraged. The law everywhere
ostensibly favours at least pecuniary honesty and the faith
of contracts; but if it affords facilities for evading those
obligations by trick and chicanery, or by the unscrupulous
use of riches in instituting unjust or resisting just litigation ;
if there are ways and means by which persons may attain
the ends of roguery, under the apparent sanction of the law;
to that extent the law is demoralizing, even in regard to
pecuniary integrity. And such cases are, unfortunately, fre-
quent under the English system. If, again, the law, by a
misplaced indulgence, protects idleness or prodigality against
their natural consequences, or dismisses crime with inadequate
penalties, the effect, both on the prudential and on the social
virtues, requires no comment. When the law, by its own
dispensations and injunctions, establishes injustice between
individual and individual; as all laws do which recognize


* Supra, vol. i. p. 131.


ORDINARY FUNCTIONS OF GOVERNMENT. 447


any form of slavery; as the laws of all countries do, though
not all in the same degree, in respect to the family relations ;
and as the laws of many countries do, though in still more
unequal degrees, as between rich and poor; the effect on the
moral sentiments of the people is still more disastrous. But
these subjects introduce considerations so much larger and
deeper than those of political economy, that I only advert to
them in order not to pass wholly unnoticed, things superior
in importance to those of which I treat.


CHAPTER IX.


THE SAME SUBJECT CONTINUED.


§ 1. Havine spoken thus far of the effects produced by
the excellences or defects of the general system of the law, I
shall now touch upon those resulting from the special character
of particular parts of it. As a selection must be made, I shall
confine myself to a few leading topics. The portions of the civil
law of a country which are of most importance economically,
(next to those which determine the status of the labourer, as
slave, serf, or free,) are those relating to the two subjects of
Inheritance and Contract. Of the laws relating to contract,
none are more important economically, than the laws of
partnership, and those of insolvency. It happens that on all
these three points, there is just ground for condemning some
of the provisions of the English law. I cannot, therefore,
select topics more suitable to be touched upon in the present
treatise.

With regard to Inheritance, I have, in an early part of this
work, considered the general principles of the subject, and sug-
gested what appear to me to be, in themselves, putting all pre-
judices apart, the best dispositions which the law could adopt.
Freedom of bequest as the general rule, but limited by
two things: first, that if there are descendants, who, being
unable to provide for themselves, would become burthensome
to the state, the equivalent of whatever the state would
accord to them should be reserved from the property for
their benefit: and secondly, that no one person should be
permitted to acquire by inheritance, more than the amount
of a moderate independence. In case of intestacy, the
whole property to escheat to the state: which should be
bound to make a just and reasonable provision for descend-


INHERITANCE. 449


ants, that is, such a provision as the parent or ancestor
ought to have made, their circumstances, capacities, and mode
of bringing up being considered.

The laws of inheritance, however, have probably several
phases of improvement to go through, before ideas so far
temoved from present modes of thinking will be taken into
serious consideration: and as, among the recognized modes
of determining the succession to property, some must be
better and others worse, it is necessary to consider which of
them deserves the preference. As an intermediate course,
therefore, less eligible in itself, but better adapted to existing
feelings and ideas, I would recommend the extension to all
Property, of the present English law of inheritance affecting
Personal property (freedom of bequest, and, in case of in-
testacy, equal division) : except that no rights should be
acknowledged in collaterals, and that the property of those
who have neither descendants nor ascendants, and make no
will, should escheat to the state.

The laws of existing nations deviate from these maxims
m two opposite ways. In England, and most of the coun-
tries in which the influence of feudality is still felt in the
laws, one of the objects aimed at in respect to land and
other immovyeable property, is to keep it together in large
Masses: accordingly, in cases of intestacy, it passes, gene-
tally speaking (for the local custom of some places is differ-
ent), exclusively to the eldest son. And though the rule of
primogeniture is not binding on testators, who in England
have nominally the power of bequeathing their property as
they please, any one proprietor may so exercise this power
as to deprive his successors of it, by entailing the property
on one particular line of his descendants: which, besides
preventing it from passing by inheritance in any other than
the prescribed manner, is attended with the incidental con-
Sequence of precluding it from being sold; since each suc-
cessive possessor, having only a life interest in the property,
cannot alienate it for a longer period than his own life. In


9
MON = G


SST ee
a


450 BOOK V. CHAPTER 1x. § 2.


other countries, such as France, the law, on the contrary,
compels division of inheritances; not only, in case of intes-
tacy, sharing the property, both real and personal, equally
among all the children, or (if there are no children) among
all relatives'in the same degree of propinquity; but also not
recognizing any power of bequest, or recognizing it over only
a limited portion of the property, the remainder being sub-
jected to compulsory equal division.

Neither of these systems, I apprehend, was introduced,
or is maintained, in the countries where it exists, from any
general considerations of justice, or any foresight of econo-
mical consequences, but chiefly from political motives; in
the one case to keep up large hereditary fortunes, and a
landed aristocracy; in the other, to break these down, and
prevent their resurrection. The first object, as an aim of
national policy, I conceive to be eminently undesirable: so
far as the second is desirable, I have pointed out what seems
to me a better mode of attaining it. The merit or demerit,
however, of either purpose, belongs to the general science
of politics, not to the limited department of that science
which is the subject of the present treatise. Each of the two
systems is a real and efficient instrument for the purpose
intended by it; but each, as it appears to me, achieves that
purpose at the cost of much mischief.


§ 2. There are two arguments of an economical cha-
racter, which are urged in favour of primogeniture. One is,
the stimulus applied to the industry and ambition of younge
children, by leaving them to be the architects of their ow?
fortunes. This argument was put by Dr. Johnson in a man-
ner more forcible than complimentary to an hereditary aris-
tocracy, when he said, by way of recommendation of primo-
geniture, that it “makes but one fool ina family.” It 1S
curious that a defender of aristocratic institutions should
be the person to assert that to inherit such a fortune as
takes away any necessity for exertion, is generally fatal to


INHERITANCE: 451


activity and strength of mind: in the present state of educa-
tion, however, the proposition, with some allowance for
exaggeration, may be admitted to be true. But whatever
foree there is in the argument, counts in favour of limiting
the eldest, as well as all the other children, to a mere provi-
Sion, and dispensing with even the “one fool” whom Dr.
Johnson was willing to tolerate. If unearned riches are so
pernicious to the character, one does not see why, i order
to withhold the poison from the junior members of a family,
there should be no way but to unite all their separate
Potions, and administer them in the largest possible dose to
one selected victim. That it should be necessary to inflict
this great evil on the eldest son, from sheer want of knowing
what else to do with a large fortune, is surely the most
arbitrarily conjured up of all embarrassments.

Some writers, however, look upon the effect of primo-
geniture in stimulating industry, as depending, not so much
upon the poverty of the younger children, as upon the con-
trast between that poverty and the riches of the elder; think-
mg it indispensable to the activity and energy of the hive,
that there should be a huge drone here and there, to impress
the working bees with a due sense of the advantages of
honey,“ Their inferiority in point of wealth,” says Mr.
M‘Culloch, speaking of the younger children, “and their
desire to escape from this lower situation, and to attain to
the same level with their elder brothers, inspires them with
an energy and vigour they could not otherwise feel. But
the advantage of preserving large estates from being frittered
down by a scheme of equal division, is not. limited to its
Influence over the younger children of their owners. It
raises universally the standard of competence, and gives Tew
force to the springs which set industry in motion. The
manner of living among the great landlords is that in which
every one is ambitious of being able to indulge; and their
though sometimes injurious to themselves,
he ingenuity and enterprise of

262


“a


habits of expense,
act as powerful incentives to t


452 BOOK Vv. CHAPTER Ix. § 2.


the other classes, who never think their fortunes sufficiently
ample, unless they will enable them to emulate the splendour
of the richest landlords; so that the custom of primogeniture
seems to render all classes more industrious, and to augment,
at the same time, the mass of wealth and the scale of
enjoyment *.”

The portion of truth, I will not say contained in these
observations, but recalled by them, I apprehend to be, that a
state of complete equality of fortunes would not be favourable
toindustry. Speaking of the mass, it is as true of wealth as of
most other distinctions—of talent, knowledge, virtue—that
those who already have, or think they have, as much of it as
any of their neighbours, will seldom greatly exert themselves to
acquire more. But it is not therefore necessary that society
should provide a set of persons with large fortunes, to fulfil
the social duty of standing to be looked at, with envy and
admiration, by the aspiring poor. The fortunes which people
have acquired for themselves, answer the purpose quite as
well, indeed much better; since a person is more powerfully
stimulated by the example of somebody who has earned a
fortune, than by the mere sight of somebody who possesses
one; and the former is necessarily an example of prudence
and frugality as well as industry, while the latter muchoftener
sets an example of profuse expense, which spreads, with per-
nicious effect, to the very class on whom the sight of riches
is supposed to have so beneficial an influence, namely those
whose weakness of mind, and taste for ostentation, makes
“the splendour of the richest landlords” attract them with
the most potent spell. In America there are few or no great
hereditary fortunes ; yet industrial energy, and the ardour of
accumulation, are not supposed to be particularly backward
in that part of the world. When a country has once fairly


* P. 9: - age
rinciples of Political Economy, ed. 1843, p. 264. There is much more


to the same effect in the recent treatise by the same author, “ On the Suc-
cession to Property vacant by Death.”


INHERITANCE. 453


entered into the industrial career, which is the occupation of
the modern, as war was that of the ancient and medieval
world, the desire of acquisition by industry needs no facti-
tious stimulus: the advantages naturally inherent in riches,
and the character they assume of a test by which talent and
Success in life are habitually measured, are an ample security
for their being pursued with sufficient intensity and zeal.
As to the deeper consideration, that the diffusion of wealth,
and not its concentration, is desirable, and that the most
wholesome state of society is not that in which immense
fortunes are possessed by a few and coveted by all, but that
in which the greatest possible numbers possess and are con-
tented with a moderate competency, which all may hope to
acquire; I refer to it in this place only to show, how widely
Separated, on social questions, is the entire mode of thought
of the defender of primogeniture, from that which is partially
promulgated in the present treatise.

The other economical argument in favour of primogeni-
ture, has especial reference to landed property. It is con-
tended, that the habit of dividing inheritances equally, or
with an approach to equality, among children, promotes the
Subdivision of land into occupations too small to admit of
being cultivated in an advantageous manner. This argument,
eternally reproduced, has again and again been refuted by
English and Continental writers. It proceeds on a supposi-
tion entirely at variance with that on which all the theorems
of political economy are grounded. It assumes that mankind
in general will habitually act in a manner opposed to their
immediate and obvious pecuniary interest. For the division
of the inheritance does not necessarily imply division of the
land; which may be held in common, as is not unfrequently
the case in France and Belgium; or may become the property
of one of the coheirs, being charged with the shares of the
others by way of mortgage; or they may, sell it outright, and
divide the proceeds. When the division of the land would
diminish its productive power, it is the direct interest of the


mareyrsrenens


serine <p shdlatea ensayo


Caras


apse nme neta oe Pa AAA


Seeeemeetemesaey Gera cad ae : >
aed Br nee evs


Saigo Real enema


Po P-Te


454 BOOK V. CHAPTER 1x. § 2.


heirs to adopt some one of these arrangements. Supposing;
however, what the argument assumes, that either from legal
difficulties or from their own stupidity. and barbarism, they
would not, if left to themselves, obey the dictates of this
obvious interest, but would insist upon cutting up the land
bodily into equal parcels, with the effect of impoverishing
themselves; this would be an objection to a law such as exists
in France, of compulsory division, but can be no reason why
testators should be discouraged from exercising the right of
bequest in general conformity to the rule of equality, since it
would always be in their power to provide that the division
of the inheritance should take place without dividing the
land itself. That the attempts of the advocates of primoge-
niture to make out a case by facts against the custom of equal
division, are equally abortive, has been shown in a former
portion of this work. In all countries, or parts of countries,
in which the division of inheritances is accompanied by small
holdings, it is because small holdings are the general system
of the country, even on the estates of the great pro-
prietors.

Unless a strong case of social utility can be made out for
primogeniture, it stands sufficiently condemned by the gene-
ral principles of justice; being a broad distinction in the
treatment of one person and of another, grounded solely on
an accident. There is no need, therefore, to make out any
case of economical evil against primogeniture. Such a case,
however, and a very strong one, may be made. It is a natural
effect of primogeniture to make the landlords a needy class.
The object of the institution, or custom, is to keep the land
together in large masses, and this it commonly accomplishes }
but the legal proprietor of a large domain is not necessarily
the bond fide owner of the whole income which it yields. It
is usually charged, in each generation, with provisions for the
other children. It is often charged still more heavily by
the imprudent expenditure of the proprietor. Great land-
owners are generally improvident in their expenses 5 they


INHERITANCE. 455


live up to their incomes when at the highest, and if any
change of circumstances diminishes their resources, some
time elapses before they make up their minds to retrench.
Spendthrifts in other classes are ruined, and disappear
from society ; but the spendthrift landlord usually holds fast
to his land, even when he has become a mere receiver of its
tents for the benefit of creditors. The same desire to keep up
the “ splendour” of the family, which gives rise to the custom
of primogeniture, indisposes the owners to sell a part in
order to set free the remainder; their apparent are therefore
habitually greater than their real means, and they are under a
perpetual temptation to proportion their expenditure to the
former rather than to the latter. From such causes as these,
in almost all countries of great landowners, the majority of
landed estates are deeply mortgaged; and instead of having
capital to spare for improvements, it requires all the increased
value of land, caused by a rapid increase of the wealth and
population of the country, to preserve the class from being
impoverished.


§ 3. To ayert this impoverishment, recourse was had to
the contrivance of entails, whereby the order of succession
was irrevocably fixed, and each holder, having only a life
mterest, was unable to burthen his successor. The land
thus passing, free from debt, into the possession of the heir,
the family could not be ruined by the improvidence of its
existing representative. The economical eyils arismmg from
this disposition of property were partly of the same kind,
partly different, but on the whole greater, than those arising
from primogeniture alone. The possessor could not now
ruin his successors, but he could still ruin himself: he was
not at all more likely than in the former case to have the
means necessary for improving the property ; while, even if
he had, he was still less likely to employ them for that pur-
pose, when the benefit was to accrue to a person whom the
entail made independent of him, while he had probably


ee


pe SS Tonia Sp


=


Ba Mera errr ryessommeressne


456 BOOK Vv. CHAPTER Ix. § 3.
younger children to provide for, in whose favour he could
not now charge the estate. While thus disabled from being
himself an improver, neither could he sell the estate to
somebody who would; since entail precludes alienation. . In
general he has even been unable to grant leases bey yond the
term of his own life; “for,” says Blackstone, “if such leases
had been valid, then, under cover of long leases, the issue
might have been virtually disinherited :” and it has been
necessary in Great Britain to relax, by statute, the rigour of
entails, in order to allow either of long leases, or of the exe-
cution of improvements at the expense of the estate. It
may be added that the heir of entail, being assured of suc-
ceeding to the family property, however undeserving of it,
and being aware of this from his earliest years, has much
more than the ordinary chances of growing up idle, dissi-
pated, and profligate. <

In England the power of entail is more limited by law,
than in Scotland and in most other countries where it exists.
A landowner can settle his property upon any number of
persons successively who are living at the time, and upon
one unborn person, on whose attaining the age of twenty-
one, the entail expires, and the land becomes his absolute
property. An estate may in this manner be transmitted
through a son, or a son and grandson, living when the deed
is executed, to an unborn child of that grandson. It has
been maintained that this power of entail is not sufficiently
extensive to do any mischief: in truth, however, it is much
larger than it seems. MNntails very rarely expire 5 the first
heir of entail, when of age, joins with the existing possessor
in resettling the estate, so as to prolong the entail for a fur-
ther term. Large properties, therefore, are rarely free, for
any considerable period, from the restraints of a strict settle-
ment; and Hnglish entails are not, in point of fact, much
less injurious than those of other countries.

In an economical point of view, the best system of landed
property is that in which land is most completely an object of


:
|


INHERITANCE. 457


commerce; passing readily from hand to hand when a buyer
can be found to whom it is worth while to offer a greater sum
for the land, than the value of the income drawn from it by
its existing possessor. ‘This of course is not meant of orna-
mental property, which is a source of expense, not profit;
but only of land employed for industrial uses, and held for
the sake of the income which it affords. Whatever facilitates
the sale of land, tends to make it a more productive instrument
for the community at large ; whatever prevents or restricts its
sale, subtracts from its usefulness. Now, not only has entail
this effect, but primogeniture also. The desire to keep land
together in large masses, from other motives than that of
promoting its productiveness, often prevents changes and


ali i ane : ¢ Aci 1
ahenations which would increase its efficiency as an imstru-
ment.


§ 4. On the other hand, a law which, like the French,
restricts the power of bequest to a narrow compass, and com-
pels the equal division of the whole or the greater part of the
property among the children, seems to me, though on different
grounds, also very seriously objectionable. The only reason
for recognizing in the children any right atall to more than a
Provision, sufficient to launch them into life, and enable them
to find a livelihood, is grounded on the expressed or pre-
sumed wish of the parent; whose claim to dispose of what is
actually his (or her) own, cannot be set aside by any pre-
tensions of others to receive what is not theirs. To control
the rightful owner’s liberty of gift, by creating in the children
a legal right superior to it, is to postpone a real claim to an
Imaginary one. To this great and paramount objection to
the law, numerous secondary ones may beadded. Desirable as
it is that the parent should treat the children with impar-
tiality, and not make an eldest son or 4 favourite, impartial
division is not always synonymous with equal division. Some
of the children may be more capable than others of providing
for themselves, or may have fewer wants, or possess other


tin woe


eres
eeenpanes


ae sorabor= red


eer


ree ears


458 BOOK V. CHAPTER 1x. § 4.


resources; and impartiality may therefore require that the
rule observed should not be one of equality, but of compen-
sation. Even when equality is desirable, it is not precise or
pedantic equality. The law, however, must proceed by fixed
rules. If one of the coheirs, being of a quarrelsome litigious
disposition, stands upon his utmost rights, the law cannot make
equitable adjustments; it cannot apportion the property as
seems best for the collective interest of the family; if there
are several parcels of land, and the heirs cannot agree about
their value, the law cannot give a parcel to each, but every
separate parcel must be either put up to sale or divided: if
there is a residence, or a park or pleasure-ground, which
would be destroyed, as such, by subdivision, it must be sold,
possibly at a great; pecuniary sacrifice, and with the destruc-
tion to.the whole family of local ties and attachments. But
what the law could not do, the parent could. By means of
the liberty of bequest, all these points might be determined
according to reason and the general interest of the persons
concerned; and the spirit of the principle of equal division
might be the better observed, because the testator was emanci-
pated from its letter. Finally, it would not then be necessary,
as under the compulsory system it is, that the law should in-
terfere authoritatively in the concerns of families, not only on
the occurrence of a death, but throughout life, in order’ to
guard against the attempts of parents to frustrate the legal
claims of their heirs, under colour of gifts and other alienations
inter vivos.

In conclusion ; all owners of property should, I conceive,
have power to dispose by will of every part of it, but not to
determine the person who should succeed to it after the
deaths of all who were living when the will was made. Under
what restrictions it should be allowable to bequeath property
to one person for life, with remainder to another person
already in existence, is a question belonging to general legis-
lation, not to political economy. Such settlements would be
no greater hindrance to alienation than any case of joint


PARTNERSHIP. 459


ownership, si
p, since the consent of persons actually in existence


is all that would ye Necessar y or any new te)
] fi arrangement re
specting the property. es


1 c
‘i eee subject of Inheritance I now pass to that
Mines ce, among these, to the important subject of
IO hose. tus Sa How much of good or evil depends
SG aie au Hes important it is that they should be
Wace the > 1S evident to all who recognize in the ex-
ee Se eae principle the great economical
fests eo ale ia The progress of the produc-
aetlittede aioe many sorts of industrial occupation
ductive power of thas i Lae Mende cere
Me roniosiatcoen ae must suffer by whatever impedes the
ones. Capitals . nee s through the aggregation of smaller
Grneandivnoty i quisite magnitude, belonging to single
Toren Be: ae countries, exist im the needful abund~
Bhasfiasions ¢ still less numerous if the laws favoured
Pe eccs hase of the concentration of property: while
a ae le that all those improved processes, and
donee on ae etheiency and economy in production, which
Roleainaty s possession of large funds, should be mono-
difficulties = hands of afew rich individuals, through the
eras Se ee persons of moderate or small
eee... oe capital. Finally; I must repeat my
a Siar oe hat the industrial economy which divides society
= ee Pe two portions, the payers of wages and the
hee “ them, the first counted by thousands and
cco y millions, is neither fit for, nor capable of, in-
Beh ae and the possibility of changing this
ies 1 for one of combination without dependence, and

y of interest instead of organized hostility, depends alto-
gether upon the future developements of the Partnership
principle.

Yet there is scarcely
great, and in most cases, in


any country whose laws do not throw
tentional obstacles in the way of


~ peenin pee gsemcin chanel ta CN oe ACT


460 BOOK V. CHAPTER Ix. § 5.


the formation of any numerous partnership. In England it is
already a serious discouragement, that all or most differences
among partners are, practically speaking, only capable of adju-
dication by the Court of Chancery: which is often worse
than placing such questions out of the pale of all law;
since any one of the disputant parties, who is either dishonest
or litigious, can involve the others at his pleasure in the end-
less expense, trouble, and anxiety, which are the unavoid-
able accompaniments of a prolonged Chancery suit, without
their having the power of freeing themselves from the
infliction even by breaking up the association. Besides this,
it required, until lately, a separate act of the legislature
before any joint-stock association could legally constitute
itself, and be empowered to act as one body. By a statute
passed only a few years ago, this necessity is done away, and
the formalities which have been substituted for it are not
sufficiently onerous to be very much of an impediment to
such undertakings. When a number of persons, whether
few or many, freely desire to unite their funds for a common
undertaking, not asking any peculiar privilege, nor the power
to dispossess any one of property, the law can have no good
reason for throwing difficulties in the way of the realization
of the project. On compliance with a few simple conditions
of publicity, any body of persons ought to have the power
of constituting themselves into a joint-stock company, OF
société en nom collectif, without asking leave either of any
public officer or of Parliament: and this liberty, mm England,
they cannot now be fairly said not to have, though they have
had it but for a little more than three years. As an association
of many partners must practically be under the management
of a few, every facility which law can give ought to be
afforded to the body for exercising the necessary control and
check over those few, whether they be themselves members
of the association, or merely its hired servants: and in this
point the English system is still at alamentable distance from
the standard of perfection, though less, I believe, owing to


PARTNERSHIP. 461


the defects of the law, than to those of the courts of judi-
cature,


- a ee ate English law may
partnership there j parsons peeps of ordinary
eae > is_one sort of joint-stock association
at absolutely disallows, and which can still be onl

called into existence by a special ++} Mea
a T pecial act either of the legisla-
liability. = mean, associations with limited
» Dentaeereerrncrc
ni he partners is limited, a une other
oe : hem. only. The first is the soczétée anonyme
spay ae which in Hoglendihas no other name than
Company nae i. seer meaning thereby a joint-stock
Mee alkcnant shareholders, by a charter from the crown or
A labili - tent of the legislature, stand exempted from
Wes a the debts of the concern, beyond the amount
ae i ees This form of association, though
an © the general law of this country, exists in many
sear : cases by special rauileguum. The other spe-
Tee cad pouted partnership is that known to the French
ape aas the name of commandite; of this, which in

Sia 1s entirely unrecognized and illegal, I shall speak
presently.

If a number of persons choose to associate for carrying
On any operation of commerce or industry, agreeing among
themselves and announcing to those with whom they deal
that the members of the association do not undertake to be
Tesponsible beyond the amount of the subscribed capital; is
there any reason that the law should raise objections to this
proceeding, and should impose on them the unlimited
responsibility which they disclaim? For whose sake? Not
for that of the partners themselves ; for it is they whom the
limitation of responsibility benefits and protects. It must
therefore be for the sake of third parties; namely, those who


462 BOOK y. CHAPTER Ix. § 6.


may have transactions with the association, and to whom it
may run in debt beyond what the subscribed capital suffices
to pay. But nobody is obliged to deal with the association;
still less is any one obliged to give it unlimited credit. The
class of persons with whom such associations have dealings
are in general perfectly capable of taking care of themselves,
and there seems no reason that the law should be more careful
of their interests than they will themselves be; provided no
false representation is held out, and they are aware from the
first what they have to trust to. The law is warranted in
requiring from all joint-stock associations with limited respon-
sibility, not only that the amount of capital on which they
profess to carry on business should either be actually paid up
or security given for it (if indeed, with complete publicity,
such a requirement would be necessary) but also that such
accounts should be kept, accessible to individuals, and if
needful, published to the world, as shall render it possible to
rscertain at any time the existing state of the company’s
affairs, and to learn whether the capital which is the sole secu-
rity for the engagements into which they enter, still subsists
unimpaired : the fidelity of such accounts being guarded by
sufficient. penalties. When the law has thus afforded to
individuals all practicable means of knowing the circum-
stances which ought to enter into their prudential calculations
in dealing with the company, there seems no more need for
interfering with individual judgment in this sort. of trans-
actions, than in any other part of the private business of
life.

The reason usually urged for such interference is, that the
managers of an association with limited responsibility, not
risking their whole fortunes in the event of loss, while in
ease of gain they may profit largely, are not sufficiently
mterested in exercising due circumspection, and are under
the temptation of exposing the funds of the association to
umproper hazards. Admitting that this is one of the disad-
vantages of such associations, it is a consideration of more


PARTNERSHIP. 463


importance to the shareholders themselves than to third
parties; since, with proper securities for publicity, the capital
of the association could not be engaged in hazards beyond
those ordinarily incident to the business it carries on, with-
out the fact’s being known, and becoming the subject of com-
ments by which the credit of the body would be likely to be
affected in quite as great a degree as the circumstances would
justify. If, under securities for publicity, it were found in
practice that companies, formed on the principle of unlimited
responsibility, obtained, with equal capital, greater credit,
companies with limited liability would be unable to maintain
an equal competition with them; and would therefore rarely
be formed, unless when such limitation was the only con-
dition on which the necessary amount of capital could be
raised: and in that case it would be very unreasonable to say
that their formation ought to be prevented.

It may further be remarked, that although, with equality
of capital, a company of limited liability offers a somewhat
less security to those who deal with it, than one in which
every shareholder is responsible with his whole fortune, yet
even the weaker of these two securities is in some respects
stronger than that which an individual capitalist can afford.
In the case of an individual, there is such security as can be
founded on his unlimited liability, but not that derived from
publicity of transactions, or from a known and large amount
of paid-up capital. This topic is well treated in an able
paper by M. Coquelin, published: in the Reyue des Deux


Mondes for July 1843*. a8 B x

“While third parties who trade with individuals,” says
this writer, “scarcely ever know,. except by approximation,
and even that most vague and uncertain, what is the amount


of capital responsible for the performance of contracts made


* The quotation is from a translation published in an American periodical,
Hunt’s Merchant’s Magazine, for May and June 1845, by Mr. H. C, Carey
of Philadelphia, to whose writings 1 have before had occasion to advert.


[CL NS nel eR ay Sb


pa ana wii siti


2


Sine ite


ers’


fr on a RR SS igs aM Ri i a EET wh METS
Soren:


4
1


464 BOOK V. CHAPTER Ix. § 6.


with them, those who trade with a société anonyme can obtain
full information if they seek it, and perform their operations
with a feeling of confidence that cannot exist in the other
case. Again, nothing is easier than for an individual trader
to conceal the extent of his engagements, as no one can know
it certainly but himself. Even his confidential clerk may be
ignorant of it, as the loans he finds himself compelled to
make may not all be of a character to require that they he
entered in his day-book. It is a secret confined to himself ;
one which transpires rarely, and always slowly; one which is
unveiled only when the catastrophe has occurred. On the
contrary, the société anonyme neither can nor ought to borrow,
without the fact becoming known to all the world—directors,
clerks, shareholders, and the public. Its operations partake,
in some respects, of the nature of those of governments.
The light of day penetrates in every direction, and there can
be no secrets from those who seek for information. Thus all
is fixed, recorded, known, of the capital and debts in the
case of the société anonyme, while all is uncertain and un-
known in the case of the individual trader. Which of the
two, we would ask the reader, presents the most favourable
aspect, or the surest guarantee, to the view of those who trade
with them?

“Again, availing himself of the obscurity in which his
affairs are shrouded, and which he desires to increase, the
private trader is enabled, so long as his business appears
prosperous, to produce impressions in regard to his means
far exceeding the reality, and thus to establish a credit not
justified by those means. When losses occur, and he sees
himself threatened with bankruptcy, the world is still igno-
rant of his condition, and he finds himself enabled to con-
tract debts far beyond the possibility of payment. The fatal
day arrives, and the creditors find a debt much greater than
had been anticipated, while the means of payment are as
much less. Eyen this is not all. The same obscurity which
has served him so well thus far, when desiring to magnify


PARTNERSHIP. 465


his capital and increase his credit, now affords him the oppor-
tunity of placing a part of that capital beyond the reach of
his creditors. It becomes diminished, if not annihilated. It
hides itself, and not even legal remedies, nor the activity of
creditors, ean bring it forth from the dark corners in which
itis placed. . . . Our readers can readily determine for
themselves if practices of this kind are equally easy in the
case of the société anonyme. We do not doubt that such
things are possible, but we think that they will agree with us
that from its nature, its organization, and the necessary pub-
licity that attends all its actions, the liability to such occur-
Tences is very greatly diminished.”

The laws of most countries, England included, have erred
in a twofold manner with regard to joint-stock companies.
While they have been most unreasonably jealous of allowing
such associations to exist, especially with limited respon-
sibility, they have generally neglected the enforcement of
publicity ; the best security to the public against any danger
which might arise from this description of partnerships ; and
a security quite as much required in the case of those associa-
tions of the kind in question, which, by an exception from their
general practice, they suffered to exist. Even in the instance
of the Bank of England, which holds a monopoly from the
legislature, and has had partial control over a matter of SO
much public interest as the state of the circulating aut
it is only within these few years that any publicity a a ne
been enforced ; and the publicity was 4% first of ely y
incomplete character, though now, for most practical purp 7


probably at length sufficient.


f limited partnership which de-
hich the managing partner
hole fortunes for the
put have others associated with
and are not liable


§ 7. The other kind o
mands our attention, 1S that in ae ae
or partners are responsible with the


m
engagements of the concer,


ite sums,

: ‘Lute only defini a b

poate on though they participate in the profits
ond,


for anything bey ee
VOL. Il.


ig ate


466 BOOK y. CHAPTER 1x. § 7.


according to any rule which may be agreed on. This is called
partnership en commandite: and the partners with limited
liability, to whom, by the French law, all interference in the
management of the concern is interdicted, are known by the
name commanditaires. Such partnerships are not permitted
by English law: whoever shares in the profits is lable for
the debts, to as plenary an extent as the managing partner.

For such prohibition no rational defence has ever, so far
as I am aware, been made. Even the insufficient reason
given against limiting the responsibility of shareholders in a
joint-stock company, does not apply here; there being no
diminution of the motives to circumspect management, since
all who take any part in the direction of the concern are
liable with their whole fortunes. To third parties, again, the
security is improved by the existence of commandite ; since
the amount subscribed by commanditaires is all of it ayail-
able to creditors, the commanditaires losing their whole invest-
ment before any creditor can lose anything ; while, if instead
of becoming partners to that amount, they had lent the sum
at an interest equal to the profit they derived from it, they
would have shared with the other creditors in the residue of
the estate, diminishing pro rata the dividend obtained by all.
While the practice of commandite thus conduces to the
interest of creditors, it is often highly desirable for the con-
tracting parties themselves. The managers are enabled to
obtain the aid of a much greater amount of capital than they
could borrow on their own security; and persons are induced
to aid useful undertakings, by embarking limited portions of
capital in them, when they would not, and often could not
prudently, have risked their whole fortunes on the chances of
the enterprise.

It may perhaps be thought that where due facilities are
afforded to joint-stock companies, commandite partnerships
are not required. But there are classes of cases to which the
commandite principle must always be better adapted than
the joint-stock principle. “Suppose,” says M. Coquelin,


PARTNERSHIP. 467


. an inventor seeking for a capital to carry his invention
into practice. To obtain the aid of capitalists, he must offer
them a share of the anticipated benefit; they must associate
themselves with him in the chances of its success. In such
a case, which of the forms would he select? Not a common
partnership, certainly;” for various reasons, and especially
because it would often be very difficult to find a partner with
capital, willing to risk his whole fortune on the success of
another person’s invention. “Neither would he select the
sogiete anonyme,” or any other form of joint-stock company,

In which he might be superseded as manager. He would
stand, in such an association, on no better footing than any
other shareholder, and he might be lost in the crowd; whereas,
the association existing, as it were, by and for him, the ma-
nagement would appear to belong to him as a matter of right.
Cases occur in which a merchant or a manufacturer, without
being precisely an inventor, has undeniable claims to the
management of an undertaking, from the possession of qua-
ities peculiarly calculated to promote its success. So great,
indeed,” continues M. Coquelin, “is the necessity, in many
cases, for the limited partnership, that it is difficult to conceive
how we could dispense with, or replace it :”? and in reference
to his own country he is probably in the right.

Where there is so great a readiness as in England, on the
part of the public, to form joint-stock associations, even
without the encouragement of a limitation of responsibility;
commandite partnership, though its prohibition is in principle
quite indefensible, cannot be deemed to be, in a merely eco-
nomical point of view, of the imperative necessity which M.
Coquelin ascribes to it. Yet the imconveniences are not
small, which arise indirectly from those provisions of the law
by which every one who shares in the profits of a concern is
subject to the full liabilities of an unlimited partnership. It
is impossible to say how many, or what useful modes of com-
bination are rendered impracticable by this state of the law.
It is sufficient for its condemnation, that, unless in some way

2H 2


4 4


468 BOOK V. CHAPTER Ix. § 7.


relaxed, it is inconsistent with the system of which M.
Leclaire has set so useful an example, the payment of wages
in part by a percentage on profits; in other words, the asso-
ciation of the operatives as virtual partners with the capita-
list.

It is, above all, with reference to the improvement and
elevation of the working classes, that complete freedom in
the conditions of partnership is indispensable. It is only by
combining, that the small means of many can be on anything
like an equality of advantage with the great fortunes of a
few. The liberty of association is not important solely for
its examples of success, but fully as much so for the sake of
attempts which would not succeed, but by their failure would
give instruction more impressive than can be afforded by
anything short of actual experience. Socialism, Communism,
every theory of social improvement, the worth of which 1s
capable of being brought to an experimental test, should be
permitted, and even encouraged, to submit itself to that test.
From such experiments the aspiring among the working
classes would derive lessons, which they would be slow to
learn from the teaching of persons supposed to have interests
and prejudices adverse to their good; and would discover, a
no cost to society, the limits of the practical worth of their
ideas of social regeneration, as applicable to the present stage
of human advancement.

The French law of partnership is superior to the English
in permitting commandite, and superior in having n0 such
unmanageable instrument as the Court of Chancery, all cases
arising from commercial transactions being adjudicated in a
comparatively cheap and expeditious manner by @ tribunal of
merchants. In other respects the French system is far WwOIRE
than the English. A company with limited responsibility
cannot be formed without the express authorization of the
department of government called the Conseil d’ Etat; body
of administrators, generally entire strangers to industrial
transactions, who have no interest in promoting enterprises,


PARTNERSHIP. 469


and are apt to think that the purpose of their institution is to
restrain them; whose consent cannot in any case be obtained
without an amount of time and labour which is a very serious
hindrance to the commencement of an enterprize, while the
extreme uncertainty of obtaining that consent at all, is a great
discouragement to capitalists who would be willing to sub-
scribe. In regard to joint-stock companies without limitation
of responsibility, which in England exist in such numbers, and
are formed with such facility, as to reduce (an a merely econo-
mical point of view) the jealousy which the law entertains of
the principle of limitation, to the rank of a very minor incon-
venience; such associations cannot, m France, exist at all,
for in cases of unlimited partnership the French law does not
permit the division of the capital into transferable shares.
The best existing laws of partnership appear to be those
of the New England States. According to Mr. Carey*, “no
where is association so little trammelled by regulations as in
New England; the consequence of which is, that it is carried
to a greater extent there, and particularly in Massachusetts
and Rhode Island, than in any other part of the world. In
these states, the soil is covered with compagnies anonymes—
chartered companies—for almost every conceivable purpose
Every town is a corporation for the management of its roads,
bridges, and schools; which are, therefore, under the direct
control of those who pay for them, and are consequently well
Managed. Academies and churches, lyceums and libraries,
Saving-fund societies, and trust companies, exist in numbers
proportioned to the wants of the people, and all are eonronw.
tions. Every district has its local bank, of a size to suit its
wants, the stock of which. is owned by the small capitalists
of the neighbourhood, and managed by themselves ; the con-
sequence of which is, that in no part of the world is the
system of banking so perfect—so little liable to vibration in
the amount of loans—the necessary effect of which is, that in


* In a note appended to his translation of M. Coquelin’s paper.


470 BOOK V. CHAPTER Ix. § 7.


none is the value of property so little affected by changes ir
the amount or value of the currency resulting from the move-
ments of their own banking institutions. In the two states
to which we have particularly referred, they are almost two
hundred in number. Massachusetts, alone, offers to our
view fifty-three insurance offices, of various forms, scattered
through the state, and all incorporated. Factories are incor-
porated, and are owned in shares; and every one that has any
partin the management of their concerns, from the purchase of
the raw material to the sale of the manufactured article, ¢s a part
owner; while every one employed in them has a prospect of
becoming one, by the use of prudence, exertion, and economy.
Charitable associations exist in large numbers, and all are incor-
porated. Fishing vessels are owned in shares by those who
navigate them; and the sailors of a whaling ship depend in a
great degree, if not altogether, upon the success of the voyage
for their compensation. Every master of a vessel, trading in the
Southern Ocean, is a part owner, and the interest he possesses
is a strong inducement to exertion and economy, by aid of
which the people of New England are rapidly driving out the
competition of other nations for the trade of that part of the
world. Wherever settled, they exhibit the same tendency to
combination of action. In New York they are the chief
owners of the lines of packet ships, which are divided into
shares, owned by the shipbuilders, the merchants, the master,
and the mates; which last generally acquire the means of
becoming themselves masters, and to this is due their great
success. The system is the most perfectly democratic of any
in the world. Jt affords to every labourer, every sailor, every
operative, male or female, the prospect of advancement ; and
its results are precisely such as we should have reason to
expect. In no part of the world are talent, industry, and pru-
dence, so certain to be largely rewarded.”

To this state might England also be brought, but not
without giving the same plenitude of liberty to voluntary asso-
ciation. The cases of insolvency and fraud on the part of


INSOLVENCY. 471


chartered companies in America, which have caused so much
loss and so much scandal in Europe, did not occur inthe part
of the Union to which this extract refers, but in other States, in
which the right of associating is much more fettered by legal
restrictions, and in which, accordingly, joint-stock associations
are not comparable in number or variety to those of New
England. Mr. Carey adds, “A careful examination of the
systems of the several states can scarcely, we think, fail to
convince the reader of the advantage resulting from permit-
ting men to determine among themselves the terms upon
which they will associate, and allowing the associations that
may be formed to contract with the public as to the terms
upon which they will trade together, whether of the limited
or unlimited liability of the partners ;” and I concur in think-
ing that to this conclusion, science and legislation must
ultimately come.


§ 8. I proceed to the subject of Insolvency Laws.

Good laws on this subject are important, first and prin-
cipally, on the score of public morals; which are on no point
more under the influence of the law, for good and evil, than
in a matter belonging so pre-eminently to the province of
law as the preservation of pecuniary integrity. But the
subject is also, in a merely economical point of view, of great
importance. First, because the economical well-being of a
people, and of mankind, depends in an especial manner upon
their being able to trust each other’s engagements. Secondly,
because one of the risks, or expenses, of industrial operations
is the risk or expense of what are commonly called bad debts,
and every saying which can be effected in this liability is a
diminution of cost of production 5 by dispensing with an item
of outlay which in no way conduces to ‘the desired end, and
which must be paid for either by the consumer of the wae
modity, or from the general profits of capital, according as the


burthen is peculiar or general. é ae
The laws and practice of nations on this subject have
cl


OSS Ait edad ate


pan OP EO TT NTT mare ae —
een STEN IE SE Ir ee, sunt mr Spe tat See Ltd ae TERT a
——_— poneneeoesapteneereen : Tee Saw Er tence =P te . Z


Seen an uncaaemananinen


_ eg sees


472 BOOK V. CHAPTER Ix. § 8.


almost always been in extremes. The ancient laws of most
countries have been all severity to the debtor. They have
invested the creditor with a power of coercion, more or less
tyrannical, which he might use against his insolvent debtor,
either to extort the surrender of hidden property, or to obtain
satisfaction of a vindictive character, which might console him
for the non-payment of the debt. This arbitrary power has
extended, in some countries, to making the insolvent debtor
serve the creditor as his slave; in which plan there were some
grains of common sense, since it might possibly be regarded
as a scheme for making him work out the debt by his labour.
In England, the coercion assumed the milder form of ordi-
nary imprisonment. The one and the other were the barba-
rous expedients of a rude age, repugnant to justice as well as
to humanity. Unfortunately the reform of them, like that
of the criminal law generally, has been taken in hand as an
affair of humanity only, not of justice: and the modish
humanity of the present time, which is essentially a thing of
one idea, (and is indeed little better than a timid shrinking
from the infliction of anything like pain, next neighbour to
the cowardice which shrinks from necessary endurance of it,)
has in this as in other cases, gone into a violent reaction
against the ancient severity, and sees in the fact of having
lost or squandered other people’s property, a peculiar title to
indulgence. Everything in the law which attached disagree-
able consequences to that fact, has been gradually relaxed,
and much of it entirely got rid of. Because insolvency was
eS late as if it were necessarily a crime, everything
is now @ne to make it, if possible, not even a misfortune.
The indulgence of the present laws to those who have
made themselves unable to pay their just debts, is usually
defended, on the plea that the sole object of the law should be,
in ease of insolvency, not to coerce the person of the debtor,
but 2 get at his property, and distribute it fairly among the
creditors. Assuming that this is and ought to be the sole
object, that object, in the present state of the law, is not


INSOLVENCY. 473


atttamed. Imprisonment at the discretion of a creditor was
really a powerful engine for extracting from the debtor any
property which he had concealed or otherwise made away
with. In depriving creditors of this instrument, the law has
not furnished them with any sufficient equivalent. And it is
seldom difficult for a dishonest debtor, by an understanding
with one or more of his creditors, or by means of pretended
creditors set up for the purpose, to abstract a part, perhaps
the greatest part, of his assets, from the general fund, through
the forms of the law itself. The facility and frequency of
such frauds is a subject of much complaint, and their pre-
vention demands a vigorous effort of the legislature, under
the guidance of judicious persons practically conversant with
the subject.

But the doctrine, that the law has done all that ought to
be expected from it, when it has put the creditors in the pos-
session of the property of an insolvent, is in itself a totally


inadmissible piece of spurious humanity. It is the business
of law to prevent wrong-doing, and not simply to patch up
hen it has been committed. The


law is bound to take care that insolvency shall not be a good
that men shall not have the privilege


the consequences of it w


pecuniary speculation; ;
of hazarding other people’s property without their knowledge
the profits of the enterprise if it is suc-
cessful, and if it fails, throwing the loss upon the lawful
owners; that they shall not find it answer to make them-
selves unable to pay their just debts, by spending the money
of their creditors in personal indulgence. The humanita-
rians do not deny that what is technically called fiudulent
bankruptcy, the false pretence of inability to pay, may rea-
sonably, when detected, be subject to punishment. But
does it follow that insolvency 1s not the consequence of mis-
conduct because the inability to pay may be real? Ifaman
has been a spendthrift, or a gambler, with property on which
his creditors had a prior claim, shall he pass scot-free because
the mischief is consummated and the money gone? Is there


or consent, taking


474 BOOK V. CHAPTER Ix. § 8.


any very material difference between this conduct, and those
other kinds of dishonesty which go by the names of fraud
and embezzlement ?

Such cases are not a minority, butalarge majority among
insolvencies. The statistics of bankruptcy prove the fact.
“ By far the greater part of all insolvencies arise from noto-
rious misconduct; the proceedings of the Insolvent Debtors
Court and of the Bankruptcy Court will prove it. Excessive
and unjustifiable overtrading, or most absurd speculation in
commodities, merely because the poor speculator ‘ thought
they would get up,’ but why he thought so he cannot tell;
speculations in hops, in tea, in silk, in corm—things with
which he is altogether unacquainted ; wild and absurd invest-
ments in foreign funds, or in joint-stocks: these are among
the most innocent causes of bankruptcy*.” The experienced
and intelligent writer from whom I quote, corroborates his
assertion by the testimony of several of the official assignees
of the Bankruptcy Court. One of them says, “As far as I
can collect from the books and documents furnished by the
bankrupts, it seems to me that” in the whole number of
cases which occurred during a given time in the court to
which he was attached, “‘ fourteen have been ruined by spe-
culations in things with which they were unacquainted; three
by neglected book-keeping; ten by trading beyond their
capital and means, and the consequent loss and expense of
accommodation-bills; forty-nine by expending more than
they could reasonably hope their profits would be, though
their business yielded a fair return; none by any general dis-
tress, onthe falling off of any particular branch of trade.”
Another of these officers says, “The new Court has been
open upwards of eighteen months, during which period fifty-
two cases of bankruptcy have come under my care. It is
my opinion that thirty-two of these have arisen from an


* From a volume published in 1845, entitled, “ Credit the Life of Com-
merce,” by Mr. J. H. Elliott.


INSOLVENCY. 475


imprudent expenditure, and five partly from that cause, and
partly from a pressure on the business in which the bank-
rupts were employed. Fifteen I attribute to improvident
speculations, combined in many instances with an extrava-
gant mode of life.”

To these citations the author adds the following state-
ments from his personal means of knowledge, which are con-
siderable. “ Many insolvencies are produced by tradesmen’s
indolence; they keep no books, or at least imperfect ones,
which they never balance; they never take stock; they em-
ploy servants, if their trade be extensive, whom they are too
indolent even to supervise, and then become insolvent. It is
not too much to say, that one-half of all the persons engaged
in trade, even in London, never take stock at all: they go on
year after year without knowing how their affairs stand, and
at last, like the child at school, they find to their surprise, but
one halfpenny left in their pocket. I will venture to say that
not one-fourth of all the persons in the provinces, either
manufacturers, tradesmen, or farmers, ever take stock ; nor in
fact does one-half of them ever keep account-books, deserving
any other name than memorandum books. I know sufficient
of the concerns of five hundred small tradesmen in the pro-
vinces, to be enabled to say, that not one-fifth of them ever
take stock, or keep even the most ordinary accounts. I am
prepared to say of such tradesmen, from carefully-prepared
tables, giving every advantage where there has been any
doubt as to the causes of their insolvency, that where nine
happen from extravagance or dishonesty, one” at most “may
be referred to misfortune alone*.”


Is it rational to expect among the trading classes any


high sense of justice, honour, or integrity, when the law


enables men who act in this manner to shuffle off the con-
upon those who have been so


and practically proclaims that


sequences of their misconduct
unfortunate as to trust them ;


* Pp. 50-1.


Para a Pe ree 3


476 BOOK v. CHAPTER Ix. § 8.


it looks upon insolvency thus produced, as a “ misfortune,”
not an offence ?

It is, of course, not denied, that insolvencies do arise
from causes beyond the control of the debtor, and that, im
many more cases, his culpability is not of a high order; and
the law ought to make a distinction in favour of such cases,
but not without a searching investigation ; nor should the
case ever be let go without having ascertained, in the most
complete manner practicable, not the fact of insolvency only,
but the cause of it. To have been trusted with money or
money’s worth, and to have lost or spent it, is prima facie
evidence of something wrong: and it is not for the creditor
to prove, which he cannot do in one case out of ten, that
there has been criminality, but for the debtor to rebut the pre-
sumption, by laying open the whole state of his affairs, and
shewing either that there has been no misconduct, or that
the misconduct has been of an excusable kind. If he fail in
this, he ought never to be dismissed without a punishment
proportioned to the degree of blame which seems justly
imputable to him; which punishment, however, might be
shortened or mitigated in proportion as he appeared likely to
exert himself in repairing the imjury done.

It is a common argument with those who approve a re-
laxed system of insolvency laws, that credit, except in the
great operations of commerce, is an evil; and that to deprive
creditors of legal redress is a judicious means of preventing
credit from being given. That which is given by retail
dealers to unproductive consumers is, no doubt, to the ex-
cess to which it is carried, a considerable evil. This, how-
ever, is only true of large, and especially of long, credits ; for
there is credit whenever goods are not paid for before they
quit the shop, or, at least, the custody of the seller; and there
would be much inconvenience in putting an end to this
sort of credit. But a large proportion of the debts on which
insolvency laws take effect, are those due by small tradesmen
to the dealers who supply them: and on no class of debts


INSOLVENCY. 477


does the demoralization occasioned by the present state of
the law, operate more perniciously. These are commercial
credits, which no one wishes to see curtailed; their existence
1s of great importance to the general industry of the country,
and to numbers of honest well-conducted persons of small
means, to whom it would be a grievous injury that they
should be prevented from obtaining the accommodation they
need, and would not abuse, through the omission of the
law to provide just remedies against dishonest or reckless
borrowers.
But although it were granted that retail transactions, on
any footing but that of ready money payment, are an evil, ‘ aa
and their entire suppression a fit object for legislation to aim cri |
at; a worse mode of compassing that object could scarcely be
invented, than to permit those who have been trusted by |
others to cheat and rob them with impunity. The law does
not select the vices of mankind as the appropriate instrument
for inflicting chastisement on the comparatively innocent :
when it seeks to discourage any course of action, it does so
by applying inducements of its own, not by outlawing those
who act in the manner it deems objectionable, and letting
loose the predatory instincts of the worthless part of man-
kind to feed upon them. If a man has committed murder,
the law puts him to death ; but it does not promise impunity
to anybody who may kill him for the sake of taking his purse.
The offence of believing another's word, even rashly, is not
So heinous that, for the sake of discouraging it, the spectacle
should be brought home to every door, of triumphant ras-~
cality, with the law on its side, mocking the victims it has
made. This pestilent example is already very widely exhi-
bited since the relaxation of the Insolvency laws. It is idle
to expect that, even by absolutely depriving creditors of all
legal redress, the kind of credit which is considered objec-
tionable would really be very much checked. Rogues and
swindlers are still an exception among mankind, and people
will go on trusting each other’s promises. Large dealers, in


478 BOOK V. CHAPTER Ix. § 8.


abundant business, would refuse credit, as many of them
already do: but in the eager competition of a great town,
what can be expected from the tradesman to whom a single
customer is of importance, the beginner, perhaps, who is
striving to get into business? He will take the risk, even if
it were still greater; he is ruined if he cannot sell his goods,
and he can but be ruined if he is defrauded. Nor does it
avail to say, that he ought to make proper inquiries, and
ascertain the character of those to whom he supplies goods
on trust. In some of the most flagrant cases of profligate
debtors which have come before the Bankruptcy Court, the
swindler had been able to give, and had given, excellent
references”.


* The following extracts from the French Code de Commerce, (the
translation is that of Mr. Fane), show the great extent to which the just
distinctions are made, and the proper investigations provided for, by French
law. The word banqueroute, which can only be translated by bankruptey,
is, however, confined in France to culpable insolvency, which is distinguished
into simple bankruptey and fraudulent bankruptcy. The following are cases
of simple bankruptcy :—

“ Every insolvent who, in the investigation of his affairs, shall appear
chargeable with one or more of the following offences, shall be proceeded
against as 2 simple bankrupt.

“Tf his house expenses, which he is bound to enter regularly in his day-
book, appear excessive,


“Tf he has spent considerable sums at play, or in operations of pure
hazard.

“Tf it shall appear that he has borrowed largely, or resold merchandize
at a loss, or below the current price, after it appeared by his last account-
taking that his debts exceeded his assets by one-half.

= Tf he has issued negotiable securities to three times the amount of his
available assets, according to his last account-taking:

E oe following may also be proceeded against as simple bankrupts :—
i ts: who has not declared his own insolvency in the manner prescribed

y :


“A Fs ;

Fe WR ETS not come in and surrendered within the time limited,
having no legitimate excuse for his absence:
“We who either :

10 either produces no books at all, or produces such as have


been nregularly kept, and this although the irregularities may not indicate
fraud.” 5 wore


7


ie
INSOLVENCY. 479


The penalty for “simple bankruptcy” is imprisonment for a term of
not less than one month, nor more than two years. The following are
cases of fraudulent brankruptey, of which the punishment is ¢ravaua forcés,
(the gallies) for a term :— ..

“Tf he has attempted to account for his property by fictitious expenses
and losses, or if he does not fully account for all his receipts :

“Tf he has frandulently concealed any sum of money or any debt due
tohim, or any merchandize or other moveables :

“Tf he has made fraudulent sales or gifts of his property :

“Tf he has allowed fictitious debts to be proved against his estate : :

“Tf he has been entrusted with property, either merely to keep, or with
special directions as to its use, and has nevertheless appropriated it to his
own use:” (for such acts of peculation by trustees there is generally in
England only a civil remedy, and that too through the Court of Chan-
cery :)

“Tf he has purchased real property in a borrowed name:

“Tf he has concealed his books. F

“The following may also be proceeded against in a similar way a

“He who has not kept books, or whose books shall not exhibit his real
Situation as regards his debts and credits. Lae ae

“Fe who, having obtained a protection (sauf-condutt), shall not have duly
attended.» iki afi

These various provisions relate only to commercial insolvency : a
laws in regard to ordinary debts are considerably more rigorous to the
debtor.


CHAPTER X.


OF INTERFERENCES OF GOVERNMENT GROUNDED ON
ERRONEOUS THEORIES.


§ 1. From the necessary functions of government, and
the effects produced on the economical interests of society by
their good or ill discharge, we proceed to the functions which
belong to what I have termed the optional class; those
which are sometimes assumed by governments and some-
times not, and which it is not unanimously admitted that
they ought to exercise.

Before entering on the general principles of the question,
it will be advisable to clear from our path all those cases, Mm
which government interference works ill, because grounded
on false views of the subject interfered with. Such cases
have no connection with any theory respecting the proper
limits of interference. There are some things with which
governments ought not to meddle, and other things with
which they ought; but whether right or wrong in itself, the
interference must work for ill, if government, not understand-
ing the subject which it meddles with, meddles to bring
about a result which would be mischievous. We will there-
fore begin by passing in review various false theories, which
have from time to time formed the ground of acts of govern-
ment more or less economically injurious.

Former writers on political economy have found it needful
to devote much trouble and space to this department
of their subject. It has now happily become possible, at
least in our own country, greatly to abridge this purely nega-
tive part of our discussions. The false theories of political
economy which have done so much mischief in times past,
are entirely discredited among all who have not lagged behind


PROTECTIONISM. 481]


the general progress of opinion; and few of the enactments
which were once grounded on those theories still help to
deform the statute-book. As the principles, on which their
condemnation rests, have been fully set forth in other parts of
this treatise, we may here content ourselves with a few brief
indications.

Of these false theories, the most notable is the doctrine of
Protection to Native Industry; a phrase meaning the prohi-
bition, or the discouragement by heavy duties, of such foreign
commodities as are capable of being produced at home. If
the theory involved in this system had been correct, the prac-
tical conclusions grounded on it would not have been unrea-
sonable. The theory was, that to buy things produced at
home was a national benefit, and the introduction of foreign
commodities, generally a national loss. It being at the same
time evident that the interest of the consumer is to buy
foreion commodities in preference to domestic whenever they
are either cheaper or better, the interest of the consumer ap-
peared in this respect to be contrary to the public interest :
he was certain, if left to his own inclinations, to do what
according to the theory was injurious to the public.

It was shewn, however, in our analysis of the effects of
ternational trade, as it had often been shewn by former
writers, that the importation of foreign commodities, in the
common course of traffic, never takes place, except when it is,
economically speaking, a national good, by causing the same
amount of commodities to be obtained at a smaller cost of
labour and capital to the country. To prohibit, therefore, this
importation, or impose duties which prevent it, is to render
the labour and capital of the country less efficient in produc-
tion than they would otherwise be; and compel a waste, of
the difference between the labour and capital necessary for the
home production of the commodity, and that which is re-
quired for producing the things with which it can be purchased
from abroad. The amount of national loss thus occasioned
is measured by the excess of the price at which the com-


9
VOL. It. =a


eS Re


vane Aenea ts


482 BOOK V. CHAPTER x. § I.


modity is produced, over that at which it could be imported.
In the case of manufactured goods, the whole difference be-
tween the two prices is absorbed in indemnifying the pro-
ducers for waste of labour, or of the capital which supports
that labour. ‘Those who are supposed to be benefited,
namely the makers of the protected articles, (unless they
form an exclusive company, and have a monopoly against
their own countrymen as well as against foreigners,) do not
obtain higher profits than other people. All is sheer loss, to
the country as well as to the consumer. When the protected
article is a product of agriculture—the waste of labour not
being incurred on the whole produce, but only on what may
be called the last instalment of it—the extra price is only in
part an indemnity for waste, the remainder being a tax paid
to the landlords.

The restrictive and prohibitory policy was originally
grounded on what is called the Mercantile System, which
representing the advantage of foreign trade to consist solely
in bringing money into the country, gave artificial encourage-
ment to exportation of goods, and discountenanced their
importation. The only exceptions to the system were those
required by the system itself. The materials and instruments
of production were the subjects of a contrary policy, directed
however to the same end; they were freely imported, and not
permitted to be exported, in order that manufacturers, being
more cheaply supplied with the requisites of manufacture, might
be able to sell cheaper, and therefore to export more largely.
For a similar reason, importation was permitted and even
favoured, when confined to the productions of countries which
were supposed to take from us still more than we took from
them, thus enriching the country by a favourable balance of
trade. As part of the same system, colonies were founded,
for the supposed advantage of compelling them to buy our
commodities, or at all events not to buy those of any other
country: in return for which restriction, we were generally
willing to come under an equivalent obligation with respect


PROTECTIONISM. 483


to the staple productions of the colonists. The consequences
of the theory were pushed so far, that it was not unusual even
to give bounties on exportation, and induce foreigners to buy
from us rather than from other countries, by a cheapness
which we artificially produced, by paying part of the price for
them, out of our own taxes. This is a stretch beyond the
point yet reached by any private tradesman in his compe-
fition for business. No shopkeeper, I should think, ever
made a practice of bribing customers by selling goods to them
at a permanent loss, making it up to himself from other funds
in his possession.

The principle of the Mercantile Theory is now given up
éven by writers and governments who still cling to the
restrictive system. Whatever hold that system has over
men’s minds, independently of the private interests which
Would be exposed to real or apprehended loss by its aban-
donment, is derived from fallacies other than the old notion
of the benefits of heaping up money in the country. The
most effective of these is the specious plea, of employing our
own countrymen and our national industry, instead of feeding
and Supporting the industry of foreigners. The answer to
this, from the principles laid down in former chapters, is
evident. Without reverting to the fundamental theorem dis-
Cussed in an early part of the present treatise*, respecting
the nature and sources of employment for labour ; it is suffi-
Clent to say, what has usually been said by the advocates of
free trade, that the alternative is not between employing our
Own country-people and foreigners, but between employing
One class and another of our own country-people. The
imported commodity is always paid for, directly or indirectly,
with the produce of our own industry: that industry being
at the same time rendered more productive, since with the
Same labour and outlay we are enabled to possess ourselves
of a greater quantity of the article. Those who have not


* Supra, vol. i., pp. 97 et seqq.


484 BOOK V. CHAPTER x. § 1.


well considered the subject, are apt to suppose that our export-
ing an equivalent in our own produce, for the foreign articles
we consume, depends on contingencies; on the consent of
foreign countries to make some corresponding relaxation of
their own restrictions, or on the question whether those from
whom we buy, are induced by that circumstance to buy more
from us; and that if these things, or things equivalent to them,
do not happen, the payment must be madein money. Now; in
the first place, there is nothing more objectionable im a money
payment than in payment by any other medium, if the state
of the market makes it the most advantageous remittance ;
and the money itself was first acquired, and would again be
replenished, by the export of an equivalent value of our own
products. But in the next place, a very short interval of
paying in money would so lower prices, as either to stop a
part of the importation, or raise up a foreign demand for our
produce, sufficient to pay for the imports. I grant that this
disturbance of the equation of international demand would
be in some degree to our disadvantage, in the purchase of
other imported articles; and that a country which prohibits
some foreign commodities, does, ceteris paribus, obtain those
which it does not prohibit, at a less price than it would other-
wise have to pay. To express the same thing in other
words; a country which destroys or prevents altogether
certain branches of foreign trade, thereby annihilating a
general gain to the world, which would be shared in some
proportion between itself and other countries—does, in some
circumstances, draw to itself, at the expense of foreigners, a
larger share than would else belong to it of the gain arising
from that portion of its foreign trade which it suffers to sub-
sist. But even this it can only be enabled to do, if foreigners
do not maintain equivalent prohibitions or restrictions against
1ts commodities. In any case, the justice or expediency of
destroying one of two gains, in order to engross a rather
larger share of the other, does not require much discussion :
the gain, too, which is destroyed, being, in proportion to the


PROTECTIONISM. 485


magnitude of the transactions, the larger of the two, since it
is the one which capital, left to itself, is supposed to seek by
preference.

Defeated as a general theory, the Protectionist doctrine
finds support im some particular cases, from considerations
which, when really in point, involve greater interests than mere
saving of labour; the interests of national subsistence and of
national defence. The discussions on the Corn Laws have
familiarized everybody with the plea, that we ought to be
independent of foreigners for the food of the people; and
the navigation laws are grounded, in theory and profession, on
the necessity of keeping up a “nursery of seamen ” for the
navy. On this last subject I at once admit, that the object is
worth the sacrifice; and that a country exposed to invasion
by sea, if it cannot otherwise have sufficient ships and sailors
of its own to secure the means of manning on an emergency
an adequate fleet, is quite right im obtaining those means,
€ven at some economical sacrifice in point of cheapness of
transport. When the English navigation laws were enacted,
the Dutch, from their maritime skill and their low rate of
profit at home, were able to carry for other nations, England
included, at cheaper rates than those nations could carry for
themselves : which placed all other countries at a great com-
parative disadvantage in obtaining experienced seamen for
their ships of war. The Navigation Laws, by which this
deficiency was remedied, and at the same time a blow struck
against the maritime power of a nation with which England
Was then frequently engaged in hostilities, were probably,
though economically disadvantageous, politically expedient.


But English ships and sailors can now navigate as cheaply as
at least an equal


those of any other country ; maintaining
competition with the other maritime nations even in their
Own trade. The ends which may once have justified Naviga-
m no longer, and there seems no reason


tion Laws, require the
for maintaining this invidious exception to the general rule


of free trade.


Serine reer


i


a0 Fine"


SAT EP


486 BOOK V. CHAPTER x. $§ 1.


With regard to subsistence, the plea of the Protectionists
has been so often and so triumphantly met, that it requires
little notice here. That country is the most steadily as well
as the most abundantly supplied with food, which draws its
supplies from the largest surface. It is ridiculous to found a
general system of policy on so chimerical a danger as that of
being at war with all the nations of the world at once; or to
suppose that, even if inferior at sea, a whole country could be
blockaded like a town, or that the growers of food in other
countries would not be as anxious not to lose an advan-
tageous market, as we should be not to be deprived of their
corn. On the subject, however, of subsistence, there is one
point which deserves more special consideration. In cases
of actual or apprehended scarcity, many countries of Europe
are accustomed to stop the exportation of food. Is this, or
not, sound policy? There can be no doubt that in the pre-
sent state of international morality, a people cannot, any
more than an individual, be blamed for not starving itself to
feed others. But if the greatest amount of good to man-
kind on the whole, were the end aimed at in the maxims of
international conduct, such collective churlishness would
certainly be condemned by them. Suppose that in ordinary
circumstances the trade in food were perfectly free, so that
the price in one country could not habitually exceed that in
any other by more than the cost of carriage, together with a
moderate profit to the importer. A general scarcity ensues,
affecting all countries, but in unequal degrees. If the price
rose in one country more than in others, it would be a proof
that in that country the scarcity was severest, and that by
permitting food to go freely thither from any other country,
it would be spared from a less urgent necessity to relieve @
greater. When the interests, therefore, of all countries are
considered, free exportation is desirable. To the exporting
country considered separately, it may, at least on the par-
ticular occasion, be an inconvenience: but taking into account
that the country which is now the giver, will in some future


PROTECTIONISM. 487


season be the receiver, and the one that is benefited by the
freedom, I cannot but think that even to the apprehension of
food-rioters it might be made apparent, that in such cases
they should do to others what they would wish done to them-
selves,

In countries in which the system of Protection is declin-
ing, but not yet wholly given up, such as the United States,
a doctrine has come into notice which is a sort of compromise
between free-trade and restriction, namely, that protection
for protection’s sake is improper, but that there is nothing
objectionable in having as much protection as may inci-
dentally result from a tariff framed solely for revenue. Even ie
in England, regret is sometimes expressed that a ‘ moderate Hi.
fixed duty” was not preserved on corn, on account of the


Patineeseunli


revenue it would yield. Independently, however, of the ; |
general impolicy of taxes on the necessaries of life, this WW
doctrine overlooks the fact, that revenue is received only on iy iy
the quantity imported, but that the tax is paid on the entire fT i]
quantity consumed. To make the public pay much that the Ab


ee


treasury may receive a little, is no eligible mode of obtaming
arevenue. In the case of manufactured articles the doctrine
involves a palpable inconsistency. The object of the duty
as a means of revenue, is inconsistent with its affording, even
incidentally, any protection. It can only operate as pro-
tection in so far as it prevents importation ; and to what-
ever degree it prevents importation, it affords no revenue.
The only case in which, on mere principles of political
economy, protecting duties can be defensible, is when they


oe smenos


eecniaen ae


seertamcinathess


are imposed temporarily (especially in a young and rising Hi

nation) in hopes of naturalizing a foreign industry, in itself ‘|

perfectly suitable to the circumstances of the country. The fed |
Hy, |


Superiority of one country over another in a branch of pro-

duction, often arises only from having begun it sooner.

There may be no inherent advantage on one part, or disad- |e

vantage on the other, but only a present superiority of ac- ie

quired skill and experience. A country which has this skill i! Hid
'


4
|


=n aR TE Nm cnn aan le ea a ae


488 BOOK V. CHAPTER x. § 1.


and experience yet to acquire, may in other respects be better
adapted to the production than those which were earlier in
the field: and besides, it is a just remark, that nothing has a
greater tendency to promote improvements in any branch of
production, than its trial under a new set of conditions. But
it cannot be expected that individuals should, at their own
risk, or rather to their certain loss, introduce a new manu-
facture, and bear the burden of carrying it on, until the pro-
ducers have been educated up to the level of those with
whom the processes are traditional. A protecting duty, con-
tinued for a reasonable time, will sometimes be the least
inconvenient mode in which the nation can tax itself for the
support of such an experiment. But the protection should
be confined to cases in which there is good ground of assur-
ance that the industry which it fosters will after a time be
able to dispense with it; nor should the domestic producers
ever be allowed to expect that it will be continued to them,
beyond the time strictly necessary for a fair trial of what
they are capable of accomplishing.

There is only one part of the Protectionist scheme which
requires any further notice: its policy towards colonies, and
foreign dependencies; that of compelling them to trade
exclusively with the dominant country. A country which
thus secures to itself an extra foreign demand for its commo-
dities, undoubtedly gives itself some advantage in the distri-
bution of the general gains of the commercial world. Since,
however, it causes the industry and capital of the colony to
be diverted from channels, which are proved to be the most pro-
ductive, inasmuch as they are those into which industry and
capital spontaneously tend to flow; there is a loss, on the whole,
to the productive powers of the world, and the mother country
does not gain so much as she makes the colony lose. If,
therefore, the mother country refuses to acknowledge any
reciprocity of obligation, she imposes a tribute on the colony
In an indirect mode, greatly more oppressive and injurious
than the direct. But if, with a more equitable spirit, she


USURY LAWS. : 489


submits herself to corresponding restrictions for the benefit
of the colony, the result of the whole transaction is the ridi-


culous one, that each party loses much, in order that the
other may gain a little.


’ §2. Next to the system of Protection, among mis-
chievous interferences with the spontaneous course of indus-
trial transactions, may be noticed certain interferences with
contracts. One instance is that of the Usury Laws. _ These
originated in a religious prejudice against receiving interest
on money, derived from that fruitful source of mischief in
modern Europe, the attempted adaptation to Christianity of
doctrines and precepts drawn from the Jewish law. In
Mahomedan nations the receiving of interest is formally
Interdicted, and rigidly abstained from; and Sismondi has
noticed, as one among the causes of the industrial inferiority
ofthe Catholic, compared with the Protestant parts of Hurope,
that the Catholic church in the middle ages gaye its sanction
to the same prejudice, which subsists, impaired but not
destroyed, wherever that religion is acknowledged. Where
law or conscientious scruples prevent lending at interest, the
capital which belongs to persons not in business is lost to
productive purposes, or can be applied to them only in pecu-
lar circumstances of personal connexion, or by a subterfuge.
Industry is thus limited to the capital of the undertakers,
and to what they can borrow from persons not bound by the
Same laws or religion as themselves. In Mussulman coun-
tries the bankers and money dealers are either Hindoos,
Armenians, or Jews.

In more improved countries, legislation no longer dis-
countenances the receipt of an equivalent for money lent;
but it everywhere interferes with the free agency of the lender
and borrower, by fixing a legal limit to the rate of interest,
and making the receipt of more than the appointed maximum
a penal offence. This restriction, though approved by Adam
Smith, has been condemned by all enlightened persons since


NE TE EE en arn


—


wigs


.


tt


490 : BOOK V. CHAPTER x. § 2.


the triumphant onslaught made upon it by Bentham in his
“Letters on Usury,” which may still be referred to as the
best extant writing on the subject.

Legislators may enact and maintain Usury Laws from
one of two motives: ideas of public policy, or concern for
the interest of the parties to the contract; in this case, of
one party only, the borrower. As a matter of policy, the
notion may possibly be, that it is for the general good that
interest should be low. It is for the good certainly of bor-
rowers. For preferring, however, their advantage to that of
lenders, it would be difficult to give any better reason than
that in most countries the governing classes are borrowers.
It is besides a misapprehension of the causes which influence
commercial transactions, to suppose that the rate of interest
is really made lower by law, than it would be made by the
spontaneous play of supply and demand. If the competition
of borrowers, left unrestrained, would raise the rate of interest
to six per cent, this proves that at five there would be a
greater demand for loans, than there is capital in the market
to supply. If the law in these circumstances permits no
interest beyond five per cent, there will be some lenders,
who not choosing to disobey the law, and not being in a
condition to employ their capital otherwise, will content
themselves with the legal rate: but others, finding that in a
season of pressing demand, more may be made of their
capital by other means than they are permitted to make by
lending it, will not lend it at all; and the loanable capital,
already too small for the demand, will be still further dimi-
nished. Of the disappointed candidates there will be many
at such periods, who must have their necessities supplied at
any price, and these will readily find a third section of lenders,
who will not be averse to join in a violation of the law, either
by circuitous transactions, partaking of the nature of fraud,
or by relying on the honour of the borrower. The extra
expense of the roundabout mode of proceeding, and an
equivalent for the risk of non-payment and of legal penalties,


USURY LAWS. 491


must be paid by the borrower, over and above the extra
interest which would at any rate have been required of him
by the general state of the market. The laws which were
intended to lower the price paid by him for pecuniary ac-
commodation, end thus in greatly increasing it. These laws
have also a directly demoralizing tendency. Knowing the
difficulty of detecting an illegal pecuniary transaction between
two persons, in which no third person is involved, so long as
it is the interest of both to keep the secret, legislators have
adopted the expedient of tempting the borrower to become
the informer, by making the annulment of the debt a part of
the penalty for the offence ; thus rewarding men, for obtaining
' the property of others by false promises, and then not only
refusing repayment, but invoking legal penalties on those who
have helped them in their need. The moral sense of man-
kind very rightly infamizes those who resist an otherwise just
claim on the ground of usury, and tolerates such a plea only
when resorted to as the best legal defence available against
an attempt really considered as partaking of fraud or extor-
tion. But this very severity of public opinion renders the
enforcement of the laws so difficult, and the infliction of the
penalties so rare, that when it does occur it merely victimizes
an individual, and has no effect on general practice.

In so far as the motive of the restriction may be supposed
to be, not public policy, but regard for the interest of the
borrower, it would be difficult to point out any case in which
such tenderness on the legislator’s part is more misplaced.
A person of sane mind, and of the age at which persons are
legally competent to conduct their own concerns, must be
presumed to be a sufficient guardian of his pecuniary interests.
If he may sell an estate, or grant a release, or _assign DWaY.

without control from the law, 1t seems very
unnecessary that the only bargain which he cannot make
without its intermeddling, should be a loan of money. The
law seems to presume that the money-lender, dealing with
necessitous persons, can take advantage of their necessities,


all his property,


=


mieten a nent


cuniiieseninn


LSE ETI AIR


eae


enna myeene tn te


saaercnetemetaeetomieniaeracaadcumras


—


a —eeeeneerrneheeReS
- ionelies


a agp get = Rw ER ete
a ~


SS


499 BOOK, V1 | CHAPTER xX. \) 2:


and exact conditions limited only by his own pleasure. It
might be so if there were only one money-lender within reach.
But when there is the whole monied capital of a wealthy com-
munity to resort to, no borrower is placed under any disad-
vantage in the market merely by the urgency of his need. If
he cannot borrow at the interest paid by other people, it must
be because he cannot give such good security; and competi-
tion will limit the extra demand to a fair equivalent for the
risk of his proving insolvent. Though the law intends favour
to the borrower, it is to him above all that injustice is, in this
case, done by it. What can be more unjust than that a per-
son who cannot give perfectly good security, should be pre-
vented from borrowing of persons who are willing to lend
money to him, by their not being permitted to receive the
rate of interest which would be a just equivalent for their
risk? Through the mistaken kindness of the law, he must
either go without the money which is perhaps necessary to
save him from much greater losses, or be driven to expe-
dients of a far more ruinous description, which the law either
has not found it possible, or has not happened, to interdict.
Adam Smith rather hastily expressed the opinion, that
only two kinds of persons, “ prodigals and projectors,” could
require to borrow money at more than the market rate of
interest. He should have included all persons who are in
any pecuniary difficulties, however temporary their necessities
may be. It may happen to any person in business, to be
disappointed of the resources on which he had calculated for
meeting some engagement, the non-fulfilment of which on a
fixed day would be bankruptcy. In periods of commercial
difficulty, this is the condition of many prosperous mercantile
firms, who become competitors for the small amount of dis-
posable capital which, in a time of general distrust, the
owners are willing to part with. Up to the relaxation of
the usury laws a few years ago, the limitations imposed by
those laws were felt as a most serious aggravation of every
commercial crisis. Merchants who could have obtained the


USURY LAWS. 493


aid they required at an interest of seven or eight per cent for
short periods, were obliged to give 20 or 30, or to resort to
forced sales of goods at a still greater loss. Experience
having obtruded these evils on the notice of Parliament, the
sort of compromise took place, of which English legislation
affords so many instances, and which helps to make our laws
and policy the mass of inconsistency that they are. We
reformed the laws as a person reforms a tight shoe, who cuts
a hole in it where it pinches hardest, and continues to wear
it. Retaining the erroneous principle as a general rule,
Parliament allowed an exception in the case in which the
practical mischief was most flagrant. It left the usury laws
unrepealed, but exempted bills of exchange, of not more than
three months date, from their operation. Some years after-
wards the laws were repealed in regard to all other contracts,
but left in force as to all those which relate to land. Not a
particle of reason could be given for making this extraor-
dinary distinction; but the “agricultural mind” was of opinion
that the interest on mortgages, though it hardly ever comes up
to the permitted point, would come up to a still higher point ;
and the laws are maintained that the landlords may, as they
think, be enabled to borrow below the market rate, as the
corn-laws were so long kept up that the same class might be
able to sell corn above the market rate. The modesty of the
pretension is quite worthy of the intelligence which can think
that the end aimed at is in any way forwarded by the means
used.

With regard to the “prodigals and projectors” spoken of
by Adam Smith ; no law can prevent a prodigal from ruining
himself, unless it lays him or his property under actual res-
straint, which, on the requisition of his relations, the Roman
Law and some of the Continental systems founded on it
give power in certain cases to do. The only effect of usury
laws upon a prodigal, is to make his ruin rather more expedi-
tious, by driving him to a disreputable class of money-dealers,
and rendering the conditions more onerous by the extra risk


494 BOOK V. CHAPTER Xx. § 3.


created by the law. As for projectors, a term, in its
unfavourable sense, rather unfairly applied to every person
who has a project; such laws may put a veto upon the prose-
cution of the most promising enterprize, when planned, as it
generally is, by a person who does not possess capital adequate
to its successful completion. Many of the greatest improve-
ments were at first looked shily on by capitalists, and had to
wait long before they found one sufficiently adventurous to
be the first in a new path: many years elapsed before
Stephenson could convince even the enterprizing mercantile
public of Liverpool and Manchester, of the advantage of
substituting railways for turnpike-roads; and plans on which
great labour and large sums have been expended with little
visible result, (the epoch in their progress when predictions of
failure are sure to be the most rife), may be indefinitely
suspended, or altogether dropped, and the outlay all lost,if,
when the original funds are exhausted, the law will not allow
more to be raised on the terms on which people are willing
to expose it to the chances of an enterprize not yet secure of
success.


§ 3. Loans are not the only kind of contract, of which
government have thought themselves qualified to regulate the
conditions better than the persons interested. There 1s
scarcely any commodity which they have not, at some place
or time, endeavoured to make either dearer or cheaper than it
would be if left to itself, The most plausible case for artifi-
cially cheapening a commodity, is that of food. The desira-
bleness of the object is in this case undeniable. But since
the average price of food, like that of other things, conforms
to the cost of production with the addition of the usual
profit; if this price is not expected by the farmer, he will,
unless compelled by law, produce no more than he requires
for his own consumption: and the law therefore, if absolutely
determined to have food cheaper, must substitute, for the ordi-
nary motives to cultivation, a system of penalties. If it shrinks


REGULATION OF THE PRICE OF FOOD. 495


from doing this, it has no resource but that of taxing the
whole nation, to givea bounty or premium to the grower or
importer of corn, thus giving everybody cheap bread at the
expense of all: in reality a largess to those who do not pay
taxes, at the expense of those who do; one of the worst
forms of a practice essentially bad, that of converting the
working classes into unworking classes by making them a
present of subsistence.

It is not however so much the general or average price of
food, as its occasional high price in times of emergency,
which governments have studied to reduce. In some cases,
as for example the famous “maximum ” of the revolutionary
government of 1793, the compulsory regulation was an attempt
by the ruling powers to counteract the necessary consequences
of their own acts; to scatter an indefinite abundance of the
circulating medium with one hand, and keep down prices
with the other; a thing manifestly impossible under any
regime except one of unmitigated terror. In case of actual
scarcity, governments are often urged, as they were in the
Irish emergency of 1847, to take measures of some sort for
moderating the price of food. But the price of a thing can-
not be raised by deficiency of supply, beyond what is suffi-
cient to make a corresponding reduction of the consumption;
and if a government prevents this reduction from being
brought about by a rise of price, there remains no mode of
effecting it unless by taking possession of all the food, and
serving it out in rations, as in a besieged town. Ina real
scarcity, nothing can afford general relief, except a determina-
tion by the richer classes to diminish their own consump-
tion. If they buy and consume their usual quantity of food,
and content themselves with giving money, they do no good.
The price is forced up until the poorest competitors have no
longer the means of competing, and the privation of food is
thrown exclusively upon the indigent, the other classes being
only affected pecuniarily. When the supply is insufficient,


somebody must consume less, and if every rich person is


496 BOOK V. CHAPTER xX. § 4.


determined not to be that somebody, all they do by subsi-
dizing their poorer competitors is to force up the price so
much the higher, with no effect but to enrich the corn-
dealers, the very reverse of what is desired by those who
recommend such measures. All that governments can do
in these emergencies, is to counsel a general moderation in
consumption, and to interdict such kinds of it as are not of
primary importance. Direct measures at the cost of the
state, to procure food from a distance, are expedient when
from peculiar reasons the thing is not likely to be done by
private speculation. In any other case they are a great error.
Private speculators will not, in such cases, venture to com-
pete with the government; and though a government can do
more than any one merchant, it cannot do nearly so much as
all merchants.


§ 4. Governments, however, are oftener chargeable with
having attempted, but too successfully, to make things dear,
than with having aimed by wrong means at making them
cheap. The usual instrument for producing artificial dear-
ness is monopoly, To confer a monopoly upon a producer or
dealer, or upon a set of producers or dealers sufficiently nume-
rous to combine, is to give them the power of levying any
amount of taxation on the public, for their individual benefit,
which will not make the public forego the use of the commo-
dity. When the sharers in the monopoly are so numerous
and so widely scattered that they are prevented from com-
bining, the evil is considerably less: but even then the com-
petition is not so active among a limited, as among an unli-
mited number. Those who feel assured of a fair average
proportion in the general business, are seldom eager to get
a larger share by foregoing a portion of their profits. A limi-
tation of competition, however partial, may have mischiev-
ous effects quite disproportioned to the apparent cause. The
mere exclusion of foreigners, from a branch of industry open
to the free competition of every native, has been known,


MONOPOLIES. 497


even in enterprising England, to render that branch a conspl-
cuous exception to the general industrial energy of the coun-
try. The silk manufacture of England remained far behind
that of other countries of Europe, so long as the foreign
fabrics were prohibited. In addition to the tax levied for
the profit, real or imaginary, of the monopolists, the con-
sumer thus pays an additional tax for their laziness and inca-
pacity. When relieved from the immediate stimulus of
competition, producers and dealers grow indifferent to the
dictates of their ultimate pecuniary interest ; preferring to the
most hopeful prospects, the present ease of adhering to rou-
tine. A person who is already thriving, seldom puts himself
out of his way to commence even a lucrative improvement,
unless urged by the additional motive of fear lest some rival
should supplant him by getting possession of it before him.
The condemnation of monopolies ought not to extend to
patents, by which the originator of an improved process is
permitted to enjoy, for a limited period, the exclusive privi-
lege of using his own improvement. This is not making
the commodity dear for his benefit, but merely postponing a
part of the increased cheapness which the public owe to
the inventor, in order to compensate and reward him for the
service. That he ought to be both compensated and rewarded
for it, will not be denied, and also that if all were at once
allowed to avail themselves of his ingenuity, without having
shared the labours or the expenses which he had to incur in
bringing his idea into a practical shape, either such expenses
and labours would be undergone by nobody, except by very
opulent and very public-spirited persons, or the state must
put a value on the service rendered by an inventor, and make
him a pecuniary grant. This has been done in some in-
stances, and may be done without inconvenience in cases of
very conspicuous public benefit; but im general an exclusive
privilege, of temporary duration, is preferable; because it
leaves nothing to amy one’s discretion; because the reward
conferred by it depends upon the invention’s being found
VOL, Il. 2K


498 BOOK Vv. CHAPTER xX. § 5.


useful, and the greater the usefulness the greater the reward;
and because it is paid by the very persons to whom the ser-
vice is rendered, the consumers of the commodity. So deci-
sive, indeed, are these considerations, that if the system of
patents were abandoned for that of rewards by the state, the
best shape which these could assume would be that of a small
temporary tax, imposed for the inventor’s benefit on all per-
sons making use of the invention.


§ 5. I pass to another kind of government inter-
ference, in which the end and the means are alike odious,
but which existed in England until not much more than
twenty years. ago, and is in full vigour at this day in some
other countries. I mean the laws against combinations of
workmen to raise wages; laws enacted and maintained for
the declared purpose of keeping wages low, as the famous
Statute of Labourers was passed by a legislature of employers,
to prevent the labouring class, when its numbers had been
thinned by a pestilence, from taking advantage of the dimi-
nished competition to obtain higher wages. Such laws exhi-
bit the infernal spirit of the slave master, when to retain the
working classes in avowed slavery has ceased to be practi-
cable.

If it were possible for the working classes, by combining
among themselves, to raise or keep up the general rate of
wages, it needs hardly be said that this would be a thing not
to be punished, but to be welcomed and rejoiced at. Unfor-
tunately the effect is quite beyond attainment by such means.
The multitudes who compose the working class are too nume-
rous, and too widely scattered, to combine at all, much more
to combine effectually. If they could do so, they might doubt-
less succeed in diminishing the hours of labour, and obtaining
the same wages for less work. But if they aimed at obtain-
ing actually higher wages than the rate fixed by demand and
supply—the rate which distributes the whole circulating
capital of the country among the entire working population—


i


COMBINATION LAWS. 499


this could only be accomplished by keeping a part of their
number permanently out of employment. As support from
public charity would of course be refused to those who could
get work and would not accept it, they would be thrown
for support upon the trades union of which they were mem-
bers; and the workmen collectively would be no better off
than before, having to support the same numbers out of
the same aggregate wages. In this way, however, the class
would have its attention forcibly drawn to the fact of a
superfluity of numbers, and to the necessity, if they would
have high wages, of proportioning the supply of labour to
the demand.

Combinations to keep up wages are sometimes successful,
in trades where the workpeople are few in number, and col-
lected in a small number of local centres. It is questionable
if combinations ever had the smallest effect on the permanent
remuneration of spinners or weayers; but the journeymen
type-founders, by a close combination, are able, it is said, to
keep up a rate of wages much beyond that which is usual in
employments of equal hardness and skill; and even the tai-
lors, a much more numerous class, are understood to have
had, to some extent, a similar success. A rise of wages,
thus confined to particular employments, is not (like a rise of
general wages) defrayed from profits, but raises the value and
price of the particular article, and falls on the consumer; the
capitalist who produces the commodity being only injured in
so far as the high price tends to narrow the market; and not
even then, unless it does so in a greater ratio than that of the
rise of price: for though, at higher wages, he employs with a
given capital fewer workmen, and obtains less of the commo-
dity, yet if he can sell the whole of this diminished quantity
at the higher price, his profits are as great as before.

This partial rise of wages, if not gained at the expense of
the remainder of the working class, ought to be regarded as a
benefit. The consumer indeed must pay forit; but cheapness


of goods is desirable only when the cause of it is that their
2K 2


500 BOOK Y. CHAPTER x. § 9.


production costs little labour, and not when occasioned by that
labour’s being ill remunerated. It may appear, however, at first
sight, that the high wages of the type-founders (for example)
are obtained at the general cost of the labouring class.
This high remuneration either causes fewer persons to find
employment in the trade, or if not, must lead to the invest-
ment of more capital in it, at the expense of other trades :
in the first case it throws an additional number of labourers on
the general market; in the second, it withdraws from that
market a portion of the demand: effects, both of which are
injurious to the working classes. Such indeed would really
be the result of a successful combination in a particular trade
or trades, for some time after its formation. But when it is
a permanent thing, the principles so often insisted upon in
this treatise, show that it can have no such effect. The
habitual earnings of the working classes at large, can be
affected by nothing but the habitual requirements of the
labouring people: these indeed may be altered, but while they
remain the same, wages never fall permanently below the
standard of these requirements, and cannot long remain above
that standard. If there had been no combinations in par-
ticular trades, and the wages of those trades had never been
kept above the universal level, there is no reason whatever to
suppose that the universal level would have been at all higher
than it now is. There would merely have been a greater
number of people altogether, and a smaller number of excep-
tions to the ordinary low rate of wages.

Combinations to keep up wages are therefore not only
permissible, but useful, whenever really calculated to have
that effect. It is, however, an indispensable condition that
the combination should be voluntary. No severity, necessary
to the purpose, is too great to be employed against attempts
to compel workmen to join a union, or take part in a strike,
by threats or violence. Mere moral compulsion, by the
expression of opinion, the law ought not to interfere with;
it belongs to more enlightened opinion to restrain it, by


e


COMBINATION LAWS. 501


rectifying the moral sentiments of the people. Other questions
arise when the combination, being voluntary, proposes to itself
objects really contrary to the public good. High wages and
short hours are generally good objects, or, at all events, may be
so, and a limitation of the number of persons in employment
may be a necessary condition of these. Combinations,
therefore, not to work for less than certain wages, or for more
than a certain number of hours, or even not to work for a
master who employs more than a certain number of appren-
tices, are, when voluntary on the part of all who engage in
them, not only unexceptionable, but would be desirable,
were it not that they almost always fail of their effect. But
in many trades unions, it is among the rules that there shall
be no task work, or no difference of pay between the most
expert workmen and the most unskilful, or that no member
of the union shall earn more than a certain sum per week, in
order that there may be more employment for the rest.
These are combinations to effect objects which are pernicious.
Their success, even when only partial, is a public mischief,
and were it complete, would be equal in magnitude to almost
any of the evils arising from bad legislation. Hardly any-
thing worse can be said of the worst laws on the subject of
property and industry, than that they place the energetic and
the idle, the skilful and the incompetent, on a level: and this
it is the avowed object of the regulations of these unions to
do. Every society which exacts from its members obedience
to rules of this description, and endeayours to enforce com-
pliance with them on the part of employers by refusal to
work, is a public nuisance. Whether the law would be war-
ranted in making the formation of such associations illegal
and punishable, depends upon the difficult question of the
legitimate bounds of constitutional liberty. What are the
proper limits to the right of association? To associate for
the purpose of violating the law, could not of course be
tolerated under any government. But among the numerous
acts which, although mischievous in themselves, the law ought


502 BOOK V. CHAPTER xX. § 6.


not to prohibit from being done by individuals, are there not
some which are rendered so much more mischievous when
people combine to do them, that the legislature ought to pro-
hibit the combination, though not the act itself? When these
questions have been philosophically answered, which belongs
to a different branch of social philosophy from the present, it
may be determined whether the kind of associations here
treated of can be a proper subject of any other than merely


moral repression.


§ 6. Among the modes of undue exercise of the power
of government, on which I have commented in this chapter,
I have included only such as rest on theories which have still
more or less of footing in the most enlightened countries. I
have not spoken of some which have done still greater mis-
chief in times not long ’past, but which are now generally
given up, at least in theory, though enough of them still
remains in practice to make it impossible as yet to class them
among exploded errors.

The notion, for example, that a government should choose
opinions for the people, and should not suffer any doctrines
in politics, morals, law, or religion, but such as it approves,
to be printed or publicly professed, may be said to be alto-
gether abandoned as a general thesis. It is now well under-
stood that a régime of this sort is fatal to all prosperity, even
of an economical kind: that the human mind, when pre-
vented either by fear of the law or by fear of opinion
from exercising its faculties freely on the most important
subjects, acquires a general torpidity and imbecility, by
which, when they reach a certain point, it is disqualified
from making any considerable advances even in the common
affairs of life, and’ which, when greater still, make it gradually
lose even its previous attainments. There cannot be a more
decisive example than Spain and Portugal, from the Reforma-
tion to the present time. The decline of those countries in
national greatness and even in material civilization, while


RESTRAINTS ON OPINION. 503


almost all the other nations of Europe were uninterruptedly
advancing, has been ascribed to various causes, but there is
one which hes at the foundation of them all: the Holy
Inquisition, and the system of mental slayery of which it is
the symbol.

Yet although these truths are very widely recognized, and
freedom both of opinion and of discussion is admitted as an
axiom in all free countries, this apparent liberality and tole-
rance has acquired so little of the authority of a principle,
that it is always ready to give way to the dread or horror
inspired by some particular sort of opinions. Within the last
two or three years several individuals have suffered imprison-
ment, for the public profession, sometimes in a very temperate
manner, of infidel opinions; and it is probable that both the
public and the government, at the first panic which arises on
the subject of Chartism or Communism, will fly to similar
means for checking the propagation of democratic or anti-
property doctrines. In this country, however, the effective
restraints on mental freedom proceed much less from the law
or the government, than from the intolerant temper of the
national mind; arising no longer from even so respectable a
source as bigotry or fanaticism, but rather from the general
habit, both in opinion and conduct, of making adherence to
custom the rule of life, and enforcing it, by social penalties,
against all persons who, without a party to back them, assert
their individual independence.


CHAPTER XI.


OF THE GROUNDS AND LIMITS OF THE LAISSER-FATRE
OR NON-INTERFERENCE PRINCIPLE.


§ 1. We have now reached the last part of our under-
taking; the discussion, so far as suited to this treatise (that
is, so far as it is a question of principle, not detail) of the
limits of the province of government; the question, to what
objects governmental intervention in the affairs of society
may or should extend, over and above those which necessarily
appertain to it. No subject has been more keenly contested
in the present age: the contest, however, has chiefly been
carried on around certain select points, with only flying ex-
cursions into the rest of the field. Those indeed who have
discussed any particular question of government interference,
such as state education (spiritual or secular), regulation of
hours of labour, a public provision for the poor, &c., have
often dealt largely in general arguments, far outstretching
the special application made of them, and have shewn a suffi-
ciently strong bias either in favour of letting things alone, or
in favour of meddling; but have seldom declared, or ap-
parently decided in their own minds, how far they would
carry either principle. The supporters of interference have
been content with asserting a general right and duty on the
part of government to intervene, wherever its intervention
would be useful: and when those who have been called the
laisser-faire school have attempted any definite limitation of
the province of government, they have usually restricted it to
the protection of person and property against force and
fraud ; a definition to which neither they nor any one else can
deliberately adhere, since it excludes, as has been shewn in a


LIMITS OF THE PROVINCE OF GOVERNMENT. 505


preceding chapter*, some of the most indispensable and
unanimously recognized of the duties of government.

Without professing entirely to supply this deficiency of a
general theory, on a question which does not, as I conceive,
admit of any universal solution, I shall attempt to afford some
little aid towards the resolution of this class of questions as
they arise, by examining, in the most general point of view
in which the subject can be considered, what are the advan-
tages, and what the evils or inconveniences, of government
interference.

We must set out by distinguishing between two kinds of
intervention by the government, which, though they may
relate to the same subject, differ widely in their nature and
effects, and require, for their justification, motives of a very
different degree of urgency. The intervention may extend
to controlling the free agency of individuals. Government
may interdict all persons from doing certain things; or from
doing them without its authorization; or may prescribe to
them certain things to be done, or a certain manner of doing
things which it is left optional with them to do or to abstain
from. This is the authoritative interference of government.
There is another kind of intervention which is not authori-
tative: when a government, instead of issuing a command
and enforcing it by penalties, adopts the course so seldom
resorted to by governments, and of which such important
use might be made, that of giving advice, and promulgating
information; or when, leaving individuals free to use their
own means of pursuing any object of general interest, the
government, not meddling with them, but not trusting the
object solely to their care, establishes, side by side with their
arrangements, an agency of its own fora like purpose. Thus,
it is one thing to maintain a Church Establishment, and
another to refuse toleration to other religions, or to persons
professing no religion, It is one thing to provide schools or


* Supra, book y. ch. 1.


506 BOOK V. CHAPTER XI. § 2.


colleges, and another to require that no person shall act as an
instructor of youth without a government license. There
might be a national bank, or a government manufactory,
without any monopoly against private banks and manufac-
tories. There might be a post-office, without penalties
against the conveyance of letters by other means. There
may be a corps of government engineers for civil pur-
poses, while the profession of a civil engineer is free
to be adopted by every one. There may be public hospitals,
without any restriction upon private medical or surgical
practice.


§ 2. It is evident, even at first sight, that the autho-
ritative form of government intervention has a much more
limited sphere of legitimate action than the other. It
requires a much stronger necessity to justify it in any case,
while there are large departments of human life from which
it must be unreservedly and imperiously excluded. What-
ever theory we adopt respecting the foundation of the social
union, and under whatever political institutions we live,
there is a circle around every individual human being, which
no government, be it that of one, of a few, or of the many,
ought to be permitted to overstep; there is a part of the life
of every person, who has come to years of discretion, within
which the individuality of that person ought to reign uncon-
trolled either by any other individual or by the public col-
lectively. That there is, or ought to be, some space in human
existence thus entrenched round, and sacred from authori-
tative intrusion, no one who professes the smallest regard to
human freedom or dignity will call in question: the point to
be determined is, where the limit should be placed; how
large a province of human life this reserved territory should
include. I apprehend that it ought to include all that part
which concerns only the life, whether inward or outward, of
the individual, and does not affect the interests of others, or
affects them only through the moral influence of example.


LIMITS OF THE PROVINCE OF GOVERNMENT. 507


With respect to the domain of the inward consciousness, the
thoughts and feelings, and as much of external conduct as is
personal only, involving no consequences, none at least of a
painful or injurious kind, to other people; I hold that it is
allowable in all, and in the more thoughtful and cultivated
often a duty, to assert and promulgate, with all the force
they are capable of, their opinion of what is good or bad,
admirable or contemptible, but not to compel others to con-
form to that opinion; whether the force used is that of extra-
legal coercion, or exerts itself by means of the law.

Even in those portions of conduct which do affect the
interests of others, the onus of making out a case always lies
upon the defenders of legal prohibitions. It is not a merely
constructive or presumptive injury to others, which will
justify the interference of law with individual freedom. To
be prevented from doing what one is inclined to,.or from
ng to one’s own judgment of what is desirable,


ays irksome, but always tends, pro tanto, to
n of the bodily or


acting accordi
is not only alw
starve the developement of some portio
mental faculties, either sensitive or active; and unless the
e of the individual goes freely with the legal re-


conscienc
either in a great or in a small degree, of


straint, it partakes,
the degradation of slavery. Scarcely any degree of utility,


short of absolute necessity, will justify a prohibitory regula-


unless it can be made to recommend itself to the general


tion,
conscience; unless persons of ordinary good intentions either


believe already, or can be induced to believe, that the thing
prohibited is a thing which they ought not to wish to do,

It is otherwise with governmental interferences which do
not restrain individual free agency. When a government
provides means for fulfilling a certain end, leaving individuals
free to avail themselves of different means if in their opinion
preferable, there is no infringement of liberty, no irksome or
degrading restraint. One of the principal objections to
ernment interference is then absent. There is, however,


gov
5
all forms of government agency, one thing which


in almost


TURIN rE


een, Cee


re


508 BOOK V. CHAPTER Ix. § 3,


is compulsory; the provision of the pecuniary means. These
are derived from taxation; or, if existing in the form of an
endowment derived from public property, they are still the
cause of as much compulsory taxation. as the sale or the
annual proceeds of the property would enable to be dispensed
with*. And the objection necessarily attaching to com-
pulsory contributions, is almost always greatly aggravated
by the expensive precautions and onerous restrictions, which
are indispensable to prevent evasion of a compulsory tax.


§ 3. A second general objection to government agency,
is that every increase of the functions devolving on the
government is an increase of its power, both in the form
of authority, and still more, in the indirect form of influence.
The importance of this consideration, in respect to political
freedom, has in general been quite sufficiently recognized, at
least in England; but many, in latter times, have been prone
to think that limitation of the powers of the government is
only essential when the government itself is badly consti-
tuted; when it does not represent the people, but is the
organ of a class, or coalition of classes; and that a govern-
ment of sufficiently popular constitution might be trusted
with any amount of power over the nation, since its power
would be only that of the nation over itself. This might be
true, if the nation, in such cases, did not practically mean a
mere majority of the nation, and if minorities were only
capable of oppressing, but not of being oppressed. Expe-
rience, however, proves that the depositaries of power who


* The only cases in which government agency involves nothing of a
compulsory nature, are the rare cases in which, without any artificial mo-
nopoly, it pays its own expenses, A bridge built with public money, on
which tolls are collected, sufficient to pay not only all current expenses,
but the interest of the original outlay, is one case in point. The govern-
ment railways in Belgium and Germany are another example. The Post
Office, if its monopoly were abolished, and it still paid its own expenses,
would be another.


LIMITS OF THE PROVINCE OF GOVERNMENT. 509


are mere delegates of the people, that is, of a majority, are
quite as ready (when they think they can count on popular
support) as any organs of oligarchy, to assume arbitrary
power, and encroach unduly on the liberty of private life.
The public collectively is abundantly ready to impose, not
only its generally narrow views of its interests, but its ab-
stract opinions, and even its tastes, as laws binding upon
individuals. And our present civilization tends so strongly
to make the power of persons acting in masses the only sub-
stantial power in society, that there never was more necessity
for surrounding individual independence of thought, speech,
and conduct, with the most powerful defences, in order to
maintain that originality of mind and individuality of cha-
racter, which are the only source of any real progress, and of
most of the qualities which make the human race much
superior to any herd of animals. Hence it is no less im-
portant in a democratic than in any other government, that
all tendency on the part of public authorities to stretch their
interference, and assume a power of any sort which can
easily be dispensed with, should be regarded with unremit-
ting jealousy. Perhaps this is even more important in a
democracy than in any other form of political society; be-
cause, where public opinion is sovereign, an individual who
is oppressed by the sovereign does not, as in most other
states of things, find some other and rival power to which he


can appeal for relief.


§4, A third general objection to government agency,
rests on the principle of the division of labour. Every addi-
tional function undertaken by the government, is a fresh
occupation imposed upon a body already overcharged with
duties. A natural consequence is that most things are ill
done; much not done at all, because the government is not
able to do it without delays which are fatal to its purpose;
that the more troublesome, and less showy, of the functions
undertaken, are postponed or neglected, and an excuse is


a


— —— i a
i aallt i Se en we cas REN eT -


510 BOOK vy. CHAPTER XI. § 4.


always ready for the neglect; while the heads of the admi-
nistration have their minds so fully taken up with official
details, in however perfunctory a manner superintended, that
they have no time or thought to spare for the great interests
of the state, and the preparation of enlarged measures of


‘social improvement.


But these inconveniences, though real and serious, result
much more from the bad organization of governments, than
from the extent or variety of the duties undertaken by them.
Government is not a name for some one functionary, or
definite number of functionaries: there may be almost any
amount of division of labour within the administrative body
itself. The evil in question is felt in great magnitude under
some of the governments on the Continent, where six or
eight men, living at the capital and known by the name of
ministers, demand that the whole public business of the
country shall pass, or be supposed to pass, under their indi-
vidual eye. But the inconvenience would be reduced to a
very manageable compass, in a country in which there was a
proper distribution of functions between the central and local
officers of government, and in which the central body was
divided into a sufficient number of departments. When
Parliament thought it expedient to confer on the government
an inspecting and partially controlling authority over rail-
ways, it did not add railways to the department of the Home
Minister, but created a Railway Board. When it deter-
mined to have a central superintending authority for pauper
administration, it established the Poor Law Commission.
There are few countries in which a greater number of func-
tions are discharged by public officers, than in some states of
the American Union, particularly the New England States:
but the division of labour in public business is extreme; most
of these officers being not even amenable to any common
superior, but performing their duties freely, under the double
check of election by their townsmen, and civil as well as
criminal responsibility to the tribunals.


ale oe


LIMITS OF THE PROVINCE OF GOVERNMENT. 511


It is, no doubt, indispensable to good government that
the chiefs of the administration, whether permanent or tem-
porary, should extend a commanding, though general, view
over the ensemble of all the interests confided, in any degree,
to the responsibility of the central power. But with a skilful
internal organization of the administrative machine, leaving
to subordinates, and as far as possible to local subordinates,
not only the execution, but to a great degree the control, of
details; holding them accountable for the results of their
acts rather than for the acts themselves, except where these
come within the cognizance of the tribunals; taking the
most effectual securities for honest and capable appoint-
ments; opening a broad path to promotion from the in-
ferior degrees of the administrative scale to the superior ;
leaving, at each step, to the functionary, a wider range in the
origination of measures, so that, in the highest grade of all,
deliberation may be concentrated on the great collective in-
terests of the country in each department; if all this were
done, the government would not probably be overburthened
by any business, in other respects fit to be undertaken by it;
though the overburthening would remain as a serious addi-
tion to the inconveniences incurred by its undertaking any


which was unfit.


§ 5. But although a better organization of governments
would greatly diminish the force of the objection to the mere
multiplication of their duties, it would still remain true that
in all the more advanced communities, the great majority of
things are worse done by the intervention of government,
than the individuals most interested in the matter would do
them, or cause them to be done, if left to themselves. The
grounds of this truth are expressed with tolerable exactness
in the popular dictum, that people understand their own
business and their own interests better, and care for them
more, than the government does, or can be expected to do.


This maxim holds true throughout the greatest part of the


512 BOOK V. CHAPTER xI. § 5.


business of life, and wherever it is true we ought to condemn
every kind of government intervention that conflicts with it.
The inferiority of government agency, for example, in any of
the common operations of mdustry or commerce, is proved
by the fact, that it is hardly ever able to maintain itself in
equal competition with individual agency, where the indi-
viduals possess the requisite degree of industrial enterprise,
and can command the necessary assemblage of means. All
the facilities which a government enjoys of access to inform-
ation; all the means which it possesses of remunerating, and
therefore of commanding, the best available talent in the
market—are not an equivalent for the one great disadvantage
of an inferior interest in the result.

It must be remembered, besides, that. even if a govern-
ment were superior in intelligence and knowledge to any
single individual in the nation, it must be inferior to all the
individuals of the nation taken together. It can neither pos-
sess in itself, nor enlist in its service, more than a portion of
the acquirements and capacities which the country contains,
applicable to any given purpose. There must be many per-
sons equally qualified for the work with those whom the
government employs, even if it selects its instruments with
no reference to any consideration but their fitness. Now
these are the very persons into whose hands, in the cases of
most common occurrence, a system of individual agency
naturally tends to throw the work, because they are capable
of doing it better and on cheaper terms than any other per-
sons. So far as this is the case, it is evident that government,
by excluding or even-by superseding individual agency, either
substitutes a less qualified instrumentality for one better
qualified, or at any rate substitutes its own mode of accom-
plishing the work, for all the variety of modes which would be
tried by a number of equally qualified persons aiming at the
same end; a competition by many degrees more propitious


to the progress of improvement, than any uniformity of
system.


SMS E SS


LIMITS OF THE PROVINCE OF GOVERNMENT. 513


§ 6. I have reserved for the last place one of the strongest
of the reasons against the extension of government agency.
Kyen if the government could comprehend within itself, in
each department, all the most eminent intellectual capacity
and active talent of the nation, it would not be the less de-
sirable that the conduct of a large portion of the affairs of
society should be left in the hands of the persons immediately
interested in them. The business of life, is an essential part
of the practical education of a people; without which, book and
school instruction, though most necessary and salutary, does
not suffice to qualify them for conduct, and for the adaptation
of means to ends. Instruction is only one of the desiderata of
mental improvement; another, almost as indispensable, is a
vigorous exercise of the active energies; labour, contrivance,
judgment, self-control: and the natural stimulus to these is
the difficulties of life. This doctrine is not to be confounded
with the complacent optimism, which represents the diffi-
culties of life as desirable things, because they call forth
qualities adapted to combat with difficulties. It is only be-
cause the difficulties exist, that the qualities which combat
with them are of any value. As practical beings it is our
business to free human life from as many as possible of its
difficulties, and not to keep up a stock of them as hunters pre-
serve game, for the exercise of pursuing it. But since the
need of active talent and practical judgment in the affairs of
life can only be diminished, and not, even on the most fayour-
able supposition, done away with, it is important that
those endowments should be cultivated not merely in a select
few, but in all, and that the cultivation should be more varied
and complete than most persons are able to find in the narrow
sphere of their merely individual interests. A people among
whom there is no habit of spontaneous action for a collective
interest—who look habitually to their government to com-
mand or prompt them in all matters of joint concern—who
expect to have everything done for them, except what can be
made an affair of mere habit and routine—have their faculties


VOL. I. 2L


514 BOOK V. CHAPTER xI. § 6.


only half developed; their education is defective in one of its
most important branches.

Not only is the cultivation of the active faculties by exer-
cise, diffused through the whole community, in itself one of
the most valuable of national possessions: it is rendered,
not less, but more, necessary, by the fact, that a high degree
of that indispensable culture is systematically kept up im
the chiefs and functionaries of the state. There cannot bea
combination of circumstances more dangerous to human
welfare, than that in which intelligence and talent are
maintained at a high standard within a governing corpora-
tion, but starved and discouraged outside the pale. Such a
system, more completely than any other, embodies the idea
of despotism, by arming with intellectual superiority as an
additional weapon, those who have already the legal power.
It approaches as nearly as the organic difference between
human beings and other animals admits, to the government
of sheep by their shepherd, without anything like so strong
an interest as the shepherd has in the thriving condition of
the flock. The only security against political slavery, is the
check maintained over governors, by the diffusion of intelli-
gence, activity, and public spirit among the governed. Exxpe-
rience proves the extreme difficulty of permanently keeping up
asufficiently high standard of those qualities; a difficulty which
increases, as the advance of civilization and security removes
one after another of the hardships, embarrassments, and
dangers against which individuals had formerly no resource but
in their own strength, skill, and courage. It is therefore of
supreme importance that all classes of the community, down
to the lowest, should have much to do for themselves; that
as great a demand should be made upon their intelligence and
virtue as it is in any respect equal to; that the government
should not only leave as much as possible to their own
faculties the conduct of whatever concerns themselves alone,
but should suffer them, or rather encourage them, to manage
as many as possible of their joint concerns by voluntary co-


'
|
|


—


LIMITS OF THE PROVINCE OF GOVERNMENT. 515


operation: since the discussion and management of collective
interests is the great school of that public spirit, and the
great source of that intelligence of public affairs, which are
always regarded as the distinctive character of the public of
free countries.

A democratic constitution, not supported by democratic
institutions in detail, but confined to the ,central govern-
ment, not only is not political freedom, but often creates a
spirit precisely the reverse, carrying down to the lowest
grade in society the desire and ambition of political domi-
nation. In some countries the desire of the people is for not
being tyrannized over, but in others it is merely for an equal
chance to everybody of tyrannizing. Unhappily this last
state of the desires is fully as natural to mankind as the for-
mer, and in many of the conditions even of civilized huma-
nity, is far more largely exemplified. In proportion as the
people are accustomed to manage their affairs by their
Own active intervention, instead of leaving them to the
government, their desires will turn to repelling tyranny,
ratlier than to tyrannizing: while in proportion as all real
initiative and direction resides in the government, and indi-
viduals habitually feel and act as under its perpetual tutelage,
popular institutions develope in them not the desire of free-
dom, but an unmeasured appetite for place and power;
diverting the intelligence and activity of the country from its
principal business, to a wretched competition for the selfish
prizes and the petty vanities of office.


§ 7. The preceding are the principal reasons, of a gene-
ral character, in favour of restricting to the narrowest com-
pass the intervention of a public authority im the business of
the community: and few will dispute the more than suffi-
ciency of these reasons, to throw, in every instance, the bur-

naking out a strong case, not on those who resist
then or 1 g g :
hose who recommend, government interference.
put on g
Laisser-faire, in short, should be the general practice: every


2D 2


516 BOOK V. CHAPTER xI. § 7.


departure from it, unless required by some great good, is a
certain evil.

The degree in which the maxim, even in the cases
to which it is most manifestly applicable, has heretofore
been infringed by governments, future ages will probably
have difficulty in crediting. Some idea may be formed of it
from the description by M. Dunoyer* of the restraints im-
posed on the operations of manufacture under the old govern-
ment of France, by the meddling and regulating spirit of
legislation.

“La société exercait sur la fabrication la juridiction la
plus illimitée et la plus arbitraire: elle disposait sans scrupule
des facultés des fabricants; elle décidait qui pourrait travail-
ler, quelle chose on pourrait faire, quels matériaux on devrait
employer, quels procédés il faudrait suivre, quelles formes on
donnerait aux produits, ete. Il ne suffisait pas de faire bien,
de faire mieux, il fallait faire suivant les régles. Qui ne
connait ce réglement de 1670, qui prescrivait de saisir et de
clouer au poteau, avec le nom des auteurs, les marchandises
non conformes aux régles tracées, et qui, a la seconde récidive,
voulait que les fabricants y fussent attachés eux-mémes? Il
ne s’agissait pas de consulter le gotit des consommateurs, mais
de se conformer aux volontés de la loi. Des légions d’in-
specteurs, de commissaires, de contrdleurs, de jurés, de gardes,
étaient chargés de les faire exécuter; on brisait les métiers,
on brilait les produits qui n’y étaient pas conformes: les
améliorations étaient punies; on mettait les inventeurs a
Pamende. On soumettait a des régles différentes la fabrica-
tion des objets destinés 4 la consommation intérieure et celle
des produits destinés au commerce étranger. Un artisan
n’était pas le maitre de choisir le lieu de son établissement,
ni de travailler en toute saison, ni de travailler pour tout le
monde. Il existe un décret du 30 Mars 1700, qui borne a
dix-huit villes le nombre des lieux ot Von pourra faire des


* De la Liberté du Travail, vol. i. pp. 353—4.


= ne
2 Art aerate eR SE


LIMITS OF THE PROVINCE OF GOVERNMENT. 517


bas au métier; un arrét du 18 Juin 1723 enjoint aux fabri-
cants de Rouen de suspendre leurs travaux du ler Juillet au
15 Septembre, afin de faciliter ceux de la récolte; Louis XIV.,
quand il voulut entreprendre la colonnade du Louvre, défendit
aux particuliers d’employer des ouvriers sans sa permission,
Sous peine de 10,000 livres d’amende, et aux ouvriers de
travailler pour les particuliers, sous peine, pour la premiére
fois, de la prison, et pour la seconde, des galéres.”

That these and similar regulations were not a dead letter,
and that the officious and vexatious meddling was prolonged
down to the French Revolution, we have the testimony of
Roland, the Girondist minister*. “TI have seen,” says he,
“eighty, ninety, a hundred pieces of cotton or woollen stuff
cut up and completely destroyed. I have witnessed similar
scenes every week for a number of years. I have seen manu-
factured goods confiscated ; heavy fines laid on the manufac-
turers; some pieces of fabric were burnt in public places, and
at the hours of market: others were fixed to the pillory, with
the name of the manufacturer inscribed upon them, and he
himself was threatened with the pillory, in case of a second
offence. All this was done under my eyes, at Rouen, in
conformity: with existing regulations, or ministerial orders.
What crime deserved so cruel a punishment? Some defects
in the materials employed, or in the texture of the fabric, or
even in some of the threads of the warp.

“I have frequently seen manufacturers visited by a band
of satellites who put all in confusion in their establishments,
spread terror in their families, cut the stuffs from the frames,
tore off the warp from the looms, and carried them away as
proofs of infrmgement; the manufacturers were summoned,
tried, and condemned; their goods confiscated; copies of
their judgment of confiscation posted up in every public
place; fortune, reputation, credit, all was lost and destroyed.


* T quote at second hand, from Mr. Carey’s Essay on the Rate of Wages,
pp. 195—6.


eae,


518 BOOK V. CHAPTER xI. § 7.


And for what offence? Because they had made of worsted, a
kind of cloth called shag, such as the English used to manu-
facture, and eyen sell in France, while the French regulations
stated that that kind of cloth should be made with mohair.
I have seen other manufacturers treated in the same way,
because they had made camlets of a particular width, used
in England and Germany, for which there was a great de-
mand from Spain, Portugal, and other countries, and from
several parts of France, while the French regulations pre-
scribed other widths for camlets.”

The time is gone by, when such applications as these of
the principle of “paternal government” would be attempted,
in even the least enlightened country of the European com-
monwealth of nations. In such cases as those cited, all the
general objections to government interference are valid, and
several of them in nearly their highest degree. But we must
now turn to the second part of our task, and direct our
attention to cases, in which some of those general objections
are altogether absent, while those which can never be got
rid of entirely, are overruled by counter-considerations of
still greater importance.

We have observed that, as a general rule, the business of
life is better performed when those who have an immediate in-
terest in itare left to take their own course, uncontrolled either

‘by the mandate of the law or by the meddling of any public
functionary. The persons, or some of the persons, who do the
work, are likely to be better judges than the government, of
the means of attaining the particular end at which they aim.
Were we to suppose, what is not very probable, that the
government has possessed itself of the best knowledge which
had been acquired up to a given time by the persons most
skilled in the occupation; even then, the individual agent has
so much stronger and more direct an interest in the result,
that the means are far more likely to be improved and per-
fected if left to his uncontrolled choice. But if the workman is
generally the best selector of means, can it be affirmed with


sonnet ahs


wore:


LIMITS OF THE PROVINCE OF GOVERNMENT. 519


the same universality, that the consumer, or person served, is
the most competent judge of the end? Is the buyer always
qualified to judge of the commodity? If not, the presump-
tion in favour of the competition of the market does not
apply to the case; and if the commodity be one, in the quality
of which society has much at stake, the balance of advantages
may be in favour of some mode or degree of intervention, by
the authorized representatives of the collective interest of the
state.


§ 8. Now, the proposition that the consumer is a com-
petent judge of the commodity, can be admitted only with
numerous abatements and exceptions. He is generally the
best judge (though even this is not true universally,) of the
material objects produced for his use. These are destined to
supply some physical want, or gratify some taste or inclina-
tion, respecting which wants or inclinations there 1s no appeal
from the person who feels them; or they are the means and
appliances of some occupation, for the use of the persons
engaged in it, who may be presumed to be judges of the
things required in their own habitual employment. But there
are other things, of the worth of which the demand of the
market is by no means a test; things of which the utility
does not consist in ministering to inclinations, nor in serving
the daily uses of life, and the want of which is least felt
where the need is greatest. This is peculiarly true of those
things which are chiefly useful as tending to raise the charac-
ter of human beings. The uncultivated cannot be competent
judges of cultivation. Those who most need to be made
wiser and better, usually desire it least, and if they desired it,
would be incapable of finding the way to it by their own
lights. It will continually happen, on the voluntary system,
that, the end not being desired, the means will not be pro-
vided at all, or that, the persons requiring improvement
having an imperfect or altogether erroneous conception of
what they want, the supply called forth by the demand of the


remnant


520 BOOK y. CHAPTER xI. § 5.


market will be anything but what is really required. Now
any well-intentioned and tolerably civilized government may
think without presumption that it does or ought to possess
a degree of cultivation above the average of the community
which it rules, and that it should therefore be capable of
offermg better education and better instruction to the people,
than the greater number of them would spontaneously select.
Education, therefore, is one of those things which it is admis-
sible in principle that a government should provide for the
people. The case is one to which the reasons of the non-in-
terference principle do not necessarily or universally extend*.


* Tn opposition to these opinions, a writer, with whom on many points I
agree, but whose hostility to government intervention seems to me too in-
discriminate and unqualified, M. Dunoyer, observes, that instruction, however
good in itself, can only be useful to the public, in so far as they are willing
to receive it, and that the best proof that the instruction is suitable to their
wants, is its success as a pecuniary enterprise. This argument seems no
more conclusive respecting instruction for the mind, than it would be respect-
ing medicine for the body. No medicine will do the patient any good if he
cannot be induced to talke it; but we are not bound to admit as a corollary
from this, that the patient will select the right medicine without assistance.
Ts it not possible that a recommendation, from any quarter which he respects,
may induce him to accept a better medicine than he would spontaneously
have chosen? This is, in respect to education, the very point in debate.
Without doubt, instruction which is so far in advance of the people that they
cannot be induced to avail themselves of it, is to them of no more worth
than if it did not exist. But between what they spontaneously choose, and
what they will refuse to accept when offered, there is a breadth of interval
proportioned to their deference for the recommender. Besides, a thing of
which the public are bad judges, may require to be shown to them and
pressed on their attention for a long time, and to prove its advantages by
long experience, before they learn to appreciate it, yet they may learn at
last; which they might never have done, if the thing had not been thus
obtruded upon them in act, but only recommended in theory. Now, a
pecuniary speculation cannot wait years, or perhaps generations, for success ;
it must succeed rapidly, or not at all. Another consideration which M.
Dunoyer seems to have overlooked, is, that institutions and modes of tuition
which never could be made sufficiently popular to repay, with a profit, the
expenses incurred on them, may be invaluable to the many by giving the
highest quality of education to the few, and keeping up the perpetual suc-
cession of superior minds by whom lmowledge is advanced, and the com-
munity urged forward in civilization.


LIMITS OF THE PROVINCE OF GOVERNMENT. 52)


With regard to elementary education, the exception to
ordinary rules may, I conceive, justifiably be carried still
further. There are certain primary elements and means of
knowledge, which it is in the highest degree desirable that
all human beings born into the community should acquire
during childhood. If their parents, or those on whom they
depend, have the power of obtaining for them this instruction,
and fail to do it, they commit a double breach of duty: towards
the children themselves, and towards the members of the
community generally, who are all lable to suffer seriously
from the consequences of ignorance and want of education
in their fellow citizens. It is therefore an allowable exercise
of the powers of government, to impose on parents the legal
obligation of giving elementary instruction to children. This
however cannot fairly be done, without taking measures to
ensure that such instruction shall be always accessible to
them, either gratuitously or at a trifling expense.

It may indeed be objected that the education of children
is one of those expenses which parents, even of the labouring
class, ought to defray; that it is desirable that they should
feel it incumbent on them to provide by their own means for
the fulfilment of their duties, and that by giving education
at the cost of others, just as much as by giving subsistence,
the standard of necessary wages is proportionally lowered,
and the springs of exertion and self-restraint in so much
relaxed. To this argument there could be no reply, if the
question were that of substituting a public provision for what
individuals would otherwise do for themselves. If all parents
im the labouring class recognized and practised the duty of
giving instruction to their children at their own expense, no
one would seek to undermine so virtuous a habit by volun-
teering a needless assistance. It is because parents do not
practise this duty, and do not include education among those
necessary expenses which their wages must provide for, that
the general rate of wages is not high enough to bear those
expenses, and that they must be borne from some other source.


529 BOOK Vv. CHAPTER XI. § 8.


And this is not one of the cases in which the tender of help
perpetuates the state of things which renders help necessary.
Instruction, when it is really such, does not enervate, but
strengthens as well as enlarges the active faculties: in what-
ever manner acquired, its effect on the mind is favourable to
the spirit of independence: and when, unless had gratuitously,
it would not. be had at all, help in this form has the opposite
tendency to that which in so many other cases makes it
objectionable; it is help towards doing without help.

In England, and most European countries, elementary
instruction cannot be paid for, at its full cost, from the com-
mon wages of unskilled labour, and would not if it could.
The alternative therefore is not between government, and
private speculation, but between a government provision and
voluntary charity: between interference by government, and
interference by associations of individuals, subscribing their
own money for the purpose, like the two great School
Societies. It is, of course, not desirable that anything should
be done by funds derived from compulsory taxation, which is
already sufficiently well done by individual liberality. How
far this is. the case with school instruction, is, in each particu-
lar instance, a question of fact. The education provided in
this country on the voluntary principle has of late been so
much discussed, that it is needless in this place to criticize it
minutely, and I shall merely express my conviction, that even
in quantity it is, and is likely to remain, altogether insufficient,
while in quality, though with some slight tendency to im-
provement, it is never good except by some rare accident, and
generally so bad as to be little more than nominal. I hold it
therefore the duty of the government to supply the defect, by
providing elementary schools, accessible to all the children of
the poor, either freely, or for a payment too inconsiderable to
be sensibly felt, but which it might be proper to demand,
merely in recognition of a principle: the remainder of the
cost to be defrayed, as in Scotland, by a local rate, that the
inhabitants of the locality might have a stronger interest in


|
|
|
|


LIMITS OF THE PROVINCE OF GOVERNMENT. 523


watching over the management, and checking negligence and
abuse.

One thing must be strenuously insisted on; that the go-
vernment must claim no monopoly for its education, either
in the lower or in the higher branches; must exert nel-
ther authority nor influence to induce the people to resort
to its teachers in preference to others, and must confer no
peculiar advantages on those who have been instructed by
them. Though the government teachers will probably be
superior to the average of private instructors, they will not
embody all the knowledge and sagacity to be found in all
instructors taken together, and it is desirable to leave open as
many roads as possible to the desired end. Nor is it to be
endured that a government should, either de jure or de facto,
have a complete control over the education of the whole peo-
ple. To possess such a control, and actually exert it, is to
be a despot. A government which can mould the opinions
and sentiments of the people from their youth upwards, can
do with them whatever it pleases. Though a government,
therefore, may, and in many cases ought to, establish schools
and colleges, it must neither compel nor bribe any. person to
come to them; nor ought the power of individuals to set up
rival establishments, to depend in any degree upon its autho-
rization. It may be justified in requiring from all the people
that they shall possess instruction im certain things, but
not in prescribing to them how or from whom they shall


obtain it.


§ 9, In the matter of education, the intervention of govern-
ment is justifiable because the case is not one in which the
interest and judgment of the consumer are a sufficient secu-
rity for the goodness of the commodity. Let us now con-
sider another class of cases, where there is no person in the
situation of a consumer, and where the interest and judg-
ment to be relied on are those of the agent himself; as in
the conduct of any business in which he is exclusively


524 BOOK V. CHAPTER xi. § 9.


interested, or in entering into any contract or engagement
by which he himself is to be bound.

The ground of the practical principle of non-interfe-
rence must here be, that most persons take a juster and
more intelligent view of their own interest, and of the means
of promoting it, than can either be prescribed to them by a
general enactment of the legislature, or pointed out in the
particular case by a public functionary. The maxim is
unquestionably sound as a general rule; but there is no
difficulty in perceiving some very large and conspicuous
exceptions to it. These may be classed under several heads.

First :—The mdiyidual who is presumed to be the best
judge of his own interests may be incapable of judging or
acting for himself; may be a lunatic, an idiot, an infant: or
though not wholly incapable, may be of immature years and
judgment. In this case the foundation of the Jaisser-faire
principle breaks down entirely. The person most interested
is not the best judge of the matter, nor a competent judge at
all. Insane persons are everywhere regarded as proper
objects of the care of the state. In the case of children and
young persons, it is common to say, that though they cannot
judge for themselves, they have their parents or other relatives
to judge for them. But this removes the question into a
different category; making it no longer a question whether
the government should interfere with individuals in the
direction of their own conduct and interests, but whether it
should leave absolutely in their power the conduct and interests
of somebody else. Parental power is as susceptible of abuse
as any other power, and is, as a matter of fact, constantly
abused. If laws do not succeed in preventing parents
from brutally ill-treating, and even from murdering their
children, far less ought it to be presumed that the interests
of children will never be sacrificed, in more commonplace and
less revolting ways, to the selfishness or the mistakes of their
parents. Whatever it can be clearly seen that parents ought
to do or forbear for the interest of children, the law is war-


LIMITS OF THE PROVINCE OF GOVERNMENT, 525


ranted, if itis able, in compelling to be done or forborne, and
is generally bound to do so. To take an example from the
peculiar province of political economy; it is right that chil-
dren, and young persons not yet arrived at maturity, should
be protected, so far as the eye and hand of the state can reach,
from being over-worked. lLabouring for too many hours in
the day, or on work beyond their strength, should not be per-
mitted to them, for if permitted it may always be compelled.
Freedom of contract, in the case of children, is but another
word for freedom of coercion. Education also, the best
which circumstances admit of their receiving, is not a thing
which parents or relatives, from indifference, jealousy, or
avarice, should have it in their power to withhold.

‘The reasons for legal intervention in favour of chil-
dren, apply not less strongly to the case of those un-
fortunate slaves and victims of the most brutal part of
mankind, the lower animals. It is by the grossest misunder-
standing of the principles of liberty, that the infliction of
exemplary punishment on ruffianism practised towards these
defenceless creatures, has been treated as a meddling by
government with things beyond its province; an interference
with domestic life. ‘The domestic life of domestic tyrants 1s
one of the things which it is the most imperative on the law
to interfere with; and it is to be regretted that metaphysical
scruples respecting the nature and source of the authority of
government, should induce many warm supporters of laws
against cruelty to animals, to seek for a justification of such
laws in the incidental consequences of the indulgence of
ferocious habits, to the interests of human beings, rather than
in the intrinsic merits of the case itself. What it would be
the duty of a human being, possessed of the requisite physical
strength, to prevent by force if attempted in his presence, it
cannot be less incumbent on society generally to repress.
The existing laws of England on the subject: are chiefly
defective in the trifling, often almost nominal, maximum, to
which the penalty even in the worst cases is limited; a fort-
night’s imprisonment, or a fine of forty shillings.


526 BOOK V. CHAPTER XI. $9.


Among those members of the community whose freedom
of contract ought to be controlled by the legislature for their
own protection, on account (it is said) of their dependent posi-
tion, it is frequently proposed to include women: and in the
recent Factory Act, their labour, in common with that of
young persons, has been placed under peculiar restrictions.
But the classing together, for this and other purposes, of women
and children, appears to me both indefensible im principle and
mischievous in practice. Children below a certain age cannot
judge or act for themselves; up to a considerably greater age
they are inevitably more or less disqualified for doing so; but
women are as capable as men of appreciating and managing
their own concerns, and the only hindrance to their doing so
arises from the injustice of their present social position. So
long as the law makes everything which the wife acquires, the
property of the husband, while by compelling her to live
with him it forces her to submit to almost any amount of
moral and even physical tyranny which he may choose to
inflict, there is some ground for regarding every act done by
her as done under coercion: but it is the great error of re-
formers and philanthropists in our time, to nibble at the con-
sequences of unjust power, instead of redressing the injustice
itself. If women had as absolutea control as men have, over
their own persons and their own patrimony or acquisitions,
there would be no plea for limiting their hours of labouring
for themselves, in order that they might have time to labour
for the husband, in what is called, by the advocates of restric-
tion, his home. Women employed in factories are the only
women in the labouring rank of life whose position is not
that of slaves and drudges; precisely because they cannot
easily be compelled to work and earn wages in factories
against their will. For improving the condition of women,
it should, on the contrary, be an object to give them the
readiest access to independent industrial employment, instead
of closing, either entirely or partially, that which is already


top)
open to them.


SPP REE POOL


LIMITS OF THE PROVINCE OF GOVERNMENT. 527


§ 10. A-second exception to the doctrine that individuals
are the best judges of their own interest, is when an in-
dividual attempts to judge irrevocably now, what will be
best for his interest at some future and distant time. The
presumption in favour of individual judgment is only legiti-
mate, where the judgment is grounded on actual, and
especially on present, personal experience; not where it is
formed antecedently to experience, and not suffered to be
reversed even after experience has condemned it. When
persons have bound themselves by a contract, not simply to
do some one thing, but to continue doing something for ever
or for a prolonged period, without any power of revoking the
engagement, the presumption which their perseverance in that
course of conduct would otherwise raise in favour of its being
advantageous to them, does not exist; and any such presump-
tion which can be grounded on their having voluntarily entered
into the contract, perhaps at an early age, and without any real
knowledge of what they undertook, is commonly next to null.
The practical maxim of leaving contracts free, is not applicable
without great limitations in case of engagements in perpe-
tuity; and the law should be extremely jealous of such
engagements ; should refuse its sanction to them, when the
obligations they impose are such as the contracting party
cannot be a competent judge of; if it ever does sanction
them, it should take every possible security for their being
contracted with foresight and deliberation ; and in compen-
sation for not permitting the parties themselves to revoke
their engagement, should grant them a release from it, on
a sufficient case being made out before an impartial


authority.


§ 11. The third exception which I shall notice, to the
doctrine that government cannot manage the affairs of indi-
viduals as well as the individuals themselves, has reference
to the great class of cases in which the individuals can only
manage the concern by delegated agency, and in which the


528 BOOK v. CHAPTER xI. § 11.


so-called private management is, in point of fact, hardly better
entitled to be called management by the persons interested,
than administration by a public officer. Whatever, if left to
spontaneous agency, can only be done by joint-stock associa-
tions, will often be as well, and sometimes better done, as far
as the actual work is concerned, by the state. Government
management is, indeed, proverbially jobbing, careless, and
ineffective; but so likewise has generally been joint-stock
management. ‘The directors of a joint-stock company, it is
true, are always shareholders; but also the members of a
government are invariably tax-payers; and in the case of
directors, no more than in that of governments, is their pro-
portional share of the benefits of good management, equal to
the interest they may possibly have in mismanagement, even
without reckoning the interest of their ease. It may be ob-
jected, that the shareholders, in their collective character,
exercise a certain control over the directors, and have almost
always full power to remove them from office. Practically,
howeyer, the difficulty of exercising this power is found to
be so great, that it is hardly ever exercised except in cases of
such flagrantly unskilful, or, at least, unsuccessful manage-
ment, as would generally produce the ejection from office of
managers appointed by the government. Against the security
afforded by meetings of shareholders, and by their individual
inspection and enquiries, may be placed the greater publicity
and more active discussion and comment, to be expected in
free countries with regard to affairs in which the general
government takes part. The defects, therefore, of govern-
ment management, do not seem to be necessarily much
greater, if necessarily greater at all, than those of manage-
ment by joint-stock.

The true reasons in favour of leaving to voluntary asso-
ciations all such things as they are competent to perform,
would exist in equal strength if it were certain that the work
itself would be as well or better done by public officers.
These reasons have been already pointed out: the mischief


LIMITS OF THE PROVINCE OF GOVERNMENT. 529


of overloading the chief functionaries of government with
demands on their attention, and diverting them from duties
which they alone can discharge, to objects which can be suf-
ficiently well attained without them; the danger of unneces-
sarily swelling the direct power and indirect influence of
government, and multiplying occasions of collision between
its agents and private citizens; and the still greater inexpe-
diency of concentrating in a dominant bureaucracy, all the
skill and experience in the management of large interests,
and all the power of organized action, existing in the com-
munity ; a practice which keeps the citizens in a relation to
the government like that of children to their guardians, and
is a main cause of the inferior capacity for political life which
has hitherto characterized the over-governed countries of the
Continent, whether with or without the forms of represen-
tative government*.

But although, for these reasons, most things which are
likely to be even tolerably done by voluntary associations,
should, generally speaking, be left to them; it does not follow
that the manner in which those associations perform their
work should be entirely uncontrolled by the government.
There are many cases in which the agency, of whatever
nature, by which a service is performed, is certain, from the
nature of the case, to be virtually single; in which a prac-


* A parallel case may be found in the distaste for politics, and absence
of public spirit, by which women, as a class, are characterized in the pre-
sent state of society, and which is often felt and complained of by political
reformers, without, in general, making them willing to recognize, or desir-
ous to remove, its cause. It obviously arises from their being taught, both
by institutions, and by the whole of their education, to regard themselves
as entirely apart from politics. Wherever they have been politicians, they
have shown as great interest in the subject, and as great aptitude for it,
according to the spirit of their time, as the men with whom they were
cotemporaries: in that period of history (for example) in which Isabella of
Castile and Elizabeth of England were, not rare exceptions, but merely bril-
liant examples of a spirit and capacity very largely diffused among women
of high station and cultivation in Europe.


9
VOL. II. 2M


530 BOOK Vv. CHAPTER xi. $11.


tical monopoly, with all the power it confers of taxing the
community, cannot be prevented from existing. I have
already more than once adverted to the case of the gas and
water companies, among which, though perfect freedom is
allowed to competition, none really takes place, and practi-
cally they are found to be even more irresponsible, and unap-
proachable by individual complaints, than the government.
There are the expenses without the advantages of plurality of
agency; and the charge made for services which cannot be dis-
pensed with, is,in substance, quite as much compulsory taxa-
tion as if imposed by law: there are few householders who
make any distinction between their “ water rate” and their
other local taxes. In the case of these particular services, the
reasons preponderate in favour of their being performed, like
the paving and cleansing of the streets, not certainly by the
general government of the state, but by the municipal autho-
rities of the town, and the expense defrayed, as even now it in
fact is, bya local rate. But in the many analogous cases which
it is best to resign to voluntary agency, the community needs
some other security for the fit performance of the service
than the interest of the managers; and it is the part of
government, either to subject the business to reasonable con-
ditions for the general advantage, or to retain such power
over it, that the profits of the monopoly may at least be
obtained for the public. This applies to the case of a road,
a canal, or a railway. These are always, in a great degree,
practical monopolies ; and a government which concedes such
monopoly unreservedly to a private company, does much the
same thing as if it allowed an individual or an association to
levy any tax they chose, for their own benefit, on all the
malt produced in the country, or on all the cotton imported
into it. To make the concession for a limited time is gene-
rally justifiable, on the principle which justifies patents for
inventions: but the state should either reserve to itself a
reversionary property in such public works, or should retain,
and freely exercise, the right of fixing a maximum of fares


ere


IC _- SOREN 2 Pee een
IL aT TT


|
|


LIMITS OF THE PROVINCE OF GOVERNMENT. 531


and charges, and, from time to time, varying that maximum.
It is perhaps necessary to remark, that the state may be the
proprietor of canals or railways without itself working them ;
and that they will almost always be better worked by means


of a company, renting the railway or canal for a limited period
from the state.


$12. To a fourth case of exception I must request parti-
cular attention, it being one to which, as it appears to me,
the attention of political economists has not yet been suffi-
ciently drawn. There are matters in which the interference
of law is required, not to overrule the judgment of indiyi-
duals respecting their own interest, but to give effect to that
Judgment; they being unable to give effect to it, except by
concert, which concert again cannot be effectual unless it
receives validity and sanction from the law. For illustration,
and without prejudging the particular point, I may advert
to the question of diminishing the hours of labour. Let us
suppose, what is at least supposable, whether it be the fact
or not—that a general reduction of the hours of factory
labour from twelve to ten, would be for the advantage of the
workpeople: that they would receive as high wages, or nearly
as high, for ten hours labour as they receive for twelve. If
this would be the result, and if the operatives generally are
convinced that it would, the limitation, some may say, will be
adopted spontaneously, and there cannot be any need for
enforcing it bya legal prohibition. I answer, that it will not
be adopted unless the body of operatives bind themselves to
one another to abide by it. A workman who refused to work
more than ten hours while there were others who worked
twelve, would either not be employed at all, or if employed,
must submit to lose one-sixth of his wages. However con-
vinced, therefore, he may be that it is the interest of the class
to work short time, it’ is contrary to his own interest to set
the example, unless he is well assured that all or most others
will follow it. But suppose a general agreement of the whole
2M 2


532 BOOK V. CHAPTER xI. § 12.


class: might not this be effectual without the sanction of
law? Not unless enforced by opinion with a rigour practically
equal to that of law. For however beneficial the observance
of the regulation might be to the class collectively, the im-
mediate interest of every individual would lie in violating it:
and the more numerous those were who adhered to the rule,
the more would individuals gain by departing from it. If
nearly all restricted themselves to ten hours, those who
chose to work for twelve would gain all the advantage of the
restriction, together with the profit of infringing it; they
would get twelve hours wages for ten hours work, and two
hours wages besides. I grant that if a large majority adhered
to the ten hours, there would be no harm done: the benefit
would be, in the main, secured to the class, while those indi-
viduals who preferred to work harder and earn more, would
have an opportunity of doing so. This certainly would be
the state of things to be wished for; and assuming that a
reduction of hours without any diminution of wages could
take place without expelling the commodity from some of
its markets—which is in every particular instance a question
of fact, not of principle—the manner in which it would be
most desirable that this effect should be brought about,
would be by a quiet change in the general custom of the
trade; short hours becoming, by spontaneous choice, the
general practice, but those who chose to deviate from it
having the fullest liberty to do so. Probably, however, so
many would prefer the twelve hours work on the improved
terms, that the limitation could not be maintained as a gene-
ral practice: what some did from choice, others would soon be
obliged to do from necessity, and those who had chosen long
hours for the sake of increased wages, would be forced in the
end to work long hours for no greater wages than before.
Assuming then that it really would be the interest of each
to work only ten hours if he could be assured that all others
would do the same, there might be no means of their attaining
this object but by converting their supposed mutual agree-


7


LIMITS OF THE PROVINCE OF GOVERNMENT. 533


ment into an engagement under penalty, by consenting to
have it enforced by law. I do not mean to express an
opinion in favour of such an enactement, but it serves to ex-
emplify the manner in which classes of persons may need the
assistance of law, to give effect to their deliberate collective
opinion of their own interest, by affording to every individual
a guarantee that his competitors will pursue the same course,
without which he cannot safely adopt it himself.

Another exemplification of the same principle, and one of
great practical moment, is afforded by what is known as the
Wakefield system of colonization. This system is grounded
on the important principle, that the degree of productiyeness
of land and labour depends on their being in a due propor-
tion to one another; that ifa few persons, in a newly-settled
country, attempt to occupy and appropriate a large district,
or if each labourer becomes too soon an occupier and culti-
vator of land, there is a loss of productive power, and a great
retardation of the progress of the colony in wealth and civiliza-
tion: that nevertheless the instinct (if such it may be called)
of appropriation, and the feelings associated in old countries
with landed proprietorship, induce almost every emigrant
to take possession of as much land as he has the means of
acquiring, and every labourer to become at once a proprietor,
cultivating his own land with no other aid than that of his
family. If this propensity to the immediate possession of
land could be in some degree restrained, and each labourer
induced to work a certain number of years on hire before he
became a landed proprietor, a perpetual stock of hired
labourers could be maintained, available for roads, canals,
works of irrigation, &c. and for the establishment and carry-
ing on of the different branches of town industry; whereby
the labourer, when he did at last become a landed proprietor,
would find his land much more valuable, through access to
markets, and facility of obtaining hired labour. Mr. Wake-
field therefore proposed to check the premature occupation of
land, and dispersion of the people, by putting upon all unap-


534 BOOK Vv. CHAPTER xi. § 12.


propriated lands a rather high price, the proceeds of which
were to be expended in conveying emigrant labourers from
the mother country.

This salutary provision however has been objected to, in
the name and on the authority of what was represented as the
the great principle of political economy, that individuals are
the best judges of their own interest. It was said, that when
things are left to themselves, land is appropriated and occu-
pied by the spontaneous choice of individuals, in the quantities
and at the times most advantageous to each person, and
therefore to the community generally; and that to interpose
artificial obstacles to their obtaining land, is to prevent them
from adopting the course which in their own judgment is
most beneficial to them, from a self-conceited notion of the
legislator, that he knows what is most for their interests, better
than they do themselves. Now this is a complete misunder-
standing, either of the system itself, or of the principle with
which it is alleged to conflict. The oversight is similar to
that which we have just seen exemplified on the subject of
hours of labour. However beneficial it might be to the
colony in the aggregate, and to each individual composing it,
that no one should occupy more land than he can properly
cultivate, nor become a proprietor until there are other
labourers ready to take his place in working for hire; if can
never be the interest of an individual to exercise this forbear-
ance, unless he is assured that others will do so too. Sur-
rounded by settlers who have each their thousand acres, how
is he benefited by restricting himself to fifty? or what does
he gain by deferring the acquisition altogether for a few years,
if all other labourers rush to conyert their first earnings into
estates in the wilderness, several miles apart from one an-
other? If they, by seizing on land, prevent the formation of
a class of labourers for wages, he will not, by postponing the
time of his becoming a proprietor, be enabled to employ the
land with any greater advantage when he does obtain it; to
what end therefore should he place himself in what will


agers 22


Sem ee


LIMITS OF THE PROVINCE OF GOVERNMENT. 535


appear, to him and others, a position of inferiority, by remain-
ing a labourer when all around him are proprietors? It is
the interest of each to do what is good for all, but only if
others will do likewise.

The principle that each is the best judge of his own inte-
rest, understood as these objectors understand it, would
prove that governments ought not to fulfil any of their
acknowledged duties—ought not, in fact, to exist at all. It
is greatly the interest of the community, collectively and
individually, not to rob or defraud one another: but there is
not the less necessity for laws to punish robbery and fraud ;
because, though it is the interest of each that nobody should
rob or cheat, it cannot be any one’s interest to refrain from
robbing and cheating others when all others are permitted
to rob and cheat him. Penal laws exist at all, chiefly for
this reason, because an eyen unanimous opinion that a cer-
tain line of conduct is for the general interest, does not make
it people’s individual interest to adhere to that line of conduct.


§ 13. Fifthly; the argument against government in-
terference, grounded on the maxim that individuals are
the best judges of their own interest, cannot apply to the
very large class of cases, in which those acts of individuals,
over which the government claims control, are not done by
those individuals for their own mterest, but for the interest
of other people. This includes, among other things, the
important and much agitated subject of public charity.
Though individuals should, in general, be left to do for
themselves whatever it can reasonably be expected that they
should be capable of doing, yet when they are at any rate
not to be left to themselves, but to be helped by other
people, the question arises, whether it is better that they
should receive this help exclusively from mdividuals, and
therefore uncertainly and casually, or by systematic ar-
rangements, in which society acts through its organ the


state.


536 BOOK V. CHAPTER xI. $§ 13.


This brings us to. the subject of Poor Laws; a subject
which would be of very minor importance if the habits of
all classes of the people were temperate and prudent, and
the diffusion of property satisfactory; but of the greatest
moment in a state of things so much the reverse of this, in
both points, as that which the British islands present.

Apart from any metaphysical considerations respecting
the foundation of morals or of the social union, it will be
admitted to be right that human beings should help one
another; and the more so, in proportion to the urgency of
the need: and none needs help so urgently as one who is
starving. The claim to help, therefore, created by destitution
is one of the strongest which can exist; and there is prima
facie the amplest reason for making the relief of so extreme
an exigency as certain to those who require it, as by any
arrangements of society it can be made.

On the other hand, in all cases of helping, there are two
sets of consequences to be considered ; the consequences of
the assistance itself, and the consequences of relying on the
assistance. The former are generally beneficial, but the
latter, for the most part, injurious; so much so, in many
cases, as greatly to outweigh the value of the benefit. And this
is never more likely to happen than in the very cases where
the need of help is the most intense. There are few things
for which it is more mischievous that people should rely on
the habitual aid of others, than for the means of subsistence,
and unhappily there is no lesson which they more easily learn.
The problem to be solved is therefore one of peculiar nicety
as well as importance; how to give the greatest amount of
needful help, with the smallest encouragement to undue
reliance on it.

Energy and self-dependence are, however, liable to be
impaired by the absence of help, as well as by its excess. It
18 even more fatal to exertion to have no hope of succeeding
by it, than to be assured of succeeding without it. When
the condition of any one is so disastrous that his energies


LIMITS OF THE PROVINCE OF GOVERNMENT. 537


are paralyzed by discouragement, assistance is a tonic, not a
sedative: it braces instead of relaxing the active faculties:
always provided that the assistance is not such as to dispense
with self-help; by substituting itself for the person’s own
labour, skill, and prudence, but is limited to affording him a
better hope of attaming success by those legitimate means.
This accordingly is a test to which all plans of philanthropy
and benevolence should be brought, whether intended for
the benefit of individuals or of classes, and whether conducted
on the voluntary or on the government principle.

In so far as the subject admits of any general doctrine or
maxim, it would appear to be this,—that if assistance is
given in such a manner that the condition of the person
helped is as desirable as that of the person who succeeds in
doing the same thing without help, the assistance, if system-
atic and capable of being previously calculated on, is mis-
chievous: but if, while available to everybody, it leaves to
every one a strong motive to do without it if he can, it is
then for the most part beneficial. This principle, applied to a
system of public charity, is that of the Poor Law of 1834.
If the condition of a person receiving relief is made as
eligible as that of the labourer who supports himself by his
own exertions, the system strikes at the root of all individual
industry and self-government; and, if fully acted up to, would
require as its supplement an organized system of compulsion,
for governing and setting to work like cattle, those who had
been removed from the influence of the motives that act on
human beings. But if, consistently with guaranteeing all
persons against absolute want, the condition of those who
are supported by legal charity can be kept considerably less
desirable than the condition of those who find support for
themselves, none but beneficial consequences can arise from
a law which renders it impossible for any person, except by
his own choice, to die from insufficiency of food. That in
England at least this supposition can be realized, is proved
by the experience of a long period preceding the close of


538 BOOK V.. CHAPTER xi. § 13.


the last century, as well as by that of many highly pauperized
districts in more recent times, which have been dispauperized
by adopting strict rules of poor-law administration, to the
great and permanent benefit of the whole labouring class.
There is probably no country in which, by varying the means
suitably to the character of the people, a legal provision for
the destitute might not be made compatible with the obser-
vance of the conditions necessary to its being innocuous.
Subject to these conditions, I conceive it to be highly
desirable, that the certainty of subsistence should be held
out by law to the destitute able-bodied, rather than that their
relief should depend on voluntary charity. In the first place,
charity almost always does too much or too little: it lavishes
its bounty in one place, and leaves people to starve in ano-
ther. Secondly, since the state must necessarily provide
subsistence for the criminal poor while undergoing punish-
ment, not to do the same for the poor who have not offended
is to give a premium on crime. And lastly, if the poor are
left to individual charity, a vast amount of mendicity is
inevitable; and to get rid of this is important, even as a
matter of police. What the state may and should abandon
to private charity, is the task of distinguishing between one
case of real necessity and another. The state must act by
general rules. It cannot undertake to discriminate between
the deserving and the undeserving indigent. It owes no
more than subsistence to the first, and it can give no less to
the last. What is said about the injustice of a law which
has no better treatment for the merely unfortunate poor than
for the ill-conducted, is founded on a misconception of the
province of law and public authority. The dispensers of
public relief have no business to be inquisitors, Guardians
and overseers are not fit to be trusted to give or withhold
other people’s money according to their verdict on the mora-
lity of the person soliciting it; and it would show much
ignorance of the ways of mankind to suppose that such per-
sons, even in the almost impossible case of their being qua-


LIMITS OF THE PROVINCE OF GOVERNMENT. 539


hfied, will take the trouble of ascertaining and sifting the
past conduct of a person in distress, so as to form a rational
judgment on it. Private charity can make these distinctions;
and in bestowing its own money, is entitled to do so accord-
ing to its own judgment. It should understand that this is
its peculiar and appropriate province, and that it is commend-
able or the contrary, as it exercises the function with more
or with less discernment. But the administrators of a public
fund ought not to be required to do more for anybody, than
that:minimum which is due even to the worst. If they are,
the indulgence very speedily becomes the rule, and refusal
the more or less capricious or tyrannical exception.


§ 14. Another class of cases which fall within the
same general principle as the case of public charity, are
those in which the acts done by individuals, though in-
tended solely for their own benefit, involve consequences
extending indefinitely beyond them, to interests of the
nation or of posterity, for which society in its collective
capacity is alone able, and alone bound, to provide. One
of these cases is that of Colonization. If it is desirable, as
no one will deny it to be, that the planting of colonies should
be conducted, not with an exclusive view to the private
interests of the first founders, but with a deliberate regard to
the permanent welfare of the nations, afterwards to arise
from these small beginnings; such regard can only be
secured by placing the enterprise, from its commencement,
under regulations constructed with the foresight and enlarged
views of philosophical legislators : and the government alone
has power either to frame such regulations, or to enforce
their observance.

The question of government intervention in the work of
Colonization involves the future and permanent interests of
civilization itself, and far outstretches the comparatively
narrow limits of purely economical considerations. But even
with a view to those considerations alone, the removal of


540 BOOK V. CHAPTER xI. § 14.


population from the overcrowded to the unoccupied parts
of the earth’s surface is one of those works of eminent social
usefulness, which most require, and which at the same time
best repay, the intervention of government.

To appreciate the benefits of colonization, it should be con-
sidered in its relation, not to a single country, but to the col-
lective economical interests of the humanrace. The question
is in general treated too exclusively as one of distribution ;
of relieving one labour-market and supplying another. It is
this, but it is also a question of production, and of the most
efficient employment of the productive resources of the
world. Much has been said of the good economy of import-
ing commodities from the place where they can be bought
cheapest ; while the good economy of producing them where
they can be produced cheapest, is comparatively little thought
of. If to carry consumable goods from the places where
they are superabundant to those where they are scarce, is a
good pecuniary speculation, is it not an equally good specu-
lation to do the same thing with regard to labour and instru-
ments? The exportation of labourers and capital from old
to new countries, from a place where their productive power
is less, to a place where it is greater, increases by so much the
aggregate produce of the labour and capital of the world. It
adds to the joint wealth of the old and the new country,
what amounts in a short period to many times the mere cost
of effecting the transport. There needs be no hesitation in
affirming that Colonization, in the present state of the world,
is the very best affair of business, in which the capital of an
old and wealthy country can possibly engage.

It is equally obvious, however, that Colonization on a
great scale can be undertaken, as an affair of business, only
by the government, or by some combination of individuals in
complete understanding with the government. Emigration
on the voluntary principle cannot have any material influence
in lightening the pressure of population in the old country,
though as far as it goes it is doubtless a benefit to the colony.


a


a eee eon


LIMITS OF THE PROVINCE OF GOVERNMENT. 541


Those labouring persons who voluntarily emigrate are seldom
the very poor; they are small farmers with some little capital,
or labourers who have saved something, and who, in removing
only their own labour from the crowded labour-market, with-
draw from the capital of the country a fund which maintained
and employed more labourers than themselves. Besides, this
portion of the community is so limited in number, that it
might be removed entirely, without making any sensible
impression upon the numbers of the population, or even upon
the annual increase. Any considerable emigration of labour
is only practicable, when its cost is defrayed, or at least
advanced, by others than the labourers themselves. Who
then is to advance it? Naturally, it may be said, the capital-
ists of the colony, who require the labour, and who intend to
employ it. But to this there is the obstacle, that a capitalist,
after going to the expense of carrying out labourers, has no
security that he shall be the person to derive any benefit from
them. If all the capitalists of the colony were to combine,
and bear the expense by subscription, they would still have
no security that the labourers, when there, would continue to
work for them. After working for a short time and earning
a few pounds, they always, unless prevented by the govern-
ment, squat on unoccupied land, and work only for themselves.
The experiment has been repeatedly tried whether it was
possible to enforce contracts for labour, or the repayment of
the passage-money of emigrants to those who adyanced it,
and the trouble and expense have always exceeded the advan-
tage. The only other resource is the voluntary contributions
of parishes or individuals, to rid themselves of surplus
labourers who are already, or who are likely to become, locally
chargeable on the poor-rate. Were this speculation to become
general, it might produce a sufficient amount of emigration
to clear off the existing unemployed population, but not to
raise the wages of the employed: and the same thing would
require to be done over again in less than another gene-
ration.


542 BOOK V. CHAPTER xt. § 14.


One of the principal reasons why Colonization should bea
national undertaking, is that in this manner alone can emigra-
tion be self-supporting. The exportation of capital and labour
to a new country being, as before observed, one of the best
of all affairs of business, it is absurd that it should not, like
other affairs of business, repay its own expenses. Of the great
addition which it makes to the produce of the world, there
can be no reason why a sufficient portion should not be inter-
cepted, and employed in reimbursing the outlay incurred in
effecting it. For reasons already given, no individual, or
body of individuals, can reimburse themselves for the ex-
pense; the government, however, can. It can take from the
annual increase of wealth, caused by the emigration, the
fraction which suffices to repay with interest what the emi-
gration has cost. The expenses of emigration to a colony
ought to be borne by the colony; and this, in general, is
only possible when they are borne by the colonial government.

Of the modes in which a fund for the support of coloni-
zation can be raised in the colony, none is comparable in
advantage to that which was first suggested, and has since
been so ably and perseveringly advocated, by Mr. Wakefield:
the plan of putting a price on all unoccupied land, and
devoting the proceeds to emigration. The unfounded and
pedantic objections to this plan have been answered in a
former part of this chapter: we have now to speak of its
advantages. First, it avoids the difficulties and discontents
incident to raising a large annual amount by taxation; a
thing which it is almost useless to attempt with a scattered
population of settlers in the wilderness, who, as experience
proves, can seldom be compelled to pay direct taxes, except
at a cost exceeding their amount; while in an infant commu-
nity indirect taxation soon reaches its limit. The sale of
lands is thus by far the easiest mode of raising the requisite
funds. But it has other and still greater recommendations.
It is a beneficial check upon the tendency of a population of
colonists to adopt the tastes and inclinations of savage life,


ea al


neal tee


LIMITS OF THE PROVINCE OF GOVERNMENT. 543


and to disperse so widely as to lose all the advantages of
commerce, of markets, of separation of employments, and
combination of labour. By making it necessary for those
who emigrate at the expense of the fand, to earn a consider-
able sum before they can become landed proprietors, it keeps
up a perpetual succession of labourers for hire, who in every
country are a most important auxiliary even to peasant pro-
prietors: and by diminishing the eagerness of agricultural
speculators to add to their domain, it keeps the settlers within
reach of each other for purposes of co-operation, arranges a
numerous body of them within easy distance of each centre
of foreign commerce and non-agricultural industry, and en-
sures the formation and rapid growth of towns and town
products. This concentration, compared with the dispersion
which uniformly occurs when unoccupied land can be had for
nothing, greatly accelerates the attamment of prosperity, and
enlarges the fund which may be drawn upon for further
emigration. Before the adoption of the Wakefield system,
the early years of all new colonies were full of hardship and
difficulty: the last colony founded on the old principle, the
Swan River settlement, being one of the most characteristic
instances. In all subsequent colonization, the Wakefield
principle has been acted upon, though imperfectly, the price
of land being generally fixed too low, and a part only of the
proceeds being devoted to emigration: yet wherever it has
been introduced at all, as in South Australia, Port Philip, and
New Zealand, the restraint put upon the dispersion of the
settlers, and the influx of capital caused by the assurance of
being able to obtain hired labour, has, in spite of many diffi-
culties and much mismanagement, produced a suddenness
and rapidity of prosperity more like fable than reality. The
oldest of the Wakefield colonies, South Australia, is scarcely
twelve years old; Port Philip is still more recent ; and they
are probably at this moment the two places, in the known
world, where labour on the one hand, and capital on the
other, are the most highly remunerated.


544 BOOK V. CHAPTER XI. § 14.


The self-supporting system of colonization, once esta-
blished, would increase in efficiency every year; its effect
would tend to increase in geometrical progression: for since
every able-bodied emigrant, until the country is fully peopled,
adds in a very short time to its wealth, over and above his
own consumption, as much as would defray the expense of
bringing out another emigrant, it follows that the greater the
number already sent, the greater number might continue to
be sent, each emigrant laying the foundation of a succession
of other emigrants at short intervals without fresh expense,
until the colony is filled up. It would therefore be worth
while, to the mother country, to accelerate the early stages of
this progression, by loans to the colonies for the purpose of
emigration, repayable from the fund formed by the sales of
land. In thus advancing the means of accomplishing a large
immediate emigration, it would be investing that amount of
capital in the mode, of all others, most beneficial to the
colony; and the labour and savings of these emigrants would
hasten the period at which a large sum would be available
from sales of land. It would be necessary, in order not to
overstock the labour-market, to act in concert with the
persons disposed to remove their own capital to the colony.
The knowledge that a large amount of hired labour would be
available, in so productive a field of employment, would
ensure a large emigration of capital from a country, like
England, of low profits and rapid accumulation : and it would
only be necessary not to send outa greater number of
labourers at one time, than this capital could absorb and
employ at high wages.

Inasmuch as, on this system, any given amount of expen-
diture, once incurred, would provide not merely a single
emigration, but a perpetually flowing stream of emigrants,
which would increase in breadth and depth as it flowed on ;
this mode of relieving overpopulation has a recommendation,
not possessed by any other plan ever proposed for making
head against the consequences of increase without restraining


LIMITS OF THE PROVINCE OF GOVERNMENT, 545


the increase itself: there is an element of indefiniteness in it;
no one can perfectly foresee how far its influence, as a yent
! for surplus population, might possibly reach. There is hence
the strongest obligation on the government of a country like
our own, with a crowded population, and unoccupied conti-
nents under its command, to build, as it were, and keep open,
a bridge from the mother country to those continents, by
establishing the self-supporting system of colonization on
i such a scale, that as great an amount of emigration as the
q colonies can at the time accommodate, may at all times be
| able to take place without cost to the emigrants themselves.


§ 15. The same principle which points out colonization,
and the relief of the indigent, as cases to which the prin-
cipal objection to Government interference does not apply,
extends also to a variety of cases, in which important
public services are to be performed, while yet there is no
individual specially interested in performing them, nor
would any adequate remuneration naturally or spontaneously
attend their performance. ‘Take for instance a voyage of
geographical or scientific exploration. The information
1 sought may be of great public value, yet no individual would
| derive any benefit from it which would repay the expense of |
fitting out the expedition; and there is no mode of intercept-
ing the benefit on its way to those who profit by it, in order
to levy a toll for the remuneration of its authors. Such
voyages are, or might be, undertaken by private subscription ;
| but this is a rare and precarious resource. Instances are more


:
:
frequent in which the expense has been borne by public


<2) GA Ce RRA TESS


companies or philanthropic associations ; but in general such
enterprises haye been conducted at the expense of govern-
ment, which is thus enabled to entrust them to the per-
sons in its judgment best qualified for the task. Again,
| it is a proper office of government to build and maintain

lighthouses, establish buoys, &c., for the security of naviga-

tion: for since it is impossible that the ships at sea, which


ee ee


VOL. TW. Q2N


546 BOOK vy. CHAPTER xi. § 15.


are benefited by a lighthouse, should be made to pay a toll
on the occasion of its use, no one would build lighthouses
from motives of personal interest, unless indemnified and
rewarded from a compulsory levy made by the state. There
are many scientific researches, of great value to a nation and
to mankind, requiring assiduous devotion of time and labour,
and not unfrequently great expense, by persons who can
obtain a high price for their services in other ways. If the
government had no power to grant indemnity for expense,
and remuneration for time and labour, thus employed, such
researches could only be undertaken by the very few persons
who, with an independent fortune, unite technical knowledge,
laborious habits, and either great public spirit, or an ardent
desire of scientific celebrity™.


* Connected with this subject is the question of providing, by means of
endowments or salaries, for the maintenance of what has been called a
learned class. The cultivation of speculative knowledge, though one of the
most useful of all employments, is a service rendered to the community
collectively, not individually, and one consequently for which it is, prima
facie, reasonable that the community collectively should pay 5 since it gives
no claim on any individual for a pecuniary remuneration : and unless a pro-
vision is made for such services from some public fund, there is not only
no encouragement to them, but there is as much discouragement as
is implied in the impossibility of gaining a living by such pursuits,
and the necessity consequently imposed on most of those who would be
capable of them, to employ the greatest part of their time in gaining a sub-
sistence. The evil, however, is greater in appearance than in reality. The
greatest things, it has been said, have generally been done by those who had
the least time at their disposal; and the occupation of some hours every
day in a routine employment, has often been found compatible with the
most brilliant achievements in literature and philosophy. Yet there are
investigations and experiments which require not only a long but a conti-
nuous devotion of time and attention: there are also occupations which so
engross and fatigue the mental faculties, as to be inconsistent with any
vigorous employment of them upon other subjects, even in intervals of
leisure. It is highly desirable, therefore, that there should be a mode of
ensuring to the public the services of scientific discoverers, and perhaps of
some other classes of savans, by affording them the means of support con-
sistently with devoting a sufficient portion of time to their peculiar pursuits.


LIMITS OF THE PROVINCE OF GOVERNMENT. 547


It may be said generally, that anything which it is
desirable should be done for the general interests of man-
kind or of future generations, or for the present in-
terests of those members of the community who require
external aid, but which is not of a nature to remunerate
individuals or associations for undertaking it, is in itself
a suitable thing to be undertaken by government: though,
before making the work their own, governments ought always
to consider if there be any rational probability of its being
done on what is called the voluntary principle, and if so,
whether it is likely to be done in a better or more effectual
manner by government agency, than by the zeal and liberality
of individuals,


§ 16. The preceding heads comprise, to the best of
my judgment, the whole of the exceptions to the practical


The fellowships of our Universities are an institution excellently adapted
for such a purpose; but are hardly ever applied to it, being bestowed, at
the best, as a reward for past proficiency, in committing to memory what
has been done by others, and not as the salary of future labours in the
advancement of Imowledge. In some countries Academies of science,
antiquities, history, &c., have been formed, with emoluments annexed,
The most effectual plan, and at the same time the least liable to abuse,
seems to be that of conferring Professorships, with duties of instruction
attached to them. The occupation of teaching a branch of knowledge, at
least in its higher departments, is a help rather than an impediment to the
systematic cultivation of the subject itself. The duties of a professorship
almost always leave much time for original researches, and the greatest
advances which have been made in the yarious sciences, both moral and
physical, have originated with those who were public teachers of them,
from Aristotle and Plato to the great names of the Scotch, French, and
German Universities. Ido not mention the English, because their pro-
fessorships are, as is well known, little more than nominal. In the case,
too, of a lecturer in a great institution of education, the public at large has
the means of judging, if not the quality of the teaching, at least the talents
and industry of the teacher; and it is more difficult to misemploy the
power of appointment to such an office, than to job in pensions and salaries
to persons not so directly before the public eye.
2Nn2


548 BOOK V. CHAPTER XI. § 16.


maxim, that the business of society can be best performed
by private and voluntary agency. It is, however, necessary
to add, that the intervention of government cannot always
practically stop short at the limit which defines the cases
intrinsically suitable for it. In the particular circumstances
of a given age or nation, there is scarcely anything, really
important to the general interest, which it may not be
desirable, or even necessary, that the government should
take upon itself, not because private individuals cannot
effectually perform it, but because they will not. At some
times and places there will be no roads, docks, harbours,
canals, works of irrigation, hospitals, schools, colleges,
printing presses, unless the government establishes them ;
the public being either too poor to command the necessary
resources, or too little advanced in intelligence to appreciate
the ends, or not sufficiently practised in conjoint action to be
capable of the means. This is true, more or less, of all coun-
tries inured to despotism, and particularly of those in which
there is avery wide distance, in civilization, between the peo-
ple and the government; as in those which have been con-
quered and are retained in subjection by a more energetic
and more cultivated people. In many parts of the world, the
people can do nothing for themselves which requires large
means and combined action; all such things are left undone,
unless done by the state. In these cases, the mode in
which the government can most surely demonstrate the sin-
cerity with which it intends the greatest good of its subjects,
is by doing the things which are made incumbent on it by the
helplessness of the public, in such a manner as shall tend not
to increase and perpetuate, but to correct that helplessness.
A good government will give all its aid in such a shape, as to
encourage and nurture any rudiments it may find of a spirit
of individual exertion. It will be assiduous in removing
obstacles and discouragements to. voluntary enterprize, and
in giving whatever facilities and whatever direction and
guidance may be necessary ; its pecuniary means will be sup-


a een


LIMITS OF THE PROVINCE OF GOVERNMENT. 549


plied, when practicable, in aid of private efforts rather than in
supersession of them, and it will call into play its machinery
of rewards and honours to elicit such efforts. Government
aid, when given merely in default of private enterprise,
should be so given as to be as far as possible a course of edu-
cation for the people in the art of accomplishing great objects
by individual energy and voluntary cooperation.

I have not thought it necessary here to insist on that part
of the functions of government which all admit to be indispen-
sable, the function of prohibiting and punishing such conduct
on the part of individuals in the exercise of their freedom, as
is clearly injurious to other persons, whether the case be one
of force, fraud, or negligence. Even in the best state which
society has yet reached, it is lamentable to think how great
a proportion of all the efforts and talents in the world are
employed in merely neutralizing one another. It is the pro-
per end of government to reduce this wretched waste to the
smallest possible amount, by taking such measures as shall
cause the energies now spent by mankind in injuring one
another, or in protecting themselves against injury, to be
turned to the legitimate employment of the human faculties,
that of compelling the powers of nature to be more and more
subservient to physical and moral good.


THE END.


LONDON:


on
4
a
&
Z
fe
|
Pa
S)
3)
a
Z
<
Z
S)
n
5
[of
Si
a


MARTINS LANE.


ST,


NEW BOOKS AND NEW EDITIONS,


PUBLISHED BY


JOHN W. PARKER, LONDON.


Sterling’s Essays and Tales. Collected and Edited,
with a Sketch of the Author’s Life. By Julius Charles Hare, M.A.,
Rector of Herstmonceux. 2 vols. post 8yo. With a Portrait, 1/. 1s.


History of the Royal Society. Compiled from Original
Authentic Documents. By C. R. Weld, Barrister at-Law, Assistant-
Secretary to the Royal Society. 2 vols. 8vo.


Philosophy of the Inductive Sciences. By William
Whewell, D.D., F.R.S., Master of Trinity College, Cambridge. A
New Edition, revised, 2 vols. 8yo., 30s.


History of the Inductive Sciences. By the same
Author. A New Edition. $8 vols., 2/. 2s.


History of England in Church and State, from the
Conquest to the Accession of the House of Plantagenet. By Sir
i Francis Palgrave, K.H. 2 vols. Svo.


The Saint’s Tragedy; the true Story of Ehzabeth of
Hungary, Saint of the Romish Calendar. By C. Kingsley, M.A.,
Rector of Eversley. With a Preface, by Professor Maurice. 5s.


. Ninfa. A Tale. By Louisa Keir Grant. Post 8vo.,
' 10s. 6d.

« The great merit of the book consists in bringing one idea forward, and
filling the reader irresistibly with it; and this is the unnatural union of two
different characters and countries, and the natural penalty that must ensue.’?—
Fraser’s Magazine.


Six Dramas illustrative of German Life; from the
Original of Princess Amalie of Saxony. With Illustrations. 10s. 6d.


A Familiar History of Birds. By Edward Stanley,
D.D., F.R.S., Lord Bishop of Norwich; President of the Linnean
Society. The Fourth Edition, in | yol., with additional matter, 5s.


— Se


NEW BOOKS AND NEW EDITIONS.


Life of Archbishop Ussher, with an Account of his
Writings. By C. R. Elrington, D.D., Regius Professor of Divinity,
Dublin. S8vo., 12s., with a fine Portrait.


Bishop Jeremy Taylor; his Predecessors, Contempo-
raries, and Successors; a Biography. By the Rey. R. A. Willmott.
Second Edition, revised, fep. 8yo., 5s.


-C. Cornelii Taciti Opera. Ad Codices antiquos exacta
et emendata, Commentario exegetico illustrata, Edidit Franciscus
Ritter, Westfalus Professor Bonnensis. Vols. I. aud II., 8vo., 14s.,
containing the Annals. Vols. III. and IV., completing the Works,
will be ready shortly.


The Antigone of Sophocles, in Greek and English,
with Critical and Explanatory Notes. By J. W. Donaldson, B.D.,
Head Master of King Edward the Sixth’s School, Bury St.
Edmunds. 8vo., 9s.


The Agamemnon of Alschylus, the Greek Text, with
a Translation into English Verse, and Notes, Critical and Explana-
tory. By John Conington, B.A., Fellow of University College,
Oxford. 8yo., 7s. 6d.


The Pheedrus, Lysis, and Protagoras of Plato. A
new and literal Translation, mainly from the Text of Bekker. By
J. Wright, B.A., Trinity College, Cambridge. 4s. 6d.


Arundines Cami; sive Musarum Cantabrigiensium
Lusus Canori. Collegit atque edidit Henricus Drury, A.M. Third
Edition, revised and enlarged, 8yo. 12s.


Burnet’s History of the Reformation of the Church of
England. Abridged by G. E. Corrie, B.D., Norrisian Professor of
Diyinity, Cambridge. 8vo., 10s. 6d.


In this edition the supplemental matter added by the Bishop, and which
has hitherto existed in a separate form, has been incorporated into the History ;
admitted errors have been corrected ; and some additions made.


A History of the English Reformation. By F. C.
Massingberd, M.A., Rector of South Ormsby. A New Edition,
revised and enlarged, 6s.


The Crusaders ; Scenes, Events, and Characters from
the Times of the Crusaders. By T. Keightley. A New Edition, 7s.


