Principles of Political Economy, Vol. 1 (John Stuart Mill, 1848)
==========================================================
The dominant economics textbook for 50 years; classical economics' final synthesis. Public domain. Internet Archive full text (fp0135_1).

VINIONOSS Id ViI0OV4


ONIHOL IG VLISHSAINA


IBIBLIOTEGA


i
tfW 2


a ll
VLISHSAINN


Se oe aan


ee Re


Pn BL at


PRINCIPLES


OF


Ose es he iC ONO vie


WITH


SOME OF THEIR APPLICATIONS TO SOCIAL PHILOSOPHY.


BY


OMENS Sen Ae Rh Mele iialt:


IN TWO VOLUMES.


Wb; IM


LONDON:
JOHN W. PARKER, WEST STRAND.


M.DCCC.XLVIII.


PREFACE.


THE appearance of a treatise like the present, on a
subject on which so many works of merit already exist,
may be thought to require some explanation.

It might perhaps be sufficient to say, that no existing
treatise on Political Economy contains the latest im-
provements which have been made in the theory of the
subject. Many new ideas, and new applications of ideas,
have been elicited by the discussions of the last few
years, especially those on Currency, on Foreign Trade,
and on the important topics connected more or less inti-
mately with Colonization : and there seems reason that
the field of Political Economy should be re-surveyed in
its whole extent, if only for the purpose of incorporating
the results of these speculations, and bringing them into
harmony with the principles previously laid down by the
best thinkers on the subject.

To supply, however, these deficiencies in former
treatises bearing a similar title, is not the sole, or even


the principal object which the Author hasin view. The
a2


iv PREFACE.


design of the book is different from that of any treatise
on Political Economy which has been produced in
England since the work of Adam Smith.

The most characteristic quality of that work, and
the one in which it most differs from some others which
have equalled or even surpassed it as mere expositions
of the general principles of the subject, is that it
invariably associates the principles with their applica-
tions. This of itself imples a much wider range of
ideas and of topics, than are included in political
economy, considered as a branch of abstract specula-
tion. For practical purposes, political economy is
inseparably intertwined with many other branches of
social philosophy. Except on matters of mere detail,
there are perhaps no practical questions, even among
those which approach nearest to the character of purely
economical questions, which admit of being decided on
economical premises alone. And it is because Adam
Smith never loses sight of this truth; because, in his
applications of Political Economy, he perpetually appeals
to other and often far larger considerations than pure
Political Economy affords—that he gives that well-
grounded feeling of command over the principles of the
subject for purposes of practice, owing to which the


“Wealth of Nations,” alone among treatises on Political


PREFACE. Vv


Economy, has not only been popular with general
readers, but has impressed itself strongly on the minds
of men of the world and of legislators.

It appears to the present writer, that a work similar
in its object and general conception to that of Adam
Smith, but adapted to the more extended knowledge and
improved ideas of the present age, is the kind of contri-
bution which Political Economy at present requires.
The “Wealth of Nations” is in many parts obsolete,
and in all, imperfect. Political Economy, properly so
called, has grown up almost from infancy since the time
of Adam Smith; and the philosophy of society, from
which practically that eminent thinker never separated
his more peculiar theme, though still in a very early
stage of its progress, has advanced many steps beyond
the point at which he left it. No attempt, however, has
yet been made to combine his practical mode of treating
his subject with the increased knowledge since acquired
of its theory, or to exhibit the economical phenomena of
society in the relation in which they stand to the best
social ideas of the present time, as he did, with such
admirable success, in reference to the philosophy of his
century.

Such is the idea which the writer of the present


work has kept before him. To succeed even partially in


val PREFACE.


realizing it, would be a sufficiently useful achievement, to
induce him to incur willingly all the chances of failure.
It is requisite, however, to add, that although his object
is practical, and, as far as the nature of the subject
admits, popular, he has not attempted to purchase either
of those advantages by the sacrifice of strict scientific
reasoning. Though he desires that his treatise should
be more than a mere exposition of the abstract doc-
trines of Political Economy, he is also desirous that such


an exposition should be found in it.


CONTENTS


OF


CS elsE gt WR S eV OWE Mon:


Page
PRELIMINARY FUEMARES) sac ciceccecesssveenseescsextrssustersuasesseseenecseenaresnnnucacass 1
BOOK
PRODUCTION.
Cuarror I. Of the Requisites of Production.

§ 1. Requisites of production, what... icc ceteees 29
2. The function of labour defined............s:ccccscssesscssesecesteeseesssaseseene 31
3. Does nature contribute more to the efficacy of labour in some

occupations than in Others? ..sccseseeseseetsseeneeseseseeeeeeseness 33
4. Some natural agents limited, others practically unlimited, in
QUATEEY oo... secs sseseesecseseereseesesnestnanencneesecvssesuenesseescasenenvensen onset 34


Cuaprer Il. Of Labour, as an Agent of Production.
§ 1. Labour employed either directly about the thing produced,


or in operations preparatory to its production................. 37
2. Labour employed in producing subsistence for subsequent

TROUT ccscacesectees cotenaitcencencenancandeneresCotsints 39
3. — in producing materials 42
4, — or implements 44
5. — in the protection of labour ... 45
6. — in the transport and distribution of the mratnce oosbHeMSONSCaONs 47
7. Labour which relates to human beings  ...........6..cceeeeeees 49
8. Labour of invention and GisCOVELY ............csccceseceeeecsesenesesseeeeeen 51
9. Labour agricultural, manufacturing, and commercial _............ 53


Vill CONTENTS.


Cuaprer III. Of Unproductive Labour.


. Labour does not produce objects, but utilities
hy > VAM RD GH RSD TERRES ss acosnoogna ccandebebotunon sonpe cachoseesccoes
3. Productive labour is that which produces utilities fixed and

embodied in’matentall ObjeCES:.y.cscrvesccecesessicteest ccsevecsnesces:
. All other labour, however useful, is classed as unproductive
. Productive and Unproductive Consumption ..........ccss.cesseee-e-
6. Labour for the supply of Productive Consumption, and labour
for the supply of Unproductive Consumption


jSop et


OT


Cuaprer IV. Of Capital.


§ I. Capital is wealth appropriated to reproductive employment
2. More capital devoted to production than actually employed


3. Examination of some cases illustrative of the idea of Capital...


Cuaprer V. Fundamental Propositions respecting
Capital.


+ Industry is limited! by Capital) 0. .....cceccececcscsesecccceseec.c.ccsscscce...

- — but does not always come up to that limit

- Increase of capital gives increased employment to labour,
without assignable bounds..................

. Capital is the result of saving

- All Capital is consumed


oe


w


. Capital is kept up, not by preservation but by perpetual
reproduction


aa >


- Why countries recover rapidly from a state of devastation ...
. Effects of defraying government expenditure by loans
- Demand for commodities is not demand for labour oS
10. Fallacy respecting Taxation


oo ss!


Cuaprer VI. Of Circulating and Fixed Capital.


§ 1. Fixed and Circulating Capital, what ....ccescscccccsccccccc
2. Increase of fixed capital, when at the expense of cireulating,

might be detrimental to the labourers
3. — this seldom if ever occurs


70
73


Cuarter VII.


CONTENTS.


ness of Productive Agents.


§ 1. Land, labour, and capital, are of different productiveness at
different times and places


2. Causes of superior productiveness. Natural advantages ........
3. — greater energy Of labour ..........cscee eee tsetse eees eee ceetces teens
4, — superior skill and knowledge .............2c.:ces-c1sssseceseereseeenssesnens
5. — superiority of intelligence and trustworthiness in the com-


munity generally


6. — superior security


Cuaprer VIII. Of Co-operation, or the Combination


of Labour.


§ 1. Combination of Labour a principal cause of superior produc-

WIENGES! Goccesrcecoquenccccseusdceco. dovchen doer pebnE Oricor osodonadesvotonsanssuossaaeios0
. Effects of separation of employments analyzed ..........0ccee
. Combination of labour between town and country
. The higher degrees of the division of labour
fi, ANMEUY ITS GLE MIS) OC NENMIBKECES) cpocencgonnecerocoosconrasertones cee on ecocsocceneaoaccec


6. Limitations of the division of labour


mo bo


CuaptTer IX. Of Production on a Large, and
Production on a Small Scale.
§ 1. Advantages of the large system of production in manufactures
2. Advantages and disadvantages of the joint-stock principle
3. Conditions necessary for the large system of production
4, Large and small farming compared


CuapterR X. Of the Law of the Increase of Labour.


§ 1. The law of the increase of production depends on those of
three elements, Labour, Capital, and Land..
2. The Law of Population


3. By what checks the increase of population is practically limited


Cuapter XI. Of the Law of the Increase of Capital.
§ 1. Means and motives to saving, on what dependent ....................
Causes of diversity in the effective strength of the desire of

ACCUM At ON neers


I
2.
3. Examples of deficiency in the strength of this desire


4, Exemplification of its excess


1X


On what depends the Degree of Productive-
L g


Page


138
14i
144
146
148
156


186
187
189


CONTENTS.


Cuarrer XII. Of the Law of the Increase of Production


Jrom Land.


§ 1. The limited quantity and limited productiveness of land, the
TRELATL TANIA (HO) ROMEO 5 aco pstonessseconsontnousscoccnoadoocesses008:

2. The law of production from the soil, a law of diminishing
return in proportion to the increased application of labour

AN GUC bale cae cetera Rees ese TST

3. Antagonist principle to the law of diminishing return; the
progress of improvements in production .......... Br Mies oceerne ss


Page


211


Cuaprer XIII. Consequences of the foregoing Laws.


§ 1. Remedies, when the limit to production is the weakness of
theyprinciple) of; accumulation ...cicsscsesorecesesssesesecedecmueresessess
. Necessity of restraining population not confined to a state of
INE qMalitya Of propent yao wee ete ae ranean en merece ce
3. — nor superseded by free trade im f00d ..........cccscssccetessesseseseeees
4. — nor by emigration


bo


BOOK IL.


DISTRIBUTION.


Cuarrer I. Of Property.


BpUDROGUCLOY Reman Ks emer ei ere ene en nee
- Statement of the question ............,
. Examination of Communism
— of St. Simonism


. The institution of property requires, not subversion, but im-
provement


§


op wr


Cuarrer Il. The same subject continued.


§ 1. The institution of property implies freedom of acquisition by
contract


2. — the validity of prescription


3. — the power of bequest, but not the right of inheritance.
Question of inheritance examined


§


an


am


it)


us


. Slavery considered in relation to the slaves
. — in relation to production


. Evidence respecting peasant properties in Switzerland
Br S01 INTO ED anococcoceceaconcocbanecenenancoscacraccrannenec


. — in Belgium


CONTENTS.


. Should the right of bequest be limited, ANNE) WOE) ccorrcuunecseccooa:
. Grounds of property in land, different from those of property


GT SHARES] EIS) oa cepeerananoceneno coe csunodseaseeccosbO0.ct nx SounpE Ro ECcOdOLcE Doo O0CID ce


. — only valid on certain conditions, which are not always


realized. The limitations considered ...........0.000008 evwtessd


. Rights of property im abUSeS  .....ccsccesessreeeesee renee ecetereseeseseseeseny


Cuaprer III. Of the Classes among whom the
Produce is distributed.


The produce sometimes shared among three classes .


. — sometimes belongs undividedly to OM ........cesscsesseeer erences
. — sometimes divided betweem two ...........cccccccsseesse seeersetsetnee


Cuaprer lV. Of Competition and Custom.


Competition not the sole regulator of the division of the pro-


PBR LTCC Vacate Uae CSA SAECO CERRO TO SEE Re CCE Sete cnc ca CREPE RCRIe ar es


. Influence of custom on rents, and on the tenure of land
. Influence of CustOM OD PFICES .......cecceecseccencceeseceevesereneseen sect cnes


Cuaprer V. Of Slavery.


. Emancipation considered in relation to the interest of the


STAVE OWIEIS) scccaccseiteiery cagessciten Get ouirsauies saan aaracavaxasssateneadtnenees


Cuarter VI. Of Peasant Proprietors.


. Difference between English and Continental opinions respect-


ing peasant properties 0...


— in Rhenish Germany


Fer TL MEAT GO Re eee etre eee orem ae nanos cause eeeednattuaecanvna cers naierkairs


X1
Page
264


268


270
276


279
280
281


284
285
288


292


294


297


§


CONTENTS.


Cuaprer VII. Continuation of the same subject.


Page
1. Influence of peasant properties in stimulating industry ............ 328
7h a TH eNOS, NSTI RE TTD. ceocoasnacncn.y eannyercarcornaynoeneannieeces 330
3. — in promoting forethought and self-control.......ccscss-0-..c00-0e-- 332
4. Their effect on population ....., ‘
5. —- on the subdivision of land

Cuaprer VIIl. Of Metayers.

1. Nature of the metayer system, and its varieties
2. Its advantages and inconveniences .oe.cecccecceeeccs-cessseesececceccscccs.es
3. Evidence concerning its effects in different countries ............ 352
4. Is its abolition desirable ? 365


Cuaprer IX.’ Of Cottiers.


1. Nature and operation of cottier tenUre....ecccecccssessccsssssseesecscess.... 368
2. In an overpeopled country its necessary consequence is

TLOTHINALRENES ey tea ea ne ee Alea 371
3. — which are inconsistent with industry, frugality, or restraint


on population .............
4. Ryot tenancy of India


Cuaprer X. Meuns of abolishing Cottier Tenancy.


1. Mode of disposing of a cottier population, the vit:


al question
for Ireland


PEDROdSTOn SP oOTDERSSNCEK OGLE OAL Eno ae BOHOCEEDSA OAS oece BE eESG 381
2. To convert them into hired labourers not desirable nor prac-

DICHILED Ieee st ee NC at 2 eer stp aan eee 382
3. Limitation of rent, by law or custom, indispensable ................ 387
2. Wisity/ ols Menurelcons dered gua nes eens eee) 389
Oey Renan RABE lie Geeta natch eee wee ae 390
6. Location of peasant proprietors on the waste lands ........... 391
7. Resources supplementary to the waste lands 396
8. Probable consequences of the measures recommended


CONTENTS. Rill


Cuapter XI. Of Wages.


Page
§ 1. Wages depend on the demand and supply of labour—in other
words, on population and capital ..........scecccseeeereseereenee 401
2, Examination of some popular opinions respecting wages ........ 402
3. Certain rare circumstances excepted, high wages imply strong
restraints On population..........eseceeeeeereeeee teeters: .. 409
4, — which are in some cases legal. 413
5. — in others, the effect of particular customs ........-......s.sses 415
6. Due restriction of population the only safeguard of a labour-
ING CLASS .sc ees wecncscecseceerentassecnennetueersectsenyensereeunecrnsczsseyocsea=s «a Al8


Cuarrer XII. Of Popular Remedies for Low Wages.


§ 1. A legal or customary minimum of wages, with guarantee of


employment .....csccceccsserssesssesnicorsccnsesennee atessseeetenancransterseattscs 424
2, — would require as a condition, legal measures for repression

OP ROSIN cecosennoneccccosssa0 ssp etenCOxce- SoG COO OCESCESIEECEO HEELERS ONES 426
3. Allowances in aid Of WAGES ......ccccceeeseret nese tce stent eset eteeesane tees 431


4. The Allotment System
Cuaprer XIII. The Remedies for Low Wages further
considered.


§ 1. Pernicious direction of public opinion on the subject of Popu-
VSCOM soccccicecceeseees su tecasevsveclivescaceesuetcesstcsannanverssuatssnsesee 1439


2. Grounds for expecting improvement 442
3. Twofold means of elevating the habits of the labouring people:
py Education .....cccecreccecses sess eseorsseeseeseesnessonneceeesectiecerasseeestetetes 448
4, — and by large measures of immediate relief, through foreign
and home colonization ........-scseceseseeseees sere ee eseec rere eren cease 449
Cuaprer XIV. Of the Differences of Wages in
different Employments.
§ 1. Differences of wages arising from different degrees of attrac-
tiveness in different employMents ........-.eseeeeeeeseeees tee eeeeee es 453
2. Differences arising from natural monopolieS ...........0:cseeeeees . 459
3. Effect on wages of a class of subsidized competitors 463
4,


— of the competition of persons with independent means of
F100) 210) 6 EES 467


CONTENTS.


i Page
5. Wages of women, why lower than those of men ..............0---. 471
| 6. Differences of wages arising from restrictive laws, and from
\ COM bINAONS pee eewene he mace A eevee ce en aceas totro es meets 472
7. Cases in which wages are fixed by custom .........c.0ccccseeseeceeees 474
Cuapter XV. Of Profits.
§ 1. Profits resolvable into three parts; interest, insurance, and
RATES SONS CIN tend Ha COpeerseeces: farce eeeiereenae ea tsternecrerercecr > 477
2. The minimum of profits; and the variations to which it is
MiB be Decseetenrnetaereysaarhces eee alice Bec ehaes eaten Crush canwataneceasieaees 480
3. Differences of profits arising from the nature of the particular
CSET 0) Len AOAXELAR iS coca ac ge acer ee Le Ree eee 482
4. General tendency of profits to an equality .......cscceeeeeee 484
5. The advances of the capitalist consist ultimately in wages of
Lea OUM earerens Sree eases Orne arte Mane eect an eg eee 490
6. The rate of profit depends on the Cost of Labour ...............0+ 492


Cuaprer XVI. Of Rent.


§ 1. Rent the effect of a natural monopoly ............csescssssseesneesseess 496
2. No land can pay rent except land of such quality or situation,


as exists in less quantity than the demand ...........cccccccceesseeces 497
3. The rent of land consists of the excess of its return, above the
return to the worst land in cultivation. ........ccccccsccsecsecseecsesseee 499
i 4. — or to the capital employed in the least advantageous cir-
| CUT SEAN COSY cc Soiree ohne eanweurete cere asec ie sek PA eed 501
} 5. Is payment for capital sunk in the soil, rent, or profit ?)............ 505
| 6. Rent does not enter into the cost of production of agricultural
PLOCUCE Ras same re Rae Conde Ree ere Ee ORNS, 509
al BOOK III.
; |
EXCHANGE.
Carrer I. Of Value.
| | Sy leePrelimmin any jem ar lise sae, acre tee es he a 513
515


2. Definitions of Value in Use, Exchange Value, and Price.
3. What is meant by general purchasing power


CONTENTS.


4. Value a relative term. A general rise or fall of Values a


GONMtLAGICEIONN crrrcees tisteraccuscesceertees tees tocrevsreereceu crac rnestevraanexsnrsi ccs
5. The laws of Value, how modified in their application to fetal
ETANSACELONS —.....cceccceeccseesnenesecarsceeteeesessnnaneneees qeseeeeseceuenvceracens
Cnaprer II. Of Demand and Supply, in their
relation to Value.

§ 1. Two conditions of Value: Utility, and Difficulty of Attainment
2. Three kinds of Difficulty of Attainment ..........: ces
3. Commodities which are absolutely limited in quantity .....

4. Law of their value, the Equation of Demand and Supply ........
5, Miscellaneous cases falling under this law ..........:-:.sssessssees


Cuaprer III. Of Cost of Production, in its relation
to Value.


§ 1. Commodities which are susceptible of indefinite multiplication
without increase of cost. Law of their Value, Cost of Pro-
GIRO pscoracnotoecuécene cencosenoonocabcccercc ponosntiDsCGGS


2. — operating through potential, but not actual, alterations of
supply


533


Cuartrer IV. Ultimate Analysis of Cost of Production.


]. Principal element in Cost of Production—Quantity of Labour

2. Wages not an element in Cost of Production

3. — except in so far as they vary from employment to employ-
ment


4. Profits an element in Cost of Production, in so far as they
vary from employment to employment. .........0.0.0 cesses

. — or are spread over unequal lengths of time ..............5

6. Occasional elements in Cost of Production: taxes, and seoneniy
value of materials .


o


XV CONTENTS.


Carrer V. Of Rent, in its relation to Value.


§ 1. Commodities which are susceptible of indefinite multiplication,
but not without increase of cost. Law of their Value, Cost
of Production in the most unfavourable existing cir-
CERUEETIS) SIINGE'S) eccqcanbocadissso uc good vom OnE SUEKITSRNO INO SOSEGOISL 01d Ne ce HEGTOCODIA
2. Such commodities, when produced in circumstances more

favourable, yield a rent equal to the difference of cost........
3. Rent of mines and fisheries, and ground-rent of buildings ....
4. Cases of extra profit analogous to rent ........ccesesecesessseseeeeeeees


Cuaprer VI. Summary of the Theory of Value.


§ 1. The theory of Value recapitulated in a series of propositions

2. How modified by the case of labourers cultivating for subsist-
ONCE Bee. aceninteeee eae

3. — by the case of slave labour


APPENDIX.


Substance of three articles in the Morning Chronicle of 11th,
13th, and 16th January 1847, in reply to MM. Mounier and
Rubichon and to the Quarterly Review, on the Subdivision
of Landed Property in France


Page


569


PRINCIPLES


OF


POLITICAL ECONOMY.


PRELIMINARY REMARKS.


In every department of human affairs, Practice long pre-
cedes Science: systematic enquiry into the modes of action
of the powers of nature, is the tardy product of a long course
of efforts to use those powers for practical ends. The con-
ception, accordingly, of Political Economy as a branch of
science, is extremely modern; but the subject with which its
enquiries are conversant has in all ages necessarily constituted
one of the chief practical interests of mankind, and, in some,
a most unduly engrossing one.

That subject is Wealth. Writers on Political Economy
profess to teach, or to investigate, the nature of Wealth, and
the laws of its production and distribution : including, directly
or remotely, the operation of all the causes by which the
condition of mankind, or of any society of human beings,
in respect to this universal object of human desire, is made
prosperous or the reverse. Not that any treatise on Political

VOL. I. B


2 PRELIMINARY REMARKS.


Economy can discuss or even enumerate all these causes; but
+t undertakes to set forth as much as is known of the laws
and principles according to which they operate.

Every one has a notion, sufficiently correct for common
purposes, of what is meant by wealth. ‘The enquiries which
relate to it are in no danger of being confounded with those
relating to any other of the great human interests. All know
that it is one thing to berich, another thing to be enlight-
ened, brave, or humane; that the questions how a nation is
made wealthy, and how it is made free, or virtuous, or emi-
nent in literature, in the fine arts, in arms or in polity, are
totally distinct enquiries. These things, indeed, are all indi-
rectly connected, and re-act upon one another. A people
has sometimes become free, because it had first grown
wealthy ; or wealthy, because it had first become free. The
creed and laws of a people act powerfully upon their econo-
mical condition; and this again, by its influence on their
mental developement and social relations, re-acts upon their
creed and laws. But though the subjects are in very close
contact, they are essentially different, and have never been
supposed to be otherwise.

It is no part of the design of this treatise to aim at meta-
physical nicety of. definition, where the ideas suggested by
a term are already as determinate as practical purposes re-
quire. But, little as it might be expected that any mischiey-
ous confusion of ideas could take place on a subject so simple

as the question, what is to be considered as wealth, it is matter
of history that such confusion of ideas has existed—that the-
orists and practical politicians have been equally, and at one
period universally, infected by it, and that for many genera-
tions it gave a thoroughly false direction to the policy of
Europe. I refer to the set of doctrines designated, since the
time of Adam Smith, by the appellation of the Mercantile
System.

While this system prevailed, it was assumed, either ex-

pressly or tacitly, in the whole policy of nations, that wealth


PRELIMINARY REMARKS. 3


consisted solely of money; or of the precious metals, which,
when not already in tke state of money, are capable of being
directly converted into it. According to the doctrines then
prevalent, whatever tended to heap up money or bullion in
‘a country added to its wealth. Whatever sent the precious
metals out of a country impoverished it. If a country pos-
sessed no gold or silver mines, the only industry by which it
could be enriched was foreign trade, being the only one
which could bringin money. Any branch of trade which
was supposed to send out more money than it brought in,
however ample and valuable might be the returns m ano-
ther shape, was looked upon as a losing trade. Exportation
of goods was favoured and encouraged (even by means ex-
tremely onerous to the real resources of the country), because
the exported goods being stipulated to be paid for in money,
it was hoped that the returns would actually be made in gold
and silver. Importation of anything, other than the precious
metals, was regarded as a loss to the nation of the whole price
of the things imported; unless they were brought in to be
re-exported at a profit, or unless, being the materials or instru-
ments of some industry practised in the country itself, they
gave the power of producing exportable articles at smaller
cost, and thereby effecting a larger exportation. The com-
merce of the world was looked upon as a struggle among
nations, which could draw to itself the largest share of the
gold and silver in existence; and in this competition no
nation could gain anything, except by making others lose as
much, or, at the least, preventing them from gaining it.

It often happens that the universal beliet of one age of
mankind—a belief from which no one was, nor without an
extraordinary effort of genius and courage, could at that time
be free becomes to a subsequent age so palpable an absur-
dity, that the only difficulty then is to imagine how such a
thing can ever have appeared credible. It has so happened
with the doctrine that money is synonymous with wealth.
The conceit seems too preposterous to be thought of as a

B 2


4 PRELIMINARY REMARKS.


serious opinion. It looks like one of the crude fancies of
childhood, instantly corrected by a word from any grown
person. But let no one feel confident that he should have
escaped the delusion if he had lived at the time when it pre-
yailed. All the associations engendered by common life, and
by the ordinary course of business, concurred in favouring
it. So long as those associations were the only medium
through which the subject was looked at, what we now think
so gross an absurdity must have seemed a truism. Once
questioned, indeed, it was doomed ; but no one was likely
to think of questioning it whose mind had not become fami-
liar with certain modes of stating and of contemplating eco-
nomical phenomena, which have only found their way into
the general understanding through the influence of Adam
Smith and of his expositors.

In common discourse, wealth is always expressed in
money. If you ask how rich a person is, you are answered
that he has so many thousand pounds. All income and
expenditure, all gains and losses, everything by which one
becomes richer or poorer, are reckoned as the coming in or
going out of so-much money. It is true that in the in-
ventory of a person’s fortune are included, not only the
money in his actual possession, or due to him, but all
other articles of value. These however enter, not in their
own character, but in virtue of the sums of money which
they would sell for; and if they would sell for less, their
owner is reputed less rich, although the things themselves
are precisely the same. It is true, also, that people do not
grow rich by keeping their money unused, and that they
must be willing to spend in order to gain. Those who
enrich themselves by commerce, do so by giving money
for goods as well as goods for money; and the first is as
necessary a part of the process as the last. But he who
buys goods for purposes of gain, does so to sell them again
for money, and in the expectation of receiving more money
than he laid out: to get money, therefore, seems even to the


PRELIMINARY REMARKS. 5


person himself the ultimate end of the whole. It often
happens that he is not paid in money, but in something
else; having bought goods to a value equivalent, which are
set off against those he sold. But he accepted these at a
money valuation, and in the belief that they would bring
in more money eventually than the price at which they were
made over to him, A dealer doing a large amount of busi-
ness, and turning over his capital rapidly, has but a small
portion of it in ready money at any one time. But he only
feels it valuable to him as it is convertible into money; he
considers no transaction closed until the net result is either
paid or credited in money: when he retires from business
it is into money that he converts the whole, and not until
then does he deem himself to have realized his gains: just
as if money were the only wealth, and money’s worth were
only the means of attaining it. If you now ask, for what end
money is desirable, unless to supply the wants or pleasures
of yourself or others, the champion of the system would not
be at all embarrassed by the question. True, he would
say, these are the uses of wealth, and very laudable uses
while confined to domestic commodities, because in that
case, by exactly the amount which you expend, you enrich
others of your countrymen. Spend your wealth, if you
please, in whatever indulgences you have a taste for; but
your wealth is nof the indulgences, it is the sum of money
or the annual money income with which you purchase
them.

While there were so many things to render the as-
sumption which is the basis of the mercantile system
plausible, there is also some small foundation in reason,
though a very insuffi¢ient one, for the distinction which
that system so emphatically draws between money and
every other kind of valuable possession. We really, and
justly, look upon a person as possessing the advantages of
wealth, not in proportion to the useful and agreeable things
of which he is in the actual enjoyment, but to his command


6 PRELIMINARY REMARKS.


over the general fund of things useful and agreeable; the
power he possesses of providing for any exigency, or obtain-
ing any object of desire. Now, money is itself that powers
while all other things, in a civilized state, seem to confer it
only by their capacity of being exchanged for money. To
possess any other article of wealth, is to possess that par-
ticular thing, and nothing else: if you wish for another thing
instead of it, you have first to sell it, or to submit to the
inconvenience and delay (if not the impossibility) of finding
some one who has what you want, and is willing to barter it
for what you have. But with money you are at once able
to buy whatever things are for sale: and he whose fortune iS
in money, or in things rapidly convertible into it, seems both
to himself and others to possess not any one thing, but all
the things which the money places it at his option to pur-
chase. The greatest part of the utility of wealth, beyond a
very moderate quantity, is not the indulgences it procures,
bet the reserved power which its possessor holds in his
hands of attaming purposes generally: and this power no
other kind of wealth confers so immediately or so certainly
as money. It 1s the only form of wealth which is not merely
applicable to some one use, but can be turned at once to
any use. And this distinction was the more likely to make
an impression upon governments, as it is one of considerable
importance to them. A civilized government derives com-
paratively little advantage from taxes unless it can collect
them im money: and if it has large or sudden payments to
make, especially payments in foreign countries for wars or
subsidies, either for the sake of conquering or of not being
conquered, (the two chief objects of national policy until a
lt pr) aces any medive of pamnt exept more
both individuals and governments, in a : Cee CS me
attach almost ex@uaine ones to eee cae ee

: é oney,
or im posse, and look upon all other things (w
part of their resources) scarcely Rie nee


either in esse
hen viewed as
as the remote


PRELIMINARY REMARKS. 7
medium of obtaining that which alone when obtained affords
the indefinite, and at the same time instantaneous, command
over objects of desire, which best answers to the idea of
wealth.

An absurdity, however, does not cease to be an ab-
surdity when we have discovered what were the appearances
which made it plausible; and the Mercantile Theory could
not fail to be seen in its true character when men began,
even in an imperfect manner, to explore into the founda-
tions of things, and seek their premises from elementary
facts, and not from the forms and phrases of common dis-
course. So soon as they asked themselves what is really
meant by money—what it is in its essential characters, and
the precise nature of the functions it performs, they reflected
that money, like other things, is only a desirable possession
on account of its uses; and that these, instead of being, as
they delusively appear, indefinite, are of a strictly defined
and limited description, namely, to facilitate the distribution
of the produce of industry, according to the convenience of
those among whom it is shared. Further consideration
showed that the uses of money are in no respect promoted
by increasing the quantity which exists and circulates in a
country ; the service which it performs being as well ren-
dered by a small as by a large aggregate amount. ‘Two
million quarters of corn will not feed so many persons as
four millions; but two millions of pounds sterling will carry
on as much traffic, will buy and sell as many commodities
as four millions, though at lower nominal prices. Money, as
money, satisfies no want, answers no purpose: its worth to
any one, consists in its bemg a convenient shape in which
to receive his incomings of all sorts, which incomings he
afterwards, at the times which suit him best, converts into
the forms in which they can be useful to him. ‘The differ-
ence between a country with money, and a country altoge-
ther without it, would be only one of convenience; a saving
of time and trouble, like grinding by water instead of: by


PFET


8 PRELIMINARY REMARKS.


hand, or (to use Adam Smith’s illustration) like the benefit
derived from roads; and to mistake money for wealth, is the
same sort of error as to mistake the highway which may be
the easiest way of getting to your house or lands, for the
house and lands themselves.

Money, being the instrument of an important public and
private purpose, is rightly regarded as wealth; but every-


thing else which serves any human purpose, and which


nature does not afford gratuitously, is wealth also. To be
wealthy is to have a large stock of useful articles, or the
means of purchasing them. Everything forms therefore a
part of wealth, which has a power of purchasing ; for which
anything useful or agreeable would be given in exchange.
Things for which nothing could be obtained in exchange,
however useful or necessary they may be, are not wealth,
in the sense in which the term is used in Political Economy.
Air, for example, though the most absolute of necessaries,
bears no price in the market, because it can be obtained gra-
tuitously: to accumulate a stock of it would yield no profit
or advantage to any one; and the laws of its production and
distribution are the subject of a very different study from
Political Economy. But though air is not wealth, mankind
are much richer by obtaining it gfatis, since the time and
labour which would otherwise be required for supplying the
most pressing of all wants, can be devoted to other purposes:
It is possible to imagine circumstances in which air would

be a part of wealth. If it became customary to sojourn
long in places where the air does not naturally penetrate, as
in diving-bells sunk in the sea, a supply of air artificially

furnished would, like water conveyed into houses, bear a

price: and if from any revolution in nature the atmosphere

became too scanty for the consumption, or could be monopo-

lized, air might acquire a very high marketable value. In

eee 5 - ee ie Eevee isso ata
mankind might at first cae _ ‘ ie ie peneiplancaltiiscl -
appear to be increased, by what


PRELIMINARY REMARKS. 9


would be so great a calamity to them. But this would be an
error; for however rich the possessor of air might become, at
the expense of the rest of the community, all persons else
would be poorer by all that they were compelled to pay for
what they had before obtained without payment.

This leads to an important distinction in the meaning of
the word wealth, as applied to the possessions of an indi-
vidual, and to those of a nation, or of mankind. In the
wealth of mankind, nothing is included which does not of
itself answer some purpose of utility or pleasure. To an
individual, anything is wealth, which, though useless in itself,
enables him to claim from others a part of their stock of
things useful or pleasant. Take, for instance, a mortgage
of a thousand pounds on a landed estate. This is wealth
to the person to whom it brings in a revenue, and who could
perhaps sell it in the market for the full amount of the debt.
But it is not wealth to the country; if the engagement were
annulled, the country would be neither poorer nor richer.
The mortgagee would have lost a thousand pounds, and the
owner of the land would have gained it. Speaking nationally,
the mortgage was not itself wealth, but merely gaye A a claim
to a portion of the wealth of B. It was wealth to A, and
wealth which he could transfer to a third person; but what
he so transferred was in fact a joint ownership, to the extent
of a thousand pounds, in the land of which B was nominally
the sole proprietor. The position of fundholders, or owners
of the public debt of a country, is similar. They are mort-
gagees on the general wealth of the country. The cancelling
of the debt would be no destruction of wealth, but a transfer
of it: a wrongful abstraction of wealth from certain members
of the community, for the profit of the government, or of the
tax-payers. Funded property therefore cannot be counted
as part of the national wealth. This is not always borne in
mind by the dealers in statistical calculations. For example,
in estimates of the gross income of the country, founded on
the proceeds of the income tax, incomes derived from the


10 PRELIMINARY REMARKS.


s excluded: although the tax-payers are
minal income, without being per-
he portion levied from them in


funds are not alway
assessed on their whole no


mitted to deduct from it t
taxation to form the income of the fundholder. In this cal-


culation, therefore, one portion of the general income of the
country is counted twice over,
made to appear greater than it


A country, however, may include
by its citizens in the funds of foreign countries, and other


debts due to them from abroad. But even this is only wealth
to them, by being a part ownership in wealth held by others.
It forms no part of the collective wealth of the human race.
It is an element in the distribution, but not in the compo-
sition of the general wealth.

It has been proposed to define wealth as signifying “ in-
struments :” meaning not tools and machinery alone, but
the whole accumulation possessed by individuals or commu-
nities, of means for the attaimment of their ends. Thus, a
field is an instrument, because it is a means to the attain-
ment of corn. Corn is an instrument, being a means to the
attainment of flour. Flour is an instrument, being a means
to the attainment of bread. Bread is an instrument, as a
means to the satisfaction of hunger and to the support of life.
Here we at last arrive at things which are not instruments,
being desired on their own account, and not as mere means
to something beyond. This view of the subject is philoso-
phically correct ; or rather, this mode of expression may be
usefully employed along with others, not as conveying a dif-
ferent view of the subject from the common one, but as
giving more distinctness and reality to the common view.
‘It departs, however, too widely from the custom of language,
to be likely to obtain general acceptation, or to be of use for
any other purpose than that of occasional illustration.

Wealth, then, may be defined, all useful or agreeable
things which possess exchangeable value; or, in other words,
all useful or agreeable things except those which can be


and the aggregate amount
is by about thirty millions.
in its wealth all stock held


PRELIMINARY REMARKS. ll
e


obtained, in the quantity desired, without labour or sacrifice.
To this definition, the only objection seems to be, that it
leaves in uncertainty a question which has been much de-
bated—whether what are called immaterial products are to
be considered as wealth; whether, for example, the skill of a
workman, or any other natural or acquired power of body or
mind, shall be called wealth, or not: a question, not of very
great importance, and which, so far as requiring discussion,
will be more conveniently considered in another place*.

These things having been premised respecting wealth, we
shall next turn our attention to the extraordinary differences
in respect to it, which exist between nation and nation, and
between different ages of the world; differences both in the
quantity of wealth, and in the kind of it; as well as in the
manner in which the wealth existing in the community is
shared among its members.

There is, perhaps, no people or community, now existing,
which subsists entirely on the spontaneous produce of vege-
tation. But many tribes still live exclusively, or almost ex-
clusively, on wild animals, the produce of hunting or fishing.
Their clothing is skins; their habitations huts rudely formed
of logs or boughs of trees, and abandoned at an hour’s notice.
The food they use being little susceptible of storing up, they
have no accumulation of it, and are often exposed to great
privations. The wealth of such a community consists solely
of the skins they wear; a few ornaments, the taste for which

-exists in most savage states; some rude utensils ; the weapons
with which they kill their game, or fight with hostile compe-
titors for the means of subsistence; canoes for crossing rivers
and lakes, or fishing in the sea; and perhaps some furs, or
other productions of the wilderess, collected to be ex-
changed with civilized people for blankets, brandy, and
tobacco; of which foreign produce also there may be some
unconsumed portion in store. To this scanty inventory of


* Infra, book i. chap. iil.


12- PRELIMINARY REMARKS.


:
material wealth, ought to be added their land; an instrument
of production, of which they make slender use, compared with
more settled communities, but which is still the source of
their subsistence, and which has a marketable value if there
be any agricultural community in the neighbourhood requir-
ing more land than it possesses. This is the state of greatest
poverty in which any entire community of human beings is
known to exist, although there are much richer communi-
ties in which portions of the inhabitants are in a condition,
as to subsistence and comfort, probably as little enviable as
that of the savage.

The first great advance beyond this state consists in the
domestication of the more useful animals; giving rise to the
pastoral, or nomad state, in which mankind do not live on
the produce of hunting, but on milk and its products, and
on the annual increase of flocks and herds. This condition
is not only more desirable in itself, but more conducive to
further progress; and a much more considerable amount
of wealth is accumulated under it. So long as the vast natural
pastures of the earth are not yet so fully occupied as to be
consumed more rapidly than they are spontaneously repro-
duced, a large and constantly increasing stock of subsistence
may be collected and preserved, with little other labour than
that of guarding the cattle from the attacks of wild beasts,
and from the force or wiles of predatory men. Large flocks
and herds, therefore, are in time possessed, by active and
thrifty individuals through their own exertions, and by the
heads of families and tribes through the exertions of those
who are connected with them by allegiance. There thus
arises, in the shepherd state, imequality of possessions, a thing
which scarcely exists in the savage state, where no one has
much more than absolute necessaries, and in case of deficiency
must share even those with his tribe. In the nomad state
some have an abundance of cattle, sufficient for the food of
a multitude, while others have not contrived to appropriate
and retain any superfluity, or perhaps any cattle at all. But


PRELIMINARY REMARKS. 13


subsistence has ceased to be precarious, since the more suc-
cessful have no other use which they can make of their
surplus than to feed the less fortunate, while every increase
in the number of persons connected with them is an increase
both of security and of power: and thus they are enabled to
divest themselves of all labour except that of government and
superintendance, and acquire dependents to fight for them
in war and to serve them in peace. One of the features of
this state of society is, that a part of the community, and
in some degree even the whole of it, possess leisure. Only a
portion of time is required for procuring food, and the re-
mainder is not engrossed by anxious thought for the morrow,
or necessary repose from muscular activity. Such a life is
highly favourable to the growth of new wants, and opens a
possibility of their gratification. A desire arises for better
clothing, utensils, and implements, than the savage state con-
tents itself with; and the surplus food renders it practicable
to devote to these purposes the exertions of a part of the
tribe. In all or most nomad communities we find domestic
manufactures of a coarse, and in some, of a fine kind. There
is ample evidence that while those parts of the world which
have been the cradle of modern civilization were still gene-
rally in the nomad state, considerable skill had been attained
in spinning, weaving, and dyeing woollen garments, in the
preparation of leather, and in what appears a still more dif-
ficult invention, that of working im metals. Kven specula-
tive science took its first beginnings from the leisure charac-
teristic of this stage of social progress. The earliest astro-
nomical observations are attributed, by a tradition which has
much appearance of truth, to the shepherds of Chaldea.
From this state of society to the agricultural the transition
is not indeed easy, (for no great change in the habits of man-
kind is otherwise than difficult, and in general either painful
or very slow), but it lies in what may be called the spon-
taneous course of events. The growth of the population of
men and cattle began in time to press upon the earth’s capa-


~ ert


ny AR Et At mR mea natn a ome


ae


14 PRELIMINARY REMARKS,


bilities of yielding natural pasture ; and this cause doubtless
produced the first tilling of the ground, just as at a later period
the same cause made the superfluous hordes of the nations
which had remained nomad precipitate themselves upon
those which had already become agricultural; until, these
haying become sufficiently powerful to repel such inroads,
the invading nations, deprived of this outlet, were also obliged
to become agricultural communities. :

But after this great step had been completed, the sub-
sequent progress of mankind seems by no means to have
been so rapid (certain rare combinations of circumstances
excepted) as might perhaps have been anticipated. The
quantity of human food which the earth is capable of return-
ing even to the most wretched system of agriculture so much
exceeds what could be obtained in the purely pastoral state,
that a great increase of population is invariably the result.
But this additional food is only obtained by a great addi-
tional amount of labour; so that not only an agricultural
has much less leisure than a pastoral population, but with
the imperfect tools and unskilful processes which are for a
long time employed (and which over the greater part of the
earth have not even yet been abandoned) agriculturists do
not, unless in unusually advantageous circumstances of cli-
mate and soil, produce so great a surplus of food beyond
their necessary consumption, as to support any large class
of labourers engaged in other departments of industry.
The surplus, too, whether small or great, is usually torn from
the producers, either by the government to which they are
subject, or by individuals, who, by superior force, or by
availing themselves of religious or traditional feelings of
subordination, have established themselves as lords of the
soil.

The first of these modes of appropriation, by the govern-
ment, is characteristic of the extensive monarchies which


from a time beyond historical record have occupied the plains


of Asia. The government, in those countries, though varying


PRELIMINARY REMARKS. 15


in its qualities according to the accidents of personal cha-
racter, seldom leaves much to the cultivators beyond mere
necessaries, and often strips them so bare even of these,
that it finds itself obliged, after taking all they have, to lend
part of it back to those from whom it has been taken, in
order to provide them with seed, and enable them to sup-
port life until another harvest. Under the régime in question,
although the bulk of the population are ill provided for, the
government, by collecting small sums from great numbers,
is enabled, with any tolerable management, to make a show
of riches quite out of proportion to the general condition of
the society ; and hence the inveterate impression, of which
Europeans have only at a late period been disabused, con-
cerning the great opulence of Oriental nations. In this
wealth, without reckoning the large portion which adheres
to the hands employed in collecting it, many persons of
course participate besides the immediate household of the
sovereign. A large part is distributed among the various
functionaries of government, and among the objects of the
sovereign’s favour or caprice. A part is occasionally em-
ployed in works of public utility. The tanks, wells, and
canals for irrigation, without which in most tropical climates
cultivation could hardly be carried on; the embankments
which confine the rivers, the bazars for dealers, and the
seraees for travellers, none of which could have been made
by the scanty means in the possession of those using them,
owe their existence to the liberality and enlightened self-
interest of the better order of princes, or to the benevolence
or ostentation of here and there a rich individual, whose
fortune, if traced to its source, is always found to have been
drawn immediately or remotely from the public revenue,
most frequently by a direct grant of a portion of it from the
sovereign.

The ruler of a society of this description, after providing
largely for his own support, and that of all persons in whom
he feels an interest, and after maintaining as many soldiers


16 PRELIMINARY REMARKS,


as he thinks needful for his security or his state, has a dis-
posable residue which he is glad to exchange for articles of
luxury suitable to his disposition: as have also the class of
persons who have been enriched by his favour, or by handling
the public revenues. A demand thus arises for elaborate
and costly manufactured articles, adapted to a narrow but a
wealthy market. This demand is often supplied almost
exclusively by the merchants of more advanced communities,
but often also raises up in the country itself a class of
artificers, by whom certain fabrics are carried to as high
excellence as can be given by patience and manual dexterity,
without any considerable knowledge of the properties of
objects: such as some of the cotton fabrics of India. These
artificers are fed by the surplus food which has been taken by
the government and its agents as their share of the produce.
So literally is this the case, that in some countries the work-
man, instead of taking his work home and being paid for it
after it is finished, proceeds with his tools to his customer’s
house, and is there subsisted until the work is complete.
The insecurity, however, of all possessions in this state of
society, induces even the richest purchasers to give a pre-
ference to such articles as, being of an imperishable nature,
and containing great value in small bulk, are adapted for
being concealed or carried off. Gold and jewels, therefore,
constitute a large proportion of the wealth of these nations,
and many a rich Asiatic carries nearly his whole fortune on
his person, or on those of the women of his harem. No
one, except the monarch, thinks of investing his wealth in a
manner not susceptible of removal. He, indeed, if he feels
safe on his throne, and reasonably secure of transmitting it
Ae Rinse eee ee
the MEieloe at eee a eS le
é : € rude manufactures
destined for the wants of the cultivators are worked up b
village artisans, who are remunerated by land given to eee
rent free to cultivate, or by fees paid to them in kind from


PRELIMINARY REMARKS. 7


such share of the crop as is left to the villagers by the govern-
ment. This state of society, however, is not destitute of a
mercantile class; composed of two divisions, grain dealers
and money dealers. The grain dealers do not usually buy
grain from the producers, but, from the agents of govern-
ment, who, receiving the revenue in kind, are glad to devolve
upon others the business of conveying it to the places where
the prince, his chief civil and military officers, the bulk of
his troops, and the artisans who supply the wants of these
various persons, are assembled. The money dealers lend to
the unfortunate cultivators when ruined by bad seasons or
fiscal exactions, the means of supporting life and continuing
their cultivation, and are repaid with enormous interest at
the next harvest; or, on a larger scale, they lend to the
government, or to those to whom it has granted a portion of
the revenue, and are indemnified by assignments on the
revenue collectors, or by having certain districts put into
their possession, that they may pay themselves from the
revenues; to enable them to do which, a great portion of
the powers of government are usually made over simul-
taneously, to be exercised by them until either the districts
are redeemed, or their receipts have liquidated the debt.
Thus, the commercial operations of both these classes of
dealers take place principally upon that part of the produce
of the country which forms the revenue of the government.
From that revenue their capital is periodically replaced with
a profit, and that is also the source from which their original
funds have almost always been derived. Such, in its general
features, is the economical condition of most of the countries
of Asia, as it has been from beyond the commencement of
authentic history, and is still, wherever not disturbed by
foreign influences.

In the agricultural communities of ancient Kurope whose
early condition is best known to us, the course of things
was different. These, at their origin, were mostly small
town-communities, at the first plantation of which in an


VOL. I. Cc


‘


18 PRELIMINARY REMARKS.


unoccupied country, or in one from which the former inha-
bitants had been expelled, the land which was taken posses-
sion of was systematically divided, in equal or nearly equal
allotments, among the families composing the community,
In some cases, instead of a town there was a confederation
of towns, occupied by people of the same reputed race, and
who were supposed to have settled in the country about the
same time. Each family produced its own food and the
materials of its clothing, which were worked up within itself,
usually by the women of the family, into the coarse fabrics
with which the age was contented. Taxes there were none;
as there were either no paid officers of government, Or if
there were, their payment had been provided for by a reserved
portion of land, cultivated by slaves on account of the state;
and the army consisted of the body of citizens. The whole
produce of the soil, therefore, belonged, without deduanel
to the family which cultivated it. So long as the progress ot
events permitted this disposition of property to last, the state
of society was, for the majority of the free cultivators, pro-
bably not an undesirable one; and under it, in some cases,
the advance of mankind in intellectual culture was extraor-
dinarily rapid and brilliant. This more especially happened,


where along with advantageous circumstances of race and


climate, and no doubt with many favourable accidents of
which all trace is now lost, was combined the advantage of a
position on the shore of a great inland sea, the other coasts
of which were already occupied by settled communities. The
knowledge which in such a position was acquired of foreign
productions, and the easy access of foreign ideas and inven-
tions, made the chain of routine, usually
people, hang loosely on these communiti
of their industrial developement ; they
of wants and desires, which stimulated them to extract from
their own soil the utmost which they
yield; and when their soil w
to the end of its capacity,


So strong in a rude
es. To speak only
early acquired variety


knew how to make it
as sterile, or after they had come
they often became traders, and


PRELIMINARY REMARKS. 19


bought up the productions of foreign countries, to sell them
in other countries with a profit.

The duration, however, of this state of things was hom
the first precarious. These little communities lived in a state
of almost perpetual war. For this there were many causes.
In the ruder and purely agricultural communities a frequent
cause was the mere pressure of their increasing population
upon their limited land, aggravated as that pressure so often
was by deficient harvests in the rude state of their agriculture,
and depending as they did for food upon a very small extent
of country. On these occasions the community often emi-
grated en masse, or sent forth a swarm of its youth, to seek,
sword in hand, for some less warlike people who could be
expelled from their land, or detained to cultivate it as slaves
for the benefit of their despoilers. What the less advanced
tribes did from necessity, the more prosperous did from
ambition and the military spirit: and after a time the whole
of these city-communities were either conquerors or con-
quered. In some cases the conquering state contented itself
with imposing a tribute on the vanquished: who, being, in
consideration of that burthen, freed from the expense and
trouble of their own military and naval protection, might
enjoy under it a considerable share of economical pros-
perity, while the ascendant community obtained a surplus
of wealth, available for purposes of collective luxury or mag-
nificence. From such a surplus the Parthenon and the
Propylea were built, the sculptures of Pheidias paid for,
and the festivals celebrated for which Auschylus, Sophocles,
Euripides and Aristophanes composed their dramas. But
this state of political relations, most useful, while it lasted,
to the progress and ultimate interest of mankind, had not
the elements of durability. A small conquering community
which does not incorporate its conquests, always ends by
being conquered. Universal dominion therefore at last rested
with the people who practised this art—with the Romans;
who, whatever were their other devices, always either began

c 2


20 PRELIMINARY REMARKS.


or ended by taking a great part of the land to enrich their
own leading citizens, and by adopting into the governing
body the principal possessors of the remainder. It is unne-
cessary to dwell on the melancholy economical history of the
Roman empire. When inequality of wealth once commences,
in a community not constantly engaged in repairing by
industry the injuries of fortune, its advances are gigantic:
the great masses of wealth swallow up the smaller. The
Roman empire ultimately became covered with the vast
landed possessions of a comparatively few families, for whose
luxury, and still more for whose ostentation, the most costly
products were raised, while the cultivators of the soil were
slaves, or small tenants in a nearly servile condition. From
this time the wealth of the empire progressively declined.
In the beginning, the public revenues, and the resources of
rich individuals, sufficed at least to cover Italy with splendid
edifices, public and private; but at length so dwindled under
the enervating influences of mis-government, that what re-
mained was not even sufficient to keep those edifices from
decay. The strength and riches of the civilized world
became inadequate to make head against the nomad popu-
lation which skirted its northern frontier: they overran the
empire, and a different order of things succeeded.

In the new frame in which European society was now
cast, the population of each country may be considered as
composed, in unequal proportions, of two distinct nations or
races, the conquerors and the conquered: the first the pro-
prietors of the land, the latter the tillers of it. These tillers
were allowed to occupy the land on conditions which, being
the product of force, were always onerous, but seldom to the
extent of absolute slavery. Already in the later times of the
Roman empire, predial slavery had extensively transformed
itself into a kind of serfdom: the coloni of the Romans were
rather villeims than actual slaves: and the incapacity and
distaste of the barbarian conquerors for personally superin-
tending industrial occupations, left no alternative but to allow


PRELIMINARY REMARKS. 21


to the cultivators, as an incentive to exertion, some real inte-
rest in the soil. If, for example, they were compelled to
labour, three days in the week, for their superior, the produce
of the remaining days was their own. If they were required
to supply the provisions of various sorts, ordinarily required
for the consumption of the castle, and were often subject to
requisitions in excess, yet after supplymg these demands they
were suffered to dispose at their will of whatever additional
produce they could raise. Under this system during the
Middle Ages it was not impossible, no more than in Russia
at present (where the same system still essentially prevails)
for serfs to acquire property; and in fact, their accumula-
tions are the primitive source of the wealth of modern
Europe.

In that age of violence and disorder, the first use made
by a serf of any small provision which he had been able to
accumulate, was to buy his freedom and withdraw himself to
some town or fortified village, which had remained undestroyed
from the time of the Roman dominion; or, without buying
his freedom, to abscond thither. In that place of refuge,
surrounded by others of his own class, he attempted to live,
secured in some measure from the outrages and exactions of
the warrior caste, by his own prowess and that of his fellows.
These emancipated serfs mostly became artificers; and lived
by exchanging the produce of their industry for the surplus
food and material which the soil yielded to its feudal pro-
prietors. This gave rise to a sort of Kuropean counterpart
of the economical condition of Asiatic countries ; except that,
in lieu of a single monarch and a fluctuating body of favourites
and employés, there was a numerous and in a considerable
degree fixed class of great landholders; exhibiting far less
splendour, because individually disposing of a much smaller
surplus produce, and for a long time expending the chief part
of it in maintaining the body of retainers whom the warlike
habits of society, and the little protection afforded by govern-
ment, rendered indispensable to their safety. The greater


pS SS


saree Sie eit lets


22 PRELIMINARY REMARKS.


stability, the fixity of personal position, which this state of
society afforded, in comparison with the Asiatic polity to
which it economically corresponded, was probably one main
reason why it was also found more favourable to improve-
ment. From this time the economical advancement of society
has not been further interrupted. Security of person and
property grew slowly, but steadily; the arts of life made
constant progress; plunder ceased to be the only source of
accumulation; and feudal Europe ripened into commercial
and manufacturing Europe. In the latter part of the middle
ages the towns of Italy and Flanders, the free cities of Ger-
many, and some towns of France and England, contained a
large and energetic population of artisans, and many rich
burghers, whose wealth had been acquired by manufacturing
industry, or by trading in the produce of such industry. The
Commons of England, the Tiers-Etat of France, the bour-
geoisie of the Continent generally, are the descendants of this
class. As these were a saving class, while the posterity of the
feudal aristocracy were a squandering class, the former by
degrees substituted themselves for the latter as the owners of
a great proportion of the land. This natural tendency was in
some cases retarded by laws contrived for the purpose of
detaining the land in the families of its possessors, in other
eases accelerated by political revolutions. Gradually, though
more slowly, the immediate cultivators of the soil, in all the
more civilized countries, ceased to be in a servile or semi-
servile state: though the legal position, as well as the econo-
mical condition attained by them, vary extremely in the
different nations of Europe, and in the great communities
which have been founded beyond the Atlantic by the des-
cendants of Kuropeans.

The world now contains several extensive regions, pro-
vided with the various ingredients of wealth in a degree of
abundance of which former ages had not eyen the idea.
Without compulsory labour, an enormous mass of food is
annually extracted from the soil, and maintains, besides the


PRELIMINARY REMARKS. 23
actual producers, an equal, sometimes a greater number of
labourers, occupied in producing conveniences and luxuries
of innumerable kinds, or in transporting them from place to
place; also a multitude of persons employed in directing and
superintending these various labours; and over and above all
these, a class more numerous than in the most luxurious
ancient societies, of persons whose occupations are of a kind
not directly productive, and of persons who have no occupa-
tion at all. The food, thus raised, supports a far larger popu-
lation than had ever existed (at least in the same regions) on
an equal space of ground; and supports them with certainty,
exempt from those periodically recurring famines so abundant
in the early history of Europe, and in Oriental countries even
now not unfrequent. Besides this great increase in the quan-
tity of food, it has greatly improved in quality and variety 5
while conveniences and luxuries, other than food, are no longer
limited to a small and opulent class, but descend, in great
abundance, through many widening strata in society, whatever
doubt may exist as to the amount of improvement effected
in the condition of the lowest of all. The collective resources
of one of these communities, when it chooses to put them
forth for any unexpected purpose; its ability to maintain
fleets and armies, to execute public works, either useful or
ornamental, to perform national acts of beneficence like the
ransom of the West India slaves; to found colonies, to have
its people taught, to do anything in short which requires ex-
pense, and to do it with no sacrifice of the necessaries or even
the substantial comforts of its inhabitants ; are such as the
world never saw before.

But in all these particulars, characteristic of the modern
industrial communities, those communities differ widely from
one another. ‘Though abounding in wealth, as compared with
former ages, they do so in very different degrees. Even of the
countries which are justly accounted the richest, some have
made a more complete use of their productive resources,
and have obtained, relatively to their territorial extent, a much


Fr


ecient ce Ne EET NE
= pmvonoe nena
| a a ce ERS


24 PRELIMINARY REMARKS.


larger produce than others; nor do they differ only in
amount of wealth, but also in the rapidity of its increase.
The diversities in the distribution of wealth, are still greater
than in the production. There are great differences in the
conditior of the poorest class in different countries ; and in
the proportional numbers and opulence of the classes which
are above the poorest. The very nature and designation of
the classes who originally share among them the produce of
the soil, vary not a little in different places. In some, the
landowners are a class in themselves, almost entirely separate
from the classes engaged in industry: in others, the pro-
prietor of the land is almost universally its cultivator, own-
ing the plough if not himself holding it. Where the pro-
prietor himself does not cultivate, there is sometimes, between
him and the labourer, an intermediate agency, that of the
farmer, who advances the subsistence of the labourers, sup-
plies the implements of production, and receives, after pay-
ing a rent to the landowner, all the produce: in other cases,
the landlord, his paid agents, and the labourers, are the
only sharers. Manufactures, again, are sometimes carried on
by scattered individuals, who own or hire the tools or
machinery they require, and employ little labour besides that
of their own family; in other cases, by large numbers work-
ing together in one building, with expensive and complex
machinery, owned by rich manufacturers. The same differ-
ence exists in the operations of trade. The wholesale opera-
tions indeed are everywhere carried on by large capitals, where
such exist; but the retail dealings, which collectively oceupy
a very great amount of capital, are sometimes conducted in


small shops, chiefly by the personal exertions of the dealers
themselves, with their families and


two; and sometimes in large estal
funds are supplied by a wealthy
and the agency is th


perhaps an apprentice or
blishments, of which the
individual or association,
at of numerous salaried
shopwomen. Besides these differences


phenomena presented by different p


shopmen or
In the economical
arts of what is usually


PRELIMINARY REMARKS. 25


called the civilized world, all those earlier states which we
previously passed in review, have continued m some part or
other of the world, down to our own time. Hunting com-
munities still exist in America, nomadic in Arabia and the
steppes of Northern Asia; Oriental society is in essentials
what it has always been; Russia and Hungary are even now,
in many respects, the scarcely modified image of feudal
Europe. Every one of the great types of human society,
down to that of the Esquimaux or Patagonians, is still
extant.

These remarkable differences in the state of different
portions of the human race, with regard to the production
and distribution of wealth, must, like all other phenomena,
depend on causes. And it is not a sufficient explanation to
ascribe them exclusively to the degrees of knowledge, pos-
sessed at different times and places, of the laws of nature and
the physical arts of life. Many other causes co-operate; and
that very progress and unequal distribution of physical know-
ledge, are partly the effects, as well as partly the causes, of
the state of the production and distribution of wealth.

In so far as the economical condition of nations turns
upon the state of physical knowledge, it is a subject for the
physical sciences, and the arts founded on-them. But in so
far as the causes are moral or psychological, dependent on
institutions and social relations or on the principles of human
nature, their investigation belongs not to physical, but to
moral and social science, and is the object of what is called
Political Economy.

The production of wealth; the extraction of the instru-
ments of human subsistence and enjoyment from the mate-
rials of the globe; is evidently not an arbitrary thing. It
has its necessary conditions. Of these, some are physical,
depending on the properties of matter. These Political Eco-
nomy does not investigate, but assumes; referring for proof
to physical science or common experience. Combining with
these facts of outward nature other truths which are laws of


it
}


26 PRELIMINARY REMARKS.


human nature, it attempts to trace the secondary or deri-
vative laws, by which the production of wealth is determined;
and in which must lie the explanation of the diversities of
riches and poverty in the present and past, and the ground
of whatever progress in wealth is reserved for the future.

Unlike the laws of Production, those of Distribution are
partly of human institution ; since the manner in which wealth
is distributed in any given society, depends on the statutes
or usages therein prevalent. But though governments or
nations can in some measure determine what institutions
shall be established, they cannot arbitrarily determine how
those institutions shall work. The conditions on which the
power they possess over the distribution of wealth is depend-
ent, and the manner in which the distribution is affected by
the various modes of conduct which society may think fit to
adopt, are determined by laws as rigid as those of Produc-
tion itself.

The laws of Production and Distribution, and some of the
practical consequences deducible from them, are the subject
of the following treatise.


BOO Kee


PRODUCTION.


BOOK


PRODUCTION.


CHAPTER I.


OF THE REQUISITES OF PRODUCTION.


§ 1. Tue requisites of production are two: labour, and
appropriate natural objects.

Labour is either bodily or mental; or, to express the dis-
tinction more comprehensively, either muscular or nervous ;
and it is necessary to include in the idea, not solely the exer-
tion itself, but all feelings of a disagreeable kind, all bodily
inconvenience or mental annoyance, connected with the
employment of one’s thoughts, or muscles, or both, in a
particular occupation. Of the other requisite


appropriate
natural objects—it is to be remarked, that some objects exist
or grow up spontaneously, of a kind suited to the supply
of human wants. There are caves and hollow trees capable
of affording shelter; fruit, roots, wild honey, and other natural
products, on which human life can be supported; but even
here a considerable quantity of labour is generally required,
not for the purpose of creating, but of finding and appro-
priating them. In all but these few and (except in the very
commencement of human society) unimportant cases, the


30 BOOK I. CHAPTER 1. - 9) I.


objects supplied by nature are only instrumental to human
wants, after having undergone some degree of transformation
by human exertion. Even the wild animals of the forest and
of the sea, from which the hunting and fishing tribes derive
their sustenance—although the labour of which they are the
subject is chiefly that required for appropriating them—must
yet, before they are used as food, be killed, divided into frag-
ments, and subjected in almost all cases to some process of
cookery, which are operations requiring a certain degree of
human labour. The amount of transformation which natural
substances undergo before being brought into the shape in
which they are directly applied to human use, varies from
this or a still less degree of alteration in the nature and
appearance of the object, to a change so total that no trace is
perceptible of the original shape and structure. There is
little resemblance between a piece of a mineral substance
found in the earth, and a plough, an axe, or a saw. There
is less resemblance between porcelain and the decomposing
granite of which it is made, or between sand mixed with
sea-weed, and glass. The difference is ereater still between
the fleece of a sheep, or a handful of cotton seeds, and a web
of muslin or broad cloth; and the sheep and seeds them-
selves are not spontaneous growths, but results of previous
labour and care. In these several cases the ultimate product
is so extremely dissimilar to the substance supplied by nature,
that in the custom of language nature is represented as only
furnishing materials.

Nature, however, does more than supply materials; she
also supplies powers. The matter of the globe is not an
inert recipient of forms and properties impressed by human
hands; it has active energies by which it co-operates with,
and may even be used as a substitute for, labour. In the
early ages men converted their corn into flour by pounding it
between two stones; they next hit on a contrivance which
enabled them, by turning a handle, to make one of the stones


revolve upon the other; and this process, a little improved,


REQUISITES OF PRODUCTION. 31


is still the common practice of the East. The muscular
exertion, however, which it required, was very severe and
exhausting, insomuch that it was often selected as a punish-
ment for slaves who had offended their masters. When the
time came at which the labour and sufferings of slaves
were thought worth economizing, the greater part of this
bodily exertion was rendered unnecessary, by contriving that
the upper stone should be made to revolve upon the lower,
not by human strength, but by the force of the wind or of
falling water. In this case, natural agents, the wind or the
gravitation of the water, are made to do a portion of the work
previously done by labour.


§ 2. Cases like this, in which a certain amount of
labour has been dispensed with, its work being devolved
upon some natural agent, are apt to suggest an erroneous
notion of the comparative functions of labour and natural
powers; as if the co-operation of those powers with human
industry were limited to the cases in which they are made to
perform what would otherwise be done by labour; as if, in
the case of things made (as the phrase is) by hand, nature
only furnished passive materials. This is an illusion. The
powers of nature are as actively operative in the one case as
‘1 the other. A workman takes a stalk of the flax or hemp
plant, splits it info separate fibres, twines together several of
these fibres with his fingers, aided by a simple instrument
called a spindle; having thus formed a thread, he lays many
such threads side by side, and places other similar threads
directly across them, so that each passes alternately over and
under those which are at right angles to it; this part of the
process being facilitated by an instrument called a shuttle.
He has now produced a web of cloth, either linen or sack-
cloth according to the material. He is said to have done this
by hand, no natural force being supposed to have acted in
concert with him. But by what force is each step of this
operation rendered possible, and the web, when produced,


ees =


eG IET


32 “ BOOK I. GHAPTER I. § 2.


held together? Is it not by the tenacity, or force of cohesion,
of the fibres? which is one of the forces in nature, and which
we can measure exactly against other mechanical forces, and
ascertain how much of any of them it suffices to neutralize or
counterbalance.

If we examine any other case of what is called the
action of man upon nature, we shall find in like manner
that the powers of nature, or in other words the properties
of matter, do all the work, when once objects are put into
the right position. This one operation, of putting things
into fit places for being acted upon by their own internal
forces, and by those residing in other natural objects, is all
that man does, or can do, with matter. He only moves one
thing to or from another. He moves a seed into the ground;
and the natural forces of vegetation produce in succession a
root, a stem, leaves, flowers, and fruit. He moves an axe
through a tree, and it falls by the natural force of gravitation;
he moves a saw through it, in a particular manner, and the
physical properties by which a softer substance gives way
before a harder, make it separate into planks, which he
arranges in certain positions, with some adhesive matter
between them, and produces a table, or a house. He moves
a spark to fuel, and it ignites, and by the force of combustion
it cooks the food, melts or softens the iron, converts into beer
or sugar the malt or cane juice, which he has previously
moved to the spot. He has no other means of acting on
matter than by moving it. Motion, and resistance to motion,
are the only things which his muscles are constructed for.
By muscular contraction he can create a pressure on an out-
ward object, which, if sufficiently powerful, will set it in
motion, or if it be already moving, will check or modify or
altogether arrest its motion, and he can do no more. But
this is enough to have given him all the command which
mankind have acquired over natural forces immeasurably
more powerful than themselves; a command which, great
as it is already, is without doubt destined to become indefi-


REQUISITES OF PRODUCTION. wes: 33


nitely greater. He exerts this power either by availing him-
self of natural forces in existence, or by arranging objects in
those mixtures and combinations by which natural forces are
generated; as when by putting a lighted match to fuel, and
water into a boiler over it, he generates the expansive force
of steam, a power which has been made so largely available
for the attainment of human purposes.

Labour, then, in the physical world, is always and solely
employed in putting objects in motion; the properties of
matter, the laws of nature, do the rest. The skill and inge-
nuity of human beings is chiefly exercised in discovering
movements, practicable by their powers, and capable of
bringing about the effects which they desire. But, while
movement is the only effect which man can immediately and
directly produce by his muscles, it is not necessary that he
should produce directly by them all the movements which he
requires. The first and most obvious substitute is the mus-
cular action of cattle: by degrees he makes the powers of
inanimate nature aid him in this too, as by making the wind,
or water, things already in motion, communicate a part of
their motion to the wheels, which before that invention he
made revolve by muscular force. He extorts this service
from the powers of wind and water by a set of actions, con-
sisting like the former in moving certain objects into certain
positions in which they constitute what is termed a machine ;
but the muscular action necessary for this is not constantly
renewed, but performed once for all, and there is on the
whole a great economy of labour.


§ 3. Some writers have raised the question, whether
nature gives more assistance to labour in one kind of industry
or in another; and have said that in some occupations
labour does most, in others nature most. In this, however,
there seems much confusion of ideas. The part which nature
has in any work of man, is indefinite and incommensurable.
It is impossible to decide that in any one thing nature does

VOL, I. D


‘


34 BOOK I. CHAPTER I, § 4.


more than in any other. One cannot even say that labour
does less. One may say, that less labour is required; but
if that which is required, is absolutely indispensable, the
result is just as much the product of labour, as of nature.
When two conditions are equally necessary for producing the
effect at all, it is useless to say that so much of it is pro-
duced by one and so much by the other: it is like attempt-
ing to decide which half of a pair of scissors has most to
do in the act of cutting; or which of the factors, five and six,
contributes most to the production of thirty. The form
which this conceit usually assumes, is that of supposing, that
nature lends more assistance to human endeavours in agricul-
ture, than in manufactures. This notion, held by the French
Economistes, and from which Adam Smith was not free,
arose froma misconception of the nature of rent. ‘The rent
of land being a price paid for a natural agency, and no such
price being paid in manufactures, these writers imagined that
since a price was paid, it was because there was a greater
amount of service to be paid for: whereas a better consider-
ation of the subject would have shown that the reason why
the use of land bears a price is simply the limitation of its
quantity, and that if air, heat, electricity, chemical agencies,
and the other powers of nature employed by manufacturers
were sparingly supplied, and could, like land, be engrossed
and appropriated, a rent could be exacted for them also.


§ 4. This leads to a distinction which we shall find to be
of primary importance. Of natural powers, some are unli~
mited, others limited in quantity. By an unlimited quantity
is of course not meant literally, but practically unlimited;
a quantity beyond the use which can in any, or at least in
present circumstances, be made of it. Land is, In some
newly settled countries, practically unlimited in quantity:
there is more than can be used by the existing population of
the country, or by any accession likely to be made to it for
generations to come. But even there, land favourably


REQUISITES OF PRODUCTION. 35)


situated with regard to markets or means of carriage, is
generally limited in quantity: there is not so much of it as
persons would gladly occupy and cultivate, or otherwise turn
to use. In all old countries, land capable of cultivation, land
at least of any tolerable fertility, must be ranked among
agents limited in quantity. Water, for ordinary purposes,
on the banks of rivers or lakes, may be regarded as of un-
limited abundance; but if required for irrigation, it may even
there be insufficient to supply all wants, while in places
which depend for their consumption on cisterns or tanks,
or on wells which are not copious, or are liable to fail, water
takes its place among things the quantity of which is
most strictly limited. Where water itself is plentiful, yet
water-power, 7. é., a fall of water applicable by its mechanical
force to the service of industry, may be exceedingly limited,
compared with the use which would be made of it if it
were more abundant. Coal, metallic ores, and other useful
substances found in the earth, are still more limited than
land. They are not only strictly local, but exhaustible ;
though, at a given place and time, they may exist in much
greater abundance than would be applied to present use
even if they could be obtained gratis. Fisheries, in the sea,
are in most cases a gift of nature practically unlimited in
amount; but the Arctic whale fisheries have long been
insufficient for the demand which exists even at the very
considerable price necessary to defray the cost of appro-
priation: and the immense extension which the Southern
fisheries have in consequence assumed, is tending to ex-
haust them likewise. River fisheries are a natural resource
of a very limited character, and would be rapidly exhausted
if allowed to be used by every one without restraint. Aur,
even that state of it which we term wind, may, in most
situations, be obtained in a quantity sufficient for every
possible use; and so likewise, on the sea coast or on large
rivers, may water carriage: though the wharfage or harbour-
room applicable to the service of that mode of transport is in
D2


<9 RSENS a ote


36 BOOK I. CHAPTER I. § 4.


many situations far short of what would be used if easily
attainable.

It will be seen hereafter how much of the economy of
society depends on the limited quantity in which some of
the most important natural agents exist, and more ‘particu-
larly, land. For the present I shall only remark that so long
as the quantity of a natural agent is practically “unlimited, it
cannot, unless susceptible of artificial monopoly, bear any
value in the market, since no one will give anything for
what can be obtained gratis. But as soon as a limitation
becomes practically operative; as soon as there is not so
much of the thing to be had, as would be appropriated and
used if it could be obtained for asking; the ownership or
use of the natural agent acquires an exchangeable value.
When more water-power is wanted in a particular district,
than there are falls of water to supply it, persons will give
an equivalent for the use of a fall of water. When there
is more land wanted for cultivation than a place possesses,
or than it possesses of a certain quality and certain advan-
tages of situation, land of that quality and situation may be
sold for a price, or let for an annual rent. This subject will
hereafter be discussed at length; but it is often useful to
anticipate, by a brief suggestion, principles and deductions
which we have not yet reached the place for exhibiting and
illustrating fully.


CHAPTER II.


OF LABOUR AS AN AGENT OF PRODUCTION.


§ 1. Tse labour which terminates in the production of
an article fitted for some human use, is either employed
directly about the thing, or in previous operations destined
to facilitate, perhaps essential to the possibility of, the subse-
quent ones. In making bread, for example, the labour
employed about the thing itself is that of the baker; but
the labour of the miller, though employed directly in the
production not of bread but of flour, is equally part of the
aggregate sum of labour by which the bread is produced ;
as is also the labour of the sower, and of the reaper. Some
may think that all these persons ought to be considered as
employing their labour directly about the thing; the corn,
the flour, and the bread being one substance in three different
states. Without disputing about this question of mere lan-
guage, there is still the ploughman, who prepared the ground
for the seed, and whose labour never came in contact with the
substance in any of its states; and the plough-maker, whose
share in the result was still more remote. All these persons
ultimately derive the remuneration of their labour from the
bread, or its price: the plough-maker as much as the rest;
for since ploughs are of no use except for tilling the soil,
no one would make or use ploughs for any other reason
than because the increased returns thereby obtained from
the ground afforded a source from which an adequate equi-
yalent could be assigned for the labour of the plough-maker.
If the produce is to be used or consumed in the form of
bread, it is from the bread that this equivalent must come.
The bread must suffice to remunerate all these labourers, and
several others; such as the carpenters and bricklayers who


38 BOOK I. CHAPTER II. § 1.


erected the farm-buildings; the hedgers and ditchers who
made the fences necessary for the protection of the crop;
the miner and smelter who extracted or prepared the iron of
which the plough and other implements were made. These,
however, and the plough-maker, do not depend for their
remuneration upon the bread made from the produce of a
single harvest, but upon that made from the produce of
all the harvests which are successively gathered until the
plough, or the buildings and fences, are worn out. We
must add yet another kind of labour; that of transporting
the produce from the place of its production to the place of
its destined use: the labour of carrying the corn to market,
and from market to the miller’s, the flour from the yniller’s
to the baker’s, and the bread from the baker’s to the place of
its fmal consumption. This labour is sometimes very COM
siderable: flour is transported to England from beyond the
Atlantic, corn from the heart of Russia; and in addition to
the labourers immediately employed, the waggoners and sal-
lors, there are also costly instruments, such as ships, in the
construction of which much labour has been expended : that
labour, however, not depending for its whole remuneration
upon the bread, but for a part only; ships being usually,
during the course of their existence, employed in the trans-
port of many different kinds of commodities.

To estimate, therefore, the labour of which any given
commodity is the result, is far from a simple operation. The
items in the calculation are very numerous—as it may seem
to some persons, infinitely so; for if, as a part of the labour
employed in making bread, we count the labour of the black-
smith who made the plough, why not also (it may be asked)
the labour of making the tools used by the blacksmith, and
the tools used in making those tools, and so back to the
origin of things? But after mounting one or two steps in
this ascending scale, we come into a region of fractions t0o

minute for calculation. Suppose, for instance, that the same
plough will last, before bemg worn out, a dozen years. Only


LABOUR AS AN AGENT OF PRODUCTION. 39


one-twelfth of the labour of making the plough must be
placed to the account of each year’s harvest. A twelfth part
of the labour of making a plough is an appreciable quantity.
But the same set of tools, perhaps, suffice to the plough-
maker for forging a hundred ploughs, which serve during the
twelve years of their existence to prepare the soil of a hun-
dred different farms. A twelve-hundredth part of the labour
of making the tools, is as much, therefore, as has been ex-
pended in procuring one year’s harvest of a single farm: and
when this fraction comes to be further apportioned among
the various sacks of corn and loaves of bread, it is seen at
once that such quantities are not worth taking into the ac-
count for any practical purpose connected with the commo-
dity. It is true that if the tool-maker had not laboured, the
corn and bread never would have been produced; but they
will not sell a tenth part of a farthing dearer in consideration
of his labour.


§ 2. Another of the modes in which labour is mdirectly
or remotely instrumental to the production of a thing, requires
particular notice: namely, when it is employed in producing
subsistence, to maintain the labourers while they are engaged
in the production. This previous employment of labour is
an indispensable condition to every productive operation, on
any other than the very smallest scale. Except the labour of
the hunter and fisher, there is scarcely any kind of labour
to which the returns are immediate. Productive operations
require to be continued a certain time, before their fruits are
obtained. Unless the labourer, before commencing his work,
possesses a store of food, or can obtain access to the stores
of some one else, in sufficient quantity to maintain him until
the production is completed, he can undertake no labour but
such as can be carried on at odd intervals, concurrently with
the pursuit of his subsistence. He cannot obtain food itself
in any abundance; for every mode of so obtaining it, requires
that there be already food in store. Agriculture only brings


40 BOOK I. CHAPTER 11. § 2.


forth food after the lapse of months; and though the labours
of the agriculturist are not necessarily continuous during the
whole ‘period, they must occupy a considerable part of It
Not only is agriculture impossible without food produced in
advance, but there must be a very great quantity in advance
to enable any considerable community to support itself wholly
by agriculture. A country like England or France is only
able to carry on the agriculture of the present year, because
that of past years has provided, in those countries or some-
where else, sufficient food to support their agricultural popu-
lation until the next harvest. They are only enabled to pro-
duce so many other things besides food, because the food
which was in store at the close of the last harvest suffices
to maintain not only the agricultural labourers, but a large
industrious population besides.

The labour employed in producing this stock of subsist-
ence, forms a great and important part of the past labour
which has been necessary to enable present Jabour to be
carried on. But there is a difference, requiring particular
notice, between this and the other kinds of previous or pre-
paratory labour. The miller, the reaper, the ploughman, the
plough-maker, the “Waggoner and waggon-maker, even the
sailor and ship-builder when employed, derive their remune-
ration from the ultimate product—the bread made from the
corn on which they have severally operated, or supplied the
instruments for operating. The labour that produced the
food which fed all these labourers, is as necessary to the
ultimate result, the bread of the present harvest, as any of
those other portions of labour; but is not, like them, remu-
nerated from it. That previous labour, has received its remu-
neration from the previous food.
duct, there are needed labour,
to feed the labourers.


In order to raise any pro-
tools, and materials, and food


But the tools and materials are of
no use except for obtaining the product, or at least are to be
applied to no other use, and the |


can be remunerated only


abour of their construction
from the product when obtained.


&


LABOUR AS AN AGENT OF PRODUCTION. 41


The food, on the contrary, is intrinsically useful, and is
applied to its direct use, that of feeding human beings. The
labour expended in producing the food, and recompensed by
it, needs not be remunerated over again from the produce of
the subsequent labour which it has fed. If we suppose that
the same body of labourers carried on a manufacture, and
grew food to sustain themselves while doing it, they have
had for their trouble the food and the manufactured article;
but if they also grew the material and made the tools, they
have had nothing for that trouble but the manufactured
article alone.

The claim to remuneration founded on the possession of
food, available for the maintenance of labourers, is of an-
other kind ; remuneration for abstinence, not for labour. If
a person has a store of food, he has it in his power to con-
sume it himself in idleness, or in feeding others to attend on
him, or to fight for him, or to sing or dance for him. If, in-
stead of these things, he gives it to productive labourers to
support them during their work, he can, and naturally will,
claim a remuneration from the produce. He will not be con-
tent with simple repayment; if he receives merely that, he
is only in the same situation as at first, and has derived no
advantage from delaying to apply his savings to his own
benefit or pleasure. He will look for some equivalent for
this forbearance: he will expect his advance of food to come
back to him with an increase, called in the language of busi-
ness, a profit: and the hope of this profit will generally have
been a part of the inducement which made him accumulate a
stock, by economizing in his own consumption; or at any
rate, which made him forego the application of it, when
accumulated, to his personal ease or satisfaction. The food
also which maintained other workmen while producing the
tools or materials, must have been provided in advance by
some one, and he too must have his profit from the ultimate
product ; but there is this difference, that here the ultimate
product has to supply not only the profit, but also the


42 BOOK I. -CHAPTER 11. § 3.


remuneration of the labour. The tool-maker (say for m-
stance the plough-maker), does not indeed usually wait for
his payment until the harvest is reaped; the farmer advances
it to him, and steps into his place by becoming the owner of
the plough. Nevertheless, it is from the harvest that the
payment is to come; since the farmer would not undertake
this outlay unless he expected that the harvest would repay
him, and with a profit too on this fresh advance; that 18,
unless the harvest would yield, besides the remuneration of
the farm labourers (and a profit for advancing it), a sufficient
residue to remunerate the plough-maker’s labourers, give
the plough-maker a profit, and a profit to the farmer on
both.


§ 3. From these considerations it appears, that 1m an
enumeration and classification of the kinds of industry
which are intended for the indirect or remote furtherance
of other productive labour, we need not include the labour
of producing subsistence or other necessaries of life to be
consumed by productive labourers; for the main end and
purpose of this labour is the subsistence itself; and though
the possession of a store of it enables other work to be
done, this is but an incidental consequence. The remaining
modes in which labour is indirectly instrumental to pro-
duction, may be arranged under five heads. ;

First: Labour employed in producing materials, on which
industry is to be afterwards employed. This is, in many
cases, a labour of mere appropriation; extractive industry,
as it has been called. The labour of the miner, for example,
consists of operations for digging out of the earth substances
conyertible by industry into various articles fitted for human
use. Extractive industry however is not confined to the
extraction of materials. Coal, for instance, is employed, not
only in the processes of industry, but in directly warming
human beings. When so used it is not a material, but is
itself the ultimate product. So also in the case of a mine


LABOUR AS AN AGENT OF PRODUCTION. 43


of precious stones. These are to some small extent em-
ployed in the productive arts, as diamonds by the glass-
cutter, emery and corundum for polishing, but their principal
destination, that of ornament, is a direct use; though they
commonly require, before being so used, some process of
manufacture, which may perhaps warrant our regarding them
as materials. Metallic ores of all sorts are materials merely.

Under the head, production of materials, we must in-
clude the industry of the wood-cutter, when employed in
cutting and preparing timber for building, or wood for the
purposes of the carpenter’s or any other art. In the forests
of America, Norway, Germany, the Pyrenees and Alps, this
sort of labour is largely employed on trees of spontaneous
growth. In other cases, we must add to the labour of the
wood-cutter that of the planter and cultivator.

Under the same head are also comprised the labours of
the agriculturist in growing flax, hemp, cotton, feeding silk-
worms, raising food for cattle, producing bark, dye-stutts,
oleaginous plants, and many other things only useful be-
cause required in other departments of industry. So, too,
the labour of the hunter, as far as his object is furs or
feathers; of the shepherd and the cattle-breeder, in respect
of wool, hides, horn, bristles, horse hair, and the like. The
things used as materials in some process or other of manu-
facture are of a most miscellaneous character, drawn from
almost every quarter of the animal, vegetable, and mineral
kingdoms. And besides this, the finished products of many
branches of industry are the materials of others. The thread
produced by the spinner is applied to hardly any use except
as material for the weaver. Even the product of the loom is
chiefly used as material for the fabricators of articles of dress
or furniture, or of further instruments of productive industry,
as in the case of the sail-maker. The currier and tanner find
their whole occupation in converting raw material into what
may be termed prepared material. In strictness of speech,
almost all food, as it comes from the hands of the agricul-


44 BOOK I. CHAPTER II. § 4.


turist, is nothing more than material for the occupation of
the baker or the cook.


§ 4. The second kind of indirect labour is that em-
ployed in making tools or implements for the assistance of
labour. I use these terms in their most comprehensive
sense, embracing all permanent instruments or helps to
production, from a flint and a piece of steel for striking a
light, to a steam-ship, or the most complex apparatus of
manufacturing machinery. There may be some hesitation
where to draw the line between implements and materials;
and some things used in production (such as fuel) would
scarcely in common language be called by either name,
popular phraseology being shaped out by a different class
of necessities from those of scientific exposition. To avoid
a multiplication of classes and denominations answering to
distinctions of no scientific importance, political economists
generally include all things which are used as immediate
means of production (the means which are not immediate
will be considered presently) either in the class of implements
or in that of materials. Perhaps the line is most usually and
most conveniently drawn, by considering as a material every
instrument of production which can only be used once, being
destroyed (at least as an instrument for the purpose in
hand) by a single employment. Thus fuel, once burnt, can-
not be again used as fuel; what can be so used is only any
portion which has remained unburnt the first time. And
not only it cannot be used without being consumed, but it is
only useful by being consumed; for if no part of the fuel
were destroyed, no heat would be generated. A fleece, again,
is destroyed as a fleece by being spun into thread; and the
thread cannot be used as thread when woven into cloth. But
an axe is not destroyed as an axe by cutting down a tree:
it may be used afterwards to cut down a hundred or a thou-
sand more ; and although deteriorated in some small degree
by each use, it does not do its work by being deteriorated, as


LABOUR AS AN AGENT OF PRODUCTION. 45


the coal and the fleece do theirs by being destroyed; on the
contrary, it is the better instrument the better it resists
deterioration. There are some things, rightly classed as
materials, which may be used as such a second and a third
time, but not while the product to which they at first con-
tributed remains in existence. The iron which formed a tank
or a set of pipes may be melted down to form a plough or
a steam-engine; the stones with which a house was built
may be used after it is pulled down, to build another. But
this cannot be done while the original product subsists; their
function as materials is suspended until the exhaustion of the
first use. Not so with the things classed as implements;
they may be used repeatedly for fresh work, until the time,
sometimes very distant, at which they are worn out, while
the work already done by them may subsist unimpaired, and
when it perishes, does so by its own laws, or by casualties of
its own.

The only practical difference of much importance arising
from the distinction between materials and implements, is
one which has attracted our attention in another case. Since
materials are destroyed as such by being once used, the whole
of the labour required for their production, as well as the
abstinence of the person who supplied the means for carrying
it on, must be remunerated from the fruits of that single
use. Implements, on the contrary, being susceptible of re-
peated employment, the whole of the products which they
are instrumental in bringing into existence are a fund which
can be drawn upon to remunerate the labour of their con-
struction, and the abstinence of those by whose accumu-
lations that labour was supported. It is enough if each
product contributes a fraction, commonly an Insignificant
one, towards the remuneration of that labour and abstinence,
or towards indemnifying the immediate producer for advanc-
ing that remuneration to the person who produced the tools.


§ 5. Thirdly: Besides materials for industry to employ


46 BOOK I. CHAPTER II. § 5.


itself on, and implements to aid it, provision must be made
to prevent its operations from being disturbed and its pro-
ducts injured, either by the destroying agencies of nature,
or by the violence or rapacity of men. This gives rise to
another mode in which labour not employed directly about
the product itself, is instrumental to its production; namely,
when employed for the protection of industry. Such is the
object of all buildings for industrial purposes ; all manu-
factories, warehouses, docks, granaries, barns, farm-buildings
devoted to cattle or to the operations of agricultural labour.
I exclude those in which the labourers live, or which are
destined for their personal accommodation: these, like their
food, supply actual wants, and must be counted in the remu-
neration of their labour. There are many modes in which
labour is still more directly applied to the protection of pro-
ductive operations. The herdsman has little other occupa-
tion than to protect the cattle from harm: the positive
agencies concerned in the realization of the product, go on
nearly of themselves. I have already mentioned the labour
of the hedger and ditcher, of the builder of walls or dykes.
To these must be added that of the soldier, the policeman,
and the judge. These functionaries are not indeed em-
ployed exclusively in the protection of industry, nor does
their payment constitute, to the individual producer, a part
of the expenses of production. But they are paid from the
taxes, which are derived from the produce of industry; and
In any tolerably governed country they render to its opera-
tions a service far more than equivalent to the cost. To
society at large they are therefore part of the expenses of
production ; and if the returns to production were not sufh-
cient to maintain these labourers in addition to all the others

required, production, at least in that form and manner, could

not take place. Besides, if the protection which the govern-

ment affords to the operations of industry were not afforded,

the producers would be under a necessity of either with-

drawing a large share of their time and labour from produc-


LABOUR AS AN AGENT OF PRODUCTION. 47


tion, to employ it in defence, or of engaging armed men to
defend them; all which labour, in that case, must be directly
remunerated from the produce; and things which would not
pay for this additional labour, would not be produced. Under
the present arrangements, the product pays its quota towards
the same protection, and notwithstandmg the waste and
prodigality incident to government expenditure, obtains it
of better quality at a much smaller cost.


§ 6. Fourthly: There is a very great amount of labour
employed, not in bringing the product into existence, but in
rendering it, when in existence, accessible to those for whose
use it is intended. Many important classes of labourers find
their sole employment in some function of this kind. There
is first the whole class of carriers, by land or water: mule-
teers, waggoners, bargemen, sailors, wharfmen, coalheavers,
porters, railway establishments, and the like. Next, there
are the constructors of all the implements of transport;
ships, barges, carts, locomotives, &c., to which must be
added roads, canals, and railways. Roads are sometimes
made by the government, and opened gratuitously to the
public; but the labour of making them is not the less paid
for from the produce. Each producer, in paying his quota
of the taxes levied generally for the construction of roads,
pays for the use of those which conduce to his convenience ;
and if made with any tolerable judgment, they increase the
returns to his industry by far more than an equivalent
amount.

Another numerous class of labourers employed in render-
ing the things produced accessible to their intended con-
sumers, is the class of dealers and traders, or, as they may
be termed, distributors. There would be a great waste of
time and trouble, and an inconvenience often amounting to
impracticability, if consumers could only obtain the articles
they want by treating directly with the producers. Both
producers and consumers are too much scattered, and the


48 BOOK I. CHAPTER II. § 6.


latter often at too great a distance from the former. To
diminish this loss of time and labour, the contrivance of fairs
and markets was early had recourse to, where consumers and
producers might periodically meet, without any intermediate
agency; and this plan answers tolerably well for many arti-
cles, especially agricultural produce, agriculturists having at
some seasons a certain quantity of spare time on their hands.
But even in this case, attendance is often very troublesome
and inconvenient to buyers who have other occupations, and
do not live in the immediate vicinity ; while, for all articles
the production of which requires continuous attention from
the producers, these periodical markets must be held at such
considerable intervals, and the wants of the consumers must
either be provided for so long beforehand, or must remain so
long unsupplied, that even before the resources of society
permitted the establishment of shops, the supply of these
wants fell universally into the hands of itinerant dealers:
the pedlar, who might appear once a month, being preferred
to the fair, which only returned once a year. In country
districts remote from towns or large villages, the industry of
the pedlar is not yet wholly superseded. But a dealer who
has a fixed abode and fixed customers is so much more to be
depended on, that consumers prefer resorting to him if he is
conveniently accessible ; and dealers therefore find their ad-
vantage in establishing themselves in every locality where
there are sufficient consumers near at hand to afford them a
remuneration.

In many cases the producers and dealers are the same per-
sons, at least as to the ownership of the funds and the control
of the operations. The tailor, the shoemaker, the baker, and
many other tradesmen, are the producers of the articles they
deal in, so far as regards the last stage in the production.
This union, however, of the functions of manufacturer and
retailer, is only expedient when the article can advanta-
geously be made at or near the place convenient for retailing
it, and is, besides, manufactured and sold in small parcels.


LABOUR AS AN AGENT OF PRODUCTION. 49


When things have to be brought from a distance, the same
person cannot effectually superintend both the making and
the retailing of them: when they are best and most cheaply
made on a large scale, a single manufactory requires so many
local channels to carry off its supply, that the retailing is most
conveniently delegated to other agency: and even shoes and
coats, when they are to be furnished in large quantities at once,
as for the supply of a regiment or of a workhouse, are usually
obtained not directly from the producers, but from interme-
diate dealers, who make it their business to ascertain from
what producers they can be obtained best and cheapest.
Kiven when things are destined to be at last sold by retail,
convenience soon creates a class of wholesale dealers. When
products and transactions have multiplied beyond a certain
point; when one manufactory supplies many shops, and one
shop has often to obtain goods from many different manufac-
tories, the loss of time and trouble both to the manufacturers
and to the retailers by treating directly with one another,
makes if more convenient to them to treat with a smaller
number of great dealers or merchants, who only buy to sell
again, collecting goods from the various producers, and dis-
tributing them to the retailers, to be by them further distri-
buted among the consumers. Of these various elements is
composed the Distributing Class, whose agency is supple-
mentary to that of the Producing Class: and the produce
so distributed, or its price, is the source from which the dis-
tributors are remunerated for their personal exertions, and
for the abstinence which enabled them to advance the funds
needful for the business of distribution.


§ 7. We have now completed the enumeration of the
modes in which labour employed on external nature is sub-
servient to production. But there is yet another mode of
employing labour, which conduces equally, though still
more remotely, to that end: this is, labour of which the
subject is human beings. Every human being has been

VOL. I. E


50 BOOK I. CHAPTER II. § 7.


brought up from infancy at the expense of much labour to
some person or persons, and if this labour, or part of it, had
not been bestowed, the child would never have attained the —
age and strength which enable him to become a labourer in
his turn. To the community at large, the labour and expense
of rearing its infant population forms a part of the outlay
which is a condition of production, and is to be replaced with
increase from the future produce of their labour. By the
individual, this labour and expense are usually incurred from
other motives than to obtain such ultimate return, and, for
most purposes of political economy, need not be taken into
account as expenses of production. But the technical or
industrial education of the community; the labour employed
in learning and in teaching the arts of production, in ac
quiring and communicating skill in those arts; this labour is
really, and in general solely, undergone for the sake of the
greater or more valuable produce thereby attained, and in
order that a remuneration, equivalent or more than equiva-
lent, may be reaped by the learner, besides an adequate remu-
neration for the labour of the teacher, when a teacher has
been employed.

As the labour which confers productive powers, whether
of hand or of head, may be looked upon as part of the labour
by which society accomplishes its productive operations, or in
other words, as part of what the produce costs to society, so
too may the labour employed in keeping up productive
powers; in preventing them from being destroyed or weak-
ened by accident or disease. The labour of a physician or
surgeon, when made use of by persons engaged in industry,
must be regarded in the economy of society as a sacrifice
incurred, to preserve from perishing by death or infirmity
that portion of the productive resources of society which is
fixed in the lives and bodily or mental powers of its produc-

tive members. To the individuals, indeed, this forms but a
part, sometimes an imperceptible part, of the motives that
induce them to submit to medical treatment: it is not prin-


LABOUR AS AN AGENT OF PRODUCTION. 51


cipally from economical motives that persons have a limb
amputated, or endeavour to be cured of a fever, although
when they do so there is generally sufficient inducement for
it even on that score alone. This is therefore one of the
cases of labour and outlay which, though conducive to pro-
duction, yet not being incurred for that end, or for the sake
of the returns arising from it, are out of the sphere of most of
the general propositions which political economy has occasion
to assert respecting productive labour: though, when society
and not the individuals are considered, this labour and outlay
must be regarded as part of the advance by which society
effects its productive operations, and for which it is indemni-
fied by the produce.


§ 8. Another kind of labour, usually classed as mental,
but conducing to the ultimate product as directly, though not
so immediately, as manual labour itself, is the labour of the
inventors of industrial processes. I say, usually classed as
mental, because in reality it is not exclusively so. All human
exertion is compounded of some mental and some bodily ele-
ments. The stupidest hodman who repeats from day to day
the mechanical act of climbing a ladder, performs a func-
tion partly intellectual; the most intelligent dog or elephant
probably could not be taught to do it: the dullest human
being, instructed beforehand, is capable of turning a mill;
but a horse cannot turn it without somebody to guide and
watch him. On the other hand, there is some bodily ingre-
dient in the labour most purely mental, when it generates any
external result. Newton could not have produced the Prin-
cipia without the bodily exertion either of penmanship or of
dictation; and he must have drawn many figures, and written
out many calculations and demonstrations, while he was pre-
paring it in his mind. Inventors, besides the labour of their
brains, generally go through much labour with their hands, in
the models which they construct and the experiments they have
to make before their idea can realize itself successfully in act.

BE 2


erg rie pate


aod |


52 BOOK I. CHAPTER I. § 8.


Whether mental, however, or bodily, their labour is a part ot
that by which the production is brought about. The labour
of Watt in contriving the steam-engine was as essential a
part of production as that of the mechanics who build or the
engineers who work the instrument; and was undergone, no
less than theirs, in the prospect of a remuneration from the
produce. The labour of invention is often estimated and
paid on the very same plan as that of execution. Many
manufacturers of ornamental goods have inventors in ther
employment, who receive wages or salaries for designing pat:
terns, exactly as others do for copying them. All this 18
strictly part of the labour of production; as the labour of
the author of a book is equally a part of its production with
that of the printer and binder.

In a national, or universal point of view, the labour of
the savant, or speculative thinker, is as much a part of pro-
duction in the very narrowest sense, as that of the inventor
of a practical art; many such inventions having been the
direct consequences of theoretic discoveries, and every exten-
sion of knowledge of the powers of nature bemg fruitful of
applications to the purposes of outward life. The electro-
magnetic telegraph was the wonderful and most unexpected
consequence of the experiments of Cirsted and the mathe-
matical investigations of Ampére: and the modern art of
navigation is an unforeseen emanation from the purely spe
culative and apparently merely curious enquiry, by the ma-
thematicians of Alexandria, into the properties of three curves
formed by the intersection of a plane surface and a cone,
No limit can be set to the importance, even in a purely
productive and material point of view, of mere thought,
Inasmuch however as these material fruits, though the result,
are seldom the direct purpose of the pursuits of savants, nor
is their remuneration in general derived from the increased
production which may be caused incidentally, and mostly
after a long interval, by their discoveries; this ultimate influ-
ence does not, for most of the purposes of political economy,


LABOUR AS AN AGENT OF PRODUCTION. 53


require to be taken into consideration; and speculative
thinkers are generally classed as the producers only of the
books, or other useable or saleable articles, which directly
emanate from them. But when (as in political economy one
should always be prepared to do) we shift our point of view,
and consider not individual acts, and the motives by which
they are determined, but national and universal results, intel-
lectual speculation must be looked upon as a most influential
part of the productive labour of society, and the portion of
its resources employed in carrying on and in remunerating
such labour, as a highly productive part of its expenditure.


§ 9. In the foregoing survey of the modes of employing
labour in furtherance of production, I have made little use of
the popular distinction of industry into agricultural, manu-
facturing, and commercial. For in truth this division fulfils
very badly the purposes of a classification. Many great
branches of productive industry find no place in it, or not
without much straining; for example (not to speak of hunters
or fishers) the miner, the road-maker, and the sailor. The
limit, too, between agricultural and manufacturing industry
cannot be precisely drawn. ‘The miller, for instance, and
the baker—are they to be reckoned among agriculturists or
among manufacturers? Their occupation is in its nature
manufacturing; the food has finally parted company with
the soil before it is handed over to them: this however might
be said with equal truth of the thresher, the winnower, the
makers of butter and cheese; operations always counted as
agricultural, probably because it is the custom for them to
be performed by persons resident on the farm, and under the
same superintendance as tillage. For many purposes all
these persons, the miller and baker inclusive, must be placed
in the same class with ploughmen and reapers. They are all
concerned in producing food, and depend for their remunera-
tion on the food produced; where the one class abounds and
flourishes, the others do so too; they form collectively the


&


54 BOOK I. CHAPTER Il. § 9.


“ agricultural interest ;” they render but one service to the
community by their united labours, and are paid from one
common source. Even the tillers of the soil, again, when
the produce is not food but the materials of what are com-
monly termed manufactures, belong in many respects to the
same division in the economy of society as manufacturers.
The cotton planter of Carolina, and the wool grower of Aus-
tralia, have more interests in common with the spinner and
weaver than with the corn grower. But on the other hand,
the industry which operates immediately upon the soil has, as
we shall see hereafter, some properties on which many impor-
tant consequences depend, and which distinguish it from all
the subsequent stages of production, whether carried on by
the same person or not; from the industry of the thresher
and winnower as much as from that of the cotton spinner.
When I speak therefore of agricultural Jabour, I shall gene-
rally mean this, and this exclusively, unless the contrary is
either stated or implied in the context. The term manufac-
turing is too vague to be of much use when precision is
required, and when I employ it I wish to be understood as
intending to speak popularly rather than scientifically.


CHAPTER III.


OF UNPRODUCTIVE LABOUR.


§ 1. Lanour is indispensable to production, but has not
always production for its effect. ‘There is much labour, and of
a high order of usefulness, of which production is not the
object. Labour has accordingly been distinguished into Pro-
ductive and Unproductive. There has been not a little con-
troversy among political economists on the question, what
kinds of labour should be reputed to be unproductive ; and
they have not always perceived, that there was in reality no
matter of fact in dispute between them.

Many writers have been unwilling to class any labour as
productive unless its result is palpable in some material ob-
ject, capable of being transferred from one person to another.
There are others (among whom are Mr. M ‘Culloch and
M. Say) who looking upon the word unproductive as a term
of disparagement, remonstrate against imposing it upon any
labour which is regarded as useful—which produces a benefit
or a pleasure worth the cost. The labour of officers of go-
vernment, of the army and navy, of physicians, lawyers,
teachers, musicians, dancers, actors, domestic servants, &c.,
when they really accomplish what they are paid for, and are
not more numerous than is required for its performance,
ought not, say these writers, to be “ stigmatized” as unpro-
ductive, an expression which they appear to regard as synony-
mous with wasteful or worthless. But this seems to me a
misunderstanding of the matter in dispute. Production not
being the sole end of human existence, the term unproductive
does not necessarily imply any stigma; nor was ever in-
tended to do so in the present case. The question is one of
mere language, and classification. Differences of language,


A$ areata verte carers


a


FF acaneaceeses aie


ee Se ene ee


56 BOOK I. CHAPTER Ir. $ 1.


however, are by no means unimportant, even when not
grounded on differences of opinion; for though either of two
expressions may be consistent with the whole truth, they
generally tend to fix attention upon different parts of it. We
must therefore enter a little into the consideration of the
various meanings which may attach to ‘the words productive
and unproductive when applied to labour.

In the first place, even in what is called the production
of material objects, it must be remembered that what is pro-
duced is not the matter composing them. All the labour of
all the human beings in the world could not produce one
particle of matter. To weave broadcloth is but to re-arrange;
in a peculiar manner, the particles of wool; to grow corn 1S
only to put a portion of matter called a seed, into a situa-
tion where it can draw together particles of matter from the
earth and air, to form the new combination called a plant.
Though we cannot create matter, we can cause it to assume
properties, by which from having been useless to us it be-
comes useful. What we produce, or desire to produce, Is
always, as M. Say rightly terms it, an utility. Labour is
not creative of objects, but of utilities. Neither, again, do
we consume and destroy the objects themselves; the matter
of which they were composed remains, more or less altered in
form : what has really been consumed is only the qualities by
which they were fitted for the purpose they have been ap-~
plied to. It is, therefore, pertinently asked by M. Say and
others—since, when we are said to produce objects, we only
produce utility, why should not all labour which produces
utility, be accounted productive? Why refuse that title to
the surgeon who sets a limb, the judge or legislator who
gonrels Security, and give it to the lapidary who cuts and
polishes a diamond ? Why deny it to the teacher from whom
T learn an art by which I can gain my bread, and accord it
to the confectioner who makes bonbons for the momentary
pleasure of a sense of taste?


It is quite true that all these kinds of labour are pro-


*


UNPRODUCTIVE LABOUR. 57


ductive of utility; and the question which now occupies us
could not have been a question at all, if the production of
utility were enough to satisfy the notion which mankind have
usually formed of productive labour. Production, and pro-
ductive, are of course elliptical expressions, involving the idea
of a something produced, but this something, in common
apprehension, I conceive to be, not utility, but Wealth. Pro-
ductive labour means labour productive of wealth. We are
recalled, therefore, to the question touched upon in our first
chapter, what Wealth is, and whether only material products,
or all useful products, are to be included in it.


§ 2. Now the utilities produced by labour are of three
kinds. They are,

First, utilities fixed and embodied in outward objects;
by labour employed in investing external material things
with properties which render them serviceable to human
beings. This is the common case, and requires no illus-
tration.

Secondly, utilities fixed and embodied in human beings;
the labour being in this case employed in conferring on human
beings, qualities which render them serviceable to themselves
and others. To this class belongs the labour of all concerned
in education; not only schoolmasters, tutors, and professors,
but governments, so far as they aim successfully at the
improvement of the people; moralists, and clergymen, as
far as productive of benefit; the labour of physicians, as far
as instrumental in preserving life and physical or mental
efficiency; of the teachers of bodily exercises and of the
various trades, sciences, and arts, together with the labour
of the learners in acquiring them; and all labour bestowed
by any persons, throughout life, in improving the know-
ledge or cultivating the bodily or mental faculties of them-
selves or others.

Thirdly, and lastly, utilities not fixed or embodied in any
object, but consisting in a mere service rendered; a pleasure


58 BOOK I. CHAPTER Ill. § 2.


given, an inconvenience or a pain averted, during a longer or
a shorter time, but without leaving a permanent acquisition
in the improved qualities of any person or thing; the labour
being employed in producing an utility directly, not (as in
the two former cases) in fitting some other thing to afford an
utility. Such, for example, is the labour of the musical per-
former, the actor, the public declaimer or reciter, and the
showman. Some good may no doubt be produced, beyond
the moment, upon the feelings and disposition, or general state
of enjoyment of the spectators; or instead of good there may
be harm; but neither the one nor the other is the effect
intended, is the result for which the exhibitor works and the
spectator pays; nothing but the immediate pleasure. Such,
again, is the labour of the army and navy: they, at the best,
prevent a country from being conquered, or from being in-
jured and insulted, which is a service, but in all other respects
leave the country neither improved nor deteriorated. Such,
too, is the labour of the legislator, the judge, the officer of
justice, and all other agents of government in their ordinary
functions, apart from any influence they may exert on the
improyement of the national mind. The service which they
render, is to maintain peace and security; these compose the
utility which they produce. It may appear to some, that
carriers, and merchants or dealers, should be placed in this
same class, since their labour does not add any properties to
objects: but I reply that it does: it adds the property of
being in the place where they are wanted, instead of being
in some other placé: which is a very useful property, and
the utility it confers is embodied in the things themselves,
which now actually are in the place where they are required
for use, and in consequence of that increased utility could be
sold at an increased price, proportioned to the labour ex-
pended in conferring it. This labour, therefore, does not
belong to the third class, but to the first.


§ 3. We have now to consider which of these three


UNPRODUCTIVE LABOUR. 59


classes of labour should be accounted productive of wealth,
since that is what the term productive, when used by itself,
must be understood to import. Utilities of the third class,
consisting in pleasures which only exist while being enjoyed,
and services which only exist while being performed, cannot
be spoken of as wealth, except by an acknowledged meta-
phor. It is essential to the idea of wealth to be susceptible
of accumulation: things which cannot, after being produced,
be kept for some time before being used, are never, I think,
regarded as wealth, since however much of them may be pro-
duced and enjoyed, the person benefitted by them is no richer,
is nowise improved in circumstances. But there is not so
distinct and positive a violation of usage in considering as
wealth any product which is both useful and susceptible of
accumulation. The skill, and the energy and perseverance,
of the artisans of a country, are reckoned part of its wealth,
no less than their tools and machinery. According to this
definition, we should regard all labour as productive which
is employed in creating permanent utilities, whether embodied
in human beings, or in any other animate or inanimate ob-
jects. And this nomenclature I have, in a former publica-
tion*, recommended, as the most conformable to the ends of
classification, though not strictly conformable to the customs
of language,

But in applying the term wealth to the industrial capa-
cities of human beings, there seems always, in popular
apprehension, to be a tacit reference to material products.
The skill of an artisan is accounted wéalth, only as being
the means of acquiring wealth in a material sense; and any
qualities not tending visibly to that object are scarcely so
regarded at all. A country would hardly be said to be richer,
except by a metaphor, however precious a possession it
might have in the genius, the virtues, or the accomplishments


* Essays on some Unsettled Questions of Political Economy. Essay III.
On the words Productive and Unproductive.


60 BOOK I. CHAPTER Ill. § 3.


of its inhabitants; unless indeed these were looked upon
as marketable articles, by which it could attract the material
wealth of other countries, as the Greeks of old, and several
modern nations have done. While, therefore, I should
prefer, were I constructing a new technical language, to
make the distinction turn upon the permanence rather than
upon the materiality of the product, yet when employing
terms which common usage has taken complete possession
of, it seems advisable so to employ them as to do the least
possible violence to that usage; since any improvement in
terminology obtained by straining the received meaning of a
popular phrase, is generally purchased beyond its value, by
the obscurity arising from the conflict between new and old
associations.

I shall therefore, in this treatise, when speaking of
wealth, understand by it only what is called material wealth,
and by productive labour only those kinds of exertion which
produce utilities embodied in material objects. But in limit-
ing myself to this sense of the word, I mean to avail myself
of the full extent of that restricted acceptation, and I shall
not refuse the appellation productive, to labour which yields
no material product as its direct result, provided that an
increase of material products is its ultimate consequence.
Thus, labour expended in the acquisition of manufacturing
skill, I class as productive, not in virtue of the skill itself,
but of the manufactured products created by the skill, and to
the creation of which the labour of learning the trade is
essentially conducive. The labour of officers of government
in affording the protection which, afforded in some manner
or other, is indispensable to the prosperity of industry, must
be classed as productive even of material wealth, because
without it, material wealth, in anything like its present
abundance, could not exist. Such labour may be said to be
productive indirectly or mediately, in opposition to the labour
of the ploughman and the cotton-spinner, which are pro-
ductive immediately. They are all alike in this, that they


UNPRODUCTIVE LABOUR. 61


leave the community richer in material products than they
found it; they increase, or tend to increase, material
wealth.


§ 4. By Unproductive Labour, on the contrary, will
be understood labour which does not terminate in the
creation of material wealth; which, however largely or suc-
cessfully practised, does not render the community, and the
world at large, richer in material products, but poorer by all
that is consumed by the labourers while so employed.

All labour is, in the language of political economy, un-
productive, which ends in immediate enjoyment, without
any increase of the accumulated stock of permanent means
of enjoyment. And all labour, according to our present defi-
nition, must be classed as unproductive, which terminates in
a permanent benefit, however important, provided that an
increase of material products forms no part of that benefit.
The labour of saving a friend’s life is not productive, unless
the friend is a productive labourer, and produces more than
he consumes. To a religious person the saying of a soul
must appear a far more important service than the saving
of a life; but he will not therefore call a missionary or a
clergyman productive labourers, unless they teach, as the
South Sea Missionaries have in some cases done, the arts of
civilization in addition to the doctrines of religion. It is, on
the contrary, evident that the greater number of missionaries
or clergymen a nation maintains, the less it has to expend on
other things; while the more it expends judiciously in keep-
ing agriculturists and manufacturers at work, the more it will
have for every other purpose. By the former it diminishes;
ceteris paribus, its stock of material products; by the latter,
it increases them.

Unproductive may be as useful as productive labour ; it
may be more useful, even in point of permanent advantage ;
or its use may consist only in pleasurable sensation, which
when gone leaves no trace; or it may not afford even this,


pes


62 BOOK I. CHAPTER 111. § 4.


but may be absolute waste. In any case society or mankind
grow no richer by it, but poorer. All material products
consumed by any one while he produces nothing, are so
much subtracted, for the time, from the material products
which society would otherwise have possessed. But though
society grows no richer by unproductive labour, the indivi-
dual may. An unproductive labourer may receive for his
labour, from those who derive pleasure or benefit from it, @
remuneration which may be to him a considerable source of
wealth ; but his gain is balanced by their loss: they may
have received a full equivalent for their expenditure, but they
are so much poorer by it. When a tailor makes a coat and
sells it, there is a transfer of the price from the customer to
the tailor, and a coat besides which did not previously exist;
but what is gained by an actor is a mere transfer from the
spectator’s funds to his, leaving no article of wealth for the
spectator’s indemnification. Thus the community collec-
tively gains nothing by the actor’s labour; and it loses, of his
receipts, all that portion which he consumes, retaining only
that which he lays by. A community, however, may add to its
wealth by unproductive labour, at the expense of other com-
munities, as an individual may at the expense of other indivi-
duals. The gains of Italian opera singers, German governesses,
French ballet dancers, &c., are a source of wealth, as far as
they go, to their respective countries, if they return thither.

The petty states of Greece, especially the ruder and more

backward of those states, were nurseries of soldiers, who hired

themselves to the princes and satraps of the Hast to carry

on useless and destructive wars, and returned with their

savings to pass their declining years in their own country:

these were unproductive labourers, and the pay they received,

together with the plunder they took, was an outlay without

return to the countries which furnished it ; but, though no
gain to the world, it was a gain to Greece, Ata later period
the same country and its coloniés supplied the Roman empire
with another class of adventurers, who, under the name of


UNPRODUCTIVE LABOUR. 63


philosophers or of rhetoricians, taught, to the youth of the
higher classes, what were esteemed the most valuable accom-
plishments: these were mainly unproductive labourers, but
their ample recompense was a source of wealth to their own
country. In none of these cases was there any accession of
wealth to the world. ‘The services of the labourers, if useful,
were obtained at a sacrifice to the world of a ‘portion of
material wealth; if useless, all that these labourers consumed
was waste.

To be wasted, however, is a liability not confined to un-
productive labour. Productive labour may equally be waste,
if more of it is expended than really conduces to production.
If defect of skill in labourers, or of judgment in those who
direct them, causes a misapplication of productive industry ;
if a farmer perseveres in ploughing with three horses and
two men, when experience has shown that two horses and
one man are sufficient, the surplus labour, although employed
for purposes of production, is wasted. If a new process is
adopted which proves no better, or not so good as those before
in use, the labour expended in perfecting the invention and
in carrying it into practice, though employed for a productive
purpose, is wasted. Productive labour may render a nation
poorer, if the wealth it produces, that is, the increase it makes
in the stock of useful or agreeable things, be of a kind not
immediately wanted: as when a commodity is unsaleable,
because produced in a quantity beyond the present demand ;
or, when speculators build docks and warehouses before
there is any trade. The bankrupt states of North America,
with their premature railways and canals, have made this
kind of mistake; and it remains to be shown whether Eng-
land, in the disproportionate developement of railway enter-
prise, has not followed the example. Labour sunk in ex-
pectation of a distant return, when the great exigencies or
limited resources of the community require that the return
be rapid, may leave the country not only poorer in the mean-
while, by all which those labourers consume, but less rich even


PRS et


xigceaee


iM LOTTE


s a
Rn Pa oe


ee


64 BOOK I. CHAPTER 111. § 5.


ultimately than if immediate returns had been sought in the
first instance, and enterprises for distant profit postponed.


§ 5. The distinction of Productive and Unproductive
is applicable to Consumption as well as to Labour. All the
members of the community are not labourers, but all are
consumers, and consume either unproductively or produc-
tively. Whoever contributes nothing directly or indirectly
to production, is an unproductive consumer. The only pro-
ductive consumers are productive labourers; the labour of
direction being of course included, as well as that of execu-
tion. But the consumption even of productive labourers 1s
not all of it Productive Consumption. There is unproduc-
tive consumption by productive consumers. What they
consume in keeping up or improving their health, strength,
and capacities of work, or in raising other productive la-
bourers to succeed them, is Productive Consumption. But
consumption on pleasures or luxuries, whether by the idle
or by the industrious, since production is neither its object,
nor is in any way advanced by it, must be reckoned Unpro-
ductive: with a reservation perhaps of a certain quantum
of enjoyment which may be classed among necessaries, since
anything short of it would not be consistent with the greatest
efficiency of labour. That alone is productive consumption,
which goes to maintain and increase the productive powers
of the community; either those residing in its soil, in its
materials, in the number and efficiency of its instruments of
production, or in its pepole.

There are numerous products which may be said not to
admit of being consumed otherwise than unproductively. The
annual consumption of gold lace, pine apples, or champagne,
must be reckoned unproductive, since these things give no
assistance to production, nor any support to life or strength,
but what would equally be given by things much less
costly. Hence it might be supposed that the labour
employed in producing them ought not to be regarded as


UNPRODUCTIVE LABOUR. 65


productive, in the sense in which the term is understood by
political economists. I grant that no labour really tends to the
enrichment of society, which is employed in producing things
for the use of unproductive consumers. The tailor who
makes a coat for a man who produces nothing, is a productive
labourer, but in a few weeks or months the coat is worn out,
while the wearer has not produced anything to replace it,
and the community is then no richer by the labour of the
tailor, than if the same sum had been paid for a stall at
the opera. Nevertheless, society has been richer by the
labour while the coat lasted, that 1s, until society, through
one of its unproductive members, chose to consume the
produce of the labour unproductively. The case of the gold
lace or the pine apple is no further different, than that
they are still further removed than the coat from the cha-
racter of necessaries. These things also are wealth until they
have been consumed.


§ 6. We see, however, by this, that there is a distinc-
tion, more important to the wealth of a community than
even that between productive and unproductive labour; the
distinction, namely, between labour for the supply of pro-
ductive, and for the supply of unproductive, consumption ;
between labour employed in keeping up or in adding to the
productive resources of the country, and that which is em-
ployed otherwise. Of the produce of the country, a part
only is destined to be consumed productively; the remainder
supplies the unproductive consumption of producers, and the
entire consumption of the unproductive classes. Suppose
that the proportion of the annual produce applied to the
first purpose amounts to half; then one-half the productive
labourers of the country are all that are employed in the
operations on which the permanent wealth of the country
depends. The other half are occupied from year to year and
from generation to generation in producing things which are
consumed and disappear without return; and whatever this

WONG We F


66 BOOK I. CHAPTER III. Q 6.


half consume is as completely lost, as to any permanent effect
on the national resources, as if it were consumed unprodue-
tively. Suppose that this second half of the labouring popt-
lation ceased to work, and that the government or their
parishes maintained them in idleness for a whole year: the
first half would suffice to produce, as they had done before,
their own necessaries and the necessaries of the second half
and to keep the stock of materials and implements undimb
nished: the unproductive classes, indeed, would be either
starved or obliged to produce their own subsistence, and
the whole community would be reduced during a year t
bare necessaries; but the sources of production would be
unimpaired, and the next year there would not necessarily
be a smaller produce than if no such interval of inactivity
had occurred; while if the case had been reversed, if the
first half of the labourers had suspended their accustomed
occupations, and the second half had continued theirs, the
country at the end of the twelvemonth would have been
entirely impoverished.

It would be a great error to regret the large proportion
of the annual produce, which in an opulent country goes to
supply unproductive consumption. It would be to lament
that the community has so much to spare from its necessities,
for its pleasures and for all higher uses. This portion of
the produce is the fund from which all the wants of the
community, other than that of mere living, are provided for;
the measure of its means of enjoyment, and of its power ol
accomplishing all purposes not productive. That so greata”
surplus should be available for such purposes, and that it
should be applied to them, is a subject only of congratulation
The things to be regretted, and to be remedied, are the
prodigious inequality with which this surplus is distributed,
and the large share which falls to the lot of persons who
render no equivalent service in return; topics of the greatest
importance, but for the discussion of which, the proper place’
is in another division of our inquiry.


CHAPTER IV.


OF CAPITAL.


§1. Ir has been seen in the preceding chapters that,
besides the primary and universal requisites of production,
labour and natural agents, there is another requisite without
which no productive operations, beyond the rude and scanty
beginnings of primitive industry, are possible: namely, a
stock, previously accumulated, of the products of former
labour. This accumulated stock of the produce of labour is
termed Capital. The function of Capital in production, it is
of the utmost importance thoroughly to understand, since a
number of the erroneous notions with which our subject is
infested, originate in an imperfect and confused apprehension
of this point.

Capital, by persons wholly unused to reflect on the sub-
ject, is supposed to be synonymous with money. ‘To expose
this misapprehension, would be to repeat what has been said
in the introductory chapter. Money is no more synonymous
with- capital than it is with wealth. Money cannot in itself
perform any part of the office of capital, since it can afford
no assistance to production. To do this, it must be ex-
changed for other things; and anything, which is susceptible
of being exchanged for other things, is capable of contri-
puting to production in the same degree. What capital does
for production, is to afford the shelter, protection, tools and
materials which the work requires, and to feed and otherwise
maintain the labourers during the process. These are the
services which present labour requires from past, and from
the produce of past, labour. Whatever things are destined
for this use—destined to supply productive labour with these


various prerequisites—are Capital.
EF 2


68 BOOK I. .CHAPTER Iv. § l.


To familiarize ourselves with the conception, let us com
a Lhe sider what is done with the capital invested in any of the


ie branches of business which compose the productive industry

ci HH of acountry. A manufacturer, for example, has one pat
Pia of his capital in the form of buildings, fitted and destined fa
eli Li carrying on his branch of manufacture. Another part le
ay has in the form of machinery. A third consists, if he bes


i | spinner, of raw cotton, flax, or wool; if a weaver, of flaxen,
woollen, silk, or cotton, thread; and the like, according i
the nature of the manufacture. Food and clothing, for hi
i operatives, it is not the custom of the present age that he
aa should directly provide; and few capitalists, except the pre
ane ducers of food or clothing, have any portion, worth mention
ing, of their capital, in that shape. Instead of this, eac
f capitalist has money, which he pays to his workpeople, and
, so enables them to supply themselves: he has also finishe
goods in his warehouses, by the sale of which he obtain
more money, to employ in the same manner, as well as {
replenish his stock of materials, and to replace his building
and machinery when worn out. His money and finishe|
goods however are not wholly capital, for he does not wholly
4 devote them to these purposes: he employs a part of the
j one, and of the proceeds of the other, in supplying his pe.
’ sonal consumption and that of his family, or in hiring groony
and valets, or maintaining hunters and hounds, or in edy.
cating his children, or in paying taxes, or in charity. What
then is his capital? Precisely that part of his possessiony,
whatever it be, which he designs to employ in carrying oy
fresh production. It is of no consequence that a part, o
even the whole of it, is in a form in which it cannot directly

supply the wants of labourers.

Suppose, for instance, that our capitalist is a hardware
manufacturer, and that his stock in trade, over and above hiy
machinery, consists at present wholly in iron goods. Troy

goods cannot feed labourers. Nevertheless by a mere chang, |
ia of the destination of these iron goods, he can cause labourer


CAPITAL. 69


to be fed. Suppose that with a portion of the proceeds he
intended to maintain a pack of hounds, or an establishment
of servants; and that he changes his intention, and employs
it in his business, paying it in wages to additional workpeople.
These workpeople are enabled to buy and consume the food
which would otherwise have been consumed by the hounds
or by the servants; and thus without the employer’s having
seen or touched one particle of the food, his conduct has
determined that so much more of the food existing in the
country has been devoted to the use of productive labourers,
and so much less consumed in a manner wholly unproduc-
tive. Now vary the hypothesis, and suppose, that what is
thus paid in wages would otherwise have been laid out not in
feeding servants or hounds but in buying plate and jewels:
and in order to render the effect perceptible let us suppose
that the change takes place on a considerable scale, and that
a large sum is diverted from buying plate and jewels to em-
ploying productive labourers, whom we shall suppose to have
been previously, like the Irish peasantry, only half employed
and half fed. The labourers, on receiving their increased
wages, will not lay them out in plate and jewels, but in food.
There is not, however, additional food in the country; nor
any unproductive labourers or animals, as in the former case,
whose food is set free for productive purposes. Food will
therefore be imported if possible ; if not possible, the labourers
will remain for a season on their short allowance: but the
consequence of this change in the demand for commodities,
occasioned by the change in the expenditure of capitalists
from unproductive to productive, is that next year more food
will be produced, and less plate and jewellery. So that again,
without having had anything to do with the food of the
labourers directly, the conversion by individuals of a portion
of their property, no matter of what sort, from an unpro-
ductive destination to a productive, has had the effect of causing
more food to be appropriated to the consumption of produc-
tive labourers. The distinction, then, between Capital and


i
-
:
‘


70 BOOK I. CHAPTER Iv. § 2.


Not-capital, does not he in the kind of commodities, but m
the mind of the capitalist—in his will to employ them for one
purpose rather than another ; and all property, however il
adapted in itself for the use of labourers, is a part of capital
so soon as it, or the value to be received from it, 1s set apat
for productive employment. The sum of all the values 9
destined by their respective possessors, composes the capitil
of the country. Whether all those values are in a shape
directly applicable to productive uses, makes no difference
Once appropriated to that end, they do not fail to find a way
of transforming themselves into things fitted to be applied
to it.


§ 2. As whatever of the produce of the country is devotel
to production is capital, so, conversely, the whole of the capit
of the country is devoted to production. This second pro
position, however, must be taken with some limitations an
explanations. A fund may be seeking for productive employ-
ment, and find none, adapted to the inclinations of its pos
sessor: it then is capital still, but unemployed capital. Or
the stock may consist of unsold goods, not susceptible a
direct application to productive uses, and not, at the moment
marketable: these, until sold, are in the condition of unem:
ployed capital. Again, artificial or accidental circumstances
may render it necessary to possess a larger stock in advance,
that is, a larger capital, before entering on production, than
is required by the nature of things. Suppose that the govern: ©
ment lays a tax on the production in one of its earlier stages,
as for instance by taxing the material. The manufacturer has
to advance the tax, before commencing the manufacture, and
is therefore under a necessity of haying a larger accumulated
stock than is required for, or is actually employed in, the pro-
duction which he carries on. He must have a larger capital,
to maintain the same quantity of productive labour; or (what
is equivalent) with a given capital he maintains less labour.
This mode of levying taxes, therefore, limits unnecessarily


CAPITAL. 71


the industry of the country: a portion of the fund destined
by its owners for production being diverted from its purpose,
and kept in a constant state of advance to the government.
For another example; a farmer may enter on his farm at
such a time of the year, that he may be required to pay one,
two, or even three quarters rent before obtaining any return
from the produce. This, therefore, he is compelled to pay
out of his capital. Now rent, when paid for the land itself,
and not for improvements made in it by labour, is not a pro-
ductive expenditure. It is not an outlay for the support of
labour, or for the provision of implements or materials the
produce of labour. It is the price paid for the use of an
appropriated natural agent. That natural agent is indeed as
indispensable (and even more so) as any implement: but the
having to pay a price for it, is not. In the case of the im-
plement (a thing produced by labour) a price of some sort 1S
the necessary condition of its existence: but the land exists
by nature. The payment for it, therefore, is not one of the
expenses of production ; and the necessity of making that pay-
ment out of capital, makes it requisite that there should be a
greater capital, a greater antecedent accumulation of the pro-
duce of past labour, than is naturally necessary, or than is
needed where land is occupied on a different system. This
extra capital, though intended by its owners for production,
is in reality employed unproductively, and annually replaced,
not from any produce of its own, but from the produce of the
labour supported by the remainder of the farmer’s capital.
Finally, that large portion of the productive capital of a
country which is employed in payimg the wages and salaries
of labourers, evidently is not, all of it, strictly and indispen-
sably necessary for production. As much of it as exceeds
the actual necessaries of life and health (an excess which in
the case of skilled labourers is usually considerable) is not
expended in supporting labour, but in remunerating it, and
the labourers could wait for this part of their remuneration
until the production is completed; it needs not necessarily


ee! ere


72 BOOK I. CHAPTER Iv. § 2.

pre-exist as capital: and if they unfortunately had to foreg)
it altogether, the same amount of production might take plac
In order that the whole remuneration of the labourers shoul!
be advanced to them in daily or weekly payments, there mus
exist In advance, and be appropriated to productive use, #
greater stock, or capital, than would suffice to carry on tli
existing extent of production: greater, by whatever amouil
of remuneration the labourers receive, beyond what the sell:
interest of a prudent slave-master would assign to his slayes
In truth, it is only after an abundant capital had already beet
accumulated, that the practice of paying in advance anj
remuneration of labour beyond a bare subsistence, could pos
sibly have arisen: since whatever is so paid, is not really
applied to production, but to the unproductive consumption
of productive labourers, indicating a fund for production
sufficiently ample to admit of habitually diverting a part of if
to a mere convenience.

It will be observed that I have assumed, that the labourers
are always subsisted from capital: and this is obviously the
fact, although the capital needs not necessarily be furnished
by a person called a capitalist. When the labourer maintains
himself by funds of his own, as when a peasant farmer or
proprietor lives on the produce of his land, or an artisan
works on his own account, they are still supported by capital,
that is, by funds provided in advance. The peasant does not
subsist this year on the produce of this year’s harvest, but


-on that of the last. The artisan is not living on the pro-


ceeds of the work he has in hand, but on those of work
previously executed and disposed of. Each is supported by
asmall capital of his own, which he periodically replaces from
the produce of his labour. The large capitalist is, in like
manner, maintained from funds provided in advance. If he
personally conducts his operations, as much of his expenditure
on himself and family as does not exceed a fair remuneration
of his labour at the market price, must be considered asa
part of his capital, expended, like any other capital, for pro-


CAPITAL. 73
7


duction: and his personal consumption, so far as it consists
of necessaries, is productive consumption.


§ 3. At the risk of being tedious, I must add a few more
illustrations, to bring out into a still stronger and clearer
light the idea of Capital. As M. Say truly remarks, it is on
the very elements of our subject that illustration is most
usefully bestowed, since the greatest errors which prevail in
it may be traced to the want of a thorough mastery over the
elementary ideas. Nor is this surprising: a branch may be
diseased and all the rest healthy, but unsoundness at the root
diffuses unhealthiness through the whole tree.

Let us therefore consider whether, and in what cases, the
property of those who live on the interest of what they pos-
sess, without being personally engaged in production, can
be regarded as capital. It is so called in common language,
and, with reference to the individual, not improperly. All
funds from which the possessor derives an income, which
income he can use without sinking and dissipating the fund
itself, are to him equivalent to capital. But to transfer has-
tily and inconsiderately to the general point of view, propo-
sitions which are true of the individual, has been a source of
innumerable errors in political economy. In the present
instance, that which is virtually capital to the individual, is
or is not capital to the nation, according as the fund which
by the supposition he has not dissipated, has or has not
been dissipated by somebody else.

For example, let property of the value of ten thousand
pounds belonging to A, be lent to B, a farmer or manufac-
turer, and employed profitably in B’s occupation. It is as
much capital as if it belonged to B. A is really a farmer or
manufacturer, not personally, but in respect of his property.
Capital worth ten thousand pounds is employed in produc-
tion—in maintaining labourers and providing tools and mate-
rials; which capital belongs to A, while B takes the trouble
of employing it, and receives for his remuneration the differ-


5 SL ene erential aoe sooennt


74 BOOK I. CHAPTER Ivy. $ 3.


ence between the profit which it yields and the interest he
pays to A. This case is the simplest of all.

Suppose next that A’s ten thousand pounds, instead of
being lent to B, are lent on mortgage to C, a landed pro-
prietor, and by him employed in improving the productive
powers of his estate, by fencing, draining, road-making, or
permanent manures. This is productive employment. The
ten thousand pounds are sunk, but not dissipated. They
yield a permanent return: the land now affords an increase
of produce, sufficient, in a few years, if the outlay has been
judicious, to replace the amount, and in time to multiply
it manifold. Here, then, is a value of ten thousand pounds,
employed in increasing the produce of the country. This
constitutes a capital, for which C, if he lets his land, receives
the returns in the nominal form of increased rent; and the
mortgage entitles A to receive from these returns, in the
shape of interest, such annual sum as has been agreed upon
between them. We will now vary the circumstances, and
suppose that C does not employ the loan in improving his
land, but in paying off a former and more onerous mortgage,
or in making a provision for children. Whether the ten
thousand pounds thus employed are capital or not, will
depend on what is done with the amount by the ultimate
receiver. If the children invest their: fortunes in a produc-
tive employment, or the mortgagee on being paid off lends
the amount to another landholder to improve his land or to
a manufacturer to extend his business, it is still capital,
because productively employed.

Suppose, however, that C, the borrowing landlord, is a
spendthrift, who burthens his land not to increase his fortune
but to squander it, expending the amount in equipages and
entertainments. In a year or two it is dissipated, and with-
out return. A is as rich as before; he has no longer his ten
thousand pounds, but he has a lien on the land, which he
could still sell for that amount. C, however, is 10,0002.
poorer than formerly; and nobody is richer. It may be said


5
CAPITAL. 75


that those are richer who have made profit out of the money
while it was being spent. No doubt if C lost it by gaming,
or was cheated of it by his servants, that is a mere transfer,
not a destruction, and those who have gamed the amount
may employ it productively. But if C has received the fair
yalue for his expenditure in articles of subsistence or luxury,
which he has consumed on himself, or by means of his
servants or guests, these articles have ceased to exist, and
nothing has been produced to replace them: while if the
same sum had been employed in farming or manufacturing,
the consumption which would have taken place would have
been more than balanced at the end of the year by new
products, created by the hands of those who would in that
case have been the consumers. By C’s prodigality, that
which would have been consumed with a return, is con-
sumed without return. C’s tradesmen may have made a
profit during the process; but if the capital had been ex-
pended productively, an equivalent profit would have been
made by builders, fencers, tool-makers, and the tradespeople
who supply the consumption of the labouring classes ; while
at the expiration of the time (to say nothing of any increase),
C would have had the ten thousand pounds or its value
replaced to him, which now he has not. There is, therefore,
on the general result, a difference to the disadvantage of the
community, of at least ten thousand pounds, being the
amount of C’s unproductive expenditure. To A, the differ-
ence is not material, since his income is secured to him,
and while the security is good, and the market rate of
interest the same, he can always sell the mortgage at its
original value. To A, therefore, the lien of ten thousand
pounds on C’s estate, is virtually a capital of that amount ;
but is it so in reference to the community? It is not. A
had a capital of ten thousand pounds, but this has been
extinguished—dissipated and destroyed by C’s prodigality.
A now receives his income, not from the produce of his
capital, but from some other source of income belonging to


= Sos aa SRE CIE
nae ene ee ee oe


SS


76 BOOK I. CHAPTER Iv. § 3.


C, probably from the rent of his land, that is, from payments
made to him by farmers out of the produce of their capital.
The national capital is diminished by ten thousand pounds,
and the national income by all which those ten thousand
pounds, employed as capital, would have produced. ‘The
loss does not fall on the owner of the destroyed capital, since
the destroyer has agreed to indemnify him for it. But his
loss is only a small portion of that sustained by the com-
munity, since what was devoted to the use and consumption
of the proprietor, was only the interest; the capital itself
was, or would have been, employed in the perpetual main-
tenance of an equivalent number of labourers, regularly
reproducing what they consumed: and of this maintenance
they are deprived without compensation.

Let us now vary the hypothesis still further, and suppose
that the money is borrowed, not by a landlord, but by the
State. A lends his capital to Government to carry on a
war: he buys from the State what are called government
securities ; that is, obligations by the government to pay a
certam annual income. If the government employed the
money in making a railroad, this might be a productive em-
ployment, and A’s property would still be used as capital;
but since it is employed in war, that is, in the pay of officers
and soldiers who produce nothing, and in destroying a
quantity of gunpowder and bullets without return, the go-
vernment is in the situation of C, the spendthrift landlord,
and A’s ten thousand pounds are so much national capital
which once existed, but exists no longer: virtually thrown
into the sea, as far as wealth or production is concerned ;
though for other reasons the employment of it may have been
justifiable. A’s subsequent income is derived, not from the
produce of his own capital, but from taxes drawn from the
produce of the remaining capital of the community; to
whom his capital is not yielding any return, to indemnify
them for the payment ; it is lost and gone, and what he now
possesses is a claim on the returns to other people’s capital


CAPITAL. Wik


and industry. This claim he can sell, and get back the
equivalent of his capital, which he may afterwards employ
productively. True; but he does not get back his own
capital, or anything which it has produced: that, and all its
possible returns, are extinguished: what he gets is the capital
of some other person, which that person is willing to ex-
change for his lien on the taxes. Another capitalist sub-
stitutes himself for A as a mortgagee of the public, and
A substitutes himself for the other capitalist as the pos-
sessor of a fund employed in production, or available for
it. By this exchange the productive powers of the com-
munity are neither increased nor diminished. The breach
in the capital of the country was made when the govern-
ment took A’s money: whereby a value of ten thousand
pounds was withdrawn or withheld from productive em-
ployment, placed in the fund for unproductive consumption,
and destroyed without equivalent.


eosin meals a


CHAPTER V.


FUNDAMENTAL PROPOSITIONS RESPECTING CAPITAL,


§ 1. Ir the preceding explanations have answered their
(f ; purpose, they have given not only a sufficiently complete pos-
session of the idea of Capital according to its definition, but a
Bie ae sufficient familiarity with it in the concrete and amidst the
r ua obscurity with which the complication of individual circum-
at stances surrounds it, to have prepared even the unpractised
\ reader for certain elementary propositions or theorems
| aaa respecting capital, the full comprehension of which is already
‘ist a considerable step out of darkness into light.

The first of these propositions is, That industry 1s
limited by capital. This is so obvious, as to be taken for
granted in many common forms of speech; but to see a
truth occasionally is one thing, to recognize it habitually,
and admit no propositions inconsistent with it, is another. |
The axiom was until lately almost universally disregarded |
by legislators and political writers; and doctrines irrecon- |
cileable with it are still very commonly professed and in-
culcated.


espera Pang


peal ene
ar


The following are common expressions, implying its

ed truth. The act of directing industry to a particular em-

; ployment is described by the phrase “ applying capital” to |
q. : the employment. To employ industry on the land is to
i ‘ apply capital to the land. To employ labour in a manufac-
ture is to invest capital in the manufacture. This implies

it that industry cannot be employed to any greater extent than
| ate there is capital to invest. The proposition, indeed, must be
it assented to as soon as it is distinctly apprehended. The
, fen expression “applying capital” is of course metaphorical:
ee what is really applied is labour; capital being an indispen-

:


FUNDAMENTAL PROPOSITIONS ON CAPITAL. 79


sable condition. Again, we often speak of the “productive
powers of capital.’ This expression is not literally correct.
The only productive powers are those of labour and natural
agents; or if any portion of capital can by a stretch of lan-
guage be said to have a productive power of its own, it is
only tools and machinery, which, like wind or water, may
be said to co-operate with labour. The food of labourers and
the materials of production have no productive power; but
labour cannot exert its productive power unless provided
with them. There can be no more industry than is supplied
with materials to work up and food to eat. Self-evident
as the thing is, it is often forgotten that the people of a
country are maintained and have their wants supplied, not
by the produce of present labour, but of past. They
consume what has been produced, not what is about to
be produced. Now, of what has been produced, a part
only is allotted to the support of productive labour;
and there will not and cannot be more of that labour than
the portion so allotted (which is the capital of the country)
can feed, and provide with the materials and instruments of
production.

Yet, in disregard of a fact so evident, it long continued
to be believed that laws and governments, without creating
capital, could create industry. Not by making the people
more laborious, or increasing the efficiency of their labour ;
these are objects to which the government can in some
degree contribute. But when the people already worked as
hard and as skilfully as they could be made to do, it was
still thought that the government, without providing addi-
tional funds, could create additional employment. A govern-
ment would, by prohibitory laws, put a stop to the importa-
tion of some commodity ; and when by this it had caused the
commodity to be produced at home, it would plume itself
upon having enriched the country with a new branch of in-
dustry, would parade in statistical tables the amount of pro-
duce yielded and labour employed in the production, and


wore


WEEP peer


80 BOOK I. CHAPTER Vv. § 2.

take credit for the whole of this as a gain to the country,
obtained through the prohibitory law. Although this sort of
political arithmetic has fallen a little into discredit in England,
it still flourishes in the nations of Continental Europe. Had
legislators been aware that industry is limited by capital, they
would have seen that, the aggregate capital of the country not
having been increased, any portion of it which they by their
laws had caused to be embarked in the newly-acquired
branch of industry must have been withdrawn or withheld
from some other; in which it gave, or would have given,
employment to probably about the same quantity of labour
which it employs in its new occupation*.


§ 2. Because industry is limited by capital, we are not
however to infer that it always reaches that limit. There
may not beas many labourers obtainable, as the capital would
maintain and employ. This has been known to occur in new
colonies, where capital has sometimes perished uselessly for


* An exception must be admitted when the industry created or
upheld by the restrictive law belongs to the class of what are called
domestic manufactures. These being carried on by persons already fed—
by the labourer, or his wife or children, in the intervals of other employ-
ment—no transfer of capital to the occupation is necessary to its being under-
taken, beyond the value of the materials and tools, which is often quite
inconsiderable. If, therefore, a protecting duty causes this occupation to
be carried on, when it otherwise would not, there is in this case a real in-
crease of the production of the country.

In order to render our theoretical proposition invulnerable, this
peculiar case must be allowed for; but it does not touch the practical
doctrine of free trade. Domestic manufactures cannot, from the very
nature of things, require protection, since the subsistence of the la-
bourers being provided from other sources, the price of the product,
however much it may be reduced, is nearly all clear gain. If, therefore,
the domestic producers retire from the competition, it is never from
necessity, but because the product is not worth the labour it costs, in
the opinion of the best judges, those who enjoy the one and undergo
the other. They prefer the sacrifice of buying their clothing to the labour
of making it. They will not continue their labour unless society will give
them more for it, than in their own opinion its product is worth.


FUNDAMENTAL PROPOSITIONS ON CAPITAL. 8]


want of labour: the Swan River settlement, in the first years
after its foundation, was an instance. There are many per-
sons maintained from existing capital, who produce nothing,
or who might produce much more than they do. If the
labourers were reduced to lower wages, or induced to work
more hours for the same wages, or if their families, who are
already maintained from capital, were employed to a greater
extent than they now are in adding to the produce, a given
capital would afford employment to more industry. The un-
productive consumption of productive labourers, the whole
of which is now supplied from capital, might cease, or be post-
poned until the produce came in; and additional productive
labourers might be maintained with the amount. By such
means society might obtain from its existing resources a
greater quantity of produce: and to such means it has been
driven, when the sudden destruction of some large portion of
its capital rendered the employment of the remainder with
the greatest possible effect, a matter of paramount considera-
tion for the time.

Where industry has not come up to the limit imposed by
capital, governments may, im various ways, for example by
importing additional labourers, bring it nearer to that limit:
as in the importation of Coolies and free negroes into our
sugar colonies. There is another way in which governments
can create additional industry. They can create capital.
They may lay on taxes, and employ the amount productively.
They may do what is nearly equivalent; they may lay taxes
on income or expenditure, and apply the proceeds towards
paying off the public debts. The fundholder when paid off
would still desire to draw an income from his property, most
of which therefore would find its way into productive employ-
ment, while a great part of it would have been drawn from
the fund for unproductive expenditure, since people do not
usually pay their taxes from what they would have saved,
but partly, if not chiefly, from what they would have spent.
It may be added, that any increase in the productive power

VOL, I. G


LE gl TE ais


82 BOOK I. CHAPTER v. § 3.


“=


of capital (or, more properly speaking, of labour) by im
provements in the arts of life, or otherwise, tends to in
crease the employment for labour; since, when there isa
greater produce altogether, it is always probable that some
portion of the increase will be saved and converted into
capital; especially when the increased returns to productive
industry hold out an additional temptation to the conver


sion of funds from an unproductive destination to a pr |


ductive.


§ 3. While,-on the one hand, industry is limited by |


capital, so on the other, every increase of capital gives, or is


capable of giving, additional employment to industry; and ©


o>


this without assignable limit. I do not mean to deny that |


the capital, or part of it, may be so employed as not to
support labourers, being fixed in machinery, buildings, im
provement of land, and the like. In any large increase of
capital a considerable portion will generally be thus em-
ployed, and will only co-operate with labourers, not main-
tain them. What I do intend to assert is, that the portion


which is destined to their maintenance, may (supposing no _
alteration in anything else) be indefinitely increased, with- |


out creating an impossibility of finding them employment:
in other words, that if there are human beings capable of
work, and food to feed them, they may always be employed
in producing something. This proposition requires to be
somewhat dwelt upon, being one of those which it is
exceedingly easy to assent to when presented in general
terms, but somewhat difficult to keep fast hold of, in
the crowd and confusion of the actual facts of society. It
is also very much opposed to common doctrines. There
is not an opinion more general among mankind than this,
that the unproductive expenditure of the rich is necessary
to the employment of the poor. Before Adam Smith,
the doctrine had hardly been questioned; and even since
his time, authors of the highest name and of great


FUNDAMENTAL PROPOSITIONS ON CAPITAL. 83


merit* have contended, that if consumers were to save and
convert into capital more than a limited portion of their
income, and were not to devote to unproductive consump-
tion an amount of means bearing acertain ratio to the capital
of the country, the extra accumulation would be merely so
much waste, since there would be no market for the com-
modities which the capital so created would produce. I
conceive this to be one of the many errors arising in pou-
tical economy, from the practice of not beginning with the
examination of simple cases, but rushing at once into the
complexity of concrete phenomena.

Every one can see that if a benevolent government pos-
sessed all the food, and all the implements and materials, of
the community, it could exact productive labour from all to
whom it allowed a share in the food, and could be in no
danger of wanting a field for the employment of this pro-
ductive labour, smce as long as there was a single want
unsaturated (which material objects could supply), of any one
individual, the labour of the community could be turned to
the production of something capable of satisfying that want.
Now, the individual possessors of capital, when they add to
it by fresh accumulations, are doing precisely the same thing,
which we suppose to be done by our benevolent government.
As it is allowable to put any case by way of hypothesis,
let us imagine the most extreme case conceivable. Suppose
that every capitalist came to be of opinion that not being
more meritorious than a well-conducted labourer, he ought not
to fare better; and accordingly laid by, from conscientious
motives, the surplus of his profits; or suppose this abstinence
not spontaneous, but imposed by Jaw or opinion upon all
capitalists, and upon landowners likewise. Unproductive
expenditure is now reduced to its lowest limit: and it is
asked, how is the increased capital to find employment?
Who is to buy the goods which it will produce? There are


* For example, Mr. Malthus, Dr. Chalmers, M. de Sismondi.
G2


re oe


EEE IS


84 BOOK I. CHAPTER v. $§ 3.


no longer customers even for those which were produced
before. The goods, therefore, will remain unsold: they will
perish in the warehouses; until capital is brought down to
what it was originally, or rather to as much less, as the
demand of the consumers has lessened. But this is seeing
only one half of the matter. In the case supposed, there
would no longer be any demand for luxuries, on the part of
capitalists and landowners. But when these classes tum
their income into capital, they do not thereby annihilate
their power of consumiption; they do but transfer it from
themselves to the labourers to whom they give employment.
Now, there are two possible suppositions in regard to ‘the
labourers ; either there is, or there is not, an increase of their
numbers, proportional to the increase of capital. If there is,
the case offers no difficulty. The production of necessaries
for the new population, takes the place of the production of
luxuries for a portion of the old, and supplies exactly the
amount of employment which has been lost. But suppose
that there is no increase of population. The whole of what
was previously expended in luxuries, by capitalists and land-
lords, is distributed among the existing labourers, in the form
of additional wages. We will assume them to be already
sufficiently supplied with necessaries. What follows? That
the labourers become consumers of luxuries; and the capital
Previously employed in the production of luxuries, is still
able to employ itself in the same manner: the difference
being, that the luxuries are shared among the community
generally, instead of being confined to a few. The increased
accumulation and increased production might, rigorously
speaking, continue, until every labourer had every indul-
gence of wealth, consistent with continuing to work; sup-
posing that the power of their labour were physically sufi-
cient to produce all this amount of indulgences for their
whole number. Thus the limit of wealth is never deficiency


1e1 but of producers, and productive power.
ition to capital gives to ]


of consumers,


Brenig : B20
ry add abour either additional


FUNDAMENTAL PROPOSITIONS ON CAPITAL. 85


employment, or additional remuneration; enriches either the
country or the labouring class. If it finds additional hands
to set to work, it increases the aggregate produce: if only the
same hands, it gives them a larger share of it; and perhaps
even in this case, by stimulating them to greater exertion,
augments the produce itself.


§ 4, A second fundamental theorem respecting Capital,
relates to the source from which it is derived. It is the
result of saving. The evidence of this lies abundantly in
what has been already said on the subject. But the propo-
sition needs some further illustration.

If all persons were to expend in personal indulgences all
that they produce, and all the income they receive from what
is produced by others, capital could not increase. All capital,
with a trifling exception, was originally the result of saving.
I say, with a trifling exception; because a person who la-
bours on his own account, may spend on his own account all
he produces, without becoming destitute; and the provision
of necessaries on which he subsists until he has reaped his
harvest or sold his commodity, though a real capital, cannot
be said to have been saved, since it is all used for the supply
of his own wants, and no abstinence has been practised. We
may imagine a number of individuals or families, settled on
as many separate pieces of land, each living on what their own
labour produces, and consuming the whole produce. But
even these must save (that is, spare from their personal con-
sumption) as much as is necessary for seed. Some saving,
therefore, there must have been, even in this simplest of all
states of economical relations; people must have produced more
than they used, or used less than they produced. Still more
must they do so before they can employ other labourers,
or increase their production beyond what can be accomplished
by the work of their own hands, All that any one employs
in supporting and earrying on any other labour than his own,
must have been originally brought together by saving ; some-


=


ats


ess,


Sener


FT ee


Se


Wy
+H
if


*


!


AES Bsns


BRO nse


86 BOOK I. CHAPTER vy. § 4.
body must have produced it and forborne to consume FE
We may say, therefore, without material inaccuracy, that _
capital, and especially all addition to capital, are the resu
of saving. :

In a rude and violent state of society, it continually
happens that the person who has capital is not the very per-
son who has saved it, but some one who being stronger, or
belonging to a more powerful community, has possessed him-
self of it by plunder. And even in a state of things several
degrees more advanced, the increase of capital has usually
been in a great measure derived from privations which,


though essentially the same with savine


g, are not generally
called by that name, because not voluntary. The actual pro-


ducers have been slaves, compelled to produce as much as
force could extort from them, and to consume as little as
the self-interest or the usually very slender humanity of their
taskmasters would permit. This kind of compulsory saving,
however, would not have caused any increase of capital,
unless a part of the amount had been saved over again,
voluntarily, by the master. If all that he made his slaves
produce and forbear to consume, had been consumed by him


on personal indulgences, he would not have increased his


capital, nor been enabled to maintain an increasing number
of slaves. To maintain any


slaves at all, implied a previous
saving ; a stock, at least of f


cod, provided in advance. This
saving may not, however, ha


ay 3 ve been made by any self-im-
posed privation of the master; but more probably by that of
the slaves themselves while free; the rapine or war, which
deprived them of their personal liberty, having transferred
also their accumulations to the conqueror, 2

There are other cases in w


associations usually belongin
operation by which capital is 1
stance, that the only way to
by increase of savin


hich the term Saying, with the

to it, does not exactly fit the
ere said, for in-
ase of capital 1s
be suggested of
But it is obvious


§
nereased. Tf itw
accelerate the incre


g, the idea would probably
greater abstinence, and increased priyation,


:
A


ee ae


FUNDAMENTAL PROPOSITIONS ON CAPITAL. 87


that whatever increases the productive power of labour, creates
an additional fund to make savings from, and enables capital
to be enlarged not only without additional privation, but con-
currently with an increase of personal consumption. Never-
theless, there is here an increase of saving, in the scientific
sense. Though there is more consumed, there is also more
spared. There is a greater excess of production over con-
sumption. It is consistent with correctness to call this a
greater saving. Though the term is not unobjectionable,
there is no other which is not liable to as great objections.
To consume less than is produced, is saving; and that is the
process by which capital is increased; not necessarily by con-
suming less, absolutely. We must not allow ourselves to be
so much the slaves of words, as to be unable to use the word
saving in this sense, without being in danger of forgetting
that to increase capital there is another way besides con-
suming less, namely, to produce more.


§ 5. A third fundamental theorem respecting Capital,
closely connected with the one last discussed, is, that although
saved, and the result of saving, it is nevertheless consumed.
The word saying does not imply that what is saved is not con-
sumed, but only that it is not consumed by the person who
saves it. If merely laid by for future use, it is said to be
hoarded; and while hoarded, is not consumed at all. But if
employed as capital, it is all consumed; not indeed by the
capitalist, but by his workpeople. Part is exchanged for
tools or machinery, which are worn out by use: part for seed
or materials, which are destroyed as such by being sown or
wrought up, and destroyed altogether by the consumption of
the ultimate product. The remainder is paid in wages to
productive labourers, who consume it for their daily wants ;
or if they in their turn save any part, this also is not, gene-
rally speaking, hoarded, but (through savings banks, benefit
clubs, or some other channel) re-employed as capital and con-


sumed.


BOOK I. CHAPTER v. § 5.


The principle now stated, is a strong example of the
necessity of attention to the most elementary truths of a
subject: for it is one of the most elementary of them all, an
yet no one who has not bestowed some thought on the matter
is habitually aware of it, and most are not even willing to
admit it when first stated. To the vulgar, it is not at all
apparent that what is saved, is consumed. To them, every
one who saves, appears in the light of a person who hoards;
they may think such conduct permissible, or even laudable,


when it is to provide for a family, and the like; but they
have no conception of it as doin
is to them another w


while spending appear


g good to other people: saving,
ord for keeping a thing to oneself:
s to them to be distributing it among
ho expends his fortune in unproductive
consumption, is looked upon as diffusing benefits all around;
and is an object of so much favour, that some portion of the


same popularity attaches even to him who spends what does
not belong to him; who not only destroys his own capital,
if he ever had any,


but, under pretence of borrowing, and on

promise of repayment, possesses himself of capital belonging

to others, and destroys that likewise.

This popular error comes from attending to a sm

tion only of the Consequences that flow
spending; al


1 that part of the effec
out of sight,


being out of mind.
saved, into an im


of it; w


others. The person w


all por-
from the saving or the
ts of either which is
The eye follows what is
aginary Strong) box, and! ¢here loses sight
hat is Spent, it follows into the hands of tradesmen
and dependents ; but without reaching the ultimate destina-
tion in either case. Saving (for productive investment) and
spending, coincide very closely in the first Stage of their
eres ee of both begin Pee mated
the things consumed, an feeds cay
ferent. There is


a destruction of material, and


Caring out of tools,
supplied to labourers,


uc a quantity of food and clothing
which they destroy by use: in the


FUNDAMENTAL PROPOSITIONS ON CAPITAL. 89


other case, there is a consumption, that 1s to say a destruc-
tion, of wines, equipages, and furniture. Thus far, the con-
sequence to the national wealth has been much the same;
an equivalent quantity of it has been destroyed in both cases.
But in the spending, this first stage is also the final stage ;
that particular amount of the produce of labour has dis-
appeared, and there is nothing left; while on the contrary
the saving person, during the whole time that the destruc-
tion was going on, has had labourers at work repairing it;
who are ultimately found to have replaced, with an increase,
the equivalent of what has been consumed. - And as this
operation admits of being repeated indefinitely . without
any fresh act of saving, a saving once made becomes a
fund to maintain a corresponding number of labourers in


perpetuity, reproducing annually their own maintenance with
a profit.

Tt is the intervention of money which obscures, to an
unpractised apprehension, the true character of these pheno-


mena. Almost all expenditure being carried on by means of
money, the money comes to be looked upon as the main
feature in the transaction, and smce that does not perish,
but only changes hands, people overlook the destruction
which takes place in the case of unproductive expenditure.
The money being merely transferred, they think the wealth
also has only been handed over from the spendthrift to other
people. But this is simply confounding money with wealth.
The wealth which has been destroyed was not the money,
but the wines, equipages, and furniture which the money
purchased; and these having been destroyed without return,
society collectively is poorer by the amount. It may be said,
perhaps, that wines, equipages, and furniture, are not sub-
sistence, tools, and materials, and could not in any case have
been applied to the support of labour; that they are adapted
for no other than unproductive consumption, and that the
detriment to the wealth of the community was when they
were produced, not when they were consumed. I am willing


90 BOOK I. CHAPTER vy. § 5.


to allow this, as far as is necessary for the argument, and the
remark would be very pertinent if these expensive ——
were drawn from an existing stock, never to be replenished,
But since, on the contrary, they continue to be ae :
long as there are consumers for them, and are oe:
increased quantity to meet an increased demand; the a a
made by a consumer to expend five thousand a year in se :
ries, keeps a corresponding number of labourers emp A
from year to year in producing things which can be g ;
use to production; their services being lost so far as regards
the increase of the national wealth, and the tools, materials,
and food which they annually consume being’ so much sub-
tracted from the general stock of the community apenas
to productive purposes. In proportion as any class is impro-
vident or luxurious, the industry of the country takes the
direction of producing luxuries for their use; while not only
the employment for productive labourers is diminished, but
the subsistence and instruments which are the means of such
employment do actually exist in smaller quantity.

Saving, in short, enriches, and spending impoverishes, the
community along with the individual; which is but saying
in other words, that society at large is richer by what it


expends in maintaining and aiding productive Jabour, but
poorer by what it consumes jn its enjoyments*,


* It is perhaps worth while to direct
Stances which to a certain extent dimini;
the general wealth by the
pensation, more or


attention to several circum-
sh the detriment caused to
prodigality of individuals, or raise up a com-
less ample, as a consequence of the detriment itself.
One of these is that spendthrifts do not really sueceed in consuming all
they spend, Their habitual carelessness as to expenditure causes them
to be cheated and robbed on all quarters, often by persons of frugal
habits, Large accumulations are continually made by the agents, stewards,
and even domestic Servants, of improvident persons of fortune ; and they


pay much higher prices for all purchases than people of careful habits,
which accounts for their being popular

fore, actually not able to ge
of wealth by a


eee
ee anes


a en RTT Tm ET


FUNDAMENTAL PROPOSITIONS ON CAPITAL. 91


§ 6. To return to our fundamental theorem. Everything
which is produced is consumed; both what is saved and
what is said to be spent; and the former quite as rapidly
as the latter. All the ordinary forms of language tend to
disguise this. When men talk of the ancient wealth of a
country, of riches inherited from ancestors, and similar ex-
pressions, the idea suggested is, that the riches so trans-
mitted were produced long ago, at the time when they are


Much of it is merely transferred to others, by whom a part may be saved.
Another thing to be observed is, that the prodigality of some may reduce
others to a forced economy. Suppose a sudden demand for some article
of luxury, caused by the caprice of a prodigal, which not having been cal-
culated on beforehand, there has been no increase of the usual supply.
The price will rise; and may rise beyond the means or the inclinations
of some of the habitual consumers, who may in consequence forego
their accustomed indulgence, and save the amount. If they do not, but
continue to expend as great a value as before on the commodity, the
dealers in it obtain, for only the same quantity of the article, a returm
increased by the whole of what the spendthrift has paid; and thus the
amount which he loses is transferred’ bodily to them, and may be added
to their capital: his increased personal consumption being made up by
the privations of the other purchasers, who have obtained less than usual
of their accustomed gratification for the same equivalent. On the other
hand, a counter-process must be going on somewhere, since the prodigal
must have diminished his purchases in some other quarter to -balance
the augmentation in this ; he has perhaps called in funds employed in sus-
taining productive labour, and the dealers in subsistence and in the
instruments of production have had commodities left on their hands, or
have received, for the usual amount of commodities, a less than usual
return. But such losses of income or capital, by industrious persons,
except when of extraordinary amount, are generally made up by increased.
pinching and privation ; so that the capital of the community may not be
on the whole impaired, and the prodigal may have had his self-indulgence
at the expense not of the permanent resources, but of the temporary
pleasures and comforts of others. For in every case the community are
poorer by what any one spends, unless others are in consequence led
to curtail their spending. There are yet other and more recondite ways
in which the profusion of some may bring about its compensation in the
extra savings of others; but these cannot be considered until that part
of the Fourth Book, which treats of the limiting principle to the accu-
mulation of capital.


92 BOOK I. CHAPTER vy. § 6.


said to have been first acquired, and that no perucy ie a
capital of the country was produced this year, an
much as may have been this year added to the kota al
Mh ewfactersitan otherwise. The greater part, in be :
the wealth now existing in England has been prod .
by human hands within the last twelye months. A —
small proportion indeed of that large aggregate was . eae
ence ten years ago;—of the present productive capital o 4
country scarcely any part, except farm-houses and ae
and a few ships and machines; and even these would no
most cases haye survived so long, if fresh labour had ae
been employed within that period in putting them -
repair. The land subsists, and the land is almost the <a
thine that subsists. Everything which is produced perishes,
and most things very quickly. Most kinds of capital are not
fitted by their nature to be long preserved. There are a few,
and but a few productions, capable of a very prolonged
existence. Westminster Abbey has lasted many Cena
with occasional repairs; some ancient sculptures have existed
above two thousand years; the Pyramids perhaps double or
treble that time. But these were objects devoted to UNTO;
ductive use. If we except bridges and aqueducts (to which
may sometimes be added tanks and embankments, ) there are
few instances of any edifice applied to industrial purposes
which has been of great duration ; such buildings do not
hold out against wear and tear, nor is it good economy to
construct them of the solidity necessary for permanency;
Capital is kept in existence from age to age not by preser-
vation but by perpetual reproduction ; every part of it 1s
used and destroyed, generally very soon after it is produced,
but those who consume it are employed meanwhile in pro-
ducing more. The growth of capital is Similar to the growth
of population. Every individual who is born, dies, but in
each year the number born exceeds the number who die:
the population, therefore, always increases, although not one
person of those com Posing it was alive until a very recent date.


ee
SS eee


FUNDAMENTAL PROPOSITIONS ON CAPITAL. 93


§ 7. This perpetual consumption and reproduction of
capital affords the explanation of what has so often excited
wonder, the great rapidity with which countries recover from
a state of devastation; the disappearance, in a short time, of
all traces of the mischiefs done by earthquakes, floods, hur-
ricanes, and the ravages of war. An enemy lays waste a
country by fire and sword, and destroys or carries away
nearly all the moveable wealth existing in it: all the inhabit-


ants are ruined, and yet in a few years after, everything is
much as it was before. This vis medicatrix nature has been
a subject of sterile astonishment, or has been cited to exem-


plify the wonderful strength of the principle of saving, which
can repair such enormous losses in so brief an interval.
There is nothing at all wonderfal in the matter. What the
enemy have destroyed, would have been destroyed in a little
time by the inhabitants themselves: the wealth which they
so rapidly reproduce, would have needed to be reproduced
and would have been reproduced in any case, and probably
in as short an interval. Nothing is changed, except that
during the reproduction they have not now the advantage of
consuming what had been produced previously. The possi-
bility of a rapid repair of their disasters, mainly depends on
whether the country has been depopulated. If its effective
population have not been extirpated at the time, and are not
starved afterwards; then, with the same skill and knowledge
which they had before, with their land and its permanent
improvements undestroyed, and the more durable buildings
probably unimpaired, or only partiaily injured, they Have
nearly all the requisites for their former amount of pro-
duction. If there is as much of food left to them, or of
valuables to buy food, as enables them by any amount of
privation to remain alive and in working condition, they
will in a short time have raised as great a produce, and
acquired collectively as great wealth and as great a capital, as
before; by the mere continuance of that ordinary amount of
exertion which they are accustomed to employ in their occu-


i
|


REPELS eee


uae


ESE A RIOT ws


94 BOOK 1. CHAPTER v. § 8.


pations. Nor does this evince any strength in the principle
of saving, in the popular sense of the term, since what
takes place is not intentional abstinence but involuntary
privation.

Yet so fatal is the habit of thinking through the medium
of only one set of technical phrases, and so little reason
have studious men to value themselves on being exempt
from the yery same mental infirmities which beset the vulgar,
that this simple explanation was never given (so far as Tam
aware) by any political economist before Dr. Chalmers; a
writer many of whose opinions I think erroneous, but who
has always the merit of studying phenomena at first hand,
and expressing them in a language of his own, which often
uncovers aspects of the truth that the received phraseologies
only tend to hide. :


§8. The same author carries out this train of thought
to some important conclusions on another closely connected
subject, that of government loans for war purposes or other
unproductive expenditure. These loans, being drawn from
capital (mm lieu of taxes, which would generally have been
paid from imcome, and made up m part or altogether by
increased economy) must, according to the principles we
have laid down, tend to impoverish the country: yet the
years in which expenditure of this sort has been on the
greatest scale, have uften been years of great apparent pros-
perity: the wealth and resources of the country, instead of
diminishing, have given every sign of rapid increase during
the process, and of greatly expanded dimensions after its
close. This was confessedly the case with Great Britain
during the last Continental war; and it would take some
space to enumerate all the unfounded theories in political
economy, to which that fact gave rise, and to which it
secured temporary credence; almost all tending to exalt
unproductive expenditure, at the expense of productive.
Without entering into all the causes which operated and


FUNDAMENTAL PROPOSITIONS ON CAPITAL. 95


which commonly do operate to prevent these extraordinary
drafts on the productive resources of a country from being
so much felt as it might seem reasonable to expect, we will
suppose the most unfavourable case possible: that the whole
amount borrowed and destroyed by the government, was
abstracted by the lender from a productive employment in
which it had actually been invested. The capital, there-
fore, of the country, is this year diminished by so much.
But unless the amount abstracted is something enormous,
there is no reason in the nature of the case why next year
the national capital should not be as great as ever. The loan
cannot have been taken from that portion of the capital of
the country which consists of tools, machinery, and build-
ings. It must have been wholly drawn from the portion
employed in paying labourers: and the labourers will suffer
accordingly. But if none of them are starved; if their
wages can bear such an amount of reduction, or if charity
interposes between them and absolute destitution, there is
no reason that their labour should produce less in the next
year than in the year before. If they produce as much as
usual, having been paid less by so many millions sterling,
those millions are gained by their employers. The breach
made in the capital of the country is thus instantly repaired,
but repaired by the privations and often the real misery of
the labouring class. Here is ample reason why such periods,
even in the most unfavourable circumstances, may easily be
times of great gain to those whose prosperity usually passes,
in the estimation of society, for national prosperity. To
see the hideous wrong side of the picture, we must look
beneath. ;

This leads to the vexed question, to which Dr. Chalmers
has very particularly adverted; whether the funds required
by a government for extraordinary unproductive expenditure,
are best raised by loans, the interest only being provided
by taxes, or whether taxes should be at once laid on to the
whole amonnt; which is called in the financial vocabulary


al a


ae


eel Rs RM as


oS.


aes


BP


96 BOOK I. CHAPTER y. Q 3.


raising the whole of the supphes within the year. Dr. Chal-
mers is strongly for the latter method. He says, the com-
mon notion is that in calling for the whole amount in one
year, you require what is either impossible, or very incon-
venient; that the people cannot, without great hardship, pay
the whole at once out of their yearly income; and that it is
much better to require of them a small payment every year
in the shape of interest, than so great a sacrifice once for all,
To which his answer is, that the sacrifice is made equally in
either case. Whatever is spent, cannot but be drawn from
yearly income. The whole and every part of the wealth
existing in the country, forms, or helps to form, the yearly
imeome of somebody. The privation which it is supposed
must result from taking the amount in the shape of taxes,
is not avoided by taking it ina loan. The suffering is not
averted, but only thrown upon the labouring classes, the
least able, and who least ought, to bear it: while all the
inconveniences, physical, moral, and political, produced by
maintaining taxes for the perpetual payment of the interest,
are incurred in pure loss. Whenever capital is withdrawn
from production, or from the fund destined for production,
to be lent to the state and expended unproductively, that
whole sum is withheld from the labouring classes ; the loan,
therefore, is im truth paid off the same year; the whole of
the sacrifice necessary for paying it off is actually made;
only it is paid to the wrong persons, and therefore does not
extinguish the claim; and paid by the very worst of taxes,
a tax exclusively on the labouring class, And after having,
in this most painful and unjust of ways, gone through the
whole effort necessary for extinguishing the debt, the country
remains charged with it, and with the payment of its interest
in perpetuity.

These views appear to me strictly just, in so far as the
yalue absorbed in loans would otherwise have been employed
in productive industry within the country. The practical
state of the case, however, seldom exactly corresponds with


FUNDAMENTAL PROPOSITIONS ON CAPITAL, 97


this supposition. ‘The loans of the less wealthy countries are
made chiefly with foreign capital, which would not, perhaps,
have been brought in to be invested on any less security than
that of the government: while those of rich and prosperous
countries are generally made not with funds withdrawn from
productive employment, but with the new accumulations
constantly making from income, and often with a part of
them which if not so taken, would have migrated to colonies
or sought other investments abroad. In these cases (which
will be more particularly examined hereafter*,) the sum wanted
may be obtained without detriment to the labourers, or de-
rangement of the national industry, and even, perhaps, with
an advantage to both, in comparison with raising the amount
by taxation, since taxes, especially when heavy, are almost
always partly paid at the expense of what would otherwise
have been saved and added to capital. Moreover, in a coun-
try which makes so great yearly additions to its wealth, that
a part can be taken and expended unproductively without
diminishing capital, or even preventing a considerable in-
crease, it is evident that even if the whole of what is so
taken would have become capital, and obtained employment
in the country, the effect on the labouring classes is far less
prejudicial, and the case against the loan system much less
strong, than in the case first supposed. This brief anticipa-
tion of a discussion which will find its proper place else-
where, appeared necessary to prevent false inferences from
the premises previously laid down.


§ 9. We now pass to a fourth fundamental theorem
respecting Capital, which is, perhaps, oftener overlooked or
misconceived than even any of the foregoing. What sup-
ports and employs productive labour, is the capital expended
in setting it to work, and not the demand of purchasers for
the produce of the labour when completed. Demand for


* Infra, book iv. chap. iv. v.


eae 2 tt STE SAS LISS


= a


98
BOOK I. CHAPTER v. $§ 9.


commodities is not demand for labour. The demand for
Leer determines in what particular branch of produe-
a Pasa es shall be employed; it determines
labour eats or a peony but not the more or less of the
That depends eS na maintenance or payment of the labour,
i directly ee a ee Oe ae othen tig
eae sustenance and remuneration of
ai establish Fe manut: ae baying velvet, but no capital to
Be: Pear me ee It is of no consequence how great
i panoneiiese i 5 un o capital is attracted into the occu-
rd tt Roumhtyanless Peary made, and consequently none
ce re ee eee: fe fue of the intending purchaser

have paid for aE i a ete a part of the price he would
they may employ ee : a on vonepeen se a
he converts part of his ir n making velvet 5 that is, unless
St inner eon into capital, and invests that
Beet aa anufacture. et us now reverse the hypo-
mane TGeE but that there is plenty of capital ready for
ie wee is i ut no demand. Velvet will not be made;
cat for making et ae preference on the part of capital
fi not produce for che 1 eee and their labourers do
: supply of their own eres 23 eet customers, but for the
a labour, which are the ue Breese Intheeapie! andy
produce something else wi vas of production, they can either

I other demand ‘thes the which is in demand, or if there be n0
ae ear have one, and can produce the

the capital cannot be dis or their own consumption. So that
A OtECUTve anor ee eo purchasers can. I
sudden change. If the demand le the effects of a
commodity to supply it is alread a unexncetedly aftentil
different element into the ae a ae this introduces 4
consumed in producing anaes oes sony io
uses, and it has therefore perished 2 which nobody wants oF
, and the employment which


Sooo tare


FUNDAMENTAL PROPOSITIONS ON CAPITAL. 99


it gave to labour is at an end, not because there is no longer
a demand, but because there is no longer a capital. This
case therefore does not test the principle. The proper test is,
to suppose that the change is gradual and foreseen, and is
attended with no waste of capital, the manufacture being dis-
continued by merely not replacing the machinery as it wears
out, and not reinvesting the money as it comes in from the
sale of the produce. The capital is thus ready for a new
employment, in which it will maintain as much labour as
before. The manufacturer and his work-people lose the benefit
of the skill and knowledge which they had acquired in the
particular business, and which can only be partially of use to
them in any other; and that is the amount of loss to the com-
munity by the change. But the labourers can still work, and
the capital which previously employed them will, either in the
same hands, or by being lent to others, employ either those
labourers or an equivalent number in some other occupation.

This truth, that purchasing produce is not employing
labour; that the demand for labour is constituted by the
wages which precede the production, and not by the demand
which may exist for the commodities resulting from the pro-
duction ; is a proposition which greatly needs all the illustra-
tion it can receive. It is, to common apprehension, a paradox;
and even among political economists of reputation, I can
hardly point to any, except Mr. Ricardo and M. Say, who
have kept it constantly and steadily in view. Almost all
others occasionally express themselves as if a person who buys
commodities, the produce of labour, was an employer of labour,
and created a demand for it as really, and in the same sense,
as if he bought the labour itself directly, by the payment of
wages. It is no wonder that political economy advances
slowly, when such a question as this still remains open,
at its very threshold. I am desirous of impressing on the
reader that a demand for commodities does not in any manner
constitute a demand for labour, but only determines into a
particular channel a portion, more or less considerable, of

H 2


100 BOOK I. CHAPTER v. § 9.


the demand already existing. It determines that a part of
the labour and capital of the community shall be employed
in producing certain things instead of other things. The
demand for labour is constituted solely by the funds directly
set apart for the use of labourers.

For the better illustration of our principle, let us put the
following case. A consumer may expend his income either
buying services or commodities ; he may employ part of if in
hiring journeymen bricklayers to build a house, or excavators
to dig artificial lakes, or labourers to make plantations and
lay out pleasure grounds; or, instead of this, he may expend
the same value in buying velvet and lace. The question is,
whether the difference between these two modes of expending
his income affects the interest of the labouring classes. It
is plain that in the first of the two cases he employs labourers,
1 who will be out of employment, or at least out of that em-
ployment, in the opposite case. But those from whom I
differ say that this is of no consequence, because in buying
velvet and lace he equally employs labourers, namely, those
who make the velvet and lace. This, according to the pmr
ciple we laid down, is an error, and I proceed to shew stil
more clearly that it is so. The consumer does not with his
own funds pay to the weavers and lacemakers their day’s
wages. He buys the finished commodity, which has been
produced by labour and capital, the labour not being paid nor
the capital furnished by him, but pre-existing. Suppose that


whi


«| he had been in the habit of expending this portion of his
He income in hiring journeymen bricklayers, who laid out the
4 amount of their wages in food and clothing, which were also
4 produced by labour and capital. He, however, determines


to prefer velvet, for which he thus creates an extra demand.
This demand cannot be satisfied without an extra supply, nor
can the supply be produced without an extra capital : where;
then, is the capital to come from? There is nothing in the
consumer’s change of purpose which makes the capital of
the country greater than it otherwise was. It appears;


FUNDAMENTAL PROPOSITIONS ON CAPITAL. 101


then, that the increased demand for velvet could not for
the present be’ supplied, were it not that the very circum-
stance which gave rise to it has set at liberty a capital of the
exact amount required. The very sum which the consumer
now employs in buying velvet formerly passed into the hands
of journeymen bricklayers, who expended it in food and
necessaries, which they now either go without, or squeeze,
by their competition, from the shares of other labourers.
The labour and capital, therefore, which formerly produced
necessaries for the use of these bricklayers, are deprived of
their market, and must look out for other employment; and
they find it in making velvet for the new demand. TI do not
mean that the very same labour and capital which produced
the necessaries turn themselves to producing the velvet; but,
in some one or other of a hundred modes, they take the
place of that which does. There was capital in existence to
do one of fwo things—to make the velvet, or to produce
necessaries for the journeymen bricklayers; but not to do
both. It was at the option of the consumer which of the two
should happen ; and if he chooses the velvet, they go without
the necessaries.

It must not be inferred from this, that it is, or that I
am bound to think it, advantageous to the labouring class,
that consumers should expend their mcome in services,
rather than in commodities. The difference does not lie
there, but in their employing it or not in the direct payment
or maintenance of labour, without the intervention of another
capital. The detriment to the labourers would have been
the same, if the consumer had persisted in building a
house, but instead of engaging labourers himself and paying
them, had given an order to a builder, and settled the account
after the work was finished. For in this manner of proceed-
ing, the consumer no longer himself maintains the labour,
but attracts the capital of another person from some other
place or occupation to do it, and therefore does not open a
new employment for labour, but merely changes the course of


102 BOOK I. CHAPTER v. § 9.


an existing employment. Thus, in whatever manner the
question is stated, we are brought back to the conclusion,
that a demand delayed until the work is completed, and
furnishing no advances but only reimbursing advances made
by others, contributes nothing to the demand for labour; and
that what is so expended, is, in all its effects, so far as regards
the employment of the labouring class, a mere nullity: 1
does not and cannot create any employment except at the
expense of other employment which existed before *.

The error, nevertheless, is a most natural one, and has
first appearances strongly on itsside. Although a demand for
velvet does nothing more in regard to the employment for
labour and capital, than to determine so much of the em-
ployment that already existed, into that particular channel
instead of any other; still, to the producers already engaged
in the velvet manufacture, and not intending to quit it, this
is of the utmost importance. To them a falling off in the
demand is a real loss, and one which, even if none of thet!
goods finally perish unsold, may mount to any height, up '
that which would make them choose as the smaller evil, 1
retire from the business. On the contrary, an increased
demand enables them to extend their transactions—to make
profit upon a larger capital, if they have it, or can borrow


* The grounds of a proposition, when well understood, usually give @
tolerable indication of the limitations of it. There is a case in which ®
demand for commodities may create employment for labour, namely, when
the labourer is already fed, without being fully employed. Worl: which cap
be done in the spare hours of persons subsisted from some other source, cau
(as we before remarked) be undertaken without withdrawing capital from
other occupations, beyond the amount (often very small) neta to repay
the expense of tools and materials. The reason of our principle thus failing,
the principle itself fails, and employment of this kind may, by the springing
up of a demand for the commodity, be called into iene without
depriving labour of an equivalent amount of employment in another quarter!
The demand does not even in this case operate on labour any otherwise
than through the medium of an existing capital, but it affords an induce
ment which causes that capital to set in motion a gre.


cae ater amount of labout
than it did before.


FUNDAMENTAL PROPOSITIONS ON CAPITAL, 103


it; and, turning oyer their capital more rapidly, they will
employ their labourers more constantly, or employ a greater
number than before. So that an increased demand for a
commodity does really, in the particular department, often
cause a greater employment to be given to labour by the same
capital. The mistake lies in not perceiving that in the cases
supposed, this advantage is given to labour and capital in one
department, only by being withdrawn from another; and that
when the change has produced its natural effect of attracting
into the employment additional capital proportional to the
increased demand, the advantage itself ceases.

The demand for commodities is a consideration of im-
portance rather in the theory of exchange, than in that of
production. Looking at things in the aggregate, and per-
manently, the remuneration of the producer is derived from
the productive power of his own capital. The sale of the
produce for money, and the subsequent expenditure of the
money in buying other commodities, are a mere exchange
of equivalent values, for mutual accommodation. It is true
that, the division of employments being one of the principal
means of increasing the productive power of labour, the
power of exchanging gives rise to a great increase of the
produce; but even then it is production, not exchange, which
remunerates labour and capital. We cannot too strictly
represent to ourselves the operation of exchange, whether
conducted by barter or through the medium of money, as the
mere mechanism by which each person transforms the remu-
neration of his labour or of his capital into the particular
shape in which it is most convenient to him to possess it;
but in no wise the source of the remuneration itself.


§10. The preceding principles demonstrate the fallacy
of many popular arguments and doctrines which are con-
tinually reproducing themselves in new forms. For example,
it has been contended, and by some from whom better things
might have been expected, that the argument for the income


iiirmasergn me


104 BOOK I. CHAPTER v. $10.


tax, grounded on its falling on the higher and middle classes
only, and sparing the poor, is an error; some have gone s0
far as to say, an imposture; because in taking from the rich
what they would have expended among the poor, the tax
injures the poor as much as if it had been directly levied
from them. Of this doctrine we now know what to think.
So far, indeed, as what is taken from the rich in taxes, would,
if not so taken, have been saved, and conyerted into capital,
or even expended in the maintenance and wages of servants
or of any class of unproductive labourers, to that extent the
demand for labour is no doubt diminished, and the poor m-
juriously affected, by any tax on the rich; and as these effects
are almost always produced in a greater or less degree, it 18
impossible so to tax the rich as that no portion whatever of
the tax can fall on the poor. But eyen here the question
arises, whether the government, after receiving the amount,
will not lay out as great a portion of it in the direct put
chase of labour, as the tax-payers would have done. In
regard to all that portion of the tax, which, if not paid to
the government, would have been consumed in the form of
commodities (or even expended in services if the payment
has been advanced by a capitalist), this, according to the

principles we have investigated, falls definitively on the rich,

and not at all on the poor. There is exactly the same demand

for labour, so far as this portion is concerned, after the tax, aS

before it. The capital which hitherto employed the labourers

of the country, remains, and is still capable of employing the

same number. There is the same amount of produce paid in

wages, or allotted to defray the feeding and clothing of

labourers,

If those against whom I am now contending were in the
right, 1t would be impossible to tax anybody except the
poor. If it is taxing the labourers, to tax what is laid out in
the produce of labour, the labouring classes pay all the taxes.
The same argument, however, equally proves, that it is im-


possible to tax the labourers at all; since the tax, being laid


FUNDAMENTAL PROPOSITIONS ON CAPITAL. 105


out either in labour or in commodities, comes all back to
them; so that taxation has the singular property of falling
on nobody. On the same showing, it would do the labourers
no harm to take from them all they have, and distribute it
among the other members of the community. It weuld all
be “spent among them,” which on this theory comes to the
same thing. The error is produced by not looking directly
at the realities of the phenomena, but attending only to the
outward mechanism of paying and spending. If we look at
the effects produced not on the money, which merely changes
hands, but on the commodities which are used and con-
sumed, we see that, in consequence of the income-tax, the
classes who pay it do really diminish their consumption.
Exactly so far as they do this, they are the persons on whom
the tax falls. It is defrayed out of what they would other-
wise have used and enjoyed. So far, on the other hand, as
the burthen falls, not on what they would have consumed,
but on what they would have saved to maintain production,
or spent in maintaining or paying unproductive labourers, to
that extent the tax forms a deduction from what would have
been used and enjoyed by the labouring classes. But if the
government, as is probably the fact, expends fully as much
of the amount as the tax-payers would have done in the
direct employment of labour, as in hiring sailors, soldiers,
and policemen, or in paying off debt, by which last operation
it even increases capital; the labouring classes not only do
not lose any employment by the tax, but may possibly gain
some, and the whole of the tax falls exclusively where it was
intended.

All that portion of the produce of the country which any
one actually and literally consumes for his own use, does
not contribute in the smallest degree to the maintenance
of labour. No one is benefitted by mere consumption,
except the person who consumes. And a person cannot
both consume his income himself, and make it over to be
consumed by others. Taking away a certain portion by


106 BOOK I. CHAPTER v. § 10.


taxation cannot deprive both him and them of it, but only
him or them. To know which is the sufferer, we must
understand whose consumption will have to be retrenched in
consequence: this, whoever it be, is the person on whom |
the tax really falls.


CHAPTER VI.


ON CIRCULATING AND FIXED CAPITAL.


§1. To complete our explanations on the subject of
capital, it is necessary to say something of the two species
into which it is usually divided. The distinction is very
obvious, and though not named, has been often adverted
to, in the two preceding chapters: but it is now proper
to define it accurately, and to point out a few of its con-
sequences.

Of the capital engaged in the production of any com-
modity, there is a part which, after being once used, exists
no longer as capital; is no longer capable of rendering service
to production, or at least not the same service, or to the
same sort of production. Such, for example, is the portion
of capital which consists of materials. The tallow and alkali
of which soap is made, once used in the manufacture, are
destroyed as alkali and tallow; and cannot be employed any
further in the soap manufacture, although, in their altered
condition, as soap, they are capable of being used as a
material or an instrument in other branches of manufacture.
In the same division must be placed the portion of capital
which is paid as the wages, or consumed as the subsistence,
of labourers. That part of the capital of a cotton spinner
which he pays away to his work-people, once so paid exists
no longer as his capital, or as a cotton spinner’s capital:
such portion of it as the workmen: consume, no longer exists
as capital at all: even if they save any part, it exists not
as the same but as a fresh capital, the result of a second act
of accumulation. Capital which m this manner fulfils the
whole of its office in the production in which it is engaged,
by a single use, is called Circulating Capital. The term,


108 BOOK I. CHAPTER vi. § 1.


which is not very appropriate, is derived from the circum-
stance, that this portion of capital requires to be constantly
renewed by the sale of the finished product, and when
renewed is perpetually parted with in buying materials and
paying wages; so that it does its work not by being kept,
but by changing hands. .

Another large portion of capital, however, consists in
instruments of production, of a more or less permanent
character; which produce their effect not by being parted
with, but by being kept; and the efficacy of which is not
exhausted by a single use. To this belong buildings, ee
chinery, and all or most things known by the name of im-


i plements or tools. The durability of some of these 1S con-
i siderable, and their function as productive instruments 18
i prolonged through many repetitions of the productive
cp operation. In this class must likewise be included capital


sunk (as the expression is) in permanent improvements of
; land. So also the capital expended once for all, the
commencement of an undertaking, to prepare the way for
subsequent operations: the expense of opening a mune,
i. for example; of cutting canals, of making roads or docks.
a Other examples might be added, but these are sufficient.
i Capital which exists in any of these durable shapes, and
the return to which is spread over a period of corresponding
duration, is called Fixed Capital.
Of fixed capital, some kinds require to be occasionally or
periodically renewed. Such are all implements and build-


: ings: they require, at intervals, partial renewal by means of
Hi | repairs, and are at last entirely worn out, and cannot be of
ie | any further service as buildings and implements, but fall
back into the class of materials. In other cases, the capital


does not, unless as a consequence of some unusual accident,
; require entire renewal: but there is alway

needed, either regularly or at least occasio
up. A dock or a canal, once made,
machine, to be made again,


s some outlay
nally, to keep it
does not require, like a
unless purposely destroyed, or


<a


CIRCULATING AND FIXED CAPITAL. 109


unless an earthquake or some similar catastrophe has filled
it up: but regular and frequent outlays are necessary to keep
itin repair. The cost of opening a mine needs not be incurred
a second time; but unless some one goes to the expense of
keeping the mine clear of water, it is soon rendered useless.
The most permanent of all kinds of fixed capital is that em-
ployed in giving increased productiveness to a natural agent,
such as land. The draining of marshy or inundated tracts like
the Bedford level, the reclaiming of land from the sea, or its
protection by embankments, are improvements calculated for
perpetuity; but drains and dykes require frequent repairs.
The same character of perpetuity belongs to the improve-
ment of land by subsoil draining, which adds so much to
the productiveness of the clay soils; or by permanent
manures, that is, by the addition to the soil, not of the
substances which enter into the composition of vegetables,
and which are therefore consumed by vegetation, but of
those which merely alter the relation of the soil to air and
water; as sand and lime on the heavy soils, clay and marl on
the light. yen such works, however, require some, though
it may be very little, occasional outlay to maintain their full
effect.

These improvements, however, by the very fact of their
deserving that title, produce an increase of return, which, after
defraying all expenditure necessary for keeping them up,
still leaves a surplus. This surplus forms the return to the
capital sunk in the first instance, and that return does not,
as in the case of machinery, terminate by the wearing out of
the machine, but continues forever. The land, thus increased
in productiveness, bears a value in the market, proportional
to the increase: and hence it is usual to consider the capital
which was invested, or sunk, in making the improvement, as
still existing in the increased value of the land. There must
be no mistake, however. The capital, like all other capital,
has been consumed. It was consumed in maintaining the
labourers who executed the improvement, and in the wear


110 BOOK I. CHAPTER vi. § 2.


a a and tear of the tools by which they were assisted. But itwas
a): rp consumed productively, and has left a permanent result in the
| improved productiyeness of an appropriated natural agent,
the land. We may call the increased produce the joint result
of the land and of a capital fixed in the land. But as the
‘ capital, having in reality been consumed, cannot be with-
i drawn, its productiveness is thenceforth indissolubly blended
with that arising from the original qualities of the soil; and
ti] the remuneration for the use of it thenceforth depends, not
ag upon the laws which govern the returns to labour and capital,
“et | if but upon those which govern the recompense for natural
agents. What these are, we shall see hereafter*.


CEE SE hes


geet


§2. There is a great difference between the effects of
hat circulating and those of fixed capital, on the amount of the
» Fa gross produce of the country. Circulating capital being

destroyed as such, or at any rate finally lost to the owner,

i by a single use; and the product resulting from that one

use being the only source from which the owner can replace
the capital, or obtain any remuneration for its productive
: employment; the product must of course be sufficient for

; those purposes, or in other words, the result of a single use |
must be a reproduction equal to the whole amount of the |

i circulating capital used, and a profit besides. This, however;
Lt is by no means necessary in the case of fixed capital. Since
machinery, for example, is not wholly consumed by one use;

. it is not necessary that it should be wholly replaced from the
, product of that use. The machine answers the purpose of its
owner if it brings in, during each interval of time, enough
js to cover the expense of repairs, and the deterioration in .
value which the machine has sustained during the same time, |
with a surplus sufficient to yield the onan profit on the


teen ponieemmeimaae


entire value of the machine.
From this it follows that all inerease of fixed capital,


* Infra, book ji, chap. xvi. On Rent.


|
.


CIRCULATING AND FIXED CAPITAL. 11)


when taking place at the expense of circulating, must be, at
least temporarily, prejudicial to the interests of the labourers.
This is true not of machinery alone, but of all improvements
by which capital is sunk; that is, rendered permanently inca-
pable of bemg applied to the maintenance and remuneration
of labour. Suppose that a person farms his own land, with
a capital of two thousand quarters of corn, employed in
maintaining labourers during one year (for simplicity we omit
the consideration of seed and tools), whose labour produces
him annually two thousand four hundred quarters, being a
profit of twenty per cent. This profit we shall suppose that
he annually consumes, carrying on his operations from year
to year on the original capital of two thousand quarters. Let
us now suppose that by the expenditure of half his capital
he effects a permanent improvement of his land, which is
executed by half his labourers, and occupies them for a year,
after which he will only require, for the effectual cultivation
of his land, half as many labourers as before. The remainder
of his capital he employs as usual. In the first year there is
no difference in the condition of the labourers, except that
part of them have received the same pay for trenching or tile-
draining or manuring the land, which they previously ob-
tained for ploughing, sowing, and reaping. At the end of the
year, however, the improver has not as before a capital of two
thousand quarters of com. Only one thousand quarters of
his capital have been reproduced in the usual way: he has
now only those thousand quarters and his improvement. He
will employ, in the next and in each following year, only half
the number of labourers, and will divide among them only
half the former quantity of subsistence. The loss would soon
be made up to them if the improved land, with the diminished
quantity of labour, produced two thousand four hundred
quarters as before, because so enormous an accession of gain
would probably induce the improver to save a part, add it to
his capital, and become a larger employer of labour. But
this may not, and often will not, be the case; for (supposing,


seerstesrees 2


=


esse pms ain reo


i
(;


aa


14
* 2
4 12
2 iiie
OE
i 1
: ;
a


112 BOOK I. CHAPTER VI. § 2.


as we may do, that the improvement will last indefinitely,
without any outlay worth mentioning to keep it up) the im-
prover will have gained largely by his improvement if the
land now yields, not two thousand four hundred, but one
thousand five hundred quarters; since this will replace the
one thousand quarters forming his present circulating capital,
with a profit of twenty-five per cent (instead of twenty 4s
before) on the whole capital, fixed and circulating together.
The improvement, therefore, may be a very profitable one to
him, and yet very injurious to the labourers.

It will perhaps be objected that agricultural improvements
do not operate in the manner supposed—do not enable a
part of the labour previously employed on the land to be dis-
pensed with—but only enable the same labour to raise a greater
produce. This is true of some kinds of agricultural improve-
ment; but the contrary is true of others. Suppose, however,
that the case were as the objection assumes it to be. Sup-
pose, too, that the greater produce, which by means of the
improvement can be raised from the soil with the same
labour, is all wanted, and will find purchasers. The improver
will in that case require the same number of labourers as
before, at the same wages. But where will he find the means
of paying them? He has no longer his original capital of
fwo thousand quarters disposable for the purpose. One
thousand of them are lost and gone—consumed in making
the improvement. If he is to employ as many labourers as
before, and pay them as highly, he must borrow, or obtain
from some other source, a thousand quarters, to supply the
deficit. But these thousand quarters already maintained, or
were destined to maintain, an equivalent quantity of labour.
They are not a fresh creation; their destination is only
changed from one productive employment to another ; and
though the agriculturist has made up the deficiency in his
own circulating capital, the breach in the circulating capital
of the community remains unrepaired,


I cannot assent to the argument relied on. by most of


|
|


.
:
.


CIRCULATING AND FIXED CAPITAL. 1S


those who contend that machinery can never be injurious to
the labouring class, namely, that by cheapening production
it creates such an increased demand for the commodity, as
enables, ere long, a greater number of persons than ever to
find employment in producing it. The fact, though too
broadly stated, is, no doubt, often true. The copyists who
were thrown out of employment by the invention of print-
ing, were doubtless soon outnumbered by the compositors
and pressmen who took their place: and the number of
labourig persons now occupied in the cotton manufacture
is many times greater than were so occupied previously to
the inventions of Hargreaves and Arkwright, which shows
that besides the enormous fixed capital now embarked in the
manufacture, it also employs a far larger circulating capital
than at any former time. But if this capital was drawn from
other employments; if the funds which took the place of the
capital sunk in costly machinery, were supplied not by an
additional saving consequent on the improvements, but by
drafts on the general capital of the community ; what better
are the labouring classes for the mere transfer? In what
manner is the loss they sustained by the conversion of cir-
culating into fixed capital, made up to them by a mere shift-
ing of part of the remainder of the circulating capital from its
old employments to a new one?

All attempts to make out that the labouring classes
collective body cannot suffer by the introduction of machinery,
or by the sinking of capital in permanent improvements, are,
I conceive, necessarily fallacious. That they would suffer in
the particular department of industry to which the change
applies, is generally admitted, and obvious to common sense;
but it is often said that though employment is withdrawn from
labour in one department, an exactly equivalent employment is
opened for it in others, because what the consumers save in the
increased cheapness of one particular article enables them to
augment their consumption of others, thereby increasing the
demand for other kinds of labour. This is plausible, but, as

VOL, I, T


asa


“eyo


}
q


ge nen ot


i Re TS.


114 BOOK I. CHAPTER vi. § 3.


we saw in the last chapter, involves a fallacy; demand for
commodities being a totally different thing from demand from
labour. It is true, the consumers have now additional money to
buy other things, but this will not create the other things, u-
less there is capital to produce them; and the improvement
has not set at liberty any capital, if even it has not absorbed
some from other employments.- The supposed increase of pr0-
duction and of employment for labour in other departments
therefore will not take place; and the increased demand for
commodities by some consumers, will be balanced by a ces
sation of demand on the part of others, namely the labourers
who were superseded by the improvement, and who will now
be maintained, if at all, by sharing, either in the way of com-
petition or of charity, in what was previously consumed by
other people.


§ 3. Nevertheless, I do not believe that as things are
actually transacted, improvements in production are often,
if ever, injurious, even temporarily; to the labouring classes
in the aggregate. They would he so if they took place sud-
denly to a great amount, because much of the capital sunk
must necessarily in that case be provided from funds already
employed as circulating capital. But improvements are always
2 a ee a x
introduced very gradually, and are seldom or never made by
withdrawing circulating capital from actual production, but
are made by the employment of the annual increase. 1 doubt
. ee would be found a single example of a great inci
ORES capital, ata time and place where circulating capita
was not rapidly increasing likewise. It is not in poor
backward countries that great and costly improvements in
production are made. To sink capital in land for a perme
nent return—to introduce expensive machinery—are acts
involving immedi ; : : ndic

e farce sacrifice for distant objects ; and indi
cate, im the first place, tolerably complete security of pro-
perty; in the second, a considerable activity of industrial
enterprise; and in the third, a high standard of what has


sceeaie


CIRCULATING AND FIXED CAPITAL. 115


been called the “effective desire of accumulation:” which


three things are the elements of a society rapidly progres-
sive in its amount of capital. Although, therefore, the
labourmg classes must suffer, not only if the increase of
fixed capital takes place at the expense of circulating, but
even if it is so large and rapid as to retard that ordinary
increase to which the growth of population has habitually
adapted itself; yet, in point of fact, this is very unlikely to
happen, since there is probably no country whose fixed capital
increases in a ratio more than proportional to its circulating.
If the whole of the railways which have lately obtained the
sanction of Parliament, were constructed in the times fixed
for the completion of each, this improbable contingency
would, most likely, be realized; but this very case is even
now affording an example of the difficulties which oppose
the diversion into new channels of any considerable portion of
the capital that supplies the old: difficulties generally much
more than sufficient to prevent enterprises that involve the
sinking of capital, from extending themselves with such rapi-
dity as to impair the sources of the existing employment for
labour.

To these considerations must be added, that even if im-
provements did for a time decrease the aggregate produce
and the circulating capital of the community, they would
not the less tend in the long run to augment both. They
increase the return to capital; and of this increase the benefit
must necessarily accrue either to the capitalist in greater
profits, or to the consumer in diminished prices; affording,
in either case, an augmented fund from which accumulation
may be made, while enlarged profits also hold out an increased
inducement to accumulation. In the case we before selected,
in which the immediate result of the improvement was to
diminish the gross produce from two thousand four hundred
quarters to one thousand five hundred, yet the profit of the
capitalist being now five hundred quarters instead of four


hundred, the extra one hundred quarters, if regularly saved,
1 2


eee UGA spa Rainn 5


i
i


eo PST EAT


116 BOOK I. CHAPTER vI. § 3.


will in a few years replace the one thousand quarters sub-
ae tracted from his circulating capital. Now, the extension of
business which almost certainly follows in any department
in which an improvement has been made, affords a strong
i inducement to those engaged in it to add to their capital;
and hence, at the slow pace at which improvements are
usually introduced, a great part of the capital which the
improvement ultimately absorbs, is drawn from the increased
4 profits and increased savings which it has itself called forth.
This tendency of improvements in production to cause
increased accumulation, and thereby ultimately to increase
ie the gross produce, even if temporarily diminishing 1t, wil
i | assume a still more decided character if it should appeal
i that there are assignable limits both to the accumulation of

ee | capital, and to the increase of production from the land, |
it which limits once attained, all further increase of produce
must stop; but that improvements in production, whatever
may be their other effects, tend to throw one or both af
these limits farther off. Now, these are truths which will
appear in the clearest light, in a subsequent stage of oy
investigation, It will be seen, that the quantity of capita
which will, or even which can, be accumulated in any country,
F and the amount of gross produce which will, or even which
ci can, be raised, bear a proportion to the state of the arts of
production there existing; and that every improvement, eve?

wi if for the time it diminish the circulating capital and the
gross produce, ultimately makes room for a larger amount oO
both, than could possibly have existed otherwise. It is this |
which is the conclusive answer to the objections against
machinery; and the proof thence arising of the ultimate
benefit of mechanical inventions to the human race, will
hereafter be seen to be conclusivex, But this does not
discharge governments from the obligation of alleviating;
and if possible preventing, the evils of which this source


i 2
SBE OTIC ATTA B I CSE DER
‘cnet ome -


dae


SSeS


* Infra, book iy, chip. y,


CIRCULATING AND FIXED CAPITAL. 7/


of ultimate benefit is or may be productive to an existing
generation. If the sinking or fixing of capital in machinery
or useful works, were ever to proceed at such a pace as to
impair materially the funds for the maintenance of labour,
it would be incumbent on legislators to take measures for
moderating its rapidity: and since improyements which do
not diminish employment on the whole, almost always throw
some particular class of labourers out of it, there cannot be
a more legitimate object of the legislator’s care than the
interests of those who are thus sacrificed to the gains of their
fellow citizens and of posterity.

To return to the theoretical distinction between fixed
and circulating capital. Since all wealth which is destined
to be employed for reproduction comes within the designa-
tion of capital, there are parts of capital which do not agree
with the definition of either species of it; for instance, the
stock of finished goods which a manufacturer or dealer at
any time possesses unsold in his warehouses. But this,
though capital as to its destination, is not yet capital in
actual exercise; it is not engaged in production, but has first
to be sold or exchanged, that is, converted into an equiva-
lent value of some other commodities ; and therefore is not
yet either fixed or circulating capital, but will become either
one or the other, or be eventually divided between them.
With the proceeds of his finished goods, a manufacturer will
partly pay his work-people, partly replenish his stock of the
materials of his manufacture, and partly provide new build-
ings and machinery, or repair the old; but how much will be
devoted to one purpose, and how much to another, depends
on the nature of the manufacture, and the requirements of
the particular moment.

It should be observed further, that the portion of capital
which is consumed in the form of seed or material, although,
unlike fixed capital, it requires to be at once replaced from
the gross produce, stands yet in the same relation to the
employment of labour, as fixed capital does. What is ex-


Bt


cha meen te
ma


118 BOOK I. CHAPTER vi. § 3.


pended in materials, is as much withdrawn from the mainte-


nance and remuneration of labourers, as what is fixed
machinery; and if capital now expended in wages were
diverted to the providing of materials, the effect on the la-
bourers would be as prejudicial as if it were converted into
fixed capital. This, however, is a kind of change which
never takes place. The tendency of improvements In. pro-
duction is always to economize, never to increase, the expen-
diture of seed or material for a given produce; and the
interest of the labourers has no detriment to apprehend from
this source.


CHAPTER VII.


ON WHAT DEPENDS THE DEGREE OF .PRODUCTIVENESS
OF PRODUCTIVE AGENTS.


§ 1. Wehave concluded our general survey of the requi-
sites of production. We have found that they may be re-
duced to three: labour, capital, and the materials and motive
forces afforded by nature. Of these, labour and the raw
material of the globe are primary and indispensable. Natu-
ral motive powers may be called in to the assistance of
labour, and are a help, but not an essential, of production.
The remaining requisite, capital, is itself the product of la-
bour: its instrumentality in production is therefore, in reality,
that of labour in an indirect shape. It does not the less
require to be specified separately. A previous application
of labour to produce the capital required for consumption
during the work, is no less essential than the application of
labour to the work itself. Of capital, again, one, and by far
the largest portion, conduces to production only by sustain-
ing in existence the labour which produces: the remainder,
namely, the instruments and materials, contribute to it
directly, in the same manner with natural agents and the


materials supplied by nature.


We now advance to the second great question in political
economy; on what the degree of productiveness of these
agents depends. For it is evident that their productive
efficacy varies greatly at various times and places. With the
same population and extent of territory, some countries have
a much larger amount of production than others, and the
same country at one time a greater amount than itself at
another. Compare England either with a similar extent of
territory in Russia, or with an equal population of Russians.


mss


De lags WT


ee ee ee


SEI Ra TR GE TS RF
moeninerS


fa SE


Bate
Te ee
aie
ae Et
4

ane
omit


120 BOOK I. CHAPTER VII. $ 2.


Compare England now with England in the middle ages;
Sicily, Northern Africa, or Syria at present, with the same
countries in the time of their greatest prosperity, before the
Roman conquest. Some. of the causes which contribute to
this difference of productiveness, are obvious; others not so
much so. We proceed to specify several of them.


§ 2. The most evident cause of superior productiveness,
is what are called natural advantages. These are various:
Fertility of soil is one of the principal. In this there are
great varieties, from the deserts of Arabia to the alluyial
plains of the Ganges, the Niger, and the Mississipp!- A
favourable climate is even more important than a rich soil.
There are countries capable of being inhabited, but too cold
to be compatible with agriculture. Their inhabitants can-
not pass beyond the nomadic state; they must live, like the
Laplanders, by the domestication of the rein-deer, if not by
hunting or fishing like the miserable Esquimaux. There are
countries where oats will ripen, but. not wheat, such as the
North of Scotland; others where wheat can be grown, but
from excess of moisture and want of sunshine, affords buta
precarious crop; as in parts of Ireland. With each advance
towards the south, or, in the European temperate region, to-
wards the east, some new branch of agriculture becomes
first possible, then advantageous; the vine, maize, figs, olives,
silk, rice, dates, successively present themselves, until we
come to the sugar, coffee, cotton, spices, &c., of climates
which also afford, of the more common agricultural products,
and with only a slight degree of cultivation, two or even three
harvests in ayear. Nor is it in agriculture alone that differ-
ences of climate are important. Their influence is felt in many
other branches of production: im the durability of all work
which is exposed to the air; of buildings, for example. If


the temples of Karnac and Luxor had not been injured by


men, they might haye subsisted in their original. perfection


almost for ever, for the inscriptions on some of them, though


DEGREES OF PRODUCTIVENESS. 121


anterior to all authentic history, are fresher than is in our
climate an inscription fifty years old: while at St. Petersburg
the most massive works, solidly executed in granite hardly a
generation ago, are already, as travellers tell us, almost in a
state to require reconstruction, from alternate exposure to
summer heat and intense frost. The superiority of the woven
fabrics of Southern Kurope over those of England in the
richness and clearness of many of their colours, is ascribed
to the superior quality of the atmosphere, for which neither
the knowledge of chemists nor the skill of dyers has been
able to provide, in our hazy and damp climate, a complete
equivalent.

Another part of the influence of climate consists in
lessening the physical requirements of the producers. In
hot regions mankind can exist in comfort with less perfect
housing, less clothing; fuel, that essential necessary of life in
cold climates, they can almost dispense with, except for in-
dustrial uses. They also require less aliment; as experience
had proved, long before theory had accounted for it by
ascertaining that most of what we consume as food is not
required for the actual nutrition of the organs, but for keep-
ing up the animal heat, and for supplying the necessary
stimulus to the vital functions, which im hot climates is
almost sufficiently supplied by air and sunshine. Much,
therefore, of the labour elsewhere expended to procure the
mere necessaries of life, not being required, more remains dis-
posable for its higher uses and its enjoyments; if the cha-
racter of the inhabitants does not rather mduce them to use
up these advantages in over-population, or in the indulgence
of repose.

Among natural advantages, besides soil and climate, must
be mentioned abundance of mineral productions, in con-
venient situations, and capable of bemg worked with mode-
rate labour. Such are the coal-fields of Great Britain, which
do so much to compensate its inhabitants for the disadvan-
tages of climate; and the scarcely inferior resources possessed


as —


SSE
a tenn Sn


Ge |
i

i i
a


122 BOOK I. CHAPTER vil. § 3.


by this country and the United States, in a copious supply
of an easily reduced iron ore, at no great depth below the
earth’s surface, and in close proximity to coal deposits ayail-
able for working it. In mountain and hill districts the
abundance of natural water-power makes considerable amends
for the usually inferior fertility of those regions. But per-
haps a greater advantage than all these is a maritime situa-
tion, especially when accompanied with good natural har-
bours; and, next to it, great navigable rivers. ‘These advan-
tages consist indeed wholly in saving of cost of carriage:
But few who have not considered the subject, have any
adequate notion how great an extent of economical advantage |

|

|

f


this comprises; nor, without having considered the influence
exercised on production by exchanges, and by what is called
the division of labour, can it be fully estimated. So m-
portant is it, that it often does more than counterbalance
sterility of soil, and almost every other natural inferiority ;
especially in that early stage of industry in which labour and
science have not yet provided artificial means of communica- |
i. ‘’ tion, capable of rivalling the natural. In the ancient world,
“u and in the middle ages, the most prosperous communities |
were not those which had the largest territory or the most
fertile soil, but rather those which had been forced by natu-
ty ral sterility to make the utmost possible use of a convenient


. maritime situation ; as Athens, Tyre, Marseilles, Venice, the
Pine | free cities on the Baltic, and the like.


ona aa


§ 3. So much for natural advantages; the value of which,
ie ceteris paribus, is too obvious to be ever underrated. But
“i ; experience testifies that natural advantages scarcely ever do

' for a community, no more than fortune and station do for an

} individual, anything like what it lies in their nature, or in

14 their capacity to do. The ereatest advantages gratuitously
bestowed generally become disadvantages. Neither now nor


in former ages have the nations possessing the best climate
and soil, been either the richest or the most powerful ; but (in


ee ee A ee eS ere


DEGREES OF PRODUCTIVENESS. 123


so far as regards the mass of the people,) generally among the
poorest, though, in the midst of poverty, probably on the
whole the most enjoying. Human life in those countries can
be supported on so little, that the poor seldom suffer from
anxiety, and in climates in which mere existence is a pleasure,
the luxury which they prefer is that of repose. Energy, at the
call of passion, they possess in abundance, but not that which
is manifested in sustained and persevering labour: andas they
seldom concern themselves enough about remote objects to
establish good political institutions, the incentives to industry
are further weakened by imperfect protection of its fruits.
Successful production, like most other kinds of success, de-
pends more on the qualities of the human agents, than on the
circumstances in which they work: and it is difficulties, not
facilities, that nourish bodily and mental energy. Accord-
ingly the tribes of mankind who have overrun and conquered
others, and compelled them to labour for their benefit, have
been mostly reared amidst hardship. They have either been
bred in the forests of northern climates, or the deficiency of
natural hardships has been supplied, as among the Greeks
and Romans, by the artificial ones of a rigid military disci-
pline. From the time when the circumstances of modern
society permitted the discontinuance of that discipline, the
South has no longer produced conquering nations; military
vigour, as well as speculative thought and industrial energy,
have all had their principal seats in the less favoured North.

As the second, therefore, of the causes of superior pro-
ductiveness, we may rank the greater energy of labour. By
this is not to be understood occasional, but regular and
habitual energy. No one undergoes, without murmuring,
a greater amount of occasional fatigue and hardship, or
has his bodily powers, and such faculties of mind as he
possesses, kept longer at their utmost stretch, than the
North American Indian: yet his indolence is proverbial,
whenever he has a brief respite from the pressure of pre-
sent wants. Individuals, or races, do not differ so much


fit
¥


eget care


~The


=


124 BOOK I. CHAPTER VII. § 3.


in the efforts they are able and willing to make under strong
immediate incentives, as in their capacity of present exertion
for a distant object; and in the thoroughness of their appli-
cation to work on ordinary occasions. In this last quality the
English, and perhaps the Anglo-Americans, appear at present
to surpass every other people. This efficiency of labour 1s |
connected with their whole character; with their defects, as L
much as with their good qualities. The majority of English- |
it men and Americans have no life but in their work ; that alone
f stands between them and ennui. Either from original tem-
perament, climate, or want of developement, they are too
of eee deficient in senses to enjoy mere existence m repose; and
cay scarcely any pleasure or amusement is pleasure or amusement
sRiere to them. Except, therefore, those who are alive to some of
ae the nobler interests of humanity (a small minority m all
pee aR countries), they have little to distract their attention from
work, or to divide the dominion over them with the one p'-

{ j pensity which is the passion of those who have no other, and

) the satisfaction of which comprises all that they imagine of
success in life—the desire of growing richer, and getting on M
‘ the world. This last characteristic belongs chiefly to those

i who are in a condition superior to day labourers ; but the
absence of any taste for amusement, or enjoyment of repose,

ep is common to all classes. Whether from this or any other
cause, the national steadiness and persistency of labour eX-
tends to the most improvident of the English working
classes—those who never think of saving, or improving their


pete ee oe oe


1 condition. It has become the habit of the country ; and life
Ma in England is more governed by habit, and less by personal
{is : inclination and will, than in any other country, except pe
i vaps China or Japan. The effect is, that where hard labour


is the thing required, there are no labourers like the English;
F though in natural intelligence, and ey


they have many superiors.
Energy of labour, though not
one which it is desirable to nourish


en in manual dexterity,


an unqualified good, nor
at the expense of other


OO oVVVOleerermrererereoreeorreorrrrrrrreerreeeeeeeeeee


DEGREES OF PRODUCTIVENESS. 125


valuable attributes of human nature, is yet, in a certain
measure, a necessary condition of any great improvement
among mankind. ‘To civilize a savage, he must be inspired
with new wants and desires, even if not of a very elevated
kind, provided that their gratification can be a motive to
bodily and mental exertion. If the negroes of Jamaica and
Demerara, after their emancipation, had contented themselves,
as it was predicted they would do, with the necessaries of life,
and abandoned all labour beyond the little which im a tropical
chmate, with a thin population and an abundance of the
richest land, is sufficient to support existence, they would
have sunk into a condition more barbarous, though less un-
happy, than their previous state of slavery. The motive
which was most relied on for inducing them to work was
their love of fine clothes and personal ornaments. No one
will stand up for this taste as in itself worthy of bemg culti-
vated, and in most societies its indulgence tends to impoverish
rather than to enrich ; but in the state of mind of the negroes
it may haye been the only incentive that could make them
voluntarily undergo systematic labour, and so acquire or
maintain habits of industry which may be converted to more
valuable ends. As much as the industrial spirit required to
be stimulated in their case, so much does it require to be
moderated in such countries as England and the United
States. There, it is not the desire of wealth that needs to be
taught, but the use of wealth, and appreciation of the objects
of desire which wealth cannot purchase, or for attaming which
it is not required. yery real improvement in the character
of the English or Americans, whether it consist m giving
them higher aspirations, or only more numerous and better
pleasures, must necessarily moderate the all-engrossing tor-
ment of their industrialism ; must diminish, therefore, so far
as it depends on that cause alone, the aggregate productive-
ness of their labour. There is no need, however, that it
should diminish that strenuous and business-like application
to the matter in hand, which is one of their most precious


= ti


Tae Qua or sweet on +


j
5


126 BOOK I. CHAPTER VII. 9 3.


characteristics. ‘“ Whoever” (says Mr. Laing*) “looks into
the social economy of an English or Scotch wae
district, in which the population has become ee
imbued with the spirit of productiveness, will observe _
it is not merely the expertness, despatch, and skill of t
operative himself, that are concerned in the ae
amount of his production in a given time, but the laboure
who wheels coal to his fire, the girl who makes ready his
breakfast, the whole population, in short, from the pore)
who brings his beer, to the banker who keeps his oe
cash, are inspired with the same alert spirit, are Im a
working to his hand with the same quickness and ae y
as he works himself. English workmen taken to the on-
tinent always complain that they cannot get on with their
work as at home, because of the slow, unpunctual, PP a
mouth working habits of those who have to work iy then
hands, and on whom their own activity and productaveness
mainly depend.” i Pe
Foreigners are generally quite unaware that to these oe
ties in English industry the wealth and power which wee
seek to emulate are in reality owing, and not to the “ ships,
colonies, and commerce” which these qualities have called
into being, and which, even if annihilated, would leave
England the richest country in the world. An Englishman,
of almost every class, is the most efficient of all labourers,
because, to use a common phrase, his heart is in his work,
But it is surely quite possible to put heart into his work
without being incapable of putting it into anything else. The
desirable medium is one which mankind have not often know
how to hit: when they do labour, to do it with all their might,
and especially with all their mind; but to devote to labour,
for mere pecuniary gain, fewer hours in the day, fewer days
in the year, and fewer years of life.


*


Notes of a Traveller, p, 290,


DEGREES OF PRODUCTIVENESS. 127


2


§ 4. The third element which determines the produc-
tiveness of the labour of a community is the skill and know-
ledge therein existing ; whether it be the skill and knowledge
of the labourers themselves, or of those who direct their
labour. No illustration is requisite to show how the efficacy
of industry is promoted by the manual dexterity of those who
perform mere routine processes; by the intelligence of those
engaged in operations in which the mind has a considerable
part; and by the amount of knowledge of natural powers and
of the properties of objects which is turned to the purposes of
industry. That the productiveness of the labour of a people
is limited by their knowledge of the arts of life, is self-evident;
and that any progress in those arts, any improved application
of the objects or powers of nature to industrial uses, enables
the same quantity and intensity of labour to raise a greater
produce.

One principal department of these improvements consists
in the invention and use of tools and machinery. The manner
in which these serve to increase production and to economize
labour, needs not be specially detailed in a work like the pre-
sent: it will be found explained and exemplified, in a manner
at once scientific and popular, nm Mr. Babbage’s well-known
“Hiconomy of Machmery and Manufactures.” An entire
chapter of Mr. Babbage’s book is composed of instances of
the efficacy of machinery in “exerting forces too great for
human power, and executing operations too delicate for
human touch.” But to find examples of work which could
not be performed at all by unassisted labour, we need not
go so far. Without pumps, worked by steam-engines or
otherwise, the water which collects in mines could not in
many situations be got rid of at all, and the mines, after being
worked to a little depth, must be abandoned: without ships
or boats, the sea could never have been crossed; without tools
of some sort, trees could not be cut down nor rocks exca-
vated ; a plough, or at least a spade, is necessary to any tillage
of the ground. Very simple and rude instruments, however,


TDS iinet.


ee


i
4
i


128 BOOK I. CHAPTER vil. § 5.


are sufficient te render literally possible most works hitherto
executed by man; and subsequent inventions have chiefly
served to enable the work to be performed in greater perfec-
tion, and, above all, with a greatly diminished quantity of
labour: the labour thus saved becoming disposable for other
employment. ;
The use of machinery is far from being the only mode in
which the effects of knowledge in aiding production are ex-
emplified. In agriculture and horticulture, machinery has
done little of importance beyond the invention and progres:
sive improvement of the plough anda few other simple instru:
ments. The greatest agricultural inventions have consisted
in the direct application of more judicious processes to the
land itself and the plants growing on it: such as rotation of
crops, to ayoid the necessity of leaving the land uncultivated
for one season in every two or three ; improved manures, to
renovate its fertility when exhausted by cropping; conversion
of bogs and marshes into cultivable land; such modes of


run ini i ees
pruning, and of training and propping up plants and trees,


as experience has shewn to deserye the preference; Im
the case of the more expensive cultures, planting the seeds
or roots further apart, and more completely pulverizing the


soil in which they are placed, &. In manufactures and com-
merce, some of the most important impr


economizing time; in making the y
upon the labour and outlay.
advantage consists in economy


ovements consist 10
eturn follow more speedily
There are others of which the
of material,


§ 5. But the effects of the increased lene
community in increasing its Wealth,
as they have become familiar to the most uneducated, from
such conspicuous instances as railways and steam ships. A
thing not yet, perhaps, so well understood and recognized, 1s
the economical value of the general diffusion of intelligence
among the people. The number of Persons fitted to direct
and superintend any industrial enterprise, or


ledge of a
need the less illustration


even to execute


DEGREES OF PRODUCTIVENESS. 129


any process which cannot be reduced almost to an affair of
memory and routine, is always far short of the demand; as is
evident from the enormous difference between the salaries
paid to such persons, and the wages of ordinary labour. The
deficiency of practical good sense, which renders the majority
of the labouring class, in this and many other countries, such
bad calculators—which makes, for instance, their domestic
economy so improvident, lax, and irregular—must disqualify
them for any but a low grade of intelligent labour, and render
their industry far less productive than with equal energy it
otherwise might be. The importance, even in this limited
aspect, of popular education, is well worthy of the attention
of politicians, especially in England; since competent obser-
vers, accustomed to employ labourers of various nations,
testify that in the workmen of other countries they often find
great intelligence wholly apart from instruction, but that if
an English labourer is anything but a hewer of wood and
drawer of water, he is indebted to education (though often to
self-education) for it*.


* Extracts from the evidence of Mr. Escher, of Zurich, (an engineer and
cotton manufacturer employing nearly two thousand working men of many
different nations), annexed to the Report of the Poor Law Commissioners
in 1840, on the training of pauper children.

“The Italians’ quickness of perception is shown in rapidly comprehend-
ing any new descriptions of labour put into their hands, in a power of
quickly comprehending the meaning of their employer, of adapting them-
selves to new circumstances, much beyond what any other classes have.
The French workmen haye the like natural characteristics, only in a some-
what lower degree. The English, Swiss, German, and Dutch workmen,
we find have all much slower natural comprehension. As workmen only,
the preference is undoubtedly due to the English; because as we find
them they are all trained to special branches, on which they have had
comparatively superior training and have concentrated all their thoughts.
As men of business or of general usefulness, and as men with whom an
employer would best like to be surrounded, I should, however, decidedly
prefer the Saxons and the Swiss, but more especially the Saxons, because
they have had a very careful general education, which has extended their


WOES te K


130 BOOK I, CHAPTER vil. § 5.


The moral qualities of the labourers are fully as important,
to the efficiency and worth of their labour, as the intellectual.
Independently of the effects of intemperance upon their
bodily and mental faculties, and of flighty, unsteady habits
upon the energy and continuity of their work (points so easily
understood as not to require being insisted upon), it is well


capacities beyond any special employment, and rendered them fit to take
up, after a short preparation, any employment to which they may be
called. If I have an English workman engaged in the erection of a steam
engine, he will understand that, and nothing else ; and for other circu
stances or other branches of mechanics, however closely allied, he will be
comparatively helpless to adapt himself to all the circumstances that may
arise, to make arrangements for them, and give sound advice or write clear
statements and letters on his work in the various related branches o
mechanics.”

On the connexion between mental cultivation and moral trustworthines
in the labouring class, the same witness says, “ The better educated work
men we find are distinguished by superior moral habits in every respect:
In the first place, they are entirely sober; they are discreet their
enjoyments, which are of a more rational and refined kind ; they have #
taste for much better society, which they approach respectfully, and col
sequently find much readier admittance to it; they cultivate music; they
read ; they enjoy the pleasures of scenery, and aval parties for excul*
sions into the country ; they are economical, and their economy extends
beyond their own purse to the stock of their master ; they are consequently
honest and trustworthy.” And in answer to a question respecting the
English workmen, “ Whilst in respect to the work to which they have heel
specially trained they are the most skilful, they are in conduct the most
ee oe
express the experience of every i e Sees ce a Bene a I
pve voplean Mahieae inns ee eee on the Continent to be:
loudest complaints). These ebrickaia eae vie oe to
the English workmen who haye seca : depnavity do not aaa

n education, but attach to the


oles in the degree in which they are in want of it. When the uneducated
English workmen are released from the bonds of iron


Sines + which
they have been restrained by discipline in wh


their employers j d
i i : yers in England, and are treate

wee irbay and friendly feeling which the mor A d workme?
on the Continent expect and receive from th e educate


eir employers, they Enplish
workmen, completely lose their balance : ployers, they, the #ng


they do not understand the!”


DEGREES OF PRODUCTIVENESS. 131


worthy of meditation, how much of the aggregate effect of
their labour depends on their trustworthiness. All the
labour expended in watching that they fulfil their engage-
ment, or in verifying that they have fulfilled it, is so much
withdrawn from the real business of production, to be devoted
to a subsidiary function rendered needful not by the neces-
sity of things but by the dishonesty of men. Nor are the
greatest outward precautions comparable in efficacy to the
monitor within. The advantage that it is to mankind to be
able to trust one another, penetrates into every crevice and
cranny of human life: the economical is perhaps the smallest
part of it, yet even this is incalculable. To consider only
the direct waste of wealth occasioned to society by human
improbity ; there is in all rich communities a predatory
population, who live by pillaging or overreaching other
people; their numbers cannot be authentically ascertained,
but on the lowest estimate, in a country like England, it is
very large. The support of these persons is a direct burthen
on the national industry. The police, and the whole apparatus
of punishment, and of criminal and partly of civil justice, are
a second burthen rendered necessary by the first. The highly
paid profession of lawyers are required and supported prin-
cipally by the dishonesty of mankind. As the standard of
integrity in a community is higher, so are all these expenses
less. But this positive saving is far outweighed by the
increased spirit, the feeling of power and confidence, with
which works of all sorts are planned and carried on by those
who feel that all whose aid is required will do their part faith-
fully according to their contracts. Conjoint action is possible
Just in proportion as human beings can rely on each other.


position, and after a certain time become totally unmanageable and useless.
The educated English workmen in a short time comprehend their position,
and adopt an appropriate behaviour.”

The entire evidence of this intelligent and experienced employer of
labour is deserving of attention; as well as much testimony on similar
points by other witnesses, contained in the same volume.

K 2


132 BOOK I. CHAPTER VII. § 5.


There are countries in Europe, of first-rate industrial pe
bilities, where the most serious impediment to cont ane
business concerns on a large scale, is the rarity of person
who are supposed fit to be trusted with the receipt a
penditure of large sums of money. There are je =
commodities are looked shily upon by merchants, | ae
they cannot depend on finding the quality of the artic pe
formable to that of the sample. Such short-sighted a
are far from unexampled even in English exports. y :
one has heard of “ devil’s dust:” and among other ne
given by Mr. Babbage is one in which a branch of ie
trade was for a long time actually stopped by the forge '
and frauds which had occurred in it. On the other bee
the substantial advantage derived in business yee
from proved trustworthiness, is not less remarkably he.
plified in the same work. “At one of our ae aly
sales and purchases on a very extensive scale are mace a
in the course of business without any of the parties a
exchanging a written document.” Spread over a whole he
transactions, how great a return, in saving of time, trou of
and expense, is brought in to the producers and dealers of
such a town from their own integrity. “The influence
established character in producing confidence operated a
very remarkable manner at the time of the exOnii f
British manufactures from the Continent during the fo
war. One of our largest establishments had been 12 =
habit of doing extensive business with a house in the cen :
of Germany; but on the closing of the continental por

against our manufactures, heavy penalties were inflicted on
all those who contravened the Berlin and Milan decrees
The English manufacturer continued, nevertheless, to recelv®


4 ; : 5 int-
orders, with directions how to consign them, and app®
ments for the time and mode


of payment, in letters, the
handwriting of w


i : i ere
hich was known to him, but which ia
; a 4
never signed, except by the Christian name of one of ¢


; ’ ; d
firm, and even in some mstances they were without an)


DEGREES OF PRODUCTIVENESS. 133


signature at all. These orders were executed, and in no
instance was there the least irregularity in the payments*.”


* Some minor instances noticed by Mr. Babbage may be cited, in further
illustration of the waste occasioned to society through the inability of its
members to trust one another,

“The cost to the purchaser, is the price he pays for any article, added
to the cost of verifying the fact of its having that degree of goodness for
which he contracts. In some cases the goodness of the article is evident
on mere inspection; and in those cases there is not much difference of
ieee at different shops. The goodness of loaf sugar, for instance, can be
discerned almost at a glance; and the consequence is, that the price is so
uniform, and the profit upon it so small, that no grocer is at all anxious to
sell it; whilst, on the other hand, tea, of which it is exceedingly difficult
to judge, and which can be adulterated by mixture so as to deceive the
skill even of a practised eye, has a great variety of different prices, and
is that article which every grocer is most anxious to sell to his customers.
The difficulty and expense of verification are in some instances so great as
to justify the deviation from well-established principles. Thus it is a gene-
val maxim that Government can purchase any article at a cheaper rate
than that at which they can manufacture it themselves. But it has, never-
theless, been considered more economical to build extensive flour-mills,
(such as those at Deptford,) and to grind their own corn, than to verify
each sack of purchased flour, and to employ persons in devising methods
of detecting the new modes of adulteration which might be continually
resorted to.” A similar want of confidence might deprive a nation, such as
the United States, of a large export trade in flour.

Again: “Some years since, » mode of preparing old clover and trefoil
seeds by a process called doctoring became so prevalent as to excite the
attention of the House of Commons. It appeared in evidence before a
Committee, that the old seed of the white clover was doctored by first
wetting it slightly, and then drying it by the fumes of burning sulphur ;
and that the red clover seed-had its colour improved by shaking it in a
sack with a small quantity of indigo; but this being detected after a time,
the doctors then used a preparation of logwood, fined by a little copperas,
and sometimes by verdigris ; thus at once improving the appearance of the
old seed, and diminishing, if not destroying, its vegetative power, already
enfeebled by age. Supposing no injury had resulted to good seed so eS
pared, it was proved that from the improved appearance, the market price
would be enhanced by this process from five to twenty-five shillings a hun-
dred weight. But the greatest evil arose from the circumstance of these
processes rendering old and worthless seed equal in appearance to the best.
One witness had tried some doctored seed, and found that not above one


134 BOOK I. CHAPTER vil. § 6.


§ 6. Among the secondary causes which determine the
productiveness of productive agents, the most important is
Security. By security I mean the completeness of the pro-
tection which society affords to its members. This consists
of protection by the government and protection against the
government. The latter is the more important. Where a
person known to possess anything worth taking away, can
expect nothing but to have it torn from him, with every el
cumstance of tyrannical violence, by the agents of a rapacious
government, it is not likely that many will exert themselves


grain in a hundred grew, and that those which did vegetate died away
afterwards; whilst about eighty or ninety per cent of good seed usually
grows. The seed so treated was sold to retail dealers in the country, vat
of course endeavoured to purchase at the cheapest rate, and from them it
got into the hands of the farmers, neither of these classes being capable og
distinguishing the fraudulent from the genuine seed, Many cultivatorsi2
consequence diminished their consumption of the article, and others were
obliged to pay a higher price to those who had skill to distinguish the
mixed seed, and who had integrity and character to prevent them from
dealing in it.”

The same writer states that Irish flax, though in natural quality inferior
to none, sells, or did lately sell, in the market at a penny to twopence Pi
pound less than foreign or British flax; part of the difference arising ou
neeneence in its preparation, but part from the cause mentioned in the
puseute of Mr. Corry, many years Secretary to the Irish Linen Board :

c : © owners of the flax, who are almost always people in the lower classes
of life, believe that they can best advance their own interests by imposing
me Buyer, Plax being sold by weight, various expedients are used to
merease it; and every expedient is injurious, particularly the damping of
tt5 @ very common practice which makes the flax afterwards heat. The
inside of every bundle (and the bundles all vary in bulk) is often full of
pebbles, or dirt of yarious kinds, to increase the weight. In this state it is
purchased and exported to Great Britain.» er
hi {twas given in evidence before a Committee of the House of Commons
t ny c lace trade at Nottingham had greatly fallen off from the malsing of
fraudulent and bad articles: that “a kind of lace called single-press Was
pa (t stall quote Mr, Babbage) which, although good to the

ye, nearly spoiled in washing by the slipping of the threads; that
not one person in a thousand could distinguish the Brierence between single
press and double-press lace; that even workmen eo manufacturers Were


obliged to employ a magnifying-elass for that purpose ; and that in another
similar article, called warp-lace, such aid was Sentai


DEGREES OF PRODUCTIVENESS. 135


to produce much more than necessaries. This is the
acknowledged explanation of the poverty of many fertile tracts
of Asia, which were once prosperous and populous. From
this to the degree of security enjoyed in the best governed
parts of Europe, there are numerous eradations. In France,
before the Revolution, a vicious system of taxation on the
land, and still more the absence of redress against the arbi-
trary exactions which were made under colour of the taxes,
rendered it the interest of every cultivator to appear poor, and
therefore to cultivate badly. The only insecurity which is
altogether paralyzing to the active energies of producers, 1s
that arising from the government, or from persons invested
with its authority. Against all other depredators there is a
hope of defending oneself. Greece and the Greek colonies
in the ancient world, Flanders and Italy in the middle ages,
by no means enjoyed what any one with modern ideas would
call security: the state of society was most unsettled and tur-
bulent ; person and property were exposed to a thousand
dangers. But they were free countries ; they were neither
arbitrarily oppressed, nor systematically plundered by their
governments. Against other enemies the individual energy
which their institutions called forth, enabled them to make
successful resistance: their labour, therefore, was eminently
productive, and their riches, while they remained free, were
constantly on the increase. The Roman despotism, putting
an end to wars and internal conflicts throughout the empire,
relieved the subject population from much of the former
insecurity: but because it left them under the grinding yoke
of its own rapacity, they became enervated and impoverished
until they were an easy prey to barbarous but free invaders.
They would neither fight nor labour, because they were no
longer suffered to enjoy that for which they fought and
laboured.

Much of the security of person and property in modern


nations is the effect of manners and opinion rather than of


law. There are countries in Europe where the monarch is


vinkaeeL
ea ead a


136 BOOK I. CHAPTER vil. § 6.


nominally absolute, but where, from the restraints imposed
by established usage, no subject feels practically in the
smallest danger of having his possessions arbitrarily seized
or a contribution levied on them by the government. ‘There
must however be in such governments much petty plunder
and other tyranny by subordinate agents, for which redress
is not obtained, owing to the want of publicity which is the
ordinary character of absolute governments. In England the
people are tolerably well protected, both by institutions and
manners, against the agents of government; but, for the
security they enjoy against other evil doers, they are vey
little indebted to their institutions. The laws cannot be said
to afford protection to property when they afford it only at
such a cost as renders submission to injury in general the
better calculation. The Security of property in England 1s
ace owing (except as regards open violence) to opinion, and the
t CRaey fear of exposure, much more than to the law and the courts
et of justice. Of late, indeed, law has thrown a part of its
Wet weight into the other scale, by a course of legislation on the
Hee subject of insolvent debtors, which is almost a direct encou-
f / ragement to repudiation of engagements. 2

B: oi Independently of all imperfection in the bulwarks which
ae Society purposely throws round what it recognizes as pro-
a a perty, there are various other modes in which defective insti-


tutions impede the employment of the productive resources


j of a country to the best advantage. We shall have occasion
for noticing Many of these in the progress of our subject.
aid It is sufficient here to remark, that the efficiency of industry
ag ; ‘ may be expected to be great, in proportion as the fruits of
d ; re industry are insured to the person exerting it; and that all

1 es social arrangements are conducive to usefy] exertion, accord-

f ing as they provide that the reward of every one for his


labour shall be proportio as much as possible to the
benefit which it prdouces.


All laws or usages which favour
ce oe or sort of persons to the disadvantage of others ;
." which chain up the efforts of an ity in
a4 Y part of the community


eet


ned


DEGREES OF PRODUCTIVENESS. 137


pursuit of their own good, or stand between those efforts and
their natural fruits—are (independently of all other grounds
of condemnation) violations of the fundamental principles
of economical policy; and tend to make the aggregate pro-
ductive powers of the community productive in a less degree
than they would otherwise be.


CHAPTER VIII.


A LA JR,
OF CO-OPERATION, OR THE COMBINATION OF LABOUR


§ 1. In the enumeration of the circumstances which
promote the productiveness of labour, we have ete one v
touched, which because of its importance, and of the a
topics of discussion which it involves, requires to be —
apart. This is, co-operation, or the combined a :

numbers. Of this great aid to production, a single ¢ es
iw iid ment, known by the name of Division of Labour, a
aay | engaged a large share of the attention of political a
eh |: mists; most deservedly indeed, but to the exclusion ot a
cases and exemplifications of the same comprehensive Jaw;
Mr. Wakefield was, I believe, the first to point out, thal a
part of the subject had, with injurious effect, been ni
for the whole; that a more fundamental principle ne
b beneath that of the division of labour, and comprehends it.
Co-operation, he observes*, is “of two distinct kinds:
first, such co-operation as takes place when several pee
help each other in the same employment; secondly, a
Co-operation as takes place when several persons help -

eed other in different employments. These may be terme
it Simple Co-operation and Complex Co-operation. 4

rik “<The advantage of simple co-operation is illustrate
. en 4 by the case of two greyhounds running together, which,
a it is said, will kill more hares than four greyhounds
ae ba running separately. In a vast number of simple oper
Bees tions performed by human exertion, it is quite obvious that
two men working together will do more than four, Or four
i times four men, each of whom should work alone. In


‘et 4


* Note to Wakefield’s edition of Adam Smith, vol, i. p. 26.


COMBINATION OF LABOUR. 139


the lifting of heavy weights, for example, in the felling of
trees, in the sawing of timber, in the gathering of much
hay or corn during a short period of fine weather, in draining
a large extent of land during the short season when such
a work may be properly conducted, in the pulling of ropes
on board ship, in the rowing of large boats, in some mining
operations, in the erection of a scaffolding for building, and
in the breaking of stones for the repair of a road, so that
the whole of the road shall always be kept in good order:
in all these simple operations, and thousands more, it is
absolutely necessary that many persons should work toge-
ther, at the same time, in the same place, and in the same
way. The savages of New Holland never help each other,
even in the most simple operations ; and their condition
is hardly superior, in some respects it is inferior, to
that of the wild animals which they now and then catch.
Let any one imagine that the labourers of England should
suddenly desist from helping each other in simple em-
ployments, and he will see at once the prodigious adyan-
tages of simple co-operation. In a countless number of
employments, the produce of labour is, up to a certain
point, in proportion to such mutual assistance amongst the
workmen. This is the first step in social improvement.”
The second is, when “one body of men having combined
their labour to raise more food than they require, another
body of men are induced to combine their labour for the
purpose of producing more clothes than they require, and
with those surplus clothes buying the surplus food of the
other body of labourers; while, if both bodies together
have produced more food and clothes than they both
require, both bodies obtain, by means of exchange, a proper
capital for setting more labourers to work in their respec-
tive occupations.” To simple co-operation, 1s thus super-
added what Mr. Wakefield terms Complex Co-operation.
The one is the combination of several labourers to help each
other in the same set of operations; the other is the com-


een NT ees POE MIR 5S i ee ig


eT.


Poecs


be


140 BOOK I. CHAPTER vill. § 1.


bination of several labourers to help one another by a divi-
sion of operations.

There is “an important distinction between simple and
complex co-operation. Of the former, one is always con-
scious at the time of practising it: it is obvious to the
most ignorant and vulgar eye. Of the latter, but a very
few of the vast numbers who practise it are in any degree
conscious. The cause of this distinction is easily seen.
When several men are employed in lifting the same
weight, or pulling the same rope, at the same time, and in
the same place, there can be no sort of doubt that they
co-operate with each other; the fact is impressed on the
mind by the mere sense of sight: but when several men, or
bodies of men, are employed at different times and places,
and in different pursuits, their co-operation with each other,
though it may be quite as certain, is not so readily per-
ceived as in the other case: in order to perceive it, a complex
Operation of the mind is required.”

In the present state of society the breeding and feeding
of sheep is the occupation of one set of people, dressing the
wool to prepare it for the spinner is that of another, spinning
it into thread of a third, weaving the thread into broadcloth
of a fourth, dyeing the cloth of a fifth, making it into a coat
of a sixth, without counting the multitude of carriers, mer-
chants, factors, and retailers, put in requisition at the suc-
cessive stages of this progress. All these persons, without
knowledge of one another or previous understanding, ¢0-
operate in the production of the ultimate result, a coat. But
these are far from being all who co-operate in it; for each of
these persons requires food, and many other articles of con-
sumption, and unless he could have relied that other people
would produce these for him, he could not have devoted his
whole time to one step in the Succession of operations which
produces one single commodity, a coat. Every person who
took part in producing food or erecting houses for this series
of producers, has, however unconsciously on his part, com-


COMBINATION OF LABOUR. 14h


bined his labour with theirs. It is by a real though unex-
pressed concert “ that the body who raise more food than
they want, can exchange with the body who raise more
clothes than they want; and if the two bodies were sepa-
rated, either by distance or disinclination—unless the two
bodies should virtually form themselves into one, for the
common object of raising enough food and clothes for the
whole—they could not divide into two distinct parts the


whole operation of producing a sufficient quantity of food and
clothes.”


§ 2. The influence exercised on production by the sepa-
ration of employments, is more fundamental than, from the
mode in which the subject is usually treated, a reader might
be induced to suppose. It is not merely that when the pro-
duction of different things becomes the sole or principal
occupation of different persons, a much greater quantity of
each kind of article is produced. The truth is much beyond
this. Without some separation of employments, very few
things would be produced at all.

Suppose a set of persons, or a number of families, all
employed in precisely the same manner: each family settled
on a piece of its own land, on which it grows by its labour
the food required for its own sustenance, and as there are no
persons to buy any surplus produce where all are producers,
each family has to produce within itself whatever other articles
it consumes. In such circumstances, if the soil was tolerably
fertile, and population did not tread too closely on the heels
of subsistence, there would be, no doubt, some kind of
domestic manufactures; clothing for the family might per-
haps be spun and woven within it, by the labour probably of
the women (a first step in the separation of employments);
and a dwelling of some sort would be erected and kept in
repair by their united labour. But beyond simple food
(precarious ‘too, from the variations of the seasons), coarse
clothing, and very imperfect lodging, it would be scarcely


nes RP EEE


i


i
<3


ag


a


a


—$


ie ts
- ‘
“a
ede: |
ae 1
’ ¥
Searle |
a
Boies
be a
‘ '
i


+
~ Lala ekvoe ae


142 BOOK I. CHAPTER vir. § 2


possible that the family should produce anything more.
They would, in general, require their utmost exertions 0
accomplish so much. Their power even of extracting food
from the soil would be kept within narrow limits by the
quality of their tools, which would necessarily be of the most
wretched description. To do almost anything in the way of
producing for themselves articles of convenience or luxury,
would require too much time, and, in many cases, their pre-
sence in a different place. Very few kinds of industry, there
fore, would exist; and that which did exist, namely the
production of necessaries, would be extremely inefficient, not
solely from imperfect implements, but because, when the
ground and the domestic industry fed by it had been made
to supply the necessaries of a single family in tolerable
abundance, there would be little motive, while the numbers
of the family remained the same, to make either the land or
the labour produce more.

But suppose an event to occur, which would amount to
a revolution in the circumstances of this little settlement.
Suppose that a company of artificers, provided with tools;
and with food sufficient to maintain them for a year, arrive im
the country and establish themselves in the midst of the
population. These new settlers occupy themselves in pro
ducing articles of use or ornament adapted.to the taste of a
simple people; and before their food is exhausted they have
produced these in considerable quantity, and are ready
exchange them for more food. The economical position o


the landed population is now most materially altered. They
have an opportunity giv


en them of acquiring comforts and
luxuries.


Things which while they depended solely on their
own labour they never could have obtained, because they
could not have produced, are now accessible to them if they
can succeed in producing an additional quantity of food and


necessaries. ‘They are thus incited to increase the produc-


tiveness of their industry. Among the conveniences for the


first time made accessible to them, better tools are probably


COMBINATION OF LABOUR. 143


one: and apart from this, they have a motive to labour more
assiduously, and adopt contrivances for making their labeur ty
more effectual. By these means they will generally succeed
in compelling their land to produce, not only food for them-
selves, but a surplus for the new comers, wherewith to buy
from them the products of their industry. The new settlers
constitute what is called a market for surplus agricultural


produce: and their arrival has enriched the settlement not iy
only by the manufactured articles which they produce, but
by the food which would not have been produced unless they
had been there to consume it.

There is no inconsistency between this doctrine, and the
principle we have laid down, that a market for commodities
does not constitute employment for labour*. The labour §)
of the agriculturists was already provided with employment ; i
they are not indebted to the demand of the new comers for
being able to maintain themselves. What that demand does
for them is, to call their labour into increased vigour and
efficiency; to stimulate them, by new motives, to new exer- He
tions. Neither do the new comers owe their maintenance q
and employment to the demand of the agriculturists: with a
year’s subsistence in store, they could have settled side by
side with the former inhabitants, and produced a similar alt
scanty stock of food and necessaries. Nevertheless, we see
of what supreme importance to the productiveness of the ft
labour of producers, is the existence of other producers
within reach, employed in a different kind of industry. The
power of exchanging the products of one kind of labour for
those of another, 1s a condition, but for which, there would
almost always be a smaller quantity of labour altogether.
When a new market is opened for any product of industry,
and a greater quantity of the article is consequently pro-
duced, the increased production is not always obtained at the
expense of some other product; it is often a new creation,


i,
f


* Supra, pp. 97—102. ae


144 BOOK I. CHAPTER VIII. $§ 3.


the result of labour which would otherwise have remained
unexerted; or of assistance rendered to labour by improve-
ments or by modes of co-operation to which recourse would
not have been had if an inducement had not been offered
for raising a larger produce.


§ 3. From these considerations it appears that a country
will seldom have a productive agriculture, unless it has a
large town population, or the only available substitute,
a large export trade in agricultural produce to supply :
population elsewhere. I use the phrase town population 1
shortness, to imply a population non-agricultural; which val
generally be collected in towns or large villages, for the sake
of combination of labour. The application of this truth by
Mr. Wakefield to the theory of colonization, has excited
much attention, and is doubtless destined to excite much
more. It is one of those great practical discoveries, which,
Once made, appear so obvious that the merit of making thew
seems less than it is. Mr. Wakefield was the first to pomt
out that the mode of planting new settlements, then com-
monly practised—setting down a number of families side by
side, each on its piece of land, and all employing themselves
in exactly the same manner,—though under favourable cl
cumstances it may assure to those families a rude abundance
of mere necessaries, can never be other than unfavourable to
great production or rapid growth: and his system consists of
arrangements for securing that every colony shall have from
the first a town population bearing due proportion to its
agricultural, and that the cultivators of the soil shall not be
So widely scattered as to be deprived by distance, of the
benefit of that town population as a market for their produce.
The principle on which the scheme is founded, does not
depend on any theory respecting the inferior productiveness
of land held in large portions, and cultivated by hired labour.
Supposing it true that land yields the greatest produce when
divided into small properties and cultivated by peasant pro-


COMBINATION OF LABOUR. 145


prietors, a town population would be just as necessary to
induce those proprietors to raise that larger produce: and if
they were too far from the nearest seat of non-agricultural
industry to use it as a market for disposing of their surplus
and thereby supplying their other wants, neither that surplus
nor any equivalent for it would, generally speaking, be pro-
duced,

It is, above all, the deficiency of town population which
limits the productiveness of the industry of a country like
India. The agriculture of India is conducted entirely on the
System of small holdings. There is, however, a considerable
amount of combination of labour. The village institutions
and customs, which are the real framework of Indian society,
make provision for joint action in the cases in which it is
seen to be necessary; or where they fail to do so, the
government (when tolerably well administered) steps in, and
by an outlay from the revenue, executes by combined labour
the tanks, embankments, and works of irrigation, which are
indispensable. The implements and processes of agriculture
are however so wretched, that the produce of the soil, in
spite of great natural fertility and a climate highly favourable
to vegetation, is miserably small: and the land might be
made to yield food in abundance for many more than the
present number of inhabitants, without departing from the
System of small holdings. But to this the stimulus is want-
ing, which a large town population, connected with the rural
districts by easy and unexpensive means of communication,
would afford. That town population, again, does not grow
up, because the few wants and unaspiring spirit of the cul-
tivators (jomed until lately with great insecurity of property,
from military and fiscal rapacity) prevent them from attempt-
Ing to become consumers of town produce. In these cir-
cumstances the best chance of an early developement of the
productive resources of India, consists in the now rapid
growth of its export of agricultural produce (cotton, indigo,
sugar, coffee, &c.) to the markets of Europe. The producers

VOL. I. ie


146 BOOK I. CHAPTER vill. § 4.


of these articles are consumers of food supplied by their
fellow-agriculturists in India; and the market thus opened
for surplus food will, if accompanied by good government,
raise up by degrees more extended wants and desires, Gee
either towards European commodities, or towards things

i which will require for their production in India a larger
ei H | manufacturing population.


sense eS eS


§ 4. Thus far of the separation of employments, 4 form
of the combination of labour without which there cannot o |
the first rudiments of industrial civilization. But when this
separation is thoroughly established ; when it has become the |
general practice for each producer to supply many others
with one commodity, and to be supplied by others with most
of the things which he consumes; reasons not less real,

q though less imperative, invite to a further extension of the

alee same principle. It is found that the productive pow oF
\ labour is increased by carrying the separation further and |
further; by breaking down more and more every proce of
1 ; industry into parts, so that each labourer shall confine him-
self to an ever smaller number of simple operations. And
thus, in time, arise those remarkable cases of what 1s called
bce, the division of labour, with which all readers on subjects of
icy | this nature are familiar. Adam Smith’s illustration fon
ral pin-making, though so well known, is so much to the point,
yay | that I will venture once more to transcribe it. “The po
Pee ness of making a pin is divided into about eighteen distinct
Phe a operations. One man draws out the wire, another straights
{ it, a third cuts it, a fourth points it, a fifth grinds it at the
ir top for receiving the head; to make the head requires twa Qh
| i fi three distinct operations; to put it on, is a peculiar business,
to whiten the pms is another; it is even a trade by itself to
put them into the paper. .... I have seen a small manu
factory where ten men only were employed, and where some |

fe of them, consequently, performed two or three distinct Opel

ie BS tions. But though they were very poor, and therefore but


*


-Seaypeeee aeons ae


a]
H
i

if


€OMBINATION OF LABOUR. 147


indifferently accommodated with the necessary machinery,
they could, when they exerted themselves, make among them
about twelve pounds of pins ina day. ‘There are in a pound
upwards of four thousand pins of a middling size. Those
ten persons, therefore, could make among them upwards of
forty-eight thousand pins ina day. Lach person, therefore,
making a tenth part of forty-eight thousand pins, might be
considered as making four thousand eight hundred pins in
a day. But if they had all wrought separately and inde-
pendently, and without any of them haying been educated
to this peculiar business, they certainly could not each of
them have made twenty, perhaps not one pin im a day.”

M. Say furnishes a still stronger example of the effects of
division of labour—from a not very important branch of in-
dustry certainly, the manufacture of playing cards. “It is
said by those engaged in the business, that each eard, that
is, a piece of pasteboard of the size of the hand, before
being ready for sale, does not undergo fewer than seventy
operations*, every one of which might be the occupation of


: * “Ce ne sont point les mémes ouvriers qui préparent le papier dont on
fait les cartes, ni les couleurs dont on les empreint; ef en ne fesant atten-
tion qu’au seul emploi de ces matiéres, nous trouverons qu’un jeu de cartes
est le résultat de plusieurs opérations dont chacune occupe une série dis-
tincte @onvriers et d’ouvriares qui s’appliquent toujours & la méme opéra-
tion. Ce sont des personnes différentes, et toujours les mémes, qui éplu-
chent les bouchons et grosseurs qui se trouvent dans le papier et nuiraient
dL Pégalité dépaisseur; les mémes qui collent ensemble les trois feuilles de
papier dont se compose le carton et qui le mettent en presse; les mémes
qui colorent le cété destiné ¥ former le dos des cartes,; les mémes qui
impriment en noir le dessin des figures; d’autres ouvriers impriment les
couleurs des mémes figures; d’autres font sécher au réchaud les cartons
une fois qwils sont imprimés; d’autres s’occupent de les lisser dessus et
dessous. C’est une occupation particuliére que de les couper d’égale dimen-
sion; c’en est une autre de les assembler pour en former des jeux; une
autre encore d’imprimer les enveloppes des jeux, et une autre encore de les
envelopper; sans compter les fonctions des personnes chargées des ventes
et des achats, de payer les ouvriers et de tenir les écritures.”— Say, Cours
@ Economique Politique Pratique, vol. 1., p. 340.

It isa remarkable proof of the economy of labour occasioned by this

L 2


a ar a


eee


Ee


Wea


148 BOOK 1. CHAPTER vill. § 5.


a distinct class of workmen. And if there are not seventy
classes of work-people in each card manufactory, it is be-
cause the division of labour is not carried so far as it might
be; because the same workman is charged with two, three,
or four distinct operations. The influence of this distri-
bution of employments is immense. I have seen a card
manufactory where thirty workmen produced daily fifteen
thousand five hundred cards, being above five hundred cards
for each labourer; and it may be presumed that if each of
these workmen were obliged to perform all the operations
himself, even supposing him a practised hand, he would not
perhaps complete two cards in a day; and the thirty work-


2
men, instead of fifteen thousand five hundred cards, would


make only sixty.”

In watchmaking, as Mr. Babbage observes, “ it was stated
in evidence before a Committee of the House of Commons,
that there are a hundred and two distinct branches of this
art, to each of which a boy may be put apprentice and that
he only learns his master’s department, and is unable, after
his apprenticeship has expired, without subsequent instruc
tion, to work at any other branch. The watch-finisher,
whose business it is to put together the scattered parts, 8
the only one, out of the hundred and two persons, who can
work in any other department than his own *.”


§ 5. The causes of the increased efficiency given t0
labour by the division of employments are some of them to0
familiar to require specification; but it is worth while to
attempt a complete enumeration of them. By Adam Smith


they are reduced to three. « First, the increase of dexterity


in every particular w : i
y I ar workman ; secondly, the saving of the


=


minute division of occupations, that an article, the production of which is
the result of such a multitude of Manual ope:


ar a
ifli ration “a e sold for
trifling sum. ations, can b


* TD, p inner p
Economy of Machinery and Manufactures, 3rd Edition, p: 201.


COMBINATION OF LABOUR, 149


time which is commonly lost in passing from one species
of work to another; and lastly, the invention of a great
number of machines which facilitate and abridge labour, and
enable one man to do the work of many.”

Of these the increase of dexterity of the individual work-
man is the most obvious and universal. It does not follow
that because a thing has been done oftener it will be done
better. That depends on the intelligence of the workman,
and on the degree in which his mind works along with his
hands. But it will be done more easily. The organs them-
selves acquire greater power: the muscles employed grow
stronger by frequent exercise, the sinews more pliant, and the
mental powers more efficient and less sensible of fatigue.
What can be done easily has at least a better chance of being
done well, and is sure to be done more expeditiously. What
was at first done slowly comes to be done quickly ; what was
at first done slowly with accuracy is at last done quickly with
equal accuracy. This is as true of mental operations as of
bodily. Even a child after much practice sums up a column
of figures with a rapidity which resembles intuition. The act
of speaking any language, of reading fluently, of playing
music at sight, are cases as remarkable as they are familiar.
Among bodily acts, dancing, gymnastic exercises, ease and
brilliancy of execution on a musical instrument, are examples
of the rapidity and facility acquired by repetition. In simpler
manual operations the effect is of course still sooner pro-
duced. ‘¢ The rapidity,” Adam Smith observes, “ with which
Some of the operations of certain manufactures are per-
formed, exceeds what the human hand could, by those who
had never seen them, be supposed capable of acquiring.”
This skill is, naturally, attained after shorter practice, in pro-
portion as the division of labour is more minute; and will not
be attamed in the same degree at all, if the workman has a
greater variety of operations to execute than allows of a suffi-


“ciently frequent repetition of each. The advantage is not


confined to the greater efficiency ultimately attained, but in-


150 BOOK I. CHAPTER VIII. § 5.


cludes also the diminished loss of time, and waste of material,
in learning the art. “A certain quantity of material,” says
Mr. Babbage*, “ will in all cases be consumed unprofitably,
or spoiled, by every person who learns an art; and as he
apples himself to each new process, he will waste some of
the raw material, or of the partly-manufactured commodity.
But if each man commit this waste in acquiring successively
every process, the quantity of waste will be much grate
than if each person confine his attention to one process.
And in general each will be much sooner qualified to execute
his one process, if he be not distracted while learning it, by
the-necessity of acquiring others.

The second advantage enumerated by Adam Smith as
arising from the division of labour, is one on which I cannot
help thinking that more stress is laid by him and others
than it deserves. To do full justice to his opinion, I will
quote his own exposition of it. “The advantage which 1s
gained by saving the time commonly lost in passing from


one sort of work to another, is much greater than we should
at first view be apt to imagine it.


very quickly from one kind of work to another, that is cal-
ried on in a different


place, and with quite different tools.
A country weaver, who cultivates a small farm, must lose a
good deal of time in passing from his loom to the field, and
from the field to his loom. When the two trades can be


carried on in the same workhouse, the loss of time is 00
doubt much less. It is even in this c


considerable. A man commonly saunter
his hand from one sort of e


he first begins the new w


It is impossible to pass


ase, however, vely
sa little in turning
mployment to another. When
ork, he is gs
hearty; his mind, as they Say, does not go to it, and for
some time he rather trifles than applies to good purpose.
The habit of saunterine an i =. eee

Reheat ae § and of indolent careless application,
which is naturally, or rather necessarily acquired by every


ee
* Page 171,


eldom very keen and


COMBINATION OF LABOUR. 151


country workman who is obliged to change his work and his
tools every half hour, and to apply his hand in twenty
different ways almost every day of his life, renders him
almost always slothful and lazy, and incapable of any vigorous
application even on the most pressing occasions.” This is
surely a most exaggerated description of the inefficiency of
country labour, where it has any adequate motive to exer-
tion. Few workmen change their work and their tools oftener
than a gardener: is he usually incapable of vigorous appli-
cation? Many of the higher description of artisans have to
perform a great multiplicity of operations with a variety of
tools. ‘They do not execute each of these with the rapidity
with which a factory workman performs his single operation;
but they are, except in a merely manual sense, more skilful
labourers, and in all senses whatever, more energetic.

Mr. Babbage, following mm the track of Adam Smith,
says, “When the human hand, or the human head, has
been for some time occupied in any kind of work, it cannot
instantly change its employment with full effect. The
muscles of the limbs employed have acquired a flexibility
during their exertion, and those not in action a stiffness
during rest, which renders every change slow and unequal
in the commencement. Long habit also produces in the
muscles exercised a capacity for enduring fatigue to a much
greater degree than they could support under other circum-
stances. A similar result seems to take place in any change
of mental exertion; the attention bestowed on the new sub-
ject not being so perfect at first as it becomes after some
exercise. The employment of different tools in the suc-
cessive processes is another cause of the loss of time in
changing from one operation to another. If these tools are
simple, and the change is not frequent, the loss of time is
not considerable; but im many processes of the arts the tools
are of great delicacy, requiring accurate adjustment every
time they are used; and in many cases the time employed
in adjusting bears a large proportion to that employed in


ph te


> age ee baa 8


"in one Occupation, and less fit for


152 BOOK I. CHAPTER vill. § 5.


fee “lling=
using the tool. The sliding-rest, the dividing coe ae
engine are of this kind; and hence, in ma 7 to keep one
sufficient extent, it is found to be good economy ~ ° A a
machine constantly employed in one kind of wor a As i
for example, having a screw motion to its ae allt
the whole length of its bed, is kept constantly cies doa of
ders; another, having a motion for equalizing Le Re
the work at the point at which it passes the tool, ae - ‘i
facing surfaces; whilst a third is constantly employ
cutting wheels.” ‘der
I =a very far from implying that these different ie.
ations are of no weight; but I think there are coun e ae
siderations which are overlooked. If one kind of mus 7ery
or mental labour is different from another, for ee.
reason it is to some extent a rest from that other; a Ps.
greatest vigour is not at once obtained in the ea 7 pre
pation, neither could the first have been inde a ie af
longed without some relaxation of energy. It vic al often
common experience that a change of occupation ee neces
afford relief where complete repose would otherwise be athout
Sary, and that a person can work many more ho
fatigue at a succession of occupations, than if confined z a
the whole time to one. Different occupations employ i
ferent muscles, or different faculties of the mind, ei.
which rest and are refreshed while others work. Bo ie
labour itself rests from mental, and conversely. pier aha
variety itself has an invigorating effect on what for wan val
more philosophical appellation we must term the an! ae
Spirits; so important to the efficiency of all work not Be é
nical, and not unimportant even to that. The company
weight due to these considerations is different with differen
individuals : Some are more fitted than others for persistency


; : ire Jonger
change; they requir
to get the steam up (to use


irksomeness of Setting to wo
more time to-bring their f


: the
a metaphor now common) ;

Dy wires
rk lasts longer, and it oe
: : " retore
aculties into full play, and there


COMBINATION OF LABOUR. 153


when this is once done, they do not like to leave off, but go
on long without intermission, even to the injury of their
health. Temperament has something to do with these dif-
ferences. There are people whose faculties seem by nature
to come slowly into action, and to accomplish little until they
have been a long time employed. Others, again, get into
action rapidly, but cannot without exhaustion continue long.
In this, however, as in most other things, though natural
differences are something, habit is much more. The habit of
passing rapidly from one occupation to another may be
acquired, like other habits, by early cultivation; and when it
is acquired, there is none of the sauntering which Adam
Smith speaks of, after each change; no want of energy and
interest, but the workman comes to each part of his occupa-
tion with a freshness and a spirit which he does not retain if
he persists in any one part (unless in case of unusual excite-
ment) beyond the length of time to which he is accustomed.


Women are usually (at least in their present social circum-
stances) of far greater versatility than men; and the present
topic is an instance among multitudes, how little the ideas


and experience of women have yet counted for, in forming
the opinions of mankind. There are few women who would
not reject the idea that work is made vigorous by being pro-
tracted, and is inefficient for some time after changing to a
new thing. Even in this case, habit, I believe, much more
than nature, is the cause of the difference. The occupations
of nine out of every ten men are special, those of nine out of
every ten women general, embracing a multitude of details,
each of which requires very little time. Women are in the
constant practice of passing quickly from one manual, and
still more from one mental operation to another, which there-
fore rarely costs them either effort or loss of time, while a
man’s occupation generally consists in working steadily for a
long time at one thing, or one very limited class of things.
But the situations are sometimes reversed, and with them
the characters. Women are not found less efficient than


154 BOOK I. CHAPTER vill. § 5.


men for the uniformity of factory work, or they would not :
it; and a man who has cultivate
generally be employed for it; an ee
the habit of turning his hand to many things, far fr i. .
the slothful and lazy person described by Adam Say Re
usually remarkably lively and active. It is true mee,
change of occupation may be too frequent even for oe
versatile. Incessant variety is even more fatiguing than y
ual sameness.

s ‘The third advantage attributed by Adam Smith to the
division of labour is, to a certain extent, real. invents
tending to save labour in a particular operation, se
likely to occur to any one, in proportion as his thoug hts 2 :
intensely directed to that occupation, and continually s
ployed upon it. A person is not so likely to make prac “ :
improvements in one department of things, whose atten a
is very much diverted to others. But, in this, much a
depends on general intelligence and habitual activity of TAD >
than on exclusiveness of occupation, and if that exclusive-
Ness is carried to a degree unfavourable to the cultivation of


intelligence, there will be more lost, in this kind of advan-


tage, than gained. We may add, that whatever may be the


8, when they are once made “
increased efficiency of labour is Owing to the invention itself,
and not to the division of labour,


The greatest advantage (
workmen) derived from the m
takes place in modern manu
one not mentioned by Adam


cause of making invention


next to the dexterity of the
inute division of labour which
facturing industry, is probably


Smith, but to which attention
has been drawn by Mr. Babbage; the more economical dis-


tribution of labour, by classing the work
their capacity. Different parts of the sa
tions require unequal degrees of skil]
and those who haye skill enough for
strength enough for the hardest part
made much more useful by being emp
the operations of which inferior work


people according to
me series of opera-
and bodily strength :
the most difficult, or
S of the labour, are
loyed Solely in them;
men are capable, being


COMBINATION OF LABOUR. f 155


left to those who are fit for no others. Production is most
efficient when the precise quantity of skill and strength,
which is required for each part of the process, is employed
in it, and no more. The operation of pin-making requires,
it seems, in its different parts, such different degrees of skill,
that the wages earned by the persons employed vary from
fourpence halfpenny a day to six shillings; and if the work-
man who is paid at that highest rate had to perform the
whole process, he would be working a part of his time
with a waste per day equivalent to the difference between
six shillings and fourpence halfpenny. Without reference
to the loss sustained in quantity of work done, and sup-
posing even that he could make a pound of pins in the
same time in which ten workmen combining their labour can
make ten pounds, Mr. Babbage computes that they would
cost, in making, three times and three-quarters as much as
they now do by means of the division of labour. In
needle-making, he adds, the difference would be still greater,
for in that, the scale of remuneration for different parts of
the process varies from sixpence to twenty shillings a day.
To the advantage which consists in extracting the greatest
possible amount of utility from skill, may be added the ana-
logous one, of extracting the utmost possible utility from
tools. “If any man,” says an able writer*, “had all the tools
which many different occupations require, at least three-
fourths of them would constantly be idle and useless. It
were clearly then better, were any society to exist where each
man had all these tools, and alternately carried on each of
these occupations, that the members of it should, if pos-
sible, divide them amongst them, each restricting himself
to some particular employment. The advantages of the
change to the whole community, and therefore to every
individual in it, are great. In the first place, the various


* Statement of some New Principles on the subject of Political Economy.
By John Rae, (Boston, U.S.) p- 164.


156 BOOK I. CHAPTER vill. § 6.


implements, being in constant employment, yield a better
return for what has been laid out in procuring them. In
consequence their owners can afford to have them of better
quality and more complete construction. ‘The result of both


events is, that a larger provision is made for the future wants
of the whole society.”


§6. The division of labour, as all writers on the subject
have remarked, is limited by the extent of the market. If,
by the separation of pinmaking into ten distinct employ-
ments, forty-eight thousand pins-can be made in a day, this
separation will only be advisable if the number of accessible
consumers is such as to require, every day, something like
forty-eight thousand pins. If there is only a demand for
twenty-four thousand, the division of labour can only be
advantageously carried to the extent which will every day
produce that smaller number. This, therefore, is a further
mode in which an accession of demand for a commodity
tends to increase the efficiency of the labour employed in its
production. The extent of the market may be limited by
several causes: too small a population ; the population too
scattered and distant to be easily accessible; deficiency of
roads and water carriage; or, finally, the population too
poor, that is, their collective labour too little effective, 0
admit of their being large consumers. ‘Indolence, want of
skill, and want of combination of labour, among those who
would otherwise be buyers of a commodity, limit, therefore,
the practicable amount of combination of labour among its pro-
ducers. In an early stage of civilization, when the demand
of any particular locality was necessarily small, industry only
flourished among those who by their command of the sea
coast or of a navigable river, could have the whole world, oF
all that part of it which lay on coasts oy navigable rivers, 48
a market for their productions, The increase of the general


accompanied with freedom of com-
mercial intercourse, improvements in nay


riches of the world, when


igation, and inland


COMBINATION OF LABOUR. 57


communication by roads, canals, or railways, tends to give
increased productiveness to the labour of every nation in par-
ticular, by enabling each locality to supply with its special
products so much larger a market, that a great extension of
the division of labour in their production is an ordinary
consequence.

The division of labour is also limited, in many cases, by
the nature of the employment. Agriculture, for example, 1s
not susceptible of so great a division of occupations as many
branches of manufactures, because its different operations
cannot possibly be simultaneous. One man cannot be always
ploughing, another sowing, and another reaping. A work-
man who only practised one agricultural operation would be
idle eleven months of the year. The same person may per-
form them all in succession, and have, in almost every cli-
mate, a considerable amount of unoccupied time. The com-
bination of labour, of which agricultural industry is suscep-
tible, is chiefly that which Mr. Wakefield terms Simple
Co-operation; many persons employed together in the same
work. To execute a great agricultural improvement, it Is
often necessary that many labourers should work together ;
but in general, except the few whose business is superintend-
ence, they all work in the same manner. A canal or a rail-
way embankment cannot be made without a combination of
many labourers; but they are all excavators, except the
engineer and his clerks.


faa LE ae
eee smaaeaerant


i
f
i


CHAPTER IX.


OF PRODUCTION ON A LARGE, AND PRODUCTION ON
A SMALL SCALE.


§ 1. Fron the importance of combination of labour, it
is an obvious conclusion, that there are many cases in which
production is made much more effective by being conducted
on a large scale. Whenever it is essential to the presley
efficiency of labour that many labourers should combine,
even though only in the way of Simple Co-operation, the
scale of the enterprise must be such as to bring many la-
bourers together, and the capital must be large enough to
maintain them. Still more needful is this when the nature
of the employment allows, and the extent of the possible
market encourages, a considerable division of labour. The
larger the enterprise, the further the division of labour may
be carried. This is one of the principal causes of large
manufactories. Even when no additional subdivision of the
work would follow an enlargement of the operations, there
will be good economy in enlarging them to the point at
which every person to whom it is convenient to assign 4
special occupation, will have full employment in that occupa
tien. This point is well illustrated by Mr. Babbage*.

“Tf machines be kept working through the twenty-four
hours,” (which is evidently the only economical mode of
employing them,) “it is necessary that some person shall
attend to admit the workmen at the time they relieve each
other; and whether the porter or other servant so employed
admit one person or twenty, his rest will be equally dis-
turbed. It will also be necessary occasionally to adjust oF


* Page 214 et <0


PRODUCTION ON A LARGE AND ON A SMALL SCALE. 159


repair the machine; and this can be done much better by
a workman accustomed to machine-making, than by the
person who uses it. Now, since the good performance and
the duration of machines depend, to a very great extent,
upon correcting every shake or imperfection in their parts
as soon as they appear, the prompt attention of a workman
resident on the spot will considerably reduce the expenditure
arising from the wear and tear of the machinery. But in the
case of a single lace-frame, or a single loom, this would be
too expensive a plan. Here then arises another circumstance
which tends to enlarge the extent of a factory. It ought to
consist of such a number of machines as shall occupy the
whole time of one workman in keeping them in order: if
extended beyond that number, the same principle of eco-
nomy would point out the necessity of doubling or tripling
the number of machines, in order to employ the whole time
of two or three skilful workmen.

“ Where one portion of the workman’s labour consists in
the exertion of mere physical force, as in weaving, and in
many similar arts, it will soon occur to the manufacturer,
that if that part were executed by a steam-engine, the same
man might in the case of weaving, attend to two or more
looms at once; and, since we already suppose that one or
more operative engineers have been employed, the number
of looms may be so arranged that their time shall be fully
occupied in keeping the steam-engine and the looms in
order.

“ Pursuing the same principles, the manufactory becomes
gradually so enlarged, that the expense of lighting during
the night amounts to a considerable sum; and as there are
already attached to the establishment persons who are up
all night, and can therefore constantly attend to it, and
also engineers to make and keep in repair any machinery,
the addition of an apparatus for making gas to light the
factory leads to a new extension, at the same time that it
contributes, by diminishing the expense of lighting, and


es SNR EERIE Bets > tive a: es


AERO MRE TERE EES:


=


oe


Foy games


160 BOOK I. CHAPTER 1x. § 1.


the risk of accidents from fire, to reduce the cost of manu-
facturing. ‘ogee

“‘ Long before a factory has reached this extent, it will
have been found necessary to ‘establish an accountant’s
department, with clerks to pay the workmen, and to see
that they arrive at their stated times; and this department
must be in communication with the agents who purchase
the raw produce, and with those who sell the manufactured
article.” It will cost these clerks and accountants little
more time and trouble to pay a large number of workmen
than a small number; to check the accounts of large transac-
tions, than of small. If the business doubled itself, it would
probably be necessary to increase, but certainly not to double,
the number either of accountants, or of buying and selling
agents. Every increase of business would enable the whole
to be carried on with a proportionally smaller amount of
labour.

As a general rule, the expenses of a business do not
increase by any means proportionally to the quantity of busi-
ness. Let us take as an example, a set of operations which
we are accustomed to see carried on by one great establish-
ment, that of the Post Office. Suppose that the business, let us
say only of the London letter-post, instead of being centralized
in a single concern, were divided among five or six competing
companies. Hach of these would be obliged to maintain almost
as large an establishment as is now sufficient for the whole.
Since each must arrange for receiving and delivering letters im
all parts of the town, each must send letter-carriers into every


street, and almost every alley, and this too as many times 1


the day as is now done by the Post Office, if the service is t0
be as well performed. Each must have an office for receiving
letters in every neighbourhood, with all
ments for collecting the letters fy
re-distributing them.


subsidiary arrange-
om the different offices and


I say nothing of the much greater
number of superior officers who would be required to check


and control the subordinates, implying not only a greater


e)


PRODUCTION ON A LARGE AND ON A SMALL SCALE. 161


cost in salaries for such responsible officers, but the necessity,
perhaps, of being satisfied in many instances with an inferior
standard of qualification, and so failing in the object.

Whether or not the advantages obtained by operating on
a large scale, preponderate in any particular case over the
more watchful attention, and greater regard to minor gains
and losses, usually found in small establishments, can be
ascertained, in a state of free competition, by an unfailing
test. Wherever there are large and small establishments in
the same business, that one of the two which in existing cir-
cumstances carries on the production at greatest advantage,
will be able to undersell the other. The power of perma-
nently underselling can only be derived from increased effec-
tiveness of labour; and this, when obtained by a more ex-
tended division of employment, or by a classification tending
to a better economy of skill, always implies a greater produce
from the same labour, and not merely the same produce from
less labour : it increases not the surplus only, but the gros:
produce of industry. If an increased quantity of the parti-
cular article is not required, and a part of the labourers in
consequence lose their employment, the capital which main-
tamed and employed them is also set at liberty ; and the
general produce of the country is increased, by some other
application of their labour.

Another of the causes of large manufactories, however, is
the introduction of processes requiring expensive machinery.
Expensive machinery supposes a large capital; and is not
resorted to except with the intention of producing, and the
hope of selling, as much of the article as comes up to the
full powers of the machine. For both these reasons, wher-
ever costly machinery are used, the large system of produc-
tion is inevitable. But the power of underselling is not in
this case so unerring a test as in the former, of the beneficial
effect on the total production of the community. The power
of underselling does not depend on the absolute increase of
produce, but on its bearing an increased proportion to the

VOL. I. M


ee


162 BOOK I. CHAPTER Ix. § l.


expenses: which, as was shown ina former chapter”, it may
do, consistently with even a diminution of the gross annual
produce. By the adoption of machinery, a circulating
capital, which was perpetually consumed and reproduced, has
been converted into a fixed capital, requiring only a small
annual expense to keep it up: and a much smaller produce
will suffice for merely covering that expense, and replacing
the remaining circulating capital of the producer. The
machinery therefore might answer perfectly well to the
manufacturer, and enable him to undersell his competitors;
although the effect on the production of the country might be
not an increase, but a diminution. It is true, the article will
be sold cheaper, and therefore, of that single article, there
will probably be not a smaller, but a greater quantity sold;
since the loss to the community collectively has fallen upon
the work-people, and they are not the principal customers, if
customers at all, of most branches of manufacture. But
though that particular branch of industry may extend itself,
it will be by replenishing its diminished circulating capital
from that of the community generally ; and if the labourers
employed in that department escape loss of employment, It
is because the loss will spread itself over the labouring
people at large. If any of them are reduced to the condition
of unproductive labourers, supported by voluntary oF legal
charity, the gross produce of the country is to that extent

permanently diminished, until the ordinary progress of accu-

mulation makes it up: but if the condition of the labouring

classes enables them to bear a temporary reduction of wages,

and the superseded labourers become absorbed in other em™-

ployments, their labour is still productive, and the breach in

the gross produce of the community is repaired, though not

the detriment to the labourers. I have restated this exposi-

tion, which has already been made in a former place, to im-

press More “sttonglvathe simphthata anode.of production


* Supra, chap. vi. p. 112,


PRODUCTION ON A LARGE AND ON A SMALL SCALE. 163


does not of necessity increase the productive effect of the
collective labour of a community, because it enables a parti-
cular commodity to be sold cheaper. The one consequence
generally accompanies the other, but not necessarily. I will
not here repeat the reasons I formerly gave, nor anticipate
those which will be given more fully hereafter, for deeming
the exception to be rather a case abstractedly possible, than
one which is frequently realized in fact.

A considerable part of the saving of labour effected by
substituting the large system of production for the small, is
the saving in the labour of the capitalists themselves. If a
hundred producers with small capitals carry on separately the
same business, the superintendence of each concern will pro-
bably require the whole attention of the person conducting it,
sufficiently at least to hinder his time or thoughts from being
disposable for anything else: while a single manufacturer,
possessing a capital equal to the sum of theirs, with ten or a
dozen clerks, could conduct the whole of their amount of
business, and have leisure too for other occupations. The
small capitalist, it is true, generally combines with the busi-
ness of direction some portion of the details, which the other
leaves to his subordinates: the small farmer follows his own
plough, the small tradesman serves in his own shop, the small
weaver plies his ownloom. But in this very union of functions
there is in a great proportion of cases a want of economy.
The principal in the concern is either wasting, in the routine
of a business, qualities suitable for the direction of it, or he
is only fit for the former, and then the latter will be ill done.
I must observe however that I do not attach, to this saying
of labour, the importance often ascribed to it. There is un-
doubtedly much more labour expended in the superintend-
ance of many small capitals than im that of one large capital.
For this labour however the small producers have generally a
full compensation, in the feeling of being their own masters,
and not servants of an employer. It may be said, that if they


value this independence they will submit to pay a price for
M 2


me


I


|
i
‘


) BOOK I. CHAPTER IX. Ze
164 ra x § 9


j . the com-
it, and to sell at the reduced rates oe aa ante
petition of the great dealer or manufacturer. i.
always do this and continue to gain ae mee
gradually disappear from society. After ha cana
ace little capital in prolonging the oe en
they either sink into the condition of hire
become dependent on others for support.


: romoted b

§ 2. Production on a large scale 1S Shee! u ances
the practice of forming a large capital by a a ee.
many small contributions; or in other words, a ihegeut
tion of joint stock companies. The advantages
stock principle are numerous and important. / anne

In the first place, many undertakings a \enpieee
of capital beyond the means of the richest indivi aes aa
partnership. No individual could have made ere aon
London to Liverpool; it is doubtful if any indiv see ee
even work the traffic on it, now when it is se Ae
government indeed could have done both ; and in viene
where the practice of co-operation is onl yin the ee pee
of its growth, the government can alone be looke ae
of those works for which a great combination of m aon
requisite ; because it can obtain those means by ne ae
taxation, and is already accustomed to the conduct = “al
Operations. For reasons, however, which are tolera ee
known, and of which we shall treat, fully hereafter, g0


f 3 ‘ is gene-
ment agency for the conduct of industrial operations 1s §
rally one of the least eli


her 1S
gible of resources, when any oth
available,


5 3 6 oes re not
Next, there are undertakings which individuals ar


. ot
olutely incapable of performing, but which they cann
perform on the scale and with th


more and more required by the
advancing state. Individuals are
ships from England to an
passengers and letters;


abs


€ continuity which are ever
exigencies of a society ae
quite capable of despatching
y or every part of the world, to a
the thing was done before joint stoc


PRODUCTION ON A LARGE AND ON A SMALL SCALE. 165


companies for the purpose were heard of. But when from the
increase of population and transactions as well as of means
of payment, the public will no longer content themselves
with occasional opportunities, but require the certainty that
packets shall start regularly, for some places once or even
twice a day, for others once a week, for others that a steam
ship of great size and expensive construction shall depart
on fixed days twice in each month, it is evident that to
afford an assurance of keeping up with punctuality such a
circle of costly operations, requires a much larger capital and
a much larger staff of qualified subordinates than can be
commanded by an individual capitalist. There are other
cases, again, in which though the business might be perfectly
well transacted with small or moderate capitals, the guarantee
of a great subscribed stock is necessary or desirable as a
security to the public for the fulfilment of pecuniary engage -
ments. This is especially the case when the nature of the
business requires that numbers of persons should be willing
to trust the concern with their money: as in the business of
banking, and that of insurance: to both of which the joint
stock principle is eminently adapted. It is an instance of
the folly and jobbery of the rulers of mankind, that until
very lately the joint stock principle, as a general resort, was
in this country interdicted by law to these two modes of
business; to banking altogether, and to insurance in the
department of sea risks; in order to bestow a lucrative
monopoly on particular establishments which the government
was pleased exceptionally to license, namely the Bank of
England, and two insurance companies, the London and the
Royal Exchange.

These are some of the advantages of joint stock over
individual management. But if we look to the other side of
the question, we shall find that individual management has
also very great advantages over joint stock. The chief of
these is the much keener interest of the managers in the
success of the undertaking.


ee

poe ees
mae F-

career oie ae


Se aetpent itraee ty


-
Pert


ot


3 SENSOR =


et ne
= a pee
see ume .


oe ee
7 SE ante eee meapeett


5 9,
166 BOOK I. CHAPTER Ix. $§ 2


+44 ee athe
The administration of a joint stock ie
main, administration by hired servants. Even ae ae
or board of directors, who are supposed ee Ae remove the
management, and who do really appoint ‘ " cood working
managers, have no pecuniary interest in me Fava alk
of the concern beyond the shares they in Be ital of the
which are always a very small part of the : he fortunes
association, and in general but a small part 0 take Gale
of the directors themselves; and the part be ae ether
management usually divides their time ee to: eheies one
occupations, of as great or greater In OTLaAMe rn of no one
interest; the business being the principal oe tapes
except those who are hired to Carry 10 on. ] i experience,
shows, and proverbs, the expression of Re eas e. compared
attest, how inferior is the quality of hired SEWES es q in the
with the ministration of those personally puree ouch
work, and how indispensable, when hired oe
employed, is “the master’s eye” to watch over lt. se requires
The successful conduct of an industrial aes The
two quite distinct qualifications: fidelity, ane possible to
fidelity of the hired managers of a concern It 1s fi to a de-
secure. When their work admits of being reduce


hich
: E é a ter on W
finite set of rules, the violation of these is a mat


si-
: ribet are vhich respo?
conscience cannot easily blind itself, and on whic But to
bility may be enforced by


hundred
Carry on a great busin

things which, as they c
Possible to conyer
First and principa
Should be incessan
continually lay
be obtained


the loss of employment.
ess successfully, requires itis 1m-
annot be defined beforehan bliations.
t into distinet and positive ccne ne
lly, it requires that the dine’ itd e
tly occupied with the subjects § fit. may
ing schemes by which greater Bs interest
» OF expense saved. This intensity © py one
in the subject it is seldom to be expected that Ba: ser-
should feel, who is conducting a business as the ee
vant and for the profit of another, There are expel point.
in human nature which are quite conclusive on the J


PRODUCTION ON A LARGE AND ON A SMALL SCALE. 167


Look at the whole class of rulers, and ministers of state.
The work they are entrusted with, is among the most inte-
resting and exciting of all occupations; the personal share
which they themselves reap of the national benefits or mis-
fortunes which befal the state under their rule, is far from
trifling, and the rewards and punishments which they may
expect from public estimation are of the plain and palpable
kind which are most keenly felt and most widely appreciated.
Yet how rare a thing is it to find a statesman im whom
mental indolence is not stronger than all these inducements.
How infinitesimal is the proportion who trouble themselves
to form, or even to attend to, plans of public improve-
ment, unless it is made still more troublesome to them
to remain inactive; or who have any other real desire than
that of rubbing on, so as to escape general blame. Ona
smaller scale, all who have ever employed hired labour
have had ample experience of the efforts made tO give as
little labour in exchange for the wages, as is compatible with
not being turned off. The universal neglect by domestic
servants of their employer’s interests, wherever these are
not protected by some fixed rule, is matter of common
remark, unless where long continuance in the same service,
and reciprocal good offices, have produced either personal
attachment, or some feeling of a common interest.

Another of the disadvantages of joint stock concerns,
which is in some degree common to all concerns on a large
scale, is disregard of small gains and small savings. In the
management of a great capital and great transactions, espe-
cially when the managers have not much interest in it of
their own, small sums are apt to be counted for next to
nothing: they never seem worth the care and trouble which
it costs to attend to them, and the credit of liberality and
openhandedness is cheaply bought by a disregard of such
trifling considerations. But small profits and small expenses,
often repeated, amount to great gains and losses: and of this
a large capitalist is often a sufficiently good calculator to be


168 BOOK I. CHAPTER Ix. § 2.


practically aware; and to arrange his business ona Ke
which if enforced by a sufficiently vigilant superinten ONC,
precludes the possibility of the habitual waste, otherwise fie
dent to a great business. But the managers of a joint Biog
concern seldom devote themselves sufficiently to the work, to
enforce unremittingly, even if introduced, through every
detail of the business,a really economical system.

From considerations of this nature, Adam Smith was led
to enunciate as a principle, that joint stock companies one
never be expected to maintain themselves without an exc a
sive privilege, except in branches of business which hi e
banking, insurance, and some others, admit of beimg, in a
considerable degree, reduced to fixed rules. This however 1s
one of those over-statements of a true principle, often met
with in Adam Smith. In his days there were few instances
of joint stock companies which had been permanently suc-
cessful without a monopoly, except the class of cases which
he referred to; but since his time there have been many ; and
the regular increase both of the spirit of combination and of
the ability to combine, will doubtless produce many more.
Adam Smith fixed his observation too exclusively on the
superior energy and more unremitting attention brought to a
business in which the whole stake and the whole gain belong
to the persons conducting it; and he overlooked various
countervailing considerations which go a great way towards
neutralizing even that great point of superiority.

Of these one of the most important is that which relates
to the intellectual and active qualifications of the directing
head. The stimulus of individual interest secures the greatest


amount of exertion, but that exertion is of little avail if the
intelligence exerted is of an inferior order,


necessarily be in the majority of concerns car
persons chiefly interested in them.

large, and can afford a remuneration
class of candidates Superior to the com
sible to select for the general m


which it must
tied on by the
Where the concern is
Sufficient to attract a
mon average, it is pos-
anagement, and for all the


PRODUCTION ON A LARGE AND ON A SMALL SCALE. 169


skilled employments of a subordinate kind, persons of a de-
gree of acquirement and cultivated intelligence which more
than compensates for their inferior interest in the result.
Their greater perspicacity enables them, with even a part of
their minds, to see probabilities of advantage which never
occur to the ordinary run of men by the continued exertion
of the whole of theirs; and their habitual rectitude of per-
ception and of judgment guards them against blunders, the
apprehension of which would prevent the others from hazard-
ing their interests in any attempt out of the ordinary routine.

It must further be remarked, that it is not a necessary
consequence of joint stock management, that the persons
employed, whether in superior or in subordinate offices, should
be paid wholly by fixed salaries. There are modes of con-
necting more or less intimately the interest of the employés
with the pecuniary success of the concern. There is a long
series of intermediate positions, between working wholly on
one’s own account, and working by the day, week, or year
for an invariable payment. Even in the case of ordinary
unskilled labour, there is such a thing as task-work, or work-
ing by the piece: and the superior efficiency of this is so
well known, that judicious employers always resort to it
when the work admits of being put out in definite portions,
without the necessity of too troublesome a surveillance to
guard against inferiority in the execution. In the case of the
managers of joint stock companies, and of the superintend-
ing and controlling officers im many private establishments,
it is a common enough practice to connect their pecuniary
interest with the interest of their employers, by giving them
part of their remuneration in the form of a percentage on
the profits. The personal interest thus given to hired ser-
vants is not comparable in intensity to that of the owner of
the capital; but it is sufficient to be a very material stimulus
to zeal and carefulness, and, when added to the advantage of
superior intelligence, often raises the quality of the service
much above that which the generality of masters are capable


ip eae Pte


PEDO leat


Laer


nares rd Sache


eam peeciitie


+


ere tina


ake


ca


PES 5 peat


170 BOOK I. CHAPTER Ix. § 3.


of rendering to themselves. The ulterior extensions of which
this principle of remuneration is susceptible, being of great
social as well as economical importance, will be more parti-
cularly adverted to in a subsequent stage of the present
enquiry.

As I have already remarked of large establishments gene-
rally, when compared with small ones, whenever competition
is free its results will show whether individual or joint stock
agency is best adapted to the particular case, since that
which is most efficient and most economical will always in
the end succeed in underselling the other. .


§ 3. The possibility of substituting the large system of
production for the small, depends, of course, in the first
place, on the extent of the market. The large system can
only be advantazeous when a large amount of business is to
be done: it implies, therefore, either a populous and flourish-
ing community, or a great opening for exportation. Again,
this as well as every other change in the system of produc-
tion is greatly favoured by a progressive condition of capital.
It is chiefly when the capital of a country is receiving a great
annual increase, that there is a large amount of capital seek-
ing for mvestment: and a new enterprise is much sooner
and more easily entered upon by new capital, than by with-
drawing capital from existing employments. The change 1s
also much facilitated by the existence of large capitals in few
hands. It is true that the same amount of capital can be
raised by bringing together many small sums. But this
(besides that it is not equally well suited to all branches of
industry), supposes a much greater degree of commercial
confidence and enterprise diffused through the community,
and belongs altogether toa more advanced stage of industrial
progress.

In the countries in which there are the largest markets,
the widest diffusion of commercial confidence and enterprise,
the greatest annual increase of capital, and the greatest


PRODUCTION ON A LARGE AND ON A SMALL SCALE. 171


number of large capitals owned by imdividuals, there is a
tendency to substitute more and more, in one branch of
industry after another, large establishments for small ones.
In England, the great type of all these characteristics, there
is not only a perpetual growth of large manufacturing esta-
blishments, but also, wherever a sufficient number of pur-
chasers are assembled, of shops and warehouses for conduct-
ing retail business on a large scale. These are almost always
able to undersell the smaller tradesmen, partly, it is under-
stood, by means of division of labour, and the economy
occasioned by limiting the employment of skilled agency to
cases where skill is required; and partly, no doubt, by the
saving of labour arising from the great scale of the transac-
tions, as it costs no more time, and not much more exertion
of mind, to make a large purchase, for example, than a small
one, and very much less than to make a number of smali
ones.

With a view merely to production, and to the greatest
efficiency of labour, this change is wholly beneficial. In
some cases it is attended with drawbacks, rather social than
economical, the nature of which has been already hinted at.
But whatever disadvantages may be supposed to attend on
the change from a small to a large system of production,
they are not applicable to the change from a large to a still
larger. When, in any employment, the régime of inde-
pendent small producers has either never been possible,
or has been superseded, and the system of many work-
men under one management has become fully established,
from that time any further enlargement in the scale of pro-
duction is generally an unqualified benefit. It is obvious,
for example, how great an economy of labour would be
obtained if London were supplied by a single gas or water
company instead of the existing plurality. While there are
even as many as two, this implies double establishments of
all sorts, when one only, with a small increase, could pro-
bably perform the whole operation equally well; double sets


172 BOOK I. CHAPTER IX. § 3.


of machinery and works, when the whole of the gas or
water required could generally be produced by one set only;
even double sets of pipes, if the companies did not prevent
this needless expense by agreeing upon a division of the
territory. Were there only one establishment, it could make
lower charges, consistently with obtaining the rate of profit
now realized. But would it do so? Even if it did not, the
community in the aggregate would still be a gainer; since
the shareholders are part of the community, and they would
obtain higher profits, while the consumers paid only the
same. It is, however, an error to suppose that the prices
are really kept down by the competition of these companies.
Where competitors are so few, they always agree not to
compete. They may run a race of cheapness to ruin a new
candidate, but as soon as he has established his footing they
come to terms with him. When, therefore, a business of
real public importance can only be carried on advantageously
upon so large a scale as to render the liberty of competition
almost illusory, it is an unthrifty dispensation of the public
Tesources that several costly sets of arrangements should be
kept up for the purpose of rendering to the community this
one service. It is much better to treat it at once as a public
areas if it be not such as the government itself could
y undertake, it should be made over entire to the
company or association which wi
terms for the public.
no one can desire to s
land (not to speak o


ct the same places
3 while the two would not
be done by one, and after a


be amalgamated, Only one
5 but
never ought to be parted with by
porary concession, as in France; and the vested right which
Parliament has allowed to be acquired by the existing com-


the state, unless on a tem-


PRODUCTION ON A LARGE AND ON A SMALL SCALE. 173


panies, like all other proprietary rights which are opposed


to public utility, is morally valid only as a claim to com-
pensation.


§ 4. The question between the large and the small
system of production as applied to agriculture—between
large and small farming, the grande and the petite culture—
stands, in many respects, on different grounds from the
general question between great and small industrial esta-
blishments. In its social aspect, and as an element in the
Distribution of Wealth, this question will occupy us here-
after: but even as a question of production, the superiority
of the large system in agriculture is by no means so clearly
established as in manufactures.

I have already remarked, that the operations of agricul-
ture are little susceptible of benefit from the division of
labour. There is but little separation of employments even
on the largest farm. The same persons may not in general
attend to the live stock, to the marketing, and to the culti-
vation of the soil; but much beyond that primary and simple
classification, the subdivision is not carried. The combina-
tion of labour of which agriculture is susceptible, is chiefly
that which Mr. Wakefield terms Simple Co-operation ;
several persons helping one another in the same work, at the
same time and place. But I confess it seems to me that this
able writer attributes more importance to that kind of co-
Operation, in reference to agriculture properly so called,
than it deserves. None of the common farming operations
require much of it. There is no particular advantage in
setting a number of people to work together in ploughing
or digging or sowing the same field, or even in mowing or
reaping it unless time presses. A single family can gene-
rally supply all the combination of labour necessary for these
purposes. And in the works in which an union of many
efforts is really needed, there is seldom found any impracti-
cability in obtaining it where farms are small.


174 BOOK I. CHAPTER Ix. § 4.


The waste of productive power by subdivision of the
land often amounts to a great evil, but this applies chiefly to
a subdivision so minute, that the cultivators have not enough -
land to occupy their time. Up to that point, the Seu
principles which recommend large factories, are applicable
to agriculture. For the greatest productive efficiency, ut
is generally desirable (though even this proposition must
be received with qualifications) that no family who have any
land, should have less than they could cultivate, or than will
fully employ their cattle and tools. These, however, are not
the dimensions of large farms, but of what are reckoned in
England very small ones. The large farmer has some ad-
vantage in the article of buildings. It does not cost so much
to house a great number of cattle in one building, as to lodge
them equally well in several buildings. There is also some
advantage in impleménts. A small farmer is not so likely to
possess expensive instruments. But the principal agricul-
tural implements, even when of the best construction, are
not expensive. It may not answer to a small farmer to own
a threshing machine, for the small quantity of corn he has
to thresh ; but there is no reason why such a machine should
not in every neighbourhood be owned in common, or Pro-
vided by some person to whom the others pay a considera-
tion for its use. The large farmer can make some saving in
cost of carriage. There is nearly as much trouble in carry-
ing a small portion of produce to market, as a much greater
produce; in bringing home a small, as a much larger quan-
tity of manure, and articles of daily consumption. There is
also the greater cheapness of buying things in large quanti-
ties, These various advantages must count for something,
but it does not seem that they ought to count for very much.
In England, for some generations, there has been little ex-
perience of small farms: but in Treland the experience has


been ample, not merely under the worst iputiniden cue bask
management: and the highest Irish authorities m


5 re “aie ay be cited
in opposition to the opinion which on this subject


commonly


PRODUCTION ON A LARGE AND ON A SMALL SCALE. 175


prevails in England. Mr. Blacker, for example, one of the
most experienced agriculturists and successful improvers in
the North of Ireland, whose experience lies chiefly in the
best cultivated, which are also the most minutely divided
parts of the country, is of opinion, that tenants holding farms
not exceeding from five to eight or ten acres, can live com-
fortably and pay as high a rent as any large farmer whatever.
“JT am firmly persuaded,” (he says*,) “ that the small farmer
who holds his own plough and digs his own ground, if he
follows a proper rotation of crops, and feeds his cattle in the
house, can undersell the large farmer, or in other words can
pay a rent which the other cannot afford; and in this I am
confirmed by the opinion of many practical men who have
well considered the subject. . . The English farmer of 700
to 800 acres is a kind of man approaching to what is known
by the name of a gentleman farmer. He must have his horse
to ride, and his gig, and perhaps an overseer to attend to his
labourers; he certainly cannot superintend himself the
labour going on in a farm of 800 acres.” After a few other
remarks, he adds, “ Besides all these drawbacks, which the
small farmer knows little about, there is the great expense of
carting out the manure from the homestead to such a great
distance, and again carting home the crop. A single horse
will consume the produce of more land, than would feed a
small farmer and his wife and two children. And what is
more than all, the large farmer says to his labourers, go to


your work; but when the small farmer has occasion to hire


them, he says come; the intelligent reader will, I dare say,


understand the difference.”

One of the objections most urged ag
that they do not and cannot maintain, proportionally to
their extent, so great a number of cattle as large farms, and
that this occasions such a deficiency of manure, that a soil


ainst small farms is,


* Prize Essay on the Management of Landed Property in Ireland, by


William Blacker, Esq., (1837) p- 23-


I ESS LE SIN, LT


i
4
\
i
j


176 BOOK I. CHAPTER Ix. § 4.


much subdivided must always be impoverished. It will be
found, however, that subdivision only produces this effect,
when it throws the land into the hands of cultivators so poor
as not to possess the amount of live stock suitable to the
size of their farms. A small farm and a badly stocked farm
are not synonymous. To make the comparison fairly, we
must suppose the same amount of capital which is possessed
by the large farmers to be disseminated among the small
ones. When this condition, or even any approach to it,
exists, and when stall feeding is practised (and stall feeding
now begins to be considered good economy even on large
farms) experience, far from bearing out the assertion that
small farming is unfavourable to the multiplication of
cattle, conclusively establishes the very reverse. The abun-
dance of cattle, and copious use of manure, on the small
farms of Flanders, are the most striking features in that
Flemish agriculture which is the admiration of all com-
petent judges, whether in England or on the Continent*.


*«<The number of beasts fed on a farm of which the whole is arable
land,” (says the elaborate and intelligent treatise on Flemish Husbandry,
from personal observation and the best sources, published in the Library of
the Society for the Diffusion of Useful Knowledge), ‘is surprising to choke
who are not acquainted with the mode in which the food is prepared for
the cattle. A beast for every three acres of land is a common proportion,
and in very small occupations where much spade husbandry is used, the pro-
portion is still greater. After comparing the accounts given in a variety
of places and situations of the average quantity of milk which a cow gives
when fed in the stall, the result is that it greatly exceeds that of our best
dairy farms, and the quantity of butter made from a given quantity of milk
is also greater. It appears astonishing that the occupier of only ten or
twelve acres of light arable land should be able to maintain four or five
cows, but the fact is notorious in the Waes country.” (pp. 59, 60.)

This subject is treated very intelligently by M. Passy, a distinguished
politician and high economical authority, whose treatise “Des Systémes
de Culture et de leur Influence sur l’Economie Sociale” is one of the most
impartial discussions, as between the two systems, which has yet appeared
in France.

“ Sans nul doute, c’est Y Angleterre qui, & superficie égale, nourrit le plus
d’animaux ; la Hollande et quelques parties de la Lombardie pourraient


PRODUCTION ON A LARGE AND ON A SMALL SCALE. 177


The disadvantage, when disadvantage there is, of small,
or rather of peasant farming, as compared with capitalist
farming, must chiefly consist in inferiority of skill and


seules lui disputer cet avantage; mais est-ce 14 un résultat des formes de
Lexploitation, et des circonstances de climat et de situation locale ne con-
courent-elles pas & le produire? C’est 4 notre avis, ce qui ne saurait étre
contesté. En effet, quoiqu’on en ait dit, partout ot la grande et la petite
culture se rencontrent sur les mémes points, c’est celle-ci qui, bien qu’elle
ne puisse entretenir autant de moutons, posséde, tout compensé, le plus
grand nombre d’animanx producteurs d’engrais. Voici, par exemple, ce qui
ressort des informations fournies par la Belgique.

“es deux provinces ot régne la plus petite culture sont celles
@Anyers et de la Flandre orientale, et elles possdent en moyenne, par
100 hectares de terres cultivées, 74 bétes bovines et 14 moutons. Les
deux provinces ow se trouyent les grandes fermes sont celles de Namur
et du Hainaut, et elles n’ont en moyenne, pour 100 hectares de terres
cultivées, que 30 bétes bovines et 45 moutons. Or, en comptant, suivant
Pusage, 10 moutons comme ’équivalent d’une téte de gros bétail, nous
rencontrons d'un cété, 76 animaux servant a maintenir la fécondité du
sol; de Yautre, moins de 35, différence 4 coup sir dnorme. (D’aprés les
documents statistiques publiés par le Ministre de PIntérieur, 3me publi-
cation officielle.) Il est 2} remarquer, au surplus, que le nombre des
animaux n’est pas dans la partie de la Belgique dont le sol est divisé en
trés-petites fermes beaucoup moindre qu’en Angleterre. En l’évaluant
dans cette derniére contrée 2 raison seulement du territoire en culture, il
y existe, par centaine d’hectares, 65 bétes & corne et prés de 260 moutons,
c.--d. ?équivalent de 91 des premiers, ou seulement 15 de plus que dans
Vautre. Et encore est-il juste d’observer qu’en Belgique presque rien n’est
perdu des engrais donnés par des animaux nourris 4 peu prés toute Vannée a
Pétable, tandis qu’en Angleterre la pature en plein air affaiblit considé-
rablement les quantités quwil devient possible de mettre entiérement 4
profit.

“ Dans le département du Nord aussi, ce sont les arrondissements dont
les fermes ont la moindre contenance qui entretiennent le plus d’animaux.
Tandis que les arrondissements de Lille et de Hazebrouck, outre un plus
grand nombre de chevaux, nourrissent, Pun l’équivalent de 52 tétes de gros
bétail, autre ’équivalent de 46; les arrondissements ot les exploitations
sont les plus grandes, ceux de Dunkerque et d’Avesnes, ne contiennent, le
premier, que ’équivalent de 44 bétes bovines, Vautre, que celui de 40.
(D’aprés la Statistique de la France publiée par le Ministre du Commerce :
dgriculture, t. i.)

“Pareilles recherches étendues sur d’autres points de la France offri-
raient des résultats analogues. S’il est vrai que dans la banlieue des villes, la


VOL. I. N


-s


ee
pao ae
Paid


LOE EO Te:


caine


s


LS


_


SP eee


Lied


See o>
~~


*


NG,


Pee


NRO. ES


178 BOOK I. CHAPTER Ix. § 4.


knowledge: but it is not true, as a general fact, that
such inferiority exists. Countries of small farms and pea-
sant farming, Flanders and Italy, had a good agriculture


petite culture s’abstienne de garder des animaux, au produit desquels elle
supplée facilement par des achats d’engrais, il ne se peut que le genre de
travail qui exige le plus de la terre ne soit pas celui qui en entretienne le
plus activement la fertilité. Assurément il n’est pas donné aux petites
fermes de posséder de nombreux troupeaux de moutons, et c’est un incon-
yénient ; mais, en revanche, elles nourrissent plus de bétes bovines que les
grandes. O’est 1h une nécessité 4 laquelle elles ne sauraient se soustraire
dans aucun des pays ow les besoins de la consommation les ont appelees
4 fleurir; elles périraient si elles ne réussissaient pas ly satisfaire. i

“Voici, au surplus, sur ce point des détails dont Vexactitude nous parle
pleinement attestée par excellence du travail ou nous les avons pulses.
Ces détails, contenus dans la statistique de la commune de Vensat (Puy
de Déme), publi¢e récemment par M. le docteur Jusseraud, maire de la
commune, sont d’autant plus précieux, qu’ils mettent dans tout leur jour
la nature des changements que le développement de la petite quituney
dans le pays dont il s’agit, apportés au nombre et 4 l’espéce des animaux
dont le produit en engrais soutient et accrott la fertilité des terres. Dans
la commune de Vensat, qui comprend 1612 hectares divisés en 4600 par-
celles appartenant& 591 propriétaires, le territoire exploité se compose de
1466 hectares. Or, en 1790, 17 fermes en occupaient les deux tiers; et z
autres tout le reste. Depuis lors, les cultures se sont morcelées, ef main-
tenant leur petitesse est extréme. Quelle a été J’influence du change-
ment sur la quantité des animaux? Une augmentation considérable. En
1790, la commune ne possédait qu’environ 300 hétes% cornes, et de 1800 &
2000 bétes 4 laine; aujourd’hui elle compte 676 des premieres, et 533 seule-
ment des secondes. Ainsi pour remplacer 1300 moutons elle a acquis 376
beenfs et vaches, et tout compensé, la somme des engrais s’est accrue dans
la proportion de 490 & 729, ou de plus de 48 pour cent. Et encore est-il &
remarquer que, plus forts et mieux nourris 4 présent, les animaux contri-
buent bien davantage 4 entretenir la fertilité des terres.

* Voila ce que les faits nous apprennent sur ce point : il n’est donc pas
vrai que la petite culture ne nourrisse pas autant d@animaux que les
autres ; loin de la, & conditions locales pareilles, c’est elle qui en posséde le
plus, et il ne devait pas étre difficile de le présumer; car, du moment ou
cest elle qui demande le plus aux terres, il faut bien qu’elle leur donne
des soins d’autant plus réparateurs qu’elle en exige davantage. Que Von
prenne un 4 un les autres reproches; qu’on les examine 2 la clarté de
se be aRDNECIES on piaphercsyas bientét qu’ils ne sauraient étre mieux
fondés, et qwils n’ont été formulds que parce qu’on a comparé pétat des
cultures dans des contrées ow les causes de la prospérité agricole nagissaient
pas avec la méme énergie.” (pp. 116-120.)


PRODUCTION ON A LARGE AND ON A SMALL SCALE, 179


many generations before England, and theirs is still, as
a whole, probably the best agriculture in the world. The
empirical skill which is the effect of daily and close obser-
vation, peasant farmers often possess in an eminent degree.
The traditional knowledge, for example, of the culture of
the vine, possessed by the peasantry of the countries where
the best wines are produced, is extraordinary. There is no
doubt an absence of science, or at least of theory; and to
some extent a deficiency of the spirit of improvement, so far
as relates to the introduction of new processes. There is also
a want of means to make experiments, which can seldom be
made with advantage except by rich proprietors or capitalists.
As for those systematic improvements which operate on a
large tract of country at once (such as great works of draining
or irrigation) or which for any other reason do really require
large numbers of workmen combining their labour, these are
not in general to be expected from small farmers, or even
small proprietors, though combination among them for such
purposes is by no means unexampled, and will become more
common as their intelligence is more developed.

Against these disadvantages is to be placed, where the
tenure of land is of the requisite kind, an ardour of industry
absolutely unexampled in any other condition of agriculture.
This is a subject on which the testimony of competent wit-
nesses is unanimous. The working of the petite culture
cannot be fairly judged where the small cultivator is merely
a tenant, and not even a tenant on fixed conditions, but (as
in Ireland) at a nominal rent greater than can be paid, and
therefore practically at a varying rent always amounting to
the utmost that can be paid. To understand the subject, it
must be studied where the cultivator is the proprietor, or at
least a métayer with a permanent tenure; where the labour
he exerts to increase the produce and value of the land
avails wholly, or at least partly, to his own benefit and that
of his descendants. In another division of our subject, we


shall discuss at some length the important subject of tenures
N 2


180 BOOK I. CHAPTER Ix. § 4.


of land, and I defer till then any citation of evidence on the
marvellous industry of peasant proprietors. It may suffice
here to appeal to the immense amount» of gross produce,
which, even without a permanent tenure, English labourers
generally obtain from their little allotments ; a produce be-
yond comparison greater than a large farmer extracts, or
would find it his interest to extract, from the same plece
of land.

And this I take to be the true reason why large cultiva-
tion is generally most advantageous as a mere investment for
profit. Land occupied by a large farmer is not farmed 50
highly. There is not nearly so much labour expended on it.
This is not on account of any economy arising from combi-
nation of labour, but because, by employing less, a greater
return is obtained in proportion to the outlay. It does not
answer to any one to pay others for exerting all the labour
which the peasant, or even the allotment holder, gladly un-
dergoes when the fruits are to be wholly reaped by himself.
This labour however is not unproductive; it all adds to the
gross produce. With anything like equality of skill and
knowledge, the large farmer does not obtain nearly so much
from the soil as the small proprietor, or the small farmer
with adequate motives to exertion: but though his returns
are less, the labour is less in a still greater degree, and as
whatever labour he employs must be paid for, it does not sult
his purpose to employ more.

But although the gross produce of the land is greatest,
ceteris paribus, under small cultivation, and although, there-
fore, a country is able on that system to support a larger
aggregate population, it is generally assumed by English
writers that what is termed the net produce, that is, the sul


plus after feeding the cultivators,


must be smaller; that
therefore,


the population disposable for all other purposes;
for manufactures, for commerce and navigation, for national
defence, for the promotion of knowledge, for the liberal pro-


fessions, for the various functions of government, for the arts


PRODUCTION ON A LARGE AND ON A SMALL SCALE. 181


and literature, all of which are entirely dependent on this sur-
plus for their existence as occupations, must be less nume-
rous; and that the nation, therefore, (waiving all question as
to the condition of the actual cultivators) must be inferior in
the principal elements of national power, and in many of
those of general well-being. This, however, has been taken
for granted much too readily, Undoubtedly the non-agri-
cultural population will bear a less ratio to the agricultural,
under small than under large cultivation. But that it will be
less numerous absolutely, is by no means a consequence. If
the total population, agricultural and non-agricultural, is
greater, the non-agricultural portion may be more numerous
in itself, and may yet be a smaller proportion of the whole.
If the gross produce is larger, the net produce may be larger,
and yet bear a smaller ratio to the gross produce. Yet even
Mr. Wakefield sometimes appears to confound these distinct
ideas. In France it is computed that two-thirds of the whole
population are agricultural. In England, at most, one-third.
Hence Mr. Wakefield infers, that “as in France only three
people are supported by the labour of two cultivators,
while in England the labour of two cultivators supports
six people, English agriculture is twice as productive as
French agriculture,” owing to the superior efficiency of
large farming, through combination of labour. But in the
first place, the facts themselves are overstated. The labour
of two persons in England does not quite support six people,
for there is not a little food imported from foreign countries
and from Ireland. In France, too, the labour of two culti-
vators does much more than supply the food of three per-
sons. It provides the three persons, and occasionally
foreigners, with flax, hemp, and to a certain extent with silk,
oils, tobacco, and latterly sugar, which in England are wholly
obtained from abroad; nearly all the timber used in France
is of home growth, nearly all which is used in England is
imported; the principal fuel of France is procured and
brought to market by persons reckoned among agriculturists,


aes


Se a ene See eee es


+


ae


182 BOOK I. CHAPTER Ix. § 4.


in England by persons not so reckoned. I do not take into
calculation hides and wool, these products being common to
both countries, nor wine or brandy produced for home con-
sumption, since England has a corresponding production of
beer and spirits; but England has no material export of either
article, and a great importation of the last, while France sup-
plies wines and spirits to the whole world. I say nothing of
fruits, eggs, and such minor exportable articles of agricultural
produce. But, not to lay undue stress on these abatements,
we will take the statement as it stands. Suppose that two
persons, in England, do bond fide produce the food of six;
while in France, for the same purpose, the labour of four is
requisite. Does it follow that England must have a larger
surplus for the support of a non-agricultural population?
No; but merely that she can devote two-thirds of her whole
produce to the purpose, instead of one-third. Suppose the
produce to be twice as great, and the one-third will amount
to as much as the two-thirds. The fact might be, that owing
to the greater quantity of labour employed on the French
system, the same land would produce food for twelve persons
which on the English system would only produce it for six:
and if this were so, which would be quite consistent with the
conditions of the hypothesis, then although the food for
twelve was produced by the labour of eight, while the six
were fed by the labour of only two, there would be the same
number of hands disposable for other employment in the one
country as in the other. I am not contending that the fact
is so. I know that the gross produce per acre in France
averages much less than in England, and that, in proportion
to the extent and fertility of the two countries, England has
in the sense we are now speaking of, much the largest dispo-
sable population. But the disproportion certainly is not
nearly so great, as Mr. Wakefield’s simple criterion would
represent it. As well might it be said that agricultural labour
in the United States, where, by the last sna four families


in every five appeared to be engaged in agriculture, must be
still more inefficient than in France,


PRODUCTION ON A LARGE AND ON A SMALL SCALE. 183


The inferiority of French cultivation (which, taking the
country as a whole, must be allowed to be real, though much
exaggerated,) is probably more owing to the lower general -
average of industrial skill and energy in that country, than
to any special cause: and even if partly the effect of minute
subdivision, it does not prove that small farming is disad-
vantageous, but only (what is undoubtedly the fact,) that
farms in France are very frequently foo small, and, what is
worse, broken up into an almost incredible number of patches
or parcelles, most inconyeniently dispersed and parted from
one another.

As a question, not of gross, but of net produce, the
comparative merits of the grande and the petite culture,
especially when the small farmer is also the proprietor,
cannot be looked upon as decided. It is a question on
which good judges at present differ. The current of English
opinion is in favour of large farms: on the Continent the
weight of authority seems to be on the other side. Professor
Rau, of Heidelberg, the author of one of the most compre-
hensive and elaborate of extant treatises on political economy,
and who has that large acquaintance with facts and authori-
ties on his own subject, which generally characterizes his
countrymen, lays it down as a settled truth, that small or
moderate-sized farms yield not only a larger gross, but a
larger net produce: though, he adds, it is desirable there
should be some great proprietors, to lead the way in new
improyements*. The most apparently impartial and discri-
minating judgment that I have met with is that of M. Passy,
who (always speaking with reference to ned produce,) gives his
verdict in favour of large farms for grain and forage; but,
for the kinds of culture which require much labour and
attention, places the advantage wholly on the side of small
cultivation; including in this description, not only the vine
Se Se

* See pp. 352 and 335 of a French translation published at Brussels in
1839, by M. Fred. de Kemmeter, of Ghent.


184 BOOK I. CHAPTER Ix. § 4.


and the olive, where a considerable amount of care and
labour must be bestowed on each individual plant, but also
roots, leguminous plants, and those which furnish the mate-
rials of manufactures. The small size, and consequent mul-
tiplication, of farms, according to all authorities, are extremely
favourable to the abundance of many minor products of
agriculture™.

It is evident that every labourer who extracts from the
land more than his own food, and that of any family he may
have, increases the means of supporting a non-agricultural
population. Even if his surplus is no more than enough to
buy clothes for him, the labourers who make the clothes are
a non-agricultural population, enabled to exist by food which
he produces. Every agricultural family, therefore, which
produces its own necessaries, adds to the net produce of
agriculture ; and so does every person born on the land, who
by employing himself on it, adds more to its gross produce
than the mere food which he eats. It is questionable whether,
even in the most subdivided districts of Europe which are cul-
tivated by the proprietors, the multiplication of hands on the
soil has approached, or tends to approach, within a great dis-
tance of this limit. In France, although the sub-division 1s con-
fessedly too great, there is proof positive that it is far from
having reached the point at which it would begin to diminish
the power of supporting a non-agricultural population. This
is demonstrated by the great increase of the towns: which
have of late increased in a much greater ratio than the popu
lation generally, showing (unless the condition of the tow?
labourers is becoming rapidly deteriorated, which there is 0
Teason to believe,) that even by the unfair and inapplicable

test of proportions, the productiveness of agriculture must be


*“ Dans le département du Nord,” says M. Passy, “une ferme de 20
hectares recueille en yeaux, laitage, cufs, et yolailles, parfois pour U2
millier de francs dans l’année; et, les frais défalqués, c’est Véquivalent


dune addition au produit net de 15 } 20 f; Si
ranes par hectare.” Des SYS
témes de Culture, p. 114, Beeeeciare


PRODUCTION ON A LARGE AND ON A SMALL SCALE. 185


on the increase. This, too, concurrently with the amplest
evidence that in the more improved districts of France, and
in some which until lately were among the unimproved, there
is a considerably increased consumption of country produce
by the country population itself.

In the present chapter we do not enter on the question of
great and small cultivation in any other respect than as a
question of production, and of the efficiency of labour. We
shall return to it hereafter as affecting the distribution of the
produce, and the physical and social well being of the culti-
vators themselves; in which aspects it deserves, and requires,
a still more particular examination.


a


al


cee secmarats ote a ne ee


CHAPTER X.


OF THE LAW OF THE INCREASE OF LABOUR.


§ 1. We have now successively considered each of the
agents or conditions of production, and of the means by
which the efficacy of these various agents is promoted. In
order to come to an end of the questions which relate exclu-
sively to production, one more, of primary importance,
remains.

Production is not a fixed but an increasing thing. When
not kept back by bad institutions, or a low state of the arts
of life, the produce of industry has usually tended to increase;
stimulated not only by the desire of the producers to augment
their means of consumption, but by the increasing number of
the consumers. Nothing in political economy can be of more
importance than to ascertain the law of this increase of pro-
duction ; the conditions to which it is subject ; whether it has
practically any limits, and what these are. There is also no
subject in political economy which is popularly less under-
stood, or on which the errors committed are of a character to
produce, and do produce, greater mischief.

We have seen that the essential requisites of production
are three—labour, capital, and natural agents; the term
capital including all external and physical requisites which
are products of labour, the term natural agents all those
which are not. But among natural agents we need not take
into account those which, existing in unlimited quantity,
being incapable of appropriation, and never altering in their


qualities, are always ready to lend an equal degree of assist-


ance to production, whatever may be its extent; as air and the
)


light of the sun. Being now about to consider the impedi-
ments to production, not the facilities for it, we need advert


LAW OF THE INCREASE OF LABOUR. 187


to no other natural agents than those which are liable to be
deficient either in quantity or in productive power. These may
be all represented by the term land. Land in the narrowest
acceptation, as the source of agricultural produce, is the chief
of them; and if we extend the term to mines and fisheries—
to what is found in the earth itself, or in the waters which
partly cover it, as well as to what is grown or fed on its
surface, it embraces everything with which we need at present
concern ourselves.

We may say, then, without a greater stretch of language
than under the necessary explanations is permissible, that
the requisites of production are Labour, Capital, and Land.
The increase of production, therefore, depends on the pro-
perties of these elements. It is a result of the merease
either of the elements themselves, or of their productiveness.
The law of increase of production must be a consequence of
the laws of these elements; the limits to the increase of pro-
duction must be the limits, whatever they are, set by those
laws. We proceed to consider the three elements succes-
sively, with reference to this effect; or in other words the
law of the increase of production, viewed in respect of its
dependence, first on Labour, secondly on Capital, and lastly
on Land.


§ 2. The increase of labour is the increase of mankind;
of population. On this subject the discussions excited by
Mr. Malthus’ Essay, have made the truth, although by no
means universally admitted, yet so fully known, that a briefer
examination of the question than would otherwise have been
necessary will probably on the present occasion suffice.

The power of multiplication inherent in all organic life
may be regarded as infinite. There is no one species of
vegetable or animal, which, if the earth were entirely aban-
doned to it, and to the things on which it feeds, would not
in a small number of years overspread every region of the
globe, of which the climate was compatible with its existence.


188 BOOK I. CHAPTER x. § 2,


The degree of possible rapidity is different in different orders
of beimgs; but in all it is sufficient, for the earth to be very
speedily filled up. There are species of vegetables of which
a single plant will produce in one year the germs of a thou-
sand; if only two come to maturity, in fourteen years the
two will have multiplied to sixteen thousand and more.
Many animals have the power of quadrupling their numbers
in a single year; if they only do as much in half a century,
ten thousand will have swelled within two centuries to
upwards of two millions and a half. The capacity of increase
is necessarily in a geometrical progression: the numerical
ratio alone is different.
To this property of organized beings, the human species
forms no exception. Its power of increase is indefinite, and
the actual multiplication would be extraordinarily rapid, if
that power were exercised to the utmost. It never is exer-
Ei 4 cised to the utmost, and yet, in the most favourable circum-
penis stances known to exist, which are those of a fertile region
colonized from an industrious and civilized community,
population has continued, for several generations, inde-
pendently of fresh immigration, to double itself in not much
more than twenty years. That there is a capacity of multi-
plication in the human species beyond even this, is evident
Li if we consider how great is the ordinary number of children
"5 to a family where the climate is good and early marriages
he si usual; and how small a proportion of them die before the
Hinge 29h) age of maturity, in the present state of hygienic knowledge,
a wa where the locality is healthy, and the family adequately pro-
ad ee fe: vided with the means of living. It is a very low estimate of
au the capacity of increase, if we only assume, that in a good
4 f sanitary condition of the people, each generation may be
Ah double the number of the generation which preceded it.
Pah amed Twenty or thirty years ago, these propositions might still
; have required considerable enforcement and illustration; but
y the evidence of them is so ample and incontestable, that they
; have made their way against all kinds of opposition, and may


LAW OF THE INCREASE OF LABOUR. 189


now be regarded as axiomatic; although the extreme reluc-
tance felt to admitting them, every now and then gives birth
to some ephemeral theory, speedily forgotten, of a different
law of increase in different circumstances, through a provi-
dential adaptation of the fecundity of the human species to
the exigencies of society. The obstacle to a just understand-
ing of the subject does not arise from these theories, but
from too confused a notion of the causes which, at most
times and places, keep the actual increase of mankind so far
behind the capacity.


§ 3. Those causes, nevertheless, are in no way myste-
rious. What prevents the population of hares and rabbits
from oyerstocking the earth? Not want of fecundity, but
causes very different: many enemies, and insufficient sub-
sistence ; not enough to eat, and liability to being eaten. In
the human race, which is not generally subject to the latter
inconvenience, the equivalents for it are war and disease.
If the multiplication of mankind proceeded, like that of the
other animals, from a blind instinct, it would be limited in
the same manner with theirs; the births would be as nume-
rous as the physical constitution of the species admitted of,
and the population would be kept down by deaths. But the
conduet of human creatures is everywhere more or less in-
fluenced by foresight of consequences, and by some impulses
superior to mere animal instincts ; and they do not, there-
fore, propagate like swine, but are capable, though in very
unequal degrees, of being withheld by prudence, or by the
social affections, from giving existence to beings born only
to misery and premature death. In proportion as mankind
rise above the condition, of the beasts, population is re-
strained by the fear of want, rather than by want itself.
Even where there is no question of starvation, most persons
are similarly acted upon by the apprehension of losing what
have come to be regarded as the decencies of their situation
in life. Hitherto no other motives than these two have been


[Fears ae ost


d
3


—_


ememeentednthormneuih


Rp


190 BOOK I. CHAPTER x. $3.


found strong enough, in the generality of mankind, to coun-
teract the tendency to increase. It has been the practice of
a great majority of the middle and the poorer classes, when-
ever free from external control, to marry as early, and in
most countries to have as many children, as was consistent
with maintaining themselves in the condition of life which
they were born to, or were accustomed to consider as theirs.
Among the middle classes, in many individual instances,
there is an additional restraint exercised from the desire of
doing more than maintaining their circumstances—of im-
proving them; but such a desire is rarely found, or rarely
has that effect, in the labouring classes. If they can bring
up a family as they were themselves brought up, even the
prudent among them are usually satisfied. Too often they
do not think even of that, but rely on fortune, or on the
resources to be found in legal or voluntary charity.

In a very backward state of society, like that of Europe
in the middle ages, and many parts of Asia at present, popu-
lation is kept down by actual starvation. The starvation
does not take place in ordinary years, but in seasons of
scarcity, which in those states of society are much more
frequent and more extreme than Kurope is now accustomed
to. In these seasons actual want, or the maladies consequent
on it, carry off numbers of the population, which in a suc
cession of favourable years again expands, to be again cruelly
decimated. In a more improved state, few, even among the
poorest of the people, are limited to absolute necessaries, and
to a bare sufficiency of those: and the increase is kept with-
in bounds, not by excess of deaths, but by limitation of
births. The limitation is brought about in various ways-
In some countries, it is the result of prudent or conscientious
self-restraint. There is a condition to which the labouring
people are habituated; they perceive that by having 00
numerous families, they must sink below that condition, oF
fail to transmit it to their children; and this they do not
choose to submit to. The countries jn which, so far as is


LAW OF THE INCREASE OF LABOUR. 191


known, agreat degree of voluntary prudence has been longest
practised on this subject, are Norway and parts of Switzerland.
Concerning both, there happens to be unusually authentic
information; many facts were carefully brought together by
-Mr. Malthus, and much additional evidence has been ob-
tained since his time. In both these countries the increase
of population is very slow; and, what checks it, is not mul-
titude of deaths but fewness of births. Both the births and
the deaths are remarkably few in proportion to the popula-
tion; the average duration of life is the longest in Europe;
the population contains fewer children, and a greater pro-
portional number of persons in the vigour of life, than is
known to be the case in any other part of the world. The
paucity of births tends directly to prolong life, by keeping
the people in comfortable circumstances; and the same pru-
dence is doubtless exercised in avoiding causes of disease, as
in keeping clear of the principal cause of poverty. It is
worthy of remark that the two countries thus honourably
distinguished, are countries of small landed proprietors.
There are other cases in which the prudence and fore-
thought, which perhaps might not be exercised by the people
themselves, are exercised by the state for their benefit; mar-
riage not being permitted until the contracting parties can
show that they have the prospect of a comfortable support.
Under these laws, of which I shall speak more fully here-
after, the condition of the people is reported to be good, and
the illegitimate births not so numerous as might be expected.
There are places, again, nm which the restraiming cause seems
to be not so much individual prudence, as some general and
perhaps even accidental habit of the country. In the rural
districts of England, during the last century, the growth of
population was very effectually repressed by the difficulty of
obtaining a cottage to live in. It was the custom for unmar-
ried labourers to lodge and board with their employers; it
was the custom for married labourers to have a cottage: and
the rule of the English poor laws by which a parish was


on


ee ee


192 BOOK I. CHAPTER xX. $3.


charged with the support of its unemployed poor, rendered
landowners ayerse to promote marriage. About the end of
the century, the, great demand for men in war and manu-
factures, made it be thought a patriotic thing to encourage
population; and about the same time the growing inclination
of farmers to live like rich people, favoured as it was by a
long period of high prices, made them desirous of keeping
inferiors at a greater distance, and, pecuniary motives arising
from abuses of the poor laws being superadded, they gra-
dually drove their labourers into cottages, which the land-
lords now no longer refused permission to build. In some
countries an old standing custom thata girl should not marry
until she had spun and woven for herself an ample trous-
seau, is said to have acted as a substantial check to popu-
lation. In England at present, the influence of prudence in
keeping down multiplication is seen by the diminished num-
ber of marriages in the manufacturing districts in years when
trade is bad.

But whatever be the causes by which population is any-
where limited to a comparatively slow rate of increase, there
is always an immense residuary power behind, ready to start
into activity as soon as the pressure which restrained it is taken
off. Itis but rarely that improvements in the condition of
the labouring classes do anything more than give a temporary
margin, speedily filled up by an increase of their numbers.
The use they commonly choose to make of any advantageous
change in their circumstances, is to take it out in the form
which, by augmenting the population, deprives the succeeding
generation of the benefit. Unless their idea and their habitual
standard of comfortable living can be raised, nothing perma-
nent can be done for them; the most promising schemes end
only in having amore numerous, but not a happier people.
By their habitual standard, I mean that down to which they


will multiply, but not lower. Every advance they make in

education, civilization, and social improvement, tends to raise

this standard; and there is no doubt that it is oradually,
» 5td G


LAW OF THE INCREASE OF LABOUR. 193


though slowly, rising in the more advanced countries of
Western Europe. Subsistence and employment in England
have never increased more rapidly than in the last sixteen
years, but the census of 1841 shewed a smaller proportional
increase of population than that of 1831: and the produce
of French agriculture and industry is increasing in a progres-
sive ratio, while the population exhibits, im every quinquen-
nial census, a smaller proportion of births to the population.

The subject however of population, in its connexion with
the condition of the labouring classes, will be considered in
another place: in the present, we have to do with it solely
as one of the elements of Production: and in that character
we could not dispense with pointing out the unlimited extent
of its natural powers of increase, and the causes owing to
which so small a portion of that unlimited power is for the
most part actually exercised. After this brief indication, we
shall proceed to the other elements.


CHAPTER XI.


OF THE LAW OF THE INCREASE OF CAPITAL.


§ 1. Tux requisites of production being labour, capital,
and land, it has been seen from the preceding chapter that
the impediments to the increase of production do not arise
from the first of these elements. On the side of labour
there is no obstacle to an increase of production, indefinite
in extent and of unslackening rapidity. Population has the
power of increasing in an uniform and rapid geometrical ratio.
If the only essential condition of production were labour, the
produce might, and naturally would, increase in the same
ratio; and there would be no limit, until the numbers of
mankind were brought to a stand:from actual want of space.

But production has other requisites, and of these, the one
which we shall next consider is Capital. There cannot be
more people m any country, or in the world, than can be
supported from the produce of past labour until that of pre-
sent labour comes in. There will be no greater number of
productive labourers in any country, or in the world, than
can be supported from that portion of the produce of past
labour, which is spared from the enjoyments of its possessor
for purposes of reproduction, and is termed Capital. We

~have next, therefore, to inquire into the conditions of the
increase of capital; the causes by which the rapidity of
its Increase is determined, and the necessary limitations of
that merease.

Since all capital is the product of saving, that is, of absti-
nence from present consumption for the sake of a future good,
the increase of capital must depend upon two things; the
amount of the fund from which saving can be made, and the
strength of the dispositions which prompt to it.


LAW OF THE INCREASE OF CAPITAL. 195


The fund from which saving ean be made, is the surplus
of the produce of labour, after supplying the necessaries
of life to all concerned in the production (including those
employed in replacing the materials, and keeping the fixed
capital in repair). More than this surplus cannot be saved
under any circumstances. As much as this, though it never
is saved, always might be. This surplus is the fund from
which the enjoyments, as distinguished from the necessaries
of the producers, are provided ; it is the fund from which all
are subsisted, who are not themselves engaged in production;
and from which all additions are made to capital. It is the
real net produce of the country. The phrase, net produce,
is often taken in a more limited sense, to denote only the
profits of the capitalist and the rent of the landlord, under
the idea that nothing can be included in the net produce of
capital, but what is returned to the owner of the capital after
replacing his expenses. But this is too narrow an accepta-
tion of the term. The capital of the employer forms the
revenue of the labourers, and if this exceeds the necessaries
of life, it gives them a surplus, which they may either expend
in enjoyments or save. For every purpose for which there
can be occasion to speak of the net produce of industry, this
surplus ought to be included in it. When this is included,
and not otherwise, the net produce of the country is the
measure of its effective power; of what it can spare for any
purpose of public utility, or private indulgence; the portion
of its produce of which it can dispose at pleasure; which
can be drawn upon to attain any ends, or gratify any wishes,
either of the government or of individuals; which it can
either spend for its satisfaction, or save for future advantage.

The amount of this fund, this net produce, this excess of
production above the physical necessaries of the producers, is
one of the elements that determine the amount of saying. The
greater the produce of labour after supporting the labourers,
the more there is which can be saved. The same thing


also partly contributes to determine, how much wi// be saved.
o 2


196 BOOK I. CHAPTER XI. § 2.


A part of the motive to saving consists in the prospect of
deriving an income from savings; in the fact that capital,
employed in production, is capable of not only reproducing
itself but yielding an increase. The greater the profit that
can be made from capital, the stronger is the motive to its
accumulation. That indeed which forms the inducement to
save, is not the whole of the fund which supplies the means
of saving, not the whole net produce of the land, capital, and
labour of the country, but only a part of it, the part which
forms the remuneration of the capitalist, and is called profit
of stock. It will however be readily enough understood, even
previously to the explanations which will be given hereatter,
that when the general productiveness of labour and capital is
great, the returns to the capitalist are likely to be large, and
that some proportion, though not an uniform one, will com-
monly obtain between the two.


§ 2. But the disposition to save does not wholly depend
on the external inducement to it; on the amount of profit
to be made from savings. With the same pecuniary induce-
ment, the inclination is very different, in different persons
and in different communities. The effective desire of accu-
mulation is of unequal strength, not only according to the
varieties of individual character, but to the general state of
society and civilization. Like all other moral attributes, 1
is One in which the human race exhibits great differences,
conformably to the diversity of its circumstances and the
stage of its progress.

On topics which if they were to be fully investigated
would exceed the bounds that can be allotted to them in this
treatise, it is satisfactory to be able to refer to other works
in which the necessary developements haye been presented
more at length. On the subject of Population this valuable
service has been rendered by the celebrated Essay of Mr.
Malthus: and on the point which now occupies us I can
refer with equal confidence to another, though a less known


LAW OF THE INCREASE OF CAPITAL. 197


work, “ New Principles of Political Economy,” by Mr. Rae*.
In no other book known to me is so much light thrown,
both from principle and history, on the causes which deter-
mine the accumulation of capital.

All accumulation involves the sacrifice of a present, for
the sake of a future good. But the expediency of such a
sacrifice varies very much in different states of circumstances;
and men’s willingness to make it, varies still more.

In weighing the future against the present, the uncer-
tainty of all things future is a leading element; and that
uncertainty is of very different degrees. “All circum-
stances,” therefore, “increasing the probability of the pro-
vision we make for futurity being enjoyed by ourselves or
others, tend” justly and reasonably ‘to give strength to the
effective desire of accumulation. ‘Thus a healthy climate or
occupation, by increasing the probability of life, has a ten-
dency to add to this desire. When engaged in safe occupa-
tions, and living in healthy countries, men are much more
apt to be frugal, than in unhealthy or hazardous occupations,


* This treatise is an example, such as not unfrequently presents itself,
how much more depends on accident, than on the qualities of a book, in
determining its reception. Had it appeared at a suitable time, and been
favoured by circumstances, it would have had every requisite for great
success. The author, a Scotchman settled in the United States, unites
much knowledge, an original vein of thought, a considerable turn for
philosophic generalities, and a manner of exposition and illustration calcu-
lated to make ideas tell not only for what they are worth, but for more
than they are worth, and which, sometimes, I think, has that effect in the
writer’s own mind. The principal fault of the book is the position of
antagonism in which, with the controversial spirit apt to be found in those
who have new thoughts on old subjects, he has placed himself towards
Adam Smith. I call this a fault, (though I think many of the criticisms
just, and some of them far-seeing), because there is much less of real difter-
ence in opinion than might be supposed from Mr. Rae’s animadversions ;
and because what he has found vulnerable in his great predecessor is chiefly
the “human foo much” in his premises; the portion of them that is over
and above what was either required or is actually used in the establishment
of his conclusions.


198 BOOK I. CHAPTER xI. § 2.


and in climates pernicious to human life. Sailors and sol-
diers are prodigals. In the West Indies, New Orleans, the
East Indies, the expenditure of the inhabitants 1s profuse.
The same people, coming to reside in the healthy parts of
Europe, and not getting into the vortex of extravagant
fashion, live economically. War and pestilence have always
‘waste and luxury among the other evils that follow in thei
train. For similar reasons, whatever gives security to the
affairs of the community, is favourable to the strength of this
principle. In this respect the general prevalence of law and
order, and the prospect of the continuance of peace and
tranquillity, have considerable influence*.” The more pet
fect the security, the greater will be the effective strength of
the desire of accumulation. Where property is less safe, or
the vicissitudes ruinous to fortunes are more frequent and
severe, fewer persons will save at all, and of those who do,
many will require the inducement of a higher rate of profit
on capital, to make them prefer a doubtful future to the
temptations of present enjoyment. ‘
These are considerations which affect the expediency,
the eye of reason, of consulting future interests at the
expense of present. But men’s inclination to make this
sacrifice does not solely depend upon its expediency. The
disposition to save, is often far short of what reason would
dictate: and at other times, is liable to be in excess of it.
Deficient strength of the desire of accumulation may
arise from improyidence, or from want of interest in others.
Improvidence may be connected with intellectual as well as
moral causes. Individuals and communities of a very low
state of intelligence are always improvident. A certain
measure of intellectual developement seems necessary t?
enable absent things, and especially things future, to act
with any force on the imagination and will. The effect of
want of interest in others in diminishing accumulation, will


* Rae, p, 123.


LAW OF THE INCREASE OF CAPITAL. 199


be admitted, if we consider how much saving at present
takes place, which has for its object the interest of others
rather than of ourselves; the education of children, their
advancement in life, the future interests of other per-
sonal connexions, the desire of promoting by the bestowal
of money or time, objects of public or private usefulness.
If mankind were generally in the state of mind to which
some approach was seen in the declining period of the
Roman empire—caring nothing for their heirs, as well as
nothing for friends, the public, or any object which survived
them—they would seldom deny themselves any indulgence
for the sake of saving, beyond what was necessary for their
own future years; which they would place in life annuities,
or in some other form which would make its existence and
their lives terminate together.


§ 3. From various degrees of these deficiencies, intellec-
tual and moral, there is in different portions of the human
race a greater diversity than is usually adverted to, in the
strength of the effective desire of accumulation. Atbackward
state of general civilization is often more the effect of defi-
ciency in this particular than in many others which attract
more attention. In the circumstances, for example, of a
hunting tribe, “man may be said to be necessarily impro-
vident, and regardless of futurity, because, in this state
the future presents nothing which can be with certainty
either foreseen or governed... - « Besides a want of the
motives exciting to provide for the needs of futurity through
means of the abilities of the present, there is a want of the
habits of perception and action, leading to a constant con-
nexion in the mind of those distant points, and of the series
of events serving to unite them. Even therefore if motives
be awakened capable of producing the exertion necessary to
effect this connexion, there remains the task of training the


mind to think and act so as to establish Ite
For instance: “Upon the banks of the St. Lawrence


200 BOOK I. CHAPTER xt. § 3.


there are several little Indian villages. They are surrounded,
in general, by a good deal of land from which the wood
seems to have been long extirpated, and have, besides,
attached to them, extensive tracts of forest. The cleared
land is rarely, I may almost say never, cultivated, nor are any
inroads made in the forest for such a purpose. The soil is,
nevertheless, fertile, and were it not, manure lies in heaps
by their houses. Were every family to inclose half an acre of
ground, till it, and plant in it potatoes and maize, it would
yield a sufficiency to support them one-half the year. They
suffer, too, every now and then, extreme want, insomuch
that, joined to occasional intemperance, it is rapidly reducing
their numbers. This, to us, so strange apathy proceeds not,
in any great degree, from repugnance to labour; on the con-
trary, they apply very diligently to it when its reward is
immediate. Thus, besides their peculiar occupations of
hunting and fishing, in which they are ever ready to engage,
they are much employed in the navigation of the St. Law-
rence, and may be seen labouring at the oar, or setting with
the pole, in the large boats used for the purpose, and always
furnish the greater part of the additional hands necessary to
conduct rafts through some of the rapids. Nor is the obsta-
cle aversion to agricultural labour. This is no doubt a pre-
judice of theirs; but mere prejudices always yield, principles
of action cannot be created. When the returns from agricul-
tural labour are speedy and great, they are also agriculturists.
Thus, some of the little islands on Lake St. Francis, near
the Indian village of St. Regis, are favourable to the growth
of maize, a plant yielding a return of a hundredfold, and
forming, even when half ripe, a pleasant and substantial
repast. Patches of the best land on these islands are, there-
fore, every year, cultivated by them, for this purpose. As
their situation renders them inaccessible to cattle, no fence 1s
required; were this additional Outlay necess
they would be neglected, like the commons
village. These had apparently, at one time,


ary, I suspect
adjoining their
been under crop:


LAW OF THE INCREASE OF CAPITAL. 201


2


The cattle of the neighbouring settlers would now, however,
destroy any crop not securely fenced, and this additional
necessary outlay consequently bars their culture. It removes
them to an order of instruments of slower return than that
which corresponds to the strength of the effective desire of
accumulation in this little society.


“Tt is here deserving of notice, that what instruments of
this kind they do form, are completely formed. The small
spots of corn they cultivate are thoroughly weeded and hoed.
A little neglect in this part would indeed reduce the crop
very much; of this experience has made them perfectly
aware, and they act accordingly. It is evidently not the
necessary labour that is the obstacle to more extended cul-
ture, but the distant return from that labour. I am assured,
indeed, that among some of the more remote tribes, the
labour thus expended much exceeds that given by the whites.
The same portions of ground being cropped without remis-
sion, and manure not being used, they would scarcely yield
any return, were not the soil most carefully broken and pul-
verized both with the hoe and the hand. In such a situation
a white man would clear a fresh piece of ground. It would
perhaps scarce repay his labour the first year, and he would
have to look for his reward in succeeding years. On the
Indian, succeeding years are too distant to make sufficient
impression, though, to obtain what labour may bring about
in the course of a few months, he toils even more assiduously
than the white man*.”

This view of things is confirmed by the experience of the
Jesuits, in their interesting efforts to civilize the Indians of
Paraguay. They gained the confidence of these savages in a
most extraordinary degree. They acquired influence over
them sufficient to make them change their whole manner of
life. They obtained their absolute submission and obedience.
They established peace. They taught them all the operations


“ Rae, p. 136,


202 BOOK I. CHAPTER xI. § 3.


of European agriculture, and many of the more difficult arts.
There were everywhere to be seen, according to Charlevoix,
“workshops of gilders, painters, sculptors, goldsmiths, watch-
makers, carpenters, joiners, dyers,’ &c. These occupations
were not practised for the personal gain of the artificers: the
produce was at the absolute disposal of the missionaries,
who ruled the people by a voluntary despotism. The obstacles
arising from aversion to labour were therefore very completely
overcome. The real difficulty was the improvidence of the
people; their imability to thmk for the future; and the neces-
sity accordingly of the most unremitting and minute super-
intendance on the part of their instructors. “ Thus at first,
if these gave up to them the care of the oxen with which
they ploughed, their indolent thoughtlessness would probably
leave them at evening still yoked to the implement. Worse
than this, instances occurred where they cut them up for sup-
per, thinking, when reprehended, that they sufficiently excused
themselves by saying, they were hungry. . . These fathers,
says Ulloa, have to visit the houses, to examine what is really
wanted: for, without this care, the Indians would never look
after anything. They must be present too, when animals
are slaughtered, not only that the meat may be equally
divided, but that nothing may be lost.” “But notwithstand-
ing all this care and superintendance,” says Charlevoix, “and
all the precautions which are taken to prevent any want of
the necessaries of life, the missionaries are sometimes much
embarrassed. It often happens that they,” (the Indians.)
“do not reserve to themselves a sufficiency of grain, even
for seed. As for their other provisions, were they not well
looked after, they would soon be without wherewithal to
support life *.”
As an example intermediate, in the strength of the effec-
tive desire of accumulation, between the state of things thus
depicted and that of modem Europe,


atk.


32


me ioe C6 SS eee TET NM


ene


the case of the


* Rae, p. 140.


LAW OF THE INCREASE OF CAPITAL. 203


Chinese deserves attention. From various circumstances in
their personal habits and social condition it might be anti-
cipated that they would possess a degree of prudence and
self-control greater than other Asiatics, but inferior to most
European nations; and the following evidence is adduced
of the fact.

“Durability is one of the chief qualities, marking a high
degree of the effective desire of accumulation. The testi-
mony of travellers ascribes to the instruments formed by the
Chinese, a very inferior durability to similar instruments
constructed by Europeans. The houses, we are told, unless
of the higher ranks, are in general of unburnt bricks, of
clay, or of hurdles plastered with earth ; the roofs, of reeds
fastened to laths. We can scarcely conceive more unsub-
stantial or temporary fabrics. Their partitions are of paper,
requiring to be renewed every year. A similar obseryation
may be made concerning their implements of husbandry,
and other utensils. They are almost entirely of wood, the
metals entering but very sparingly into their construction ;
consequently they soon wear out, and require frequent
renewals. A greater degree of strength in the effective
desire of accumulation, would cause them to be constructed
of materials requiring a greater present expenditure, but
bemg far more durable. From the same cause, much land,
that in other countries would be cultivated, lies waste. All
travellers take notice of large tracts of land, chiefly swamps,
which continue in a state of nature. To bring a swamp into
tillage is generally a process, to complete which, requires
several years. It must be previously drained, the surface
long exposed to the sun, and many operations performed,
before it can be made capable of bearing a crop. Though
yielding, probably, a very considerable return for the labour
bestowed on it, that return is not made until a long time has
elapsed. The cultivation of such land implies a greater
strength of the effective desire of accumulation than exists


in the empire.


a ei Ne a A


:


IIT OF Bits OR BSE 4 a EE a aaa


204 BOOK I. CHAPTER xr. § 3.


“The produce of the harvest is, as we have remarked,
always an instrument of some order or another; it is a pro-
vision for future want, and regulated by the same laws as
those to which other means of attaining a similar end con-
form. It is there chiefly rice, of which there are two har-
vests, the one in June, the other in October. The period
then of eight months between October and June, is that for
which provision is made each year, and the different estimate
they make of to-day and this day eight months will appear
in the self-denial they practise now, in order to guard against
want then. The amount of this self-denial would seem to
be small. The father Parennin, indeed, (who seems to have
been one of the most intelligent of the Jesuits, and spent a
long life among the Chinese of all classes,) asserts, that it
is their great deficiency in forethought and frugality in this
respect, which is the cause of the scarcities and famines that
frequently occur.”

That it is defect of providence, not defect of industry,
that limits production among the Chinese, is still more obvious
than in the case of the semi-agriculturized Indians. “Where
the returns are quick, where the instruments formed require
but little time to bring the eyents for which they were formed
to an issue,” it is well known that “the great progress which
has been made in the knowledge of the arts suited to the
nature of the country and the wants of its inhabitants”
makes industry energetic and effective. “The warmth of the
climate, the natural fertility of the country, the knowledge
which the inhabitants have acquired of the arts of agriculture,
and the discovery and gradual adaptation to every soil of the
most useful vegetable productions, enable them very speedily

to draw from almost any part of the surface, what is there
esteemed an equivalent to much more than the labour bestowed
in tilling and cropping it. They have commonly double,


sometimes treble harvests. These, when they consist of a


grain so productive as rice, the usual crop, can scarce fail to


yield to their skill, from almost any portion of soil that can


LAW OF THE INCREASE OF CAPITAL. 205


be at once brought into culture, very ample returns. Accord-
ingly there is no spot that labour can immediately bring under
cultivation, that is not made to yield to it. Hills, even
mountains, are ascended and formed into terraces; and water,
in that country the great productive agent, is led to every
part by drains, or carried up to it by the ingenious and simple
hydraulic machines which have been in use from time imme-
morial among this singular people. They effect this the more
easily, from the soil, even in these situations, being very deep
and covered with much vegetable mould. But what yet more
than this marks the readiness with which labour is forced to
form the most difficult materials into instruments, where these
instruments soon bring to an issue the events for which theyare
formed, is the frequent occurrence on many of their lakes and
rivers, of structures resembling the floating gardens of the
Peruvians, rafts covered with vegetable soil and cultivated.
Labour in this way draws from the materials on which it acts
very speedy returns. Nothing can exceed the luxuriance of
vegetation when the quickening powers of a genial sun are
ministered to by a rich soil and abundant moisture. It is
otherwise, as we have seen, in cases where the returns, though
copious, is distant. European travellers are surprised at
meeting these little floating farms by the side of swamps
which only require draining to render them tillable. It seems
to them strange that labour should not rather be bestowed
on the solid earth, where its fruits might endure, than on
structures that must decay and perish in a few years. The
people they are among think not so much of future years as
of the present time. The effective desire of accumulation
is of very different strength in the one, from what it is in
the other. The views of the Kuropean extend to a distant
futurity, and he is surprised at the Chinese, condemned,
through improvidence, and want of sufficient prospective
care, to incessant toil, and as he thinks, insufferable
The views of the Chinese are confined to
he is content, as we say, to live from


wretchedness.
narrower bounds;


i an
F
PEG
4
{ i


ears Te ote


+e ~ r seteating. -Amever teres, i Re 2% 43 4


206 BOOK I. CHAPTER xI. § 3.


day to day, and has learnt to conceive even a life of toila
blessing *.”

When a country has carried production as far as in the
existing state of knowledge it can be carried with an amount
of return corresponding to the average strength of the effec-
tive desire of accumulation in that country, it has reached
what is called the stationary state; the state in which no
further addition will be made to capital, unless there takes
place either some improvement in the arts of production, or
an increase in the strength of the desire to accumulate. In
the stationary state, although capital does not on the whole
increase, some persons grow richer and others poorer. Those
whose degree of providence is below the usual standard,
become impoverished, their capital perishes, and makes room
for the savings of those whose effective desire of accumulation
exceeds the average. These become the natural purchasers
of the lands, manufacturies, and other instruments of pro-
duction owned by their less provident countrymen.

What the causes are which make the return to capital
greater in one country than in another, and which, in certain
circumstances, make it impossible for any additional capital
to find investment unless at diminished returns, will appear
clearly hereafter. In China, if that country has really at-
tained, as it is supposed to have done, the stationary state,
accumulation has stopped when the returns to capital are
still as high as is indicated by a rate of interest legally twelve
per cent, and practically varying (it is said) between eighteen
and thirty-six. It is to be presumed therefore that no greater
amount of capital than the country already possesses, can find
employment at this high rate of profit, and that any lower
rate does not hold out to a Chinese, sufficient temptation to
induce him to abstain from present enjoyment. What a
contrast with Holland, where, during the most flourishing
period of its history, the government was able habitually to


* Rae, pp. 151—5.


LAW OF THE INCREASE OF CAPITAL. 207


borrow at two per cent, and private individuals, on good
security, at three. Since China is not a country like Burmah,
or the native states of India, where an enormous interest is
but an indispensable compensation for the risk incurred from
the bad faith or poverty of the state, and of almost all private
borrowers ; the fact, if fact it be, that the increase of capital
has come to a stand while the returns to it are still so large,
denotes a much less degree of the effective desire of accu-
mulation, in other words a much lower estimate of the
future relatively to the present, than that of most European


nations.


§ 4. We have hitherto spoken of countries in which the
average strength of the desire to accumulate is short of that
which, under circumstances of any tolerable security, reason
and sober calculation would approve. We have now to
speak of others in which it decidedly surpasses that standard.
In the more prosperous countries of Europe, although in
them also are to be found abundance of prodigals, and in
some of them (and in none more than in England) the ordi-
nary degree of economy and providence among those who
live by manual labour cannot be considered high, still in a
very numerous portion of the community, the professional,
manufacturing, and trading classes, being those who, gene-
rally speaking, unite more of the means with more of the
motives for saving than any other class, the spirit of accu-
mulation is so strong, that the signs of rapidly increasing
wealth meet every eye: and the great amount of capital
seeking investment excites astonishment, whenever peculiar
circumstances turning much of it into some one channel, such
as railway construction or foreign speculative adventure,
bring the largeness of the total amount into evidence.

There are many circumstances which, in England, give a
peculiar force to the accumulating propensity. The long
exemption of the country from the ravages of war, and the
far earlier period than elsewhere at which property was


208 BOOK I, CHAPTER xI. § 4,

secure from military violence or arbitrary spoliation, have
produced a long-standing and hereditary confidence in the
safety of funds when trusted out of the owner’s hands, which
in most other countries is of much more recent origin, and
less firmly established. The geographical causes which have
made industry rather than war the natural source of power
and importance to Great Britain, have turned an unusual
proportion of the most enterprising and energetic characters
into the direction of manufactures and commerce ; into sup-
plying their wants and gratifying their ambition by producing
and saving, rather than by appropriating what has been pro-
duced and saved. Much also depended on the better politi-
cal institutions of this country, which by the scope they
have allowed to individual freedom of action, have encour-
aged personal activity and self-reliance, while by the liberty
they confer of association and combination, they facilitate
industrial enterprise on a large scale. The same institutions
in another of their aspects, give a most direct and potent
stimulus to the desire of acquiring wealth. The earlier
decline of feudalism ‘haying removed or much weakened
invidious distinctions between the originally trading classes
and those who had been accustomed to despise them ; and a
polity having grown up which made wealth the real source
of political influence, its acquisition was invested with a
fictitious value, independent of its intrinsic utility. It be-
came synonymous with power; and since power with the
common herd of mankind gives power, wealth became the
chief source of personal consideration, and the measure and
stamp of success in life. To get out of one rank in society
into the next above it, is the great aim of English bourgeois
life, and the acquisition of wealth the means. And inasmuch
as to be rich without industry, constitutes a step in the
social seale aboye those who are rich by means of industry,
it becomes the object of ambition to save not merely as
much as will afford a large income while in business, but
enough to retire from business, and liye in affluence on


LAW OF THE INCREASE OF CAPITAL. 209


realized gains. These causes are, in England, greatly aided
by that extreme indifference of the people to personal enjoy-
ment, which is a characteristic of all countries over which
puritanism has passed. But if accumulation is, on one hand,
rendered easier by the absence of a taste for pleasure, it is,
on the other, made more difficult by the presence of a very
real taste for expense. So strong is the association between
personal consequence and the signs of wealth, that the silly
desire for the appearance of a large expenditure has the force
of a passion among large classes of a nation which derives less
pleasure than perhaps any other in the world from what it
spends. Owing to this circumstance, the effective desire of
accumulation has never reached so high a pitch in England
as it did in Holland, where, there being no rich idle class
to set the example of a reckless expenditure, and the mer-
cantile classes, who possessed the substantial power on which
social influence always waits, -being left to establish their
own scale of living and standard of propriety, their habits
remained frugal and unostentatious.

In England and Holland, then, for a long time past, and
now in most other countries in Europe (which are rapidly
following England in the same race,) the desire of accumula-
tion does not require, to make it effective, the copious returns
which it requires in Asia, but is sufficiently called into action
by a rate of profit so low, that instead of slackening, accumu-
lation seems now to proceed more rapidly than ever; and the
second requisite of increased production, increase of capital,
shews no tendency to become deficient. So far as that
element is concerned, production is susceptible of an increase
without any assignable bounds.

The progress of accumulation would no doubt be consi-
derably checked, if the returns to capital were to be reduced
still lower than at present. But why should any possible
increase of capital have that effect? This question carries the


mind forward to the remaining one of the three requisites


WON. Me P


210 BOOK I. CHAPTER xI. 9§ 4.


of production. The limitation to production, not consisting
in any necessary limit to the increase of the other two ele-
ments, labour and capital, must turn upon the properties of
the only element which is inherently, and in itself, limited
in quantity. It must depend upon the properties of land.


te 3
oR) |
+ ok iS
-
oy
Nee
+ 5
e
, |


a


CHAPTER XII.


OF THE LAW OF THE INCREASE OF PRODUCTION FROM
LAND.


§ 1. Lawnp differs from the other elements of produc-
tion, labour and capital, in not being susceptible of indefinite
increase. Its extent is limited, and the extent of the more
productive kinds of it more limited still. It is also evident
that the quantity of produce capable of being raised on any
given piece of land is not indefinite. This limited quantity
of land, and limited productiveness of it, are the real limits to
the increase of production.

That they are the ultimate limits, must always have been
clearly seen. But since the final barrier has never in any
instance been reached; since there is no country in which
all the land, capable of yielding food, is so highly cultivated
that a larger produce could not (even without supposing any
fresh advance in agricultural knowledge) be obtained from it,
and since a large portion of the earth’s surface still remains
entirely uncultivated; it is commonly thought, and is very
natural at first to suppose, that for the present all limitation
of production or population from this source is at an indefinite
distance, and that ages must elapse before any practical
necessity arises for taking the limiting principle into serious
consideration.

I apprehend this to be not only an error, but the most
serious one, to be found in the whole field of political economy.
The question is more important and fundamental than any
other; it involves the whole subject of the causes of poverty,
in a rich and industrious community; and unless this one
matter be thoroughly understood it is to no purpose pro-
ceeding any further in our inquiry.

p 2


enone Ty


a RE


212 BOOK I. CHAPTER XII. § 2.


§ 2. The limitation to production from the properties of
the soil, is not like the obstacle opposed by a wall, which
stands immoyeable in one particular spot, and offers no hin-
drance to motion short of stopping it entirely. We may
rather compare it to a highly elastic and extensible band,
which is hardly ever so violently stretched that it could not
possibly be stretched any more, yet the pressure of which is
felt long before the final limit is reached, and felt more
severely the nearer that limit is approached.

After a certain, and not very advanced, stage in the pro-
gress of agriculture; as soon, in fact, as men have applied
themselves to cultivation with any energy, and have brought
to it any tolerable tools; from that time it is the law of pro-
duction from the land, that in any given state of agricultural
skill and knowledge, by increasing the labour, the produce is
not increased in an equal degree; doubling the labour does not
double the produce; or, to express the same thing in other
words, every increase of produce is obtained by a more than
proportional increase in the application of labour to the land.

This general law of agricultural industry is the most im-
portant proposition in political economy. Were the law
different, nearly all the phenomena of the production and
distribution of wealth would be other than they are. The
most fundamental errors which still prevail on our subject,
result from not perceiving this law at work underneath the
more superficial agencies on which attention fixes itself; but
mistaking those agencies for the ultimate causes of effects
of which they may influence the form and mode, but of which
it alone determines the essence.

When, for the purpose of raising an increase of produce,
recourse is had to inferior land, it is evident that, so far, the
produce does not increase in the same proportion with the
labour. The very meaning of inferior land, is land which
with equal labour returns a smaller amount of produce.
Land may be inferior either in fertility or in situation. The
one requires a greater proportional amount of labour for


LAW OF INCREASE OF PRODUCTION FROM LAND. 213


growing the produce, the other for carrying it to market.
If the land A yields a thousand quarters of wheat, to a given
outlay in wages, manure, &c., and in order to raise another
thousand recourse must be had to the land B, which is either
less fertile or more distant from the market, the two thou-
sand quarters will cost more than twice as much labour as the
original thousand, and the produce of agriculture will be
increased in a less ratio than the labour employed in pro-
curing it.

Instead of cultivating the land B, it would be possible,
by higher cultivation, to make the land A produce more.
It might be ploughed or harrowed twice instead of once, or
three times instead of twice; it might be dug instead of
being ploughed ; after ploughing, it might be gone over with
a hoe instead of a harrow, and the soil more completely pul-
verized; it might be oftener or more thoroughly weeded;
the implements used might be of higher finish, and more ela-
borate construction; a greater quantity or more expensive
kinds of manure might be applied, or when applied, they
might be more carefully mixed and incorporated with the soil.
These are some of the modes by which the same land may be
made to-yield a greater produce ; and when a greater produce
must be had, some of these are among the means usually
employed for obtaining it. But, thatit is obtained at a more
than proportional increase of expense, is evident from the
fact that inferior lands are cultivated. Inferior lands, or
lands at a greater distance from the market, of course yield
an inferior return, and an increasing demand cannot be sup-
plied from them unless at an augmentation of cost, and there-
fore of price. If the additional demand could continue to be
supplied from the superior lands, by applying additional
labour and capital, at no greater proportional cost than that
at which they yield the quantity first demanded of them, the
owners or farmers of those lands could undersell all others,
and engross the whole market. Lands of a lower degree of
fertility or in a more remote situation, might indeed be cul-


-
ch


'


- ey lesewng nese Bt


met


214 BOOK I. CHAPTER xII. § 2.


tivated by their proprietors, for the sake of subsistence or
independence ; but it never could be the interest of any one
to farm them for profit. That a profit can be made from
them, sufficient to attract capital to such an investment, is a
proof that cultivation on the more eligible lands has reached
a point, beyond which any greater application of labour and
capital would yield, at the best, no greater return than can
be obtained at the same expense from less fertile or less
favourably situated lands.

The careful cultivation of a well farmed district of Eng-
land or Scotland is a symptom and an effect of the more
unfavourable terms which the land has begun to exact for
any increase of its fruits. Such elaborate cultivation costs
much more in proportion, and requires a higher price to
render it profitable, than farming on a more superficial sys-
tem; and would not be adopted if access could be had to
land of equal fertility, previously unoccupied. Where there
is the choice of raising the increasing supply which society
requires, from fresh land of as good quality as that already
cultivated, no attempt is made to extract from land anything
approaching to what it will yield on what are esteemed the
best European modes of cultivating. The land is tasked up
to the point at which the greatest return is obtained in pro-
portion to the labour employed, but no further: any addi-
tional labour is carried elsewhere. “It is long,” says one of
latest travellers in the United States*, “before an English
eye becomes reconciled to the lightness of the crops and the
careless farming (as we should call it) which is apparent.
One forgets that where land is so plentiful and labour so
dear as it is here, a totally different principle must be pur-
sued to that which prevails in populous countries, and that
the consequence will of course be a want of tidiness, as it
were, and finish, about everything which requires labour.”


* Letters from America, by John Robert Godley, yol.i. p. 42. See also
Lyell’s Travels in America, vol. ii. p- 83.


LAW OF INCREASE OF PRODUCTION FROM LAND. 215


Of the two causes mentioned, the plentifulness of land seems
to me the true explanation, rather than the dearness of
labour; for, however dear labour may be, when food
is wanted, labour will always be applied to producing it
in preference to anything else. But this labour is more
effective for its end by being applied to fresh soil, than if it
were employed in bringing the soil already occupied into
higher cultivation. Only when no soils remain to be broken
up but such as either from distance or inferior quality require
a considerable rise of price to render their cultivation profit-
able, can it become advantageous to apply the high farming
of Europe to any American lands; except, perhaps, in the
immediate vicinity of towns, where saving in cost of carriage
may compensate for. great inferiority in the return from the
soil itself, As American farming is to English, so is the
ordinary English to that of F landers, Tuscany, or the Terra di
Lavoro: where by the application of a far greater quantity of
labour there is obtained a considerably larger gross produce,
but on such terms as would never be advantageous to a mere
speculator for profit, unless made so by much higher prices
of agricultural produce.

The principle which has now been stated must be received,
no doubt, with certain explanations and limitations. Even
after the land is so highly cultivated that the mere application
of additional labour, or of an additional amount of ordinary
dressing, would yield no return proportioned to the expense,
it may still happen that the application of a much greater
additional labour and capital to improving the soil itself, by
draining or permanent manures, would be as liberally remu-
nerated by the produce, as any portion of the labour and
capital already employed. It would sometimes be much more
amply remunerated. This could not be, if capital always
sought and found the most advantageous employment; but
if the most advantageous employment has to wait longest for
its remuneration, it 1s only in a rather advanced stage of


industrial developement that the preference will be given to


216 BOOK I. CHAPTER xr. § 2


it; and even in that advanced stage, the laws or usages con-
nected with property in land and the tenure of farms, are
often such as to prevent the disposable capital of the country
from flowing freely into the channel of agricultural improve-
ment: and hence the increased supply, required by increasing
population, is sometimes raised at an augmenting cost by
higher cultivation, when the means of producing it without
increase of cost are known and accessible. There can be no
doubt that if capital were forthcoming to execute, within the
next year, all known and recognized improvements in the
land of the United Kingdom which would pay (as the phrase
is) at the existing prices, that is, which would increase the
produce in as great or a greater ratio than the expense; the
result would be such (especially if we include Ireland in the
supposition) that inferior land would not fora long time require
to be brought under tillage: probably a considerable part of
the less productive lands now cultivated, which are not parti-
cularly favoured by situation, would go out of culture ; or (as
the improvements in question are not so much applicable to
good land, but operate rather by converting bad land into
good) the contraction of cultivation might principally take
place by a less high dressing and less elaborate tilling of
land generally; a falling back to something nearer the cha-
racter of American farming; such only of the poor lands
being altogether abandoned as were not found susceptible of
improvement. And thus the aggregate produce of the whole
cultivated land would bear a larger proportion than before
to the labour expended on it; and the general law of dimi-
nishing return from land would haye undergone, to that
extent, a temporary supersession. No one however can sup-
pose that even in these circumstances, the whole produce
required for the country could be raised exclusively from the
best lands, together with those Possessing advantages of situ-
ation to place them on a par with the best, Much would
undoubtedly continue to be produced under less advantage-
ous conditions, and with a smaller Proportional return, than


LAW OF INCREASE OF PRODUCTION FROM LAND. 217


that obtained from the best soils and situations. And in pro-
portion as the further increase of population required a still
greater addition to the supply, the general law would resume
its course, and the further augmentation would be obtained
at a more than proportionate expense of labour and capital.


§ 3. That the produce of land increases, ceteris paribus,
in a diminishing ratio to the increase in the labour employed,
is, as we have said, (allowing for occasional and temporary
exceptions) the universal law of agricultural industry. This
principle however has been denied, and experience confidently
appealed to, in proof that the returns from land are not less
but greater, in an advanced, than im an early, stage of culti-
yation—when much capital, than when little, is applied to
agriculture. So much so indeed, that (it is affirmed) the
worst land now in cultivation produces as much food per
acre, and even as much to a given amount of labour, as
our ancestors contrived to extract from the richest soils in
England.

It is very possible that this may be true; and even if not
true to the letter, toa great extent it certainly is so. Un-
questionably a much smaller proportion of the population is
now occupied in producing food for the whole, than in the
early times of our history. This, however, does not prove
that the law of which we have been speaking does not exist,
but only that there is some antagonizing principle at work,
capable for a time of making head against the law. Such an
agency there is, in habitual antagonism to the law of diminish-
ing return from land; and to the consideration of this we shall
now proceed. It is no other than the progress of civiliza-
tion. I use this general and somewhat vague expression,
because the things to be included are so various, that hardly
any term of a more restricted signification would comprehend
them all.

Of these the most obvious is the progress of agricultural
knowledge, skill, and invention. Improved processes of


218 BOOK I. CHAPTER XII. § 3.


agriculture are of two kinds: some enable the land to yield a
greater absolute produce, without an equivalent increase of
labour; others have not the power of increasing the produce,
but have that of diminishing the labour and expense by which
it is obtained. Among the first are to be reckoned the dis-
use of fallows, by means of the rotation of crops; and the in-
troduction of new articles of cultivation capable of entering
advantageously into the rotation. The change made in
British agriculture towards the close of the last century by
the introduction of turnip-husbandry, is spoken of as amount-
ing toa revolution. These improvements operate not only
by enabling the land to produce a crop every year instead of
remaining idle one year in every two or three to renovate its
powers, but also by direct increase of its productiveness;
since the great addition made to the number of cattle by the
increase of their food, affords more abundant manure to fer-
tilize the corn lands. Next in order comes the introduction
of new articles of food containing a greater amount of sus-
tenance, like the potatoe, or more productive species or
varieties of the same plant, such as the Swedish turnip. In
the same class of improvements must be placed a better
knowledge of the properties of manures, and of the most
effectual modes of applying them; the introduction of new
and more powerful fertilizing agents, such as guano, and the
conversion to the same purpose, of substances previously
wasted; inventions like subsoil ploughing or tile draining, by
which the produce of some kinds of land is so greatly multi-
plied; improvements in the breed or feeding of labouring

cattle; augmented stock of the animals which consume and

convert into human food what would otherwise be wasted ;

ee ee toe

land to Pionete are such as jae eas cf a

tools; the enoqaeGen of ee eas ponstructiod e

manual labour, as the winnowin a. ee ee

a more skilful Bnd economical a eae threshing machines ;

al application of muscular exer-


a. waa


LAW OF INCREASE OF PRODUCTION FROM LAND. 219


tion, such as the introduction, so slowly accomplished in
England, of Scotch ploughing with two horses abreast and
one man, instead of three or four horses in a team, and two
men; &c. These improvements do not add to the produc-
tiveness of the land; but they are equally calculated with the
former to counteract the tendency in the cost of production
of agricultural produce, to rise with the progress of popula-
tion and demand.

Analogous in effect to this second class of agricultural
improvements, are improved means of communication. Good
roads are equivalent to good tools. It is of no consequence
whether the economy of labour takes place im extracting the
produce from the soil, or in conveying it to the place where it
is to be consumed. Not to say in addition, that the labour
of cultivation itself is diminished by whatever lessens the
cost of bringing manure from a distance, or facilitates the
many operations of transport from place to place which occur
within the bounds of the farm. Railways and canals are
virtually a diminution of the cost of production of all things


‘sent to market by them; and literally so of all those, the


appliances and aids for producing which, they serve to trans-
mit. By their means land can be cultivated, which would
not otherwise have remunerated the cultivators without a
rise of price. Improvements in navigation have, with respect
to food or materials brought from beyond sea, a correspond-
ing effect.

From similar considerations it appears that many purely
mechanical improvements, which have (apparently at least)
no peculiar connexion with agriculture, nevertheless enable a


given amount of food to be obtained with a smaller expendi-


ture of labour. A great improvement in the process of smelt-
ing iron, would tend to cheapen agricultural implements,
diminish the cost of railroads, of waggons and carts, ships,
and perhaps buildings and many other things to which iron
is not at present applied, because it is too costly; and would
thence diminish the cost of production of food. The same


220 BOOK I. CHAPTER XII. § 3.


effect would follow from any improvement in those processes
of what may be termed manufacture, to which the material of
food is subjected after it is separated from the ground.
The first application of wind or water-power to grind
corn, tended to cheapen bread as much as a very im-
portant discovery in agriculture would have done; and any
great improvement in the construction of corn-mills would
haye, in proportion, a similar influence. The effects of
cheapening locomotion have been already considered. There
are also engineering inventions which facilitate all great ope-
rations on the earth’s surface. An improvement in the art
of taking levels is of importance to draining, not to mention
canal and railway making. The fens of Holland and of some
parts of England are drained by pumps worked by the wind
or by steam. Where works of irrigation, or where tanks or
embankments are necessary, mechanical skill is a great re-
source for cheapening production.

Those manufacturing improvements which cannot be
made instrumental to facilitate, in any of its stages, the actual
production of food, and therefore do not help to counteract
or retard the diminution of the proportional return to labour
from the soil, have however another effect which is practically
equivalent. What they do not prevent, they yet, in some
degree, compensate for.

The materials of manufactures being all drawn from the
land, and many of them from agriculture, which supplies in
particular the entire material of clothing; the general law of
production from the land, the law of diminishing return, must
in the last resort be applicable to manufacturing as well as to
agricultural industry. As population increases, and the
power of the land to yield increased produce is strained
harder and harder, any additional supply of material, as well
as of food,-must be obtained by a more than proportionally
increasing expenditure of labour. But the cost of the mate-
rial forming generally a very small portion of the entire cost of
the manufacture, the agricultural labour concerned in the


LAW OF INCREASE OF PRODUCTION FROM LAND. 221


production of manufactured goods is but a small fraction of

the whole labour worked up in the commodity. All the rest
) of the labour tends constantly and strongly towards diminu-
tion, as the amount of production increases. Manufactures
are vastly more susceptible than agriculture, of mechanical
i improvements, and contrivances for saving labour: and it has
already been seen how greatly the division of labour, and its
skilful and economical distribution, depend upon the extent
of the market, and upon the possibility of production in
large masses. In manufactures, accordingly, the causes tend-
ing to increase the productiveness of industry, preponderate
;


greatly over the one cause which tends to diminish it : and the

increase of production, called forth by the progress of society,

takes place not at an increasing, but at a continually diminish-

ing proportional cost. This fact has manifested itself in the

| progressive fall of the prices and values of almost every kind

of manufactured goods during two centuries past; a fall

} accelerated by the mechanical inventions of the last sixty or

\ seventy years, and susceptible of being prolonged and ex-
tended beyond any limit which it would be safe to specify.

Now it is quite conceivable that the efficiency of agri-

cultural labour might be undergomg, with the increase of

produce, a gradual diminution; that the price of food, in


em i acer


growing proportion of the population might be needed to
raise food for the whole; while yet the productive power of
labour in all other branches of industry might be so rapidly
| augmenting, that the required amount of labour could be
spared from manufactures, and nevertheless a greater produce
be obtained, and the aggregate wants of the community be
on the whole better supplied than before. The benefit might
even extend to the poorest class. The increased cheapness
of clothing and lodging might make up to them for the aug-
mented cost of their food.
There is, thus, no possible improvement in the arts of
production which does not in one or another mode exercise


i “ s 8
| consequence, might be progressively rising, and an ever-


229 BOOK I. CHAPTER XII. § 3.


an antagonist influence to the law of diminishing return to
agricultural labour. Nor is it only industrial improvements
which have this effect. Improvements in government, and
almost every kind of moral and social advancement, operate
in the same manner. Suppose a country in the condition of
France before the Revolution: taxation imposed exclusively
on the industrious classes, and on such a principle as to be
an actual penalty on production; and no redress obtainable
for any injury to property or person, when inflicted by people
of rank or court influence. Was not the hurricane which
swept away this system of things, even if we look no further
than to its effect in augmenting the productiveness of labour,
equivalent to many industrial inventions? The removal ofa
fiscal burthen on agriculture, such as the tithe, has the same
effect as if the labour necessary for obtaining the existing
produce were suddenly reduced one-tenth. The abolition of
corn laws, or of any other restrictions which prevent commo-
dities from being produced where their cost of production 1s
lowest, amounts to a vast improvement in production. When
fertile land previously reserved as hunting-ground, or for any
other purpose of amusement, is set free for culture, the aggre-
gate productiveness of agricultural industry is increased. It
is well known what has been the effect in England of badly
administered poor laws, and the still worse effect in Ireland
of a bad system of tenancy, in rendering agricultural labour
slack and ineffective. No improvements operate more directly
upon the productiveness of labour than those in the tenure of
farms, and in the laws relating to landed property. The
breaking up of entails, the cheapening of the transfer of
property, and whatever else promotes the natural tendency of
land in a system of freedom, to pass out of hands which can
make little of it into those which can make more ; the sub-
stitution of long leases for tenancy at will, and of any


tolerable system of tenancy whatever for the wretched cottier


system ; above all, the acquisition of a fixed interest in the


soil by the cultivators of it; all these things are as real, and


Seen: cas


SE a ren


LAW OF INCREASE OF PRODUCTION FROM LAND. 223


some of them as great, improvements in production, as the
invention of the spinning-jenny or the steam-engine.

We may say the same of improvements in education.
The intelligence of the workman is a most important ele-
ment in the productiveness of labour. So low, in some of
the most civilized countries, is the present standard of that
intelligence, that there is hardly any source from which a
more indefinite amount of improvement may be looked for
in productive power, than by endowing with brains those
who now have only hands. The carefulness, economy, and
general trustworthiness of labourers are as important as their
intelligence. Friendly relations, and a community of interest
and feeling between labourers and employers, are eminently
so: I should rather say, would be; for I know not where
any such sentiment of friendly alliance now exists. Nor is
it only in the labouring class that improvement of mind and
character operates with beneficial effect even on industry.
In the rich and idle classes, increased mental energy, more
solid instruction, and stronger feelings of conscience, public
spirit, or philanthropy, would qualify them to originate and
promote the most valuable improvements, both in the econo-
mical resources of their country, and in its institutions and
customs. ‘To look no further than the most obvious pheno-
mena; the backwardness of French agriculture in the precise
points in which benefit might be expected from the influence
of an educated class, is partly accounted for by the exclusive
devotion of the richer landed proprietors to town interests
and town pleasures. There is scarcely any possible amelio-
ration of human affairs which would not, among its other
benefits, have a favourable operation, direct or indirect, upon
the productiveness of industry. The intensity of devotion
to industrial occupations would indeed in many cases be
moderated by a more liberal and genial mental culture, but
the labour actually bestowed on those occupations would
almost always be rendered more effective.

Before pointing out the principal inferences to be drawn


294 BOOK I. CHAPTER XII. $3.


from the nature of the two antagonist forces by which the
productiveness of agricultural industry is determined, we
must observe that what we have said of agriculture, is true,
with little variation, of the other occupations which it repre-
sents; of all the arts which extract materials from the globe.
Mining industry, for example, usually yields an increase of
produce at a more than proportional increase of expense.
It does worse, for even its customary annual produce requires
to be extracted by a greater and greater expenditure of labour
and capital. As a mine does not reproduce the coal or the
ore taken from it, not only are all mines at last exhausted,
but even when they as yet show no signs of exhaustion, they
must be worked at an ever increasing cost; shafts must be
sunk deeper, galleries driven farther, greater power applied to
keep them clear of water; the produce must be lifted from a
greater depth, or conveyed a greater distance. The law of
diminishing return applies therefore to mining, in a still more
unqualified sense than to agriculture; but the antagonizing
agency, that of improvements in production, also applies in
a still greater degree. Mining Operations are more suscep-
tible of mechanical improvements, than agricultural: the first
great application of the steam-engine was to mining; and
there are unlimited possibilities of improvement in the che-
mical processes by which the metals are extracted. There
is another contingency, of no unfrequent occurrence, which
avails to counterbalance the progress of all existing mines
towards exhaustion: this is, the discovery of new ones, equal
or superior in richness.

To resume; all natural agents which are limited in quan-
tity, are not only limited in their ultimate productive powet,
but, long before that power is stretched to the utmost, they
yield to any additional demands on progressively harder
terms. This law may however be suspended, or temporarily


controlled, by whatever adds to the general. power of man-


kind over nature; and especially by any extension of theit


knowledge, and their consequent command, of the properties
and powers of natural agents,


ate


CHAPTER XIII.


CONSEQUENCES OF THE FOREGOING LAws.


§ 1. From the preceding exposition it appears that the
limit to the increase of production is twofold: from defi-
ciency of capital, or of land. Production comes to a pause,
either because the effective desire of accumulation is not
sufficient to give rise to any further increase of capital, or
because, however disposed the pessessors of surplus income
may be to save a portion of it, the limited land at the dis-
posal of the community does not permit additional capital to
be employed with such a return, as would be an equivalent
to them for their abstinence.

In countries where the principle of accumulation is as
weak as it is in the various nations of Asia; where people
will neither save, nor work to obtain the means of saving,
unless under the inducement of enormously high profits, nor
even then if it is necessary to wait a considerable time for
them; where either productions remain scanty, or drudgery
great, because there is neither capital forthcoming nor fore-
thought sufficient for the adoption of the contrivances by
which natural agents are made to do the work of human
labour; the desideratum for such a country, economically
considered, is an increase of industry, and of the effective
desire of accumulation. The means are, first, a better
government: more complete security of property ; moderate
taxes, and freedom from arbitrary exaction under the name
of taxes; a more permanent and more advantageous tenure
of land, securing to the cultivator as far as possible the undi-
vided benefits of the industry, skill, and economy he may
exert. Secondly, improvement of the public intelligence ;
the decay of usages or superstitions which interfere with the

VOL. TI. Q


226 BOOK I. CHAPTER XIII. § 2.


effective employment of industry ; and the growth of mental
activity, making the people alive to new objects of desire.
Thirdly, the introduction of foreign arts, which raise the
returns derivable from additional capital, to a rate correspond-
ing to the low strength of the desire of accumulation: and
the importation of foreign capital, which renders the increase
of production no longer exclusively dependent on the thrift
or providence of the inhabitants themselves, while it places
before them a stimulating example, and by instilling new
ideas and breaking the chains of habit, if not by improving
the actual condition of the population, tends to create in them
new wants, increased ambition, and greater thought for the
future. These considerations apply more or less to all the
Asiatic populations, and to the less civilized and industrious
parts of Europe, as Russia, Hungary, Spain, and Ireland.


§ 2. But there are other countries, and England is at
the head of them, in which neither the spirit of industry nor
the effective desire of accumulation need any encouragement;
where the people will toil hard for a small remuneration, and
save much for a small profit; where, although the general
thriftiness of the labouring class is much below what is desir-
able, the spirit of accumulation in the more prosperous patt
of the community requires abatement rather than increase.
In these countries there would never be any deficiency of
capital, if its imcrease were never checked or brought to a
stand by too great a diminution of its returns. It is the
tendency of the returns to a progressive diminution, which
causes the increase of production to be often attended with
a deterioration in the condition of the producers; and this
tendency, which would in time put an end to increase of
production altogether, is a result of the necessary and in-
herent conditions of production from the land.

In all countries which have passed a very early stage in
the progress of agriculture, every increase in the demand for
food, occasioned by increased population, will always, unless


CONSEQUENCES OF THE FOREGOING LAWS. 227


there is a simultaneous improvement in production, diminish
the share which on a fair division would fall to each indivi-
dual. An increased production, in default of unoccupied
tracts of fertile land, or of fresh improvements tending to
cheapen commodities, can never be obtained but by in-
creasing the labour in more than the same proportion. The
population must either work harder, or eat less, or obtain
their usual food by sacrificing a part of their other custo-
mary comforts. Whenever this necessity is postponed, it is
because the improvements which facilitate production con-
tinue progressive ; because the contrivances of mankind for
making their labour more effective, keep up an equal struggle
with nature, and extort fresh resources from her reluctant
powers as fast as human necessities occupy and engross the
old.

From this, results the important corollary, that the
necessity of restraining population is not, as many persons
believe, peculiar to a condition of great inequality of pro-
perty. A greater number of people cannot, in any given
state of civilization, be collectively so well provided for as a
smaller. The niggardliness of nature, not the injustice of
society, are the cause of the penalty attached to over-popula-
tion. An unjust distribution of wealth does not even aggra-
vate the evil, but, at most, causes it to be somewhat earlier
felt. It is in vain to say, that all mouths which the increase
of mankind calls into existence, bring with them hands.
The new mouths require as much food as the old ones, and
the hands do not produce as much. If all instruments of
production were held in joint property by the whole people,
and the produce divided with perfect equality among them,
and if in a society thus constituted, mdustry were as ener-
getic and the produce as ample as at present, there would
be enough to make all the existing population extremely
comfortable ; but when that population had doubled itself,
as, with the existing habits of the people, under such an
encouragement, it undoubtedly would, in little more than

Q 2


ae tron) ae see


228 BOOK I. CHAPTER xilI. § 2.


twenty years, what would then be their condition? Unless
the arts of production were in the same time improved in —
so unexampled a degree as to double the productive power
of labour—the inferior soils which must be resorted to, and
the more laborious and scantily remunerative cultivation which
must be employed on the superior soils, to procure food for
so much larger a population, would, by an insuperable neces-
sity, render every individual in the community poorer than
before. Ifthe population continued to increase at the same
rate, a time would soon arrive when no one would have more
than mere necessaries, and, soon after, a time when no one
would have a sufficiency of those, and the further increase of
population would be arrested by death.

Whether, at the present or any other time, the produce of
industry, proportionally to the labour employed, is increas-
ing or diminishing, and the average condition of the people
improving or deteriorating, depends upon whether popula-
tion is advancing faster than improvement, or improvement
than population. After a degree of density has been at-
tained, sufficient to allow the principal benefits of combina-
tion of labour, all further increase tends in itself to mischief,
so far as regards the average condition of the people; but
the progress of improvement has a counteracting operation,
and allows of increased numbers without any deterioration,
and even consistently with a higher average of comfort.
Improvement must here be understood in a wide sense;
including not only new industrial inventions, or an extended
use of those already known, but improvements in institu-
tions, education, opinions, and human affairs generally, pro-
vided they tend as almost all improvements do, to give NeW
motives or new facilities to production. If the productive
powers of the country increase as rapidly as advancing num-
bers call for an augmentation of produce, it is not neces-
sary to obtain that augmentation by the cultivation of soils
more sterile than the worst already under culture, or by
applying additional labour to the old soils at a diminished


neni


CONSEQUENCES OF THE FOREGOING LAWS. 229


advantage; or at all events, this loss of power is compen-
sated by the increased efficiency with which, in the progress
of improvement, labour is employed in manufactures. In
one way or the other, the increased population is provided
for, and all are as well off as before. But if the growth of
human power over nature is suspended or slackened, and
population does not slacken its increase; if, with only the
existing command over natural agencies, those agencies are
called upon for an increased produce; that greater produce
will not be afforded to the increased population, without


either demanding on the average a greater effort from each,


or on the average reducing each to a smaller ration out of
the aggregate produce.

As a matter of fact, at some periods the progress of
population has been the most rapid of the two, at others
that of improvement. In England during a long interval
preceding the French Revolution, population increased
slowly; but the progress of improvement, at least in agricul-
ture, would seem to have been still slower, since although
nothing occurred to lower the value of the precious metals,
the price of corn rose considerably, and England, from an
exporting, became an importing country. This evidence,
however, is not quite conclusive, inasmuch as the ex-
traordinary number of abundant seasons during the first
half of the century, not continuing during the last, was
a cause of increased price in the latter period, extrinsic
to the ordinary progress of society. Whether during the
same period improvements in manufactures, or dimi-
nished cost of imported commodities, made amends for
the diminished productiveness of labour on the land, is
uncertain. But ever since the great mechanical inyen-
tions of Watt, Arkwright, and their contemporaries, the
return to labour has probably increased as fast as the popu-
lation; and would even have outstripped it, if that very
augmentation of return had not called forth an additional
portion of the inherent power of multiplication in the human


230 BOOK I. CHAPTER XIII. §3.


species. During the fifteen or twenty years last elapsed, so
{ rapid has been the extension of improved processes of agri-
culture, that even the land yields a greater produce in propor-
tion to the labour employed; the average price of corn is
decidedly lower, and the country more nearly feeds its own
population without foreign aid, than it did in 1828. But
though improvement may during a certain space of time
keep up with, or even surpass, the actual increase of popula-
tion, it assuredly never comes up to the rate of increase of
which population is capable: and nothing could have pre-
vented a general deterioration in the condition of the human
race, were it not that population has in fact been restrained.
Had it been restrained still more, and the same improvements
taken place, there would haye been a larger dividend than
there now is, for the nation or the species at large. The
new ground wrung from nature by the improvement would
not have been all used up in the support of mere numbers.
Though the gross produce would not have been so great,


there would have been a greater produce per head of the
population.


| ‘i
i
Hi)
pr
iy
{


§ 3. When the growth of numbers outstrips the progress
of improvement, and a country is driven to obtain the means
of subsistence on terms more and more unfavourable, by the
inability of its land to meet additional demands except on
more onerous conditions ; there are two expedients by which
it may hope to mitigate that disagreeable necessity, even
though no change should take place in the habits of the
people with respect to their rate of increase. One of these
expedients is the importation of food from abroad. The
other is emigration.

The admission of cheaper food from a foreign country; 18
equivalent to an agricultural invention by whith food could


be raised at a similarly diminished cost at home. It equally
increases the productive power of ]


‘ abour, The return was,
before, so much food for so much


labour employed in the


CONSEQUENCES OF THE FOREGOING LAWS. 231


growth of food: the return is now, a greater quantity of food,
for the same labour employed in producing cottons or hard-
ware, or some other commodity to be given in exchange for
food. The one improvement, like the other, throws back the
decline of the productive power of labour by a certain dis-
tance: but in the one case as in the other, it immediately
resumes its course; the tide which has receded, instantly
begins to re-advance. It might seem, indeed, that when a
country draws its supply of food from so wide a surface as the
whole habitable globe, so little impression can be produced on
that great expanse by any increase of mouths in one small
corner of it, that the imhabitants of the country may double
and treble their numbers, without feeling the effect im any
increased tension of the springs of production, or any en-
hancement of the price of food throughout the world. But
in this calculation several things are overlooked.

In the first place, the foreign regions from which corn
can be imported do not comprise the whole globe, but
those parts of it almost alone, which are in the immediate
neighbourhood of coasts or navigable rivers. The coast is
the part of most countries which is earliest and most thickly
peopled, and has seldom any food to spare. The chief source
of supply, therefore, is the strip of country along the banks
of some navigable river, as the Nile, the Vistula, or the
Mississipp1 5 and of such there is not, in the productive
regions of the earth, so great a multitude, as to suffice during
an indefinite time for a rapidly growing demand, without an
increasing strain on the productive powers of the soil. To
obtain auxiliary supplies of corn from the interior in any
abundance, would, in the existing state of the communica-
tions, be hopeless. By improved roads, and ultimately by
canals and railways, the obstacle will be so reduced as not to
be insuperable: but this is a slow progress; in all the food-
exporting countries except America, a very slow progress ;
and one which cannot keep pace with population, unless the
increase of the last is very effectually restrained.


939 BOOK I. CHAPTER XIII. § 3.


In the next place, even if the supply were drawn from
the whole instead of a small part of the surface of the ex-
porting countries, the quantity of food would still be limited
which could be obtained from them without an increase of
the proportional cost. The countries which export food may
be divided into two classes; those in which the effective
desire of accumulation is strong, and those in which it is
weak. In Australia and the United States of America the
effective desire of accumulation is strong; capital increases
fast, and the production of food might be very rapidly ex-
tended. But in such countries population also increases
with extraordinary rapidity. Their agriculture has to pro-
vide for their own expanding numbers, as well as for those
of the importing countries. They must therefore, from the
nature of the case, be rapidly driven, if not to less fertile, at
least, what is equivalent, to remoter and less accessible lands,
and to modes of cultivation like those of old countries, less
productive in proportion to the labour and expense.

But the countries which have at the same time cheap
food and great industrial prosperity are few, being only
those in which the arts of civilized life have been transferred
full grown to a rich and uncultivated soil. Among old coun-
tries those which are able to export food, are able only
because their industry is in a very backward state; because
capital, and hence population, have never increased sufli-
ciently to make food rise to a higher price. Such countries
are Russia, Poland, and Hungary. In those regions the
effective desire of accumulation is weak, the arts of produc-
tion most imperfect, capital scanty, and its increase, especially
from domestic sources, slow. When an increased demand
arose for food to be exported to England, it would only be
very gradually that food could be produced to meet it. The
capital needed could not be obtained by transfer from other
employments, for such do not exist. The cottons or hard-
ware which would be received from England in exchange for
corn, the Russians and Poles do not now produce in the


a ae I LE PEPE ITLL LSE TET


CONSEQUENCES OF THE FOREGOING LAWS. 233


country: they go without them. Something might in time
be expected from the increased exertions to which producers
would be stimulated by the market opened for their produce;
but to such increase of exertion, the institutions of countries
whose agricultural population consists of serfs, are the reverse
of favourable, and even in this age of movement these insti-
tutions do not rapidly change. If a greater outlay of capital
is relied on as the source from which the produce is to be in-
creased, the means must either be obtained by the slow pro-
cess of saving, under the impulse given by new commodities
and more extended intercourse (and in that case the popula-
tion would most likely increase as fast), or must be brought
in from foreign countries. If England is to obtain a rapidly
increasing supply of corn from Russia or Poland, English
capital must go there to produce it. This, however, is at-
tended with so many difficulties, as are equivalent to great
positive disadvantages. It is opposed by difference of lan-
guage, differences of manners, and a thousand obstacles
arising from the institutions and social relations of the coun-
try: and after all it would inevitably so stimulate population
on the spot, that nearly all the increase of food produced by
its means, would be consumed without leaving the country :
so that if it were not the almost only mode of introducing
foreign arts and ideas, and giving an effectual spur to the
face card civilization of those countries, little reliance could
be placed on it for increasing the exports, and supplying
other countries with a progressive and indefinite increase of
food. But to improve the civilization of a country is a slow


‘process, and gives time for so great an increase of population


both in the country itself, and in those supplied from it, that
its effect in keeping down the price of food against the in-
crease of demand, is not likely to be more decisive on the scale
of all Europe, than on the smaller one of a particular nation.

The law, therefore, of diminishing return to industry
whenever population makes a more rapid progress than im-
provement, is not solely applicable to countries which are


seo cee


eee


SOIR Si Ra a a rt tgp eer pern mc ernest oi


234 BOOK I. CHAPTER XIII. § 3.


fed from their own soil, but in substance applies quite as
much to those which are willing to draw their food from any
accessible quarter that can afford it cheapest. If, indeed, the
release of the corn trade from restriction had produced, or
should still produce, a sudden cheapening of food, this, like
any other sudden improvement in the arts of life, would
throw the natural tendency of affairs a stage or two further

_ back, but without at all altering its course. There would be
more for everybody in the first instance; but this more,
would begin immediately and continue always to grow less,
so long as population went on increasing, unaccompanied by
other events of a countervailing tendency.

Whether the repeal of the corn laws is likely, even tem-
porarily, to give any considerable increase of margin for
population to fill up, it would be premature as yet to attempt
to decide. All the elements of the question have been
thrown into temporary disorder by the consequences of bad
harvests and of the potatoe failure. But as far as can be
foreseen, there seems little reason to expect an importation
of the customary articles of food either so great in itself, or
capable of such rapid increase, as to interfere much with
the operation of the general law. One contingency indeed
there is, connected with freedom of importation, which
may produce temporary effects greater than were ever
contemplated either by the bitterest enemies or the most
ardent adherents of free-trade in food. Maize, or Indian
corn, is a product capable of being supplied in quantity suffi-
cient to feed the whole country, at a cost, allowing for diffe-
rence of nutritive quality, cheaper even than the potatoe.
If maize should ever substitute itself for wheat as the staple
food of the poor, the productive power of labour in obtaining
food would be so enormously increased, and the expense of
maintaining a family so diminished, that it would require
perhaps some generations for population, even if it started


forward at an American pace, to overtake this great accession
to the facilities of its support.


CONSEQUENCES OF THE FOREGOING LAWS. IS


§ 4. Besides the importation of corn, there is another
resource, which can be invoked by a nation whose increasing
numbers press hard, not against their capital, but against the
productive capacity of their land: I mean Emigration, espe-
cially in the form of Colonization. Of this remedy the
efficacy as far as it goes is real, since it consists in seeking
elsewhere those unoccupied tracts of fertile land, which if
they existed at home would enable the demand of an increas-
ing population to be met without any falling off im the pro-
ductiveness of labour. Accordingly, when the region to be
colonized is near at hand, and the habits and tastes of the
people sufficiently migratory, this remedy is completely effec-
tual. The migration from the older parts of the American
Confederation to the new territories, which is to all intents
and purposes colonization, is what enables population to go
on unchecked throughout the Union without having yet
dimininished the return to industry or increased the difficulty
of earning a subsistence. If Australia or the interior of
Canada were as near to Great Britain as Wisconsin and Iowa
to New York; if the superfluous people could remove to it
without crossing the sea, and were of as adventurous and
restless a character, and as little addicted to staying at home,
as their kinsfolk of New England, those unpeopled con-
tinents would render the same service to the United Kingdom
which the old states of America derive from the new. But,
these things being as they are—although a judiciously con-
ducted emigration is a most important resource for suddenly
lightening the pressure of population by a single effort—there
is no probability that even under the most enlightened ar-
rangements a permanent stream of emigration could be kept
up, sufficient to take*off, as in America, all that portion of the
annual increase’ (when proceeding at its greatest rapidity)
which being in excess of the progress made during the same
short period in the arts of life, tends to render hving more
difficult for every averagely-situated individual in the commu-
nity. And unless this can be done, emigration cannot even


236 BOOK I. CHAPTER XIII. § 4.


temporarily dispense with the necessity of checks to popula-
tion. Further than this we have not to speak of it in this
place. The general subject of colonization as a practical
question, its importance to this country, and the principles
on which it should be conducted, will be touched incidentally
in many passages of this work, and treated of in a chapter
devoted to the purpose.


BOOKIE


Zz
©
—
SI
=
jaa)
ar
AS
I
PR
_—
=


BOOK II.


DISTRIBUTION.


CHAPTER I.


OF PROPERTY.


§ 1. Tue principles which have been set forth in the first
part of this Treatise, are, in certain respects, strongly distin-
guished from those, on the consideration of which we are now
about to enter. The laws and conditions of the production
of wealth, partake of the character of physical truths. There
is nothing optional, or arbitrary in them. Whatever man-
kind produce, must be produced in the modes, and under the
conditions, imposed by the constitution of external things,
and by the inherent properties of their own bodily and mental
structure. Whether they like it or not, their production will
be limited by the amount of their previous accumulation, and,
that being given, it will be proportional to their energy, their
skill, the perfection of their machinery, and their judicious
use of the advantages of combined labour. Whether they
like it or not, a double quantity ‘of labour will not raise, on the
same land, a double quantity of food, unless some improye-
ment takes place in the processes of cultivation. Whether


ms ty mre oom
aE LST


oar Se eae IESE SEES —s : me


240 BOOK Il. CHAPTER I. § l.


they like it or not, the unproductive expenditure of indivi- ’
duals will pro tanto tend to impoverish the community, and
only their productive expenditure will enrich it. The
opinions, or the wishes, which may exist on these different
matters, do not control the things themselves. We cannot
indeed foresee to what extent the modes of production may
be altered, or its powers increased, by future extensions of -
our knowledge of the laws of nature, suggesting new pro-
cesses of industry of which we have at present no conception.
But howsoever we may succeed in making for ourselves
more space within the limits set by the constitution of things,
those limits exist; there are ultimate laws, which we did
not make, which we cannot alter, and to which we can only
conform.

It is not so with the Distribution of Wealth. That is a
matter of human institution, solely. The things once there,
mankind, individually or collectively, can do with them as
they like. They can place them at the disposal of whomso-
ever they please, and on whatever terms. Further, in the
social state, in every state except total solitude, any disposal
whatever of them can only take place by the general consent
of society. Even what a person has produced by his indi-
vidual toil, unaided by any one, he cannot keep unless it is
the will of society that he should. Not only can society
take it from him, but individuals could and would take it
from him, if society only remained passive; if it did not

- either interfere en masse, or employ and pay people for the
purpose of interfering, to prevent him from being disturbed
ete ane et Sane
which it is determined ae Ae z oe) fe ee 2
the community make on ic ee py cea a Coes 2
eae aes - ae very different in different

mankind so chose. : i e still more different, if
eaet tence ee, a mankind, doubtless, are not
consequences of the funda-


———


PROPERTY.


241


mental laws of human nature, and of the constitution of the
planet which we inhabit, modified by local or special peculia-
nities. But the laws of the generation of human opinions
are not within our present subject. They are part of the
general theory of human progress, a far larger and more
dificult subject of inquiry than political economy. We have
here to consider, not the causes, but the consequences, of the
rules according to which wealth may be distributed. Those,
at least, are as little arbitrary, and have as much the charac-
ter of physical laws, as the laws of production. Human
beings can control their own acts, but not the consequences
of their acts, even on their own minds. Society can subject
the distribution of wealth t@ whatever rules it thinks best;
but what practical results shall flow from the operation of
those rules, society cannot choose, but must be content to
learn.

We proceed then to the consideration of the different
modes of distributing the produce of land and labour, which
have been adopted in practice, or may be conceived in theory.
Among these, our attention is first claimed by that primary
and fundamental institution, on which, unless in some excep-
tional and very limited cases, the economical arrangements
of society have always rested, although in its secondary
features it has varied and is hable to vary. I mean, of
course, the institution of individual property.


§ 2. Private property, as an institution, did not owe its
origin to any of those considerations of utility, which plead
so strongly for the maintenance of it when established.
Enough is known of rude ages, both from history and from
analogous states of society in our own time, to show, that
tribunals (which always precede laws) were originally
established, not to determine rights, but to repress violence
and terminate quarrels. With this object chiefly in view,
they naturally enough gave legal effect to first occupancy, by
treating as the aggressor the person who first commenced


VOL. IT. R


et : es i
Ayu 4 i}
mie oa |

‘a. (aM
me tee


en ne ee ea


242 BOOK II. CHAPTERI. § 2.


violence, by turning, or attempting to turn, another out of
possession. The preservation of the peace, which was the
original object of civil government, was thus attained; while,
by confirming to those who already possessed it, even what
was not the fruit of personal exertion, a guarantee was in-
cidentally given to them and others that they would be pro-
tected in what was so.

In considering the institution of pro
in social philosophy, we must leave out 0
actual origin in any of the existing nations
we may suppose a community unhampered by any previous
possession ; a body of colonists, occupying for the first time
an uninhabited country; bringing’ nothing with them but what
belonged to them in common, and having a clear field for
the adoption of the institutions and polity which they judged
most expedient: free therefore to choose whether they would
conduct the work of production on the principle of individual
property, or on some system of common ownership and col-
lective agency.

If private property were adopted, we must
it would be accompanied by none of the initia
and injustices which obstruct the beneficial operation of the
principle in old societies. Every full grown man or woman,
we must suppose, would be secured in the unfettered use
and disposal of his or her bodily and mental faculties; and
the instruments of production, the land and tools, would be
divided fairly among them, so that all might start, 10 respect
to outward appliances, on equal terms. It is even possible
to conceive that in this original apportionment, compensa-
tion might be made for the injuries of nature; and the balance
redressed by assigning to the less robust members of the
community advantages in the distribution, sufficient to put
them on a par with the rest. But the division, once ™a°%
would not again be interfered with ; individuals would be lett
to their own exertions and to the ordinary cha
making an advantageous use of what was assigned


perty as a question
f consideration its
of Europe, and


presume that
] inequalities


nees, for
O them.


es oe ee Ni


SE RIOT = a


PROPERTY. 243


If individual property, on the contrary, were excluded, the
plan which must be adopted would be to hold the land and
all instruments of production as the joint property of the
community, and to carry on the operations of industry on the
common account. The direction of the labour of the com-
munity would devolve upon a magistrate or magistrates,
whom we may suppose elected by the suffrages of the com-
munity, and whom we must assume to be voluntarily obeyed
by them. The division of the produce would in like manner
be a public act. The principle might either be that of com-
plete equality, or of apportionment to the necessities or deserts
of individuals, in whatever manner might be conformable to
the ideas of justice or policy prevailing in the community.
Examples of such associations, on a small scale, are the
monastic orders, the Moravians, the followers of Rapp, and
others; and from the plausible remedy which they hold out
for the miseries and iniquities of a state of much inequality
of wealth, schemes for a larger application of the same idea
have reappeared and become popular at all periods of active
speculation on the first principles of society. In an age like
the present, when a general reconsideration of all first prim-
ciples is felt to be inevitable, and when for the first time in
history the most suffering portions of the community have a
voice in the discussion, it was impossible but that ideas of
this nature should spread far and wide. Owenism, or Social-
ism, in this country, and Communism on the Continent, are
the most prevailing forms of the doctrme. These suppose a
democratic government of the industry and funds of society,
and an equal division of the fruits. In the more refined and
elaborate form of the same scheme, which attained a temporary
celebrity under the name of St. Simonism, the administering
authority was supposed to be a monarchy or aristocracy, not
of birth but of capacity; the remuneration of each member of
the community being by salary, proportioned to the import-
ance of the services supposed to be rendered by each to the


general body.
R 2


244 BOOK II. CHAPTER I. § 3.


§ 3. It would be too much to affirm that communities
constituted on either of these principles could not perma-
nently subsist. That a country of any large extent could be
formed into a single “Co-operative Society,” is indeed not
easily conceivable. The nearest approach to it ever realized
seems to have been the government of Peru under the Incas,
a despotism held together by a superstition ; not likely to be
erected into a type for modern aspirations, although it ap-
peared mild and beneficent to those who contrasted it with
the iron rule which took its place*. But a country might be
covered with small Socialist communities, and these might
have a Congress to manage their joint concerns. The scheme
is not what is commonly meant by impracticable. Supposing
that the soil and climate were tolerably propitious, and that
the several communities, possessing the means of all neces-
sary production within themselves, had not to contend in the
general markets of the world against the competition of
societies founded on private property, I doubt not that by a
very rigid system of repressing population, they might be
able to live and hold together, without positive discomfort.
This would be a considerable improvement, so far as the
great majority are concerned, over those existing states of
society in which no restraint at all is placed on population,
or in which the restraint is very inadequate.

The objection ordinarily made to a system of community
of property and equal distribution of the produce, that each
person would be incessantly occupied in evading his fair
share of the work, is, I think, in general considerably over-
stated. There is a kind of work, hitherto more indispen-
sable than most others, that of fighting, which is never con-
ducted on any other than the co-operative system; and neither
in a rude nor in a civilised society has the supposed difficulty
been experienced. Education and the current of opinion hav-
ing adapted themselves to the exigency, the sense of honour


* See Prescott’s “ History of the Conquest of Peru.”


ne er et a


COMMUNISM. 245


and the fear of shame have as yet been found to operate
with sufficient strength; and common sentiment has sanc-
tioned the enforcement by adequate penalties, upon those not
sufficiently influenced by other motives, of rules of discipline
certainly not deficient in rigidity. The same sanctions would
not fail to attach themselves to the operations of industry,
and to secure, as indeed they are found to do in the Moravian
and similar establishments, a tolerable adherence to the pre-
scribed standard of duty. The deficiency would be of mo-
tives to exceed that minimum standard. In war, the question
lies between great success and great failure, between losing
a battle and gaining it, perhaps between being slaves and
conquerors: and the circumstances of the case are stirring
and stimulating to the feelings and faculties. The common
operations of industry are the reverse of stirring and stimu-
lating, and the only direct result of extra exertion would
be a trifling addition to the common stock shared out among
the mass. Mankind are capable of a far greater amount of
public spirit than the present age is accustomed to suppose
possible. But if the question were that of taking a great
deal of personal trouble to produce a very small and uncon-
spicuous public benefit, the love of ease would preponderate.
Those who made extra exertions would expect and demand
that the same thing should be required from others and made
a duty; and in the long run, little more work would be per-
formed by any, than could be exacted from all: the limit to
all irksome labour would be the amount which the majority
would consent to have made compulsory on themselves.
But the majority, even in our present societies, where the
intensity of competition and the exclusive dependence of
each on his own energies tend to give a morbid strength to
the industrial spirit, are almost everywhere indolent and
unambitious; content with little, and unwilling to trouble
themselves in order to make it more. The standard of
industrial duty would therefore be fixed extremely low.
There are, no doubt, some kinds of useful exertion, to which


246 BOOK Il. CHAPTER I. $3.


the stimulus would not be weakened in the same degree.
Invention is one of these. Invention is in itself an agreeable
exercise of the faculties; and when applied successfully to
the diminution of labour or the satisfaction of the physical
wants of the community, it would in any society be a source
of considerable éclat. But though to invent is a pleasant
operation, to perfect an invention and render it practical is
a dull and toilsome one; requiring also means and appli-
ances which, in a society so constructed, no one would
possess of his own. The many and long-continued trials
by which the object is at last attained, could only be made
i, by first persuading the majority that the scheme would be
. advantageous; and might be broken off at the very time
when the work approached completion, if the patience of the
majority became exhausted. We might expect therefore
that there would be. many projects conceived, and very few
perfected: while, the projects being prosecuted, if at all, at
the public expense and not at the projector’s, if there was
. any disposition to encourage them, the proportion of bad :
le schemes to good would probably be even greater than at
: present.

i It must be further observed, that the perfect equality
contemplated in the theory of the scheme could not be really
attained. The produce might be divided equally, but how
could the labour? There are many kinds of work, and by
what standard are they to be measured one against another?
Who is to judge how much cotton spinning, or distributing
‘a goods from the stores, or bricklaying, or chimney sweeping,
Ba is equivalent to so much ploughing? In the existing system

of industry these things do adjust themselves with some,


aslo TN aida


‘ :

| cs but a distant, approach to fairness. If one kind of
work is harder or more disagreeable than another, or requires
j a longer practice, it is better paid, simply because there are


{ te: competitors for it; and an individual generally finds
at % se earn most by doing the thing which he is fittest
or. admit that this self-adjusting machinery does not


COMMUNISM. 247


touch some of the grossest of the existing inequalities of
remuneration, and in particular the unjust advantage pos-
sessed by almost the commonest mental over almost the
hardest and most disagreeable bodily labour; Employments
which require any kind of technical education, however sim-
ple, have hitherto been the subject of a real monopoly as
against the mass. But as popular instruction advances, this
monopoly is already becoming less complete, and every
increase of prudence and foresight among the people en-
croaches upon it more and more. On the Communist system
the impossibility of making the adjustment between different
qualities of labour is so strongly felt, that the advocates of
the scheme usually find it necessary to provide that all
should work by turns at every description of useful labour:
an arrangement which, by putting an end to the division of
employments, would sacrifice the principal advantage which
co-operative production possesses, and would probably reduce
the amount of production still lower than in our supposition.
And after all, the nominal equality of labour would be so
great a real inequality, that justice would revolt against its
being enforeed. All persons are not equally fit for all
labour; and the same quantity of labour is an unequal bur-
then on the weak and the strong, the hardy and the delicate,
the quick and slow, the dull and the intelligent.

Assuming, however, all the success which is claimed for
this state of society by its partisans, it remains to be con-
sidered how much would be really gained for mankind, and
whether the form that would be given to life, and the charac-
ter which would be impressed on human nature, can satisfy
any but a very low estimate of the capabilities of the species.
Those who have never known freedom from anxiety as to
the means of subsistence, are apt to overrate what is gained
for positive enjoyment by the mere absence of that uncer-
tainty. The necessaries of life, when they have always been
secure for the whole of life, are scarcely more a subject of
consciousness or a source of happiness than the elements.


248 BOOK Il. CHAPTER I. § 3.


There is little attractive in a monotonous routine, without
vicissitudes, but without excitement; a life spent in the
enforced observance of an external rule, and performance of
a prescribed task: in which labour would be devoid of its
chief sweetener, the thought that every effort tells perceptibly
on the labourer’s own interests or those of some one with
whom he identifies himself; in which no one could by his
own exertions improve his condition, or that of the objects of
his private affections ; in which no one’s way of life, oceupa-
tions, or movements, would depend on choice, but each
would be the slave of all: a social system in which identity
of education and pursuits would impress on all the same un-
varying type of character, to the destruction of that multiform
developement of human nature, those manifold unlikenesses,
that diversity of tastes and talents, and variety of intellectual
points of view, which by presenting to each innumerable
notions that he could not have conceived of himself, are the
great stimulus to intellect and the mainspring of mental and
moral progression. The perfection of social arrangements
would be to secure to all persons complete independence and
freedom of action, subject to no restriction but that of not
doing injury to others: but the scheme which we are con-
sidering abrogates this freedom entirely, and places every
action of every member of the community under command.

I am aware it may be said that the great majority of the
species already suffer, in the existing state of society, all the
disadvantages whieh I ascribe to the Communist system. The
factory labourer has as monotonous, indeed a more monoto-
nous existence, than a member of an Owenite community;
working a greater number of hours, and at the same dull
eecupauor without the alternation of employment which the
Socialist scheme provides. The generality of labourers, in
this and most other countries, have as little choice of occu-
pation or freedom of locomotion, are practically as dependant
on fixed rules and on the will of others, as they could be
on any system short of actual slavery; to say nothing of the


COMMUNISM. 249


entire domestic subjection of one half the species, to whom
it is the signal honour of Owenism and most other forms of
Communism that they assign equal rights, in all respects,
with those of the hitherto dominant sex. Again, it may be
said of almost all labourers, on the present system, namely of
all who work by the day, or for a fixed salary, that labouring
for the gain of others, not for their own, they have no interest
in doing more than the smallest quantity of work which will
pass as a fulfilment of the mere terms of their engagement.
Production, therefore, it may be said, should be at least as
inefficient on the present plan, as it would be from a similar
cause under the other.

To take the last argument first, it is true that, for the
very reason assigned, namely, the insufficient interest which
day-labourers have in the result of their labour, there is a
natural tendency in such labour to be extremely inefficient :
a tendency only to be overcome by vigilant superintendence
on the part of persons who ae interested in the result. The
“master’s eye” is notoriously the only security to be relied
on. If a delegated and hired superintendence is found
effectual, it is when the superimtendents themselves are well
superintended, and have a high salary and a privileged situa-
tion to lose on being found neglectful of their trust. Super-
intend them as you will, day-labourers are so much inferior
to those who work by the piece, that the latter system is
practised in all industrial occupations to which it is con-
veniently applicable. And yet it is by no means true that
day-labourers, under the present arrangements, have no in-
ducements of private interest to energetic action. They have
a strong inducement, that of gaining a character as work-
men, which may secure them a preference in employment;
and they have often a hope of promotion, and of rising in the
world, nor is that hope always disappointed. Where no such
possibility is open to the labouring classes, their condition is
confessedly wrong, and demands a remedy. With respect to
the other objections which I have anticipated, I freely admit


250 BOOK If. CHAPTER I. § 4.


them. I believe that the condition of the operatives in a
well-regulated manufactory, with a great reduction of the
hours of labour and a considerable variety of the kind of it,
is very like what the condition -of all would be in a Socialist
community. I- believe that the majority would not exert
themselves for any thing beyond this, and that unless they
did, nobody else would ; and that on this basis human life
would settle itself into one invariable round. But to main-
tain even this state, the limitation of the propagative powers
of the community must be as much a matter of public regu-
lation as everything else; since under the supposed arrange-
ments prudential restraint would no longer exist. Now, if
we suppose an equal degree of regulation to take place under
the present system, either compulsorily, or, what would be so
much preferable, voluntarily; a condition at least equal to
what the Socialist system offers to all, would fall to the lot of
the least fortunate, by the mere action of the competitive
principle. Whatever of pecuniary means or freedom of
action any one obtained beyond this, would be so much to
be counted in favour of the competitive system. It is an
abuse of the principle of equality to demand that no indivi-
dual be permitted to be better off than the rest, when his
being so makes none of the others worse off than they other-
wise would be. ,


§ 4. These arguments, to my mind conclusive against
Communism, are not applicable to St. Simonism, a system of
far higher intellectual pretensions than the other; constructed
with greater foresight of objections, and juster appreciation of
them; grounded on views of human nature much less limited,
and the work altogether of larger and more accomplished
minds, by most of whom accordingly, what was erroneous
in their theory has long ago been seen and abandoned. The
St. Simonian scheme does not contemplate an equal, but
an unequal division of the produce; it does not propose
that all should be occupied alike, but differently, according


COMMUNISM. 251


to their vocation or capacity; the function of each being
assigned, like grades in a regiment, by the choice of the
directing authority, and the remuneration being by salary,
proportioned to the importance, in the eyes of that autho-
rity, of the function itself, and the merits of the person who
fulfils it. For the constitution of the ruling body, different
plans might be adopted, consistently with the essentials of the
system. It might be appointed by popular suffrage. In the
idea of the original authors, the rulers were supposed to be
persons of genius and virtue, who obtained the yoluntary
adhesion of the rest by mere force of mental superiority,
through a religious feeling of reverence and subordination.
Society, thus constituted, would wear as diversified a face as
it does now; would be still fuller of interest and excitement,
would hold out even more abundant stimulus to individual
exertion, and would nourish, it is to be feared, even more of
rivalries and animosities than at present. That the scheme
might in some peculiar states of society work with advantage,
I will not deny. There is indeed a successful experiment,
of a somewhat similar kind, on record, to which I have once
alluded; that of the Jesuits, in Paraguay. A race of savages,
belonging to a portion of mankind more averse to consecu-
tive exertion for a distant object than any other authentically
Inown to us, was brought under the mental dominion of
civilized and instructed men who were united among them-
selves by a system of community of goods. To the absolute
authority of these men they reverentially submitted them-
selves, and were induced by them to learn the arts of civilized
life, and to practise labours for the community which ‘no
inducement that could have been offered would have prevailed
on them to practise for themselves. This social system was
of short duration, being prematurely destroyed by diplo-
matic arrangements and foreign force. That it could be
brought into action at all was probably owing to the immense
distance in point of knowledge and intellect which separated
the few rulers from the whole body of the ruled, without any


252 BOOK IJ. CHAPTER I. § 5.


intermediate orders, either social or intellectual. In any
other circumstances it would probably have been a complete
failure; and we may venture to say that in no Kuropean
community could it have even the partial success, which
might really be obtained by an association on the principle of
Communism. It supposes an absolute despotism in the heads
of the association; which would probably not be much im-
proved if the depositaries of the despotism (contrary to the
views of the authors of the system) were varied from time to
time according to the result of a popular canvass. But to
suppose that one or a few human beings, howsoever selected,
could, by whatever machinery of subordinate agency, be
qualified to adapt each person’s work to his capacity, and
proportion each person’s remuneration to his merits—to be,
in fact, the dispensers of distributive justice to every member
of a community, were it even the smallest that ever had a
separate political existence—or that any use which they could
make of this power would give general satisfaction, or would
be submitted to without the aid of force—is a supposition
almost too chimerical to be reasoned against. A fixed rule,
like that of equality, might be acquiesced in, and so might
chance, or an external necessity; but that ahandful of human
beings should weigh everybody in the balance, and give more
to one and less to another at their sole pleasure and judg-
ment, would not be borne unless from persons believed to be
more than men, and backed by supernatural terrors.


§ 5. There has never been imagined any mode of dis-
tributing the produce of industry, so well adapted to the
requirements of human nature on the whole, as that of letting
the share of each individual (not in a state of bodily or men-
tal incapacity,) depend in the main on that individual’s own
energies and exertions, and on such furtherance as may be
obtained from the voluntary good offices of others. It is not
the subversion of the system of individual property that
should be aimed at; but the improvement of it, and the


PROPERTY. 253


participation of every member of the community in its bene-
fits. The principle of private property has never yet had a
fair trial in any country; and less so, perhaps, in this country
than in some others. The social arrangements of modern
Europe commenced from a distribution of property which
was the result, not of just partition, or acquisition by industry,
but of conquest and violence: and notwithstanding what in-
dustry has been doing for many centuries to modify the work
of force, the system still retains many traces of its origin.
The laws of property have never yet conformed to the prin-
ciples on which the justification of private property rests.
They have made property of things which never ought to be
property, and absolute property where only a qualified pro-
perty ought to exist. They have not held the balance fairly
between human beings, but have heaped impediments upon
some, to give advantages to others; they have purposely fos-
tered inequalities, and prevented all from starting fair in the
race. That all should indeed start on perfectly equal terms,
is inconsistent with any law of private property: but if as
much pains as has been taken to aggravate the inequality of
chances arising from the natural working of the principle,
had been taken to temper that inequality by every means not
subversive of the principle itself; if the tendency of legisla-
tion had been to favour the diffusion, instead of the concen-
tration of wealth, to encourage the subdivision of the large
masses, instead of striving to keep them together; the prin-
ciple of individual property would have been found to have
no real connexion with the physical and social evils which
have made so many minds turn eagerly to any prospect of
relief, however desperate.

It is, at the same time, undeniable that an increasing
power of co-operation in any common undertaking, is one of
the surest fruits, and most accurate tests, of the progress of
civilization: and we may expect, as mankind improve, that


joint enterprises of many kinds, which would now be im-
practicable, will be successively numbered among possibili-


254 BOOK IJ. CHAPTER I. $§ 5.


ties, thus augmenting, to an indefinite extent, the powers of
the species. But the proper sphere for collective action lies
in the things which cannot be done by individual agency,
either because no one can have a sufficiently strong personal
interest in accomplishing them, or because they require an
assemblage of means surpassing what can be commanded by
one or a few individuals. Where individual agency is at all
suitable, it is almost always the most suitable; working, as
it does, with so much greater intensity of motive when the
object is personal, with so much stronger a sense of respon-
sibility when it is public, and in either case with a feeling of
independence and individual power, unknown to the members
of a body under joint government.


CHAPTER II.


THE SAME SUBJECT CONTINUED.


§ 1. Iris next to be considered, what is included in the
idea of private property, and by what considerations the
applicability of the principle is bounded.

The institution of property, reduced to its essential ele-
ments, consists in the recognition, in each person, of a right
to the exclusive disposal of what he or she have. produced by
their own exertions, or received by gift or fair agreement,
without force or fraud, from those who produced it. The
foundation of the whole is, the right of producers to what
they themselves have produced. It may be objected, there-
fore, that the institution as it now exists, recognizes rights of
property in individuals over things which they have not pro-
duced. For example, (it may be said,) the operatives in a
manufactory create, by their labour and skill, the whole pro-
duce; yet instead of its belonging to them, the law gives
them only their stipulated hire, and transfers the produce to
some one who has merely supplied the funds, without perhaps
contributing anything to the work itself, even in the form of
superintendence. The answer to this is, that the labour of
manufacture is only one of the conditions which must
combine for the production of the commodity. The labour
cannot be carried on without materials and machinery, nor
without a stock of necessaries provided in advance, to main-
tain the labourers during the production. All these things
are the fruits of previouslabour. If the labourers were pos-
sessed of them, they would not need to divide the produce
with any one; but since they have them not, an equivalent
must be given to those who have, both for the antecedent
labour, and for the abstinence by which the produce of that


256 BOOK II. CHAPTER Ii. § 1.


labour, instead of being expended on indulgences, has been
reserved for this use. The capital may not have been, and
in most cases was not, created by the labour and abstinence
of the present possessor; but it was created by the labour
and abstinence of some former person, who, by gift or con-
tract, transferred his claims to the present capitalist; and the
abstinence at least must have been continued by each succes-
sive owner, down to the present. The terms of co-operation
between present labour and the fruits of past labour, are a
subject for adjustment between the two parties. ach is
necessary to the other. The capitalist can do nothing with-
out labourers, nor the labourers without capital. It may be
said, they do not meet on an equal footing: the capitalist, as
the richer, can take advantage of the labourer’s necessities,
and make his conditions as he pleases. He could do so, un-
doubtedly, if he were but one. The capitalists collectively
could do so, if they were not too numerous to combine, and
act asa body. But as things are, they have no such advan-
tage. Where combination is impossible, the terms of the
contract depend on competition, that is, on the amount of
capital which the collective abstinence of society has pro-
vided, compared with the number of the labourers. If the
labourers compete for employment, the capitalists on their
part compete for labour, to the full extent of the circulating
capital of the country. A joint administration on account of
the state, would not make the fund go further, or afford better
terms to the labourers, unless either by enforcing, on the
society collectively, greater abstinence, or by limiting more
strictly the number of the labouring population. It is im-
possible to increase the quotient that falls to the share of
each labourer, without either augmenting the dividend, or
diminishing the divisor.

The right of property includes, then, the freedom of
acquiring by contract. The right of each to what he has
produced, implies a right to what has been produced by
others, if obtained by their free consent, and without fraud;


PROPERTY, 257


since the producers must either have given it from good will,
or exchanged it for what they esteemed an equivalent, and to
prevent them from doing so would be to infringe their right
of property in the product of their own industry.


§ 2. Before proceeding to consider the things which the
principle of individual property does not include, we must
specify one more thing which it does include: and this is,
that a title, after a certain period, shall be given by prescrip-
tion. According to the fundamental idea of property, indeed,
nothing ought to be treated as such, which has been acquired
by force or fraud, or appropriated in ignorance of a prior
title vested in some other person; but it is necessary to the
security of rightful possessors, that they should not be
molested by charges of wrongful acquisition, when by the
lapse of time witnesses must have perished or been lost sight
of, and the real character of the transaction can no longer be
cleared up. Possession which has not been legally ques-
tioned within a moderate number of years, ought to be, as by
the laws of all nations it is, a complete title. Even when
the acquisition was wrongful, the dispossession, after a gene-
ration has elapsed, of the probably bona fide possessors, by
the revival of a claim which had been long dormant, would
generally be a greater injustice, and almost always a greater
private and public mischief, than leaving the original wrong
without atonement. It may seem hard that a claim origi-
nally just, should be defeated by mere lapse of time; but
there is a time after which (even looking at the individual
case, and without regard to the general effect on the security
of possessors), the balance of hardship turns the other way.
With the injustices of men as with the convulsions and dis-
asters of nature, the longer they remain unrepaired, the
greater become the obstacles to repairing them, arising from
the after-growths which would have to be torn up or broken
through. Inno human transactions, not even in the simplest
and clearest, does it follow that a thing is fit to be done now,


VOL. I. s


258 BOOK Il. CHAPTER II. § 3.


because it was fit to be done sixty years ago. It is scarcely
needful to remark, that these reasons for not disturbing acts
of injustice of old date, cannot apply to unjust systems or
institutions; since a bad law or usage is not one bad act, m
the remote past, but a perpetual repetition of bad acts, as
long as the law or usage lasts.

Such, then, being the essentials of private property, it is
now to be considered, to what extent the forms in which the
institution has existed in different states of society, or still
exists, are necessary consequences of its principle, or are
recommended by the reasons on which it is grounded.


§ 3. Nothing is implied in property but the right of each
to his own faculties, to what he can produce by them, and to
whatever he can get for them in a fair market: together with
his right to give this to another person if he chooses, and the
right of that other to receive and enjoy it.

It follows, therefore, that although the right of bequest,
or gift after death, forms part of the idea of private property,
the right of inheritance, as distinguished from bequest, does
not. That the property of a person who has made no dis-
position of it during his lifetime, should pass first to his
children, and failing them, to his nearest relations, may bea
proper arrangement or not, but is no consequence of the
principle of private property. Although there belong to the
decision of such questions many considerations besides those
of political economy, it is not foreign to the plan of this work
to suggest, for the judgment of thinkers, the view of them
which most recommends itself to the writer’s mind.

No presumption in favour of existing ideas on this sub-
ject is to be derived from their antiquity. In early ages,
the property of a deceased person passed to his children and
nearest relatives by so natural and obvious an arrangement
that no other could ever have been thought of in competition
with it. In the first place, they were usually present on the
spot; they were in possession, and if they had no other title,


INHERITANCE. 259


had that, so important in an early state of society, of first
occupancy. Secondly, they were already, in a manner, joint
owners of his property during his life. If the property was
in land, it had generally been conferred by the State on a
family rather than on an individual: if it consisted of cattle
or moveable goods, it had probably been acquired, and was
certainly protected and defended, by the united efforts of all
members of the family who were of an age to work or fight.
Exclusive individual property, in the modern sense, scarcely
entered into the ideas of the time; and when the first magis-
trate of the association died, he really left nothing vacant but
his own share in the division, which devolved on the member
of the family who succeeded to his authority. To have dis-
posed of the property otherwise, would have been to break
up a little commonwealth, united by ideas, interest, and habits,
and to cast them adrift on the world. These considerations,
though rather felt than reasoned about, had so great an, in-
fluence on the minds of mankind, as to create the idea of an
inherent right in the children to the possessions of their
ancestor ; a right which it was not competent to himself to
defeat. Bequest, in a primitive state of society, was seldom
recognized ; a clear proof, were there no other, that property
was conceived in a manner totally different from the con-
ception of it in the present time.

But the feudal family, the last historical form of patri-
archal life, has long perished, and the unit of society is
not now the family or clan, composed of all the reputed
descendants of a common ancestor, but the individual ; or at
most a pair of individuals, with their unemancipated children.
Property is now inherent in individuals, not in families ; the
children when grown up do not follow the occupations or
fortunes of the parent: if they participate in his pecuniary
means it is at his pleasure, and not by a voice in the owner-
ship and government of the whole, but generally by the
exclusive enjoyment of a part: and in this country at least


(except as far as entails or other settlements are an obstacle)
32


=i


260 BOOK II. CHAPTER JI. § 3.


it is in his power to disinherit even his children, and leave
his fortune to strangers. More distant relatives are in general
almost as completely detached from the family and its inte-
rests as if they were in no way connected with it. The
only claim they are supposed to have on their richer rela-
tions is to a preference, ceteris paribus, in good offices, and
some aid in case of actual necessity.

So great a change in the constitution of society must
make a considerable difference in the grounds on which the
disposal of property by inheritance should rest. The rea-
sons usually assigned by modern writers for giving the pro-
perty of a person who dies intestate, to the children, or
nearest relatives, are first, the supposition that im so dispos-
ing of it, the law is more likely than in any other mode to do
what the proprietor himself would have done, if he had done
anything; and secondly, the hardship, to those who lived with
their parent and partook in his opulence, of being cast down
from the enjoyments of wealth into poverty and privation.

There is force in both these arguments. The law certainly
ought to do, for the children or dependants of an intes-
tate, whatever it was the duty of the parent or protector to
have done, but from accident or negligence or worse causes
he failed to do. Whether it would be possible, by means of
a public administrator of intestate estates, to take cognizance
of special claims and see justice done in detail, is a question
of some difficulty into which I forbear to enter. I shall
only consider what might with best reason be laid down as
a general rule.

We may first remark, that in regard to collateral rela-
tions, it is not, unless from special and peculiar causes, the
duty of any one to make a pecuniary provision for them.
No one now expects it, unless there happen to be no direct
heirs; nor would it be expected even then, if the expecta-
tion were not created by the provisions of the law in case
of intestacy. I see, therefore, no reason why collateral
inheritance should exist at all. Mr. Bentham long ago pro-


INHERITANCE, 261


posed, and other high authorities have agreed in the opi-
nion, that if there are no heirs either in the descending or
in the ascending line, the property, in case of intestacy,
should escheat to the State. There is no good reason why
the accumulations of some childless miser should on his
death (as every now and then happens) go to enrich a distant
relative who never saw him, who perhaps never knew him-
self to be related to him until there was something to be
gained by it, and who had no moral claim upon him of any
kind, more than the most entire stranger. Where collaterals
have real claims, those claims are personal, and the proper
mode of paying regard to them is by bequest. That duty
may be neglected, but is not more likely to be so in the case
of relatives than of strangers, who may have just as strong
claims of the same nature. If any near relatives, known to
be such, were in a state of indigence, a donation, or a small
pension, according to circumstances, might, in case of intes-
tacy, be assigned to them when the State appropriated the
inheritance. This would be a justice, or a generosity, which
they do not experience from the present law, since that gives
all to the nearest collaterals, however great may be the
necessities of those more distant.

The claims of children are of a different nature: they are
real, and indefeasible. But even of these, I venture to think
that the measure usually taken 1s an erroneous one: what is
due to children is in some respects underrated, in others, as
it appears to me, exaggerated. One of the most binding of
all obligations, that of not bringing children into the world
unless they can be maintained in comfort, and brought up
with a likelihood of its continuance, is both disregarded in
practice and made light of in theory in a manner disgraceful
to human intelligence. On the other hand, when the parent
possesses property, the claims of the children upon it seem to
me to be the subject of an opposite error. Whatever fortunea
parent may have inherited, or, still more, may have acquired,
I cannot admit that he owes to his children, merely because


: 7


262 BOOK IJ. CHAPTER II. § 3.


they are his children, to leave them rich, without the neces-
sity of any exertion. I could not admit it, even if to be so
left were always, and certainly, for the good of the children
themselves. But this is in the highest degree uncertain. It
depends on individual character. Without supposing extreme
cases, it may be affirmed that in a majority of instances the
good not only of society but of the individuals would be better
consulted by bequeathing to them a moderate, than a large
provision. This, which is a commonplace of moralists an-
cient and modern, is felt to be true by many intelligent
parents, and would be acted upon much more frequently, if
they did not allow themselves to consider less what really
is, than what will be thought by others to be, advantageous
to the children.

The duties of parents to their children are those which
are indissolubly attached to the fact of causing the existence
of a human being. The parent owes to society to endea-
vour to make the child a good and valuable member of it,
and owes to his children to provide, so far as depends on
him, such education, and such appliances and means, as will
enable them to start with a fair chance of a successful life.
To this every child has a claim; and I cannot admit, that
as a child he has a claim to more. There is a case in which
these obligations present themselves nakedly, without any
extrinsic circumstances to disguise or confuse them: it is
that of an illegitimate child. To such a child it is generally
felt that there is due from the parent, the amount of pro-
vision for his welfare which will enable him to make his
life on the whole a desirable one. I hold that to no child,
merely as such, anything more is due, than what is admitted
to be due to an illegitimate child: and that no child for
whom thus much has been done, has, unless on the score of
previously raised expectations, any grievance, if the remainder
of the parent’s fortune is devoted to public uses, or to the
benefit of individuals on whom in the parent’s opinion it is
better bestowed.


INHERITANCE. 263


In order to give the children that fair chance of a desir-.
able existence, to which they are entitled, it is generally
necessary that they should not be brought up from childhood
in habits of luxury which they will not have the means of
indulging in after-life. This, again, is a duty often flagrantly
violated by possessors of terminable incomes, who have
little property to leave. When the children of rich parents
have lived, as to a certain degree it is natural they should do,
in habits corresponding to the scale of expenditure in which
the parents indulge, it is generally the duty of the parents to
make a greater provision for them, than would suffice for
children otherwise brought up. I say generally, because even
here there is another side to the question. It is a proposi-
tion quite capable of being maintained, that to a strong
nature, which has to make its way against narrow circum-
stances, to have known early some of the feelings and expe-
riences of wealth, is on the whole an advantage both in the
formation of character and in the happiness of life. But
ordinary rules of conduct are not framed to suit strong
natures, and it is mostly true, that children havea just ground
of complaint, who have been brought up more luxuriously
than they are afterwards enabled to live. Their claim, there-
fore, is good to a provision bearing some relation to the mode
of their bringing up. But this too is a claim which, though
just in itself, is particularly liable to be stretched further than
its reasons warrant. ‘The case is exactly that of the younger
children of the nobility and landed gentry, the bulk of whose
fortune passes to the eldest son. The other sons, who are
usually numerous, are brought up in the same habits of lux-
ury as the future heir, and they receive, as a younger bro-
ther’s portion, generally what the reason of the case dictates,
namely, enough to support, in the habits of life to which they
are accustomed, themselves, but not a wife and children. It
really is no grievance to any man, that for the means of
marrying and of supporting a family, he has to depend on his
own exertions.


wa abd en


Pn et ao


264 BOOK Il. CHAPTER Il. § 4.


A provision, then, such as is admitted to be reasonable
in the case of illegitimate children, of younger children,
wherever in short the justice of the case, and the real interests
of the individuals and of society, are the only things consi-
dered, is, I conceive, all that parents owe to their children,
and all, therefore, which the state owes to the children of
those who die intestate. The surplus, if any, I hold that it
may rightfully appropriate to the general purposes of the
community. I would not, however, be so far misunderstood
as to be supposed to recommend that parents should not do
more for their children than what, merely as children, they
have a moral right to. In some cases it is imperative, in
many laudable, and in all allowable, to do much more. For
this however, the means are afforded by the liberty of
bequest. It is due, not to the children but to the parents,
that they should have the power of showing marks of affec-
tion, of requiting services and sacrifices, and of bestowing
their wealth according to their own preferences, or their own
judgment of fitness.


§ 4. Whether the power of bequest should itself be sub-
ject to limitation, is an ulterior question of no little import-
ance. Unlike inheritance ab intestato, bequest is one of the
attributes of property: the ownership of a thing cannot be
looked upon as complete without the power of bestowing it,
at death or during life, at the owner’s pleasure: and all the
reasons, which recommend that private property should
exist, recommend pro tanto this extension of it. But pro-
perty is only a means to an end, not itself the end. Like all
other proprietary rights, and even in a greater degree than
most, the power of bequest is liable to conflict with objects
still more important. It does so, when, not content with
bequeathing an estate to A, the testator prescribes that on
A’s death it shall pass to his eldest son, and to that son’s
son, and so on for ever. No doubt, persons have occasion-
ally exerted themselves more strenuously to acquire a fortune,


BEQUEST. 265


from the hope of founding a family in perpetuity; but the mis-
chiefs to society of such perpetuities outweigh the value of this
incentive to exertion, and the incentives im the case of those
who have the opportunity of making large fortunes are strong
enough without it. A similar abuse of the power of bequest
is committed when a person who does the meritorious act of
leaving property for public uses, attempts to prescribe the
details of its application in perpetuity; when in founding a
place of education (for instance) he dictates, for ever, what
doctrines shall be taught. It bemg impossible that any one
should know what doctrines will be fit to be taught after he
has been dead for centuries, the law ought not to give effect
to such dispositions of property, unless subject to the perpe-
tual revision (after a certain interval has elapsed) of a fitting
authority.

These are obvious limitations. But even the simplest
exercise of the right of bequest, that of determining the
person to whom property shall pass immediately on the
death of the testator, has always been reckoned among the
privileges which might be limited or varied, according to
views of expediency. The limitations, hitherto, have been
almost solely in favour of children. In England the right is
in principle unlimited, almost the only impediment being
that arising from a settlement by a former proprietor, in
which case the holder for the time cannot indeed bequeath
his possessions, but only because there is nothing to be-
queath, he having merely a life interest. By the Roman
law, on which the civil legislation of the Continent of Europe
is principally founded, bequest originally was not permitted
at all, and even after it was introduced, a legitima portio was
compulsorily reserved for each child: and such is still the
law in some of the Continental nations. By the French
law since the Revolution, the parent can only dispose by
will, of a portion equal to the share of one child, each of the
children taking an equal portion. This entail, as it may be
called, of the bulk of every one’s property upon the children


i‘
i"
8
He
fe
\
¥
; :


266 BOOK II. CHAPTER II. § 4.


collectively, seems to me as little defensible in principle as
an entail in favour of one child, though it does not shock so
directly the sentiment of justice. It is questionable whether
parents should be compelled to leave to their children even
that provision which, as children, I have contended that
they have a moral claim to. Children may forfeit that claim
by general unworthiness, or particular ill-conduct to the
parents: they may have other resources or prospects: what
has been previously done for them, in the way of education
and advancement in life, may fully satisfy their moral claim;
or others may have claims superior to theirs. If they are of
age and strength to provide, however humbly, for themselves,
the maintenance of some authority in the parent by the
power of disinheriting, is perhaps expedient. But how-
ever the case may be as to a mere provision, I hold that
justice and expediency are wholly against compelling any-
thing beyond. That a person should be certain from child-
hood of succeeding to a large fortune independently of the
good will and affection of any human being, is, unless under
very favourable influences of other kinds, almost a fatal cir-
cumstance in his education.

The extreme restriction of the power of bequest in French
law, was adopted as a democratic expedient, to break down
the custom of primogeniture, and counteract the tendency of
inherited property to collect in large masses. I agree in
thinking these objects eminently desirable; but the means
used are not, I think, the most judicious. Were I framing
a code of laws according to what seems to me best in itself,
without regard to existing opinions and sentiments, I should
prefer to restrict, not what any one might bequeath, but
what any one should be permitted to acquire, by bequest or
inheritance. ach person should have power to dispose by
will of his whole property; but not to lavish it in enriching
some one individual, beyond a certain maximum, which
should be fixed sufficiently high to afford the means of com-
fortable independence. The inequalities of property which


BEQUEST. 267


arise from unequal industry, frugality, perseverance, talents,
and even opportunities, are inseparable from the principle of
private property, and if we accept the principle, we must
bear with these consequences of it: but I see nothing
objectionable in fixing a limit to what any one may acquire
by the mere favour of others, without any exercise of his
faculties, and in requiring that if he desires any further
accession of fortune, he shall work for it. I do not conceive
that the degree of limitation which this would impose on the
right of bequest, would be felt as a burthensome restraint
by any testator who estimated a large fortune at its true
value, that of the pleasures and advantages that can be pur-
chased with it: on even the most extravagant estimate of
which, it must be apparent to every one, that the difference
to the happiness of the possessor between a moderate inde-
pendence and five times as much, is insignificant when
weighed against the enjoyment that might be given, and the
permanent benefits diffused, by some other disposal of the
four-fifths. So long indeed as the opinion practically pre-
vails, that the best thing which can be done for an object of
affection is to heap on him to satiety all the external good
things of life, there might be little use in enacting such a
law, even if it were possible to get it passed, since if there
were the inclination, there would generally be the power of
evading it. The law would be unavailing unless the popular
sentiment went energetically along with it; which (judging
from the tenacious adherence of public opinion in France to
the law of compulsory division,) it would in some states of
society and government be very likely to do, however much
the contrary may be the fact in England and at the present
time. If the restriction could be made practically effectual,
the benefit would be great. Wealth which could no longer
be employed in enriching a few, would either be devoted to
objects of public usefulness, or if bestowed on individuals,
would be distributed among a larger number. While those
enormous fortunes which no one needs for any purpose but


268 BOOK II. CHAPTER II, § 5.


© ph NOR es ae ED


ostentation or improper power, would become much less
numerous, there would be a great multiplication of families
in easy circumstances, with the advantages of leisure, and all
the real enjoyments which wealth can give, except those of
vanity; a class by whom the services which a nation is
entitled to expect from its leisured classes, either by their
direct exertions or by the tone they give to the feelings and
tastes of the public, would be rendered in a much more
beneficial manner than at present. A large portion also of
the accumulations of successful industry would probably be
devoted to public uses, either by direct bequests to the State,
or by the endowment of institutions; as is already done very
largely in the United States, where the ideas and practice in


the matter of inheritance seem to be unusually rational and
beneficial *,


$5. The next point to be considered is, whether the


reasons on which the institution of property rests, are appli-
cable to all things in which a right of exclusive ownership is
at present recognized ; and if not, on what other grounds the
recognition is defensible.


* “Munificent bequests and donations for public purposes, whether


charitable or educational, form a striking feature in the modern history of
the United States, and especially of New England. Not only is it common
for rich capitalists to leave by willa portion of their fortune towards the
endowment of national institutions, but individuals during their lifetime
make magnificent grants of money for the same objects. There is here no
compulsory law for the equal partition of property among children, as in
France, and on the other hand, no custom of entail or primogeniture, as
England, so that the affluent feel themselves at liberty to share their wealth
between their kindred and the public; it being impossible to found a
family, and parents having frequently the happiness of seeing all their
children well provided for and independent long before their death. I
have seen a list of bequests and donations made during the last thirty
years for the benefit of religious, charitable, and literary institutions in
the state of Massachusetts alone, and they amounted to no less a sum than


six millions of dollars, or more than a million sterling.”—Lyell’s Travels
in America, Vol, i., p. 263.


PROPERTY IN LAND. 269


The essential principle of property being to assure to all
persons what they have produced by their labour and accu-
mulated by their abstinence, this principle cannot apply to
what is not the produce of labour, the raw material of the
earth. If the land derived its productive power wholly from
nature, and not at all from industry, or if there were any
means of discriminating what is derived from each source, it
not only would not be necessary, but it would be the height
of injustice, to let'the gift of nature be engrossed by a few.
The use of the land in agriculture must indeed, for the
time being, be of necessity exclusive: the same person who
has ploughed and sown must be permitted to reap: but the
land might be occupied for one season only, as among the
ancient Germans; or might be periodically redivided as
population increased; or the State might be the universal
landlord, and the cultivators tenants under it, either on lease
or at will.

But though iand is not the produce of industry, most of
its valuable qualities are so. Labour is not only requisite
for using, but almost equally so for fashioning, the instru-
ment. Considerable labour is often required at the com-
mencement, to clear the land for cultivation. In many cases,
even when cleared, its productiveness is wholly the effect of
labour and art. The Bedford Level produced little or nothing
until artificially drained. The bogs of Ireland, until the
same thing is done to them, can produce little besides fuel.
One of the barrenest soils in the world, composed of the
material of the Goodwin Sands, the Pays de Waes in Flanders,
has been so fertilized by industry, as to have become one of
the most productive in Europe. Cultivation also requires
buildings and fences, which are wholly the produce of labour.
The fruits of this industry cannot be reaped in a short period.
The labour and outlay are immediate, the benefit is spread
over many years, perhaps over all future time. A holder
will not incur this labour and outlay when his successors and
not himself will be benefited by it. If he undertakes such


AS


270 BOOK Il. CHAPTER II. § 6.


improvements, he must haye a long period before him in
which to profit by them: and he cannot continue always to
have a long time before him, unless his tenure is per-
petual*.


§ 6. These are the reasons which form the justification,
in an economical point of view, of property in land. It is
seen, that they are only valid, in so far as the proprietor of
land is its improver. Whenever, in any country, the pro-
prietor, generally speaking, ceases to be the improver, poli-
tical economy has nothing to say in defence of landed pro-


* “Qe qui donnait ) Phomme Vintelligence et la constance dans ses
travaux, ce qui lui faisait diriger tous ses efforts vers un but utile 4 sa race,
c’était le sentiment de la perpétuité. Les terrains les plus fertiles sont
toujours ceux que les eaux ont déposés le long de leur cours, mais ce sont
aussi ceux qu’elles menacent de leurs inondations ou qu’elles corrompent
par des marécages. Avec la garantie de la perpétuité, Vhomme entreprit
de longs et pénibles travaux pour donner aux marécages un écoulement,
pour éléver des digues contre les inondations, pour répartir par des canaux
d’arrosement des eaux fertilisantes sur les mémes champs que les memes
eaux condamnaient & la stérilité. Sans la méme garantie, ’homme, ne se
contentant plus des fruits annuels de la terre, a démélé parmi la végétation
sauvage les plantes vivaces, les arbustes, les arbres qui pouvaient Ini étre
utiles, il les a perfectionnés par la culture, il a changé en quelque sorte leur
essence, et il les a multipliés. Parmi les fruits, en effet, on en reconnait
que des siécles de culture ont seuls pu amener 2 la perfection qu’ils ont
atteinte anjourd’hui, tandis que d’autres ont été importés des régions les
plus lointaines. L’homme en méme temps a ouvert la terre jusqu’a une
grande profondeur, pour renouveler son sol, et le fertiliser par le mélange
de ses parties et les impressions de Vair; il a fixé sur les collines la terre
qui s’en échappait, et il a couvert la face entiére de la campagne d’une
végétation partout abondante, et partout utile a la race humaine. Parmi
ses travaux, ily en a dont il ne recueillera le fruit qu’au bout de dix ou de
vingt ans; il y en a d’autres dont ses derniers neyeux jouiront encore
dans plusieurs siécles. Tous ont concouru 2 augmenter la force productive
de Ja nature, 4 donner 4 Ja race humaine un reyenu infiniment plus abon-
dant, un revenu dont une portion considérable est consommée par ceux
qui n’ont point part & la propriété territoriale, et qui cependant n’auraient
point trouvé de nourriture sans ce partage du sol qui semble les ayoir
deshérités.”—Sismondi, Etudes sur V Economie Politique, Troisiéme Essai,
De la Richesse Territoriale.


PROPERTY IN LAND. 971


perty, as there established. In no sound theory of private
property was it ever contemplated that the proprietor of land
should be merely a sinecurist quartered on it.

In Great Britain, the landed proprietor is not unfre-
quently an improver. But it cannot be said that he is gene-
rally so. And in the majority of cases he grants the liberty
of cultivation on such terms, as to prevent improvements
from being made by any one else. In the southern parts of
the island, as there are usually no leases, permanent im-
provements can scarcely be made except by the landlord’s
capital: accordingly the South, compared with the North of
England, and with the Lowlands of Scotland, is extremely
backward in agricultural improvement. The truth is, that
any very general improvement of land by the landlords, is
hardly compatible with a law or custom of primogeniture.
When the land goes wholly to the heir, it generally goes to
him severed from the pecuniary resources which would
enable him to improve it, the personal property being
absorbed by the provision for younger children, and the
land itself often heavily burthened for the same purpose.
There is therefore but a small proportion of landlords who
have the means of making expensive improvements, unless
they do it with borrowed money, and by adding to the mort-
gages with which in most cases the land was already bur-
thened when they received it. But the position of the owner
of a deeply mortgaged estate is sO precarious; economy is so
unwelcome to one whose apparent fortune greatly exceeds
his real means, and the vicissitudes of rent and price which
only trench upon the margin of his income, are so formidable
to one who can call little more than that margin his own;
that it is no wonder if few landlords find themselves in a
condition to make immediate sacrifices for the sake of future
profit. Were they ever so much inclined, those alone can
prudently do it, who have seriously studied the principles of
scientific agriculture: and great landlords have seldom seri-
ously studied anything. They might at least hold out in-


272 BOOK Il, CHAPTER I, § 6.


ducements to the farmers to do what they will not or cannot
do themselves; but even in granting leases, it is in England
a general complaint that they tie up their tenants by coye-
nants grounded on the practices of an obsolete and exploded
agriculture; while most of them, by withholding leases alto-
gether, and giving the farmer no guarantee of possession
beyond a single harvest, keep the land on a footing little
more favourable to improvement than in the time of our
barbarous ancestors,


—— immetata quibus jugera liberas
Fruges et Cererem ferunt,
Nec cultura placet longior annua.


Landed property in England is thus very far from com-
pletely fulfilling the conditions which render its existence
economically justifiable. But if insufficiently realized even
in England, in Ireland those conditions are not complied with
atall. With individual exceptions (some of them very
honourable ones), the owners of Irish estates do nothing for
the land but drain it of its produce. What has been epi-
grammatically said in the discussions on “peculiar burthens”
is literally true when applied to them; that the greatest
“‘burthen on land” is the landlords. Returning nothing to
the soil, they consume its whole produce, minus the potatoes
strictly necessary to keep the inhabitants from dying of
famine; and when they have any notion of improvement, it
consists in not leaving even this pittance, but turning out the
people, to beggary if not to starvation. When landed pro-
perty has placed itself upon this footing it ceases to be defen-
sible, and the time has come for making some new arrange-
ment of the matter.

When the “sacredness of property” is talked of, it should
always be remembered, that this sacredness does not belong
in the same degree to landed property. No man made the
land. It is the original inheritance of the whole species
Public reasons exist for its being appropriated. But if those
reasons lost their force, the thing would be unjust. It is no


PROPERTY IN LAND. 7/3)


hardship to anyone, to be excluded from what others have
produced. They were not bound to produce it for his use,
and he loses nothing by not sharing in what otherwise would
not have existed at all. But it is some hardship to be born
into the world and to find all nature’s gifts previously en-
grossed, and no place left for the new-comer. ‘To reconcile
people to this, after they have once admitted into their minds
the idea that any moral rights belong to them as human
beings, it will always be necessary to convince them that the
exclusive appropriation is good for mankind on the whole,
themselves included. But this is what no sane human being
could be persuaded of, if the relation between the landowner
and the cultivator were the same everywhere as it is in
Ireland.

Landed property is felt, even by those most tenacious of
its rights, to be a different thing from other property; and
where the bulk of the community have been disinherited of
their share of it, and it has become the exclusive attribute
of a small minority, men have generally tried to reconcile it,
at least in theory, to their sense of justice, by endeavouring
- to attach duties to it, and erecting it mto a sort of magis-
tracy, either moral or legal. But if the state is at liberty to
treat the possessors of land as public functionaries, it is only
going one step farther to say, that it is at liberty to discard
them. 'The claim of the landowners to the land is altogether
subordinate to the general policy of the state. The principle
of property gives them no right to the land, but only a right
to compensation for whatever portion of their interest in
the land it may be the policy of the state to deprive
them of. To that, their claim is indefeasible. It is due to
landowners, and to owners of any property whatever,
recognized as such by the state, that they should not be
dispossessed of it without receiving its full pecuniary value,
or an annual income equal to what they derived from it.
This is due on the general principles ‘on which property
rests. If the land was bought with the produce of the


VOL. I. UP


; Q74 BOOK Il. CHAPTER It. § 6.


labour and abstinence of themselves or their ancestors, com-
pensation is due to them on that ground ; even if otherwise,
it is still due on the ground of prescription. Nor can it ever
be necessary for accomplishing an object by which the com-
munity altogether will gain, that a particular portion of the
community should be immolated. When the property is of
; a kind to which peculiar affections attach themselves, the
4 compensation ought to exceed a bare pecuniary equivalent. :
el But, subject to this proviso, the state is at liberty to deal with :
“| landed property as the general interests of the community may
require, even to the extent, if it so happen, of doing with
a the whole, what is done with a part whenever a bill is
! passed for a railroad or a new street. I do not pretend that
occasions can often arise in which so drastic a measule
would be fit to be taken into serious consideration, oF that it
should be thought of as any thing else than an extreme remedy,
which may happen to be the only suitable one for an extreme
case. But even if this ultimate prerogative of the state |
could never require to be actually exercised, it ought mever-
weit theless to be asserted, because the principle which permits
the greater of two things permits the less, and though to do
all which the principle would sanction might never be advis-
able, to do much less than all not only may be so, but often
is so in a very high degree. The community has too much
at stake in the proper cultivation of the land, and in the con-
ai ditions annexed to the occupancy of it, to leave these things
i to the discretion of a class of persons called landlords, when
they have shown themselves unfit for the trust. The legisla-
ture, which if it pleased might convert the whole body of
landlords into fundholders or pensioners, might, a fortiort,
commute the average receipts of Irish landowners into a
fixed rent charge, and raise the tenants into proprietors ;
supposing always (without which these acts would be nothing
better than robbery,),that the full market value of the land
was tendered to the landlords, in case they preferred that to
accepting the conditions proposed.


+

ey
bey

5


nih sa
eat


per a as


“a


PROPERTY IN LAND. 275


There will be another place for discussing the various
modes of landed property and tenure, and the advantages and
inconveniences of each; in this chapter our concern is with
the right itself, the grounds which justify it, and (as a corol-
lary from those grounds,) the conditions by which it should
be limited. To me it seems almost an axiom that property
in land should be interpreted strictly, and that the balance in
all cases of doubt should incline against the proprietor. The
reverse is the case with property in moveables, and in all
things the product of labour: over these, the owner’s power
both of use and of exclusion should be absolute, except
where positive evil to society would result from it; but in
the case of land, no exclusive right should be permitted in
any individual, which cannot be shown to be productive of
positive good. ‘To be allowed any exclusive right at all, over
a portion of the common inheritance, while there are others
who have no portion, is already a privilege. No quantity of
moveable goods which a person can acquire by his labour,
prevents others from acquiring the like by the same means;
but from the very nature of the case, whoever owns land,
keeps it from somebody else. The privilege, or monopoly,
is only defensible as a necessary evil: it becomes an injustice
when carried to any point to which the compensating good
does not follow it.

For instance, the exclusive right to the land for purposes
of cultivation does not imply an exclusive right to it for pur-
poses of access; and no such right ought to be recognized,
except to the extent necessary to protect the produce against
damage, and the owner’s privacy against invasion. The pre-
tension of two Dukes to shut up a part of the Highlands,
and exclude the rest of mankind from many square miles of
mountain scenery to prevent disturbance to wild animals,
is an abuse; it exceeds the legitimate bounds of landed pro-
perty. When land is not intended to be cultivated, no good
reason can in general be given for its being private property
at all; and if any man is permitted to call it his, he ought to


2


276 BOOK If. GHAPTER II. § 7.

know that he holds it by sufferance of the community, and
on an implied condition that his ownership, since it cannot
possibly do them any good, at least shall not deprive them
of any, which they could have derived from the land if it
had been unappropriated. Even in the case of cultivated
land, a man whom, though only one among millions, the
law permits to hold thousands of acres as his single share,
is not entitled to think that all this is given to him t
use and abuse, and deal with as if it concerned nobody
but himself. The rents or profits which he can obtain from
it are his, and his only; but with regard to the land, in
everything which he does with it, and in everything which he
abstains from doing, he is morally bound, and should when-
ever the case admits be legally compelled, to make his inte-
rest and pleasure consistent with the public good. The
species at large still retains, of its original claim to the soil of
the planet which it inhabits, as much as is compatible with
the purposes for which it has parted with the remainder.


§ 7. Besides property in the produce of labour, and
property in land, there are other things which are oT have
been subjects of property, in which no proprietary rights
ought to exist at all. But as the civilized world has m
general made up its mind on most of these, there is no neces-
BIby, for dwelling on them in this place. At the head of them,
1s property in human beings. It is almost superfluous 1
observe, that this institution can have no place m any society
even pretending to be founded on justice, or on fellowship
oe human creatures. But, iniquitous as it is, yeb
when the state has expr i S ing:
for generations, have Le eee ee ee
sanction of law, it is another Ee f Saran ie t

i : quity to abolish the propery
without full compensation. This wrong was avoided by the
great measure of justice in 1833, probably the most virtuous
act, as well as one of the most practically beneficent, eve?
done collectively by a nation, Other exan 5 ty

xamples of proper)


PROPERTY. 277


which ought not to have been created, are properties in public
trusts; such as judicial offices under the old French regime,
and the heritable jurisdictions which, in countries not wholly
emerged from feudality, pass with the land. Our own
country affords, as cases in point, that of a commission in
the army, and of an advowson, or right of nomination to an
ecclesiastical benefice. A property is also sometimes created
in a right of taxing the public; in a monopoly, for instance,
or other exclusive privilege. These abuses prevail most in
semibarbarous countries; but are not without example in
the most civilized. In France there are several important
trades and professions, including notaries, attorneys, brokers,
appraisers, printers, even bakers and butchers, of which
the numbers are limited by law. The brevet or privilege of
one of the permitted number consequently brings a high
price in the market. There is in England a court of jus-
tice (the Palace Court at Westminster) in which the num-
ber of barristers permitted to practise is restricted to four,
who buy their places from their predecessors. In these
yarlous cases, compensation probably could not with justice
be refused, on the abolition of the privilege. There are
other cases in which this would be more doubtful. The ques-
tion would turn upon what, in the peculiar circumstances,
was sufficient to constitute prescription; and whether the
legal recognition which the abuse had obtained, was sufficient
to constitute it an institution, or amounted only to an occa-
sional licence. It would be absurd to claim compensation
for losses caused by changes in a tariff, a thing confessedly
variable from year to year; or for monopolies like those
granted to individuals by Queen Elizabeth, favours of a des-
potic authority, which the power that gave was competent at
any time to recal.

So much on the institution of property, a subject of
which, for the purposes of political economy, it was indis-
pensable to treat, but on which we could not usefully confine

ourselves to economical considerations. We have now to


278 BOOK Il. CHAPTER Il. § 7.


inquire on what principles and with what results the distri-
bution of the produce of land and labour is effected, under
the relations which this institution creates among the different
members of the community.


CHAPTER III.


OF THE CLASSES AMONG WHOM THE PRODUCE IS
DISTRIBUTED.


§ 1. Private property being assumed as a fact, we have
next to enumerate the different classes of persons to whom
it gives rise; whose concurrence, or at least whose permission,
is necessary to production, and who are therefore able to
stipulate for a share of the produce. We have to inquire,
according to what laws the produce distributes itself among
these classes, by the spontaneous action of the interests of
those concerned: after which, a further question will be,
what effects are or might be produced by laws, institutions,
and measures of government, in superseding or modifying
that spontaneous distribution.

The three requisites of production, as has been so often
repeated, are labour, capital, and land: understanding by
capital, the means and appliances which are the accumulated
results of previous labour, and by land, the materials and
instruments supplied by nature, whether contained in the
interior of the earth, or constituting its surface. Since each
of these elements of production may be separately appropri-
ated, the industrial community may be considered as divided
into landowners, capitalists, and productive labourers. Each
of these classes, as such, obtains a share of the produce: no
other person or class obtains anything, except by concession
from them. ‘The remainder of the community is, in fact,
supported at their expense, giving, if any equivalent, one
consisting of unproductive services. These three classes
therefore are considered in political economy as making up
the whole community.


280 BOOK IJ. CHAPTER Ill. § 2.


§ 2. But although these three sometimes exist as separate
classes, dividing the produce among them, they do not
necessarily or always so exist. The fact is so much other-
wise, that there are only one or two communities in which
the complete separation of these classes is the general rule,
England and Scotland, with parts of Belgium and Holland,
are almost the only countries in the world, where the land,
capital, and labour employed in agriculture, are generally the
property of separate owners. The ordinary case is, that the
same person owns either two of these requisites, or all three.

The case in which the same person owns all three, em-
braces the two extremes of society, in respect to the inde-
pendence and dignity of the labouring class. First, when
the labourer himself is the proprietor. Thisis the commonest
case in the Northern States of the American Union; one of
the commonest in France, Switzerland, the three Scandi-
navian kingdoms, and parts of Germany” ; and a common


* ©The Norwegian return” (say the Commissioners of Poor Law
Enquiry, to whom information was furnished from nearly every country in
Europe and America by the ambassadors and consuls there) “states that
at the last census in 1825, out of a population of 1,051,318 persons, there
were 59,464 freeholders. As by 59,464 freeholders must be meant 59,464
heads of families, or about 300,000 individuals; the freeholders must form
more than a fourth of the whole population. Mr. Macgregor states that in
Denmark (by which Zealand and the adjoining islands are probably meant)
out of a population of 926,110, the number of landed proprietors and
farmers is 415,110, or nearly one-half. In Sleswick Holstein, out of a popu-
lation of 604,085, it is 196,017, or about one-third. The proportion of pro-
prietors and farmers to the whole population is not given in Sweden; but
the Stockholm return estimates the average quantity of land annexed toa
labourer’s habitation at from one to five acres; and though the Gottenburg
return gives a lower estimate, it adds, that the peasants possess much of the
land. In Wurtemberg we are told that more than two-thirds of the
labouring population are the proprietors of their own habitations, and that
almost all own at least a garden of from three-quarters of an acre to an acre
and a half.” In some of these statements, proprietors and farmers are not
discriminated; but “all the returns concur in stating the number of day-
labourers to be very small.”—(Preface to Foreign Communications, p. XXXVill.)
As the general status of the labouring people, the condition of a workman
for hire is almost peculiar to Great Britain.


CLASSES WHO DIVIDE THE PRODUCE. 281


case in parts of Italy and in Belgium. In all these countries
there are, no doubt, large landed properties, and a still
greater number which, without being large, require the occa-
sional or constant aid of hired labourers. Much, however,
of the land is owned in portions too small to require any
other labour than that of the peasant and his family, or fully
to occupy even that. The capital employed is not always
that of the peasant proprietor, many of these small proper-
ties being mortgaged to obtain the means of cultivating; but
the capital is invested at his risk, and though he pays interest
for it, it gives to no one any right of interference, except
perhaps eventually to take possession of the land, if the
interest ceases to be paid.

The other case in which the land, labour, and capital,
belong to the same person, is the case of slave countries, in
which the labourers themselves are owned by the landowner.
Our West India colonies before emancipation, and the sugar
colonies of the nations by whom a similar act of justice is
still unperformed, are examples of large establishments for
agricultural and manufacturmg labour (the production of
sugar and rum is a combination of both) in which the land,
the factories (if they may be so called), the machinery, and
the degraded labourers, are all the property of a capitalist. In
this case, as well as in its extreme opposite, the case of the
peasant proprietor, there is no division of the produce.


§ 3. When the three requisites are not all owned by the
same person, it often happens that two of them are so.
Sometimes the same person owns the capital and the land,but
not the labour. The landlord makes his engagement directly
with the labourer, and supplies the stock necessary for culti-
vation. ‘This system is the usual one in those parts of Con-
tinental Europe, in which the labourers are neither serfs on
the one hand, nor proprietors on the other. It was the
common system in France before the Revolution, and is still


much practised in some parts of that country, when the Jand


282 BOOK II. CHAPTER Ill. $§ 3.


is not the property of the cultivator. It prevails generally
in the level districts of Italy, except those purely pastoral,
such as the Maremma of Tuscany and the Campagna of
Rome. On this system the division of the produce is be--
tween two classes, the landowner and the labourer.

In other cases again the labourer does not own the land,
but owns the little stock employed upon it, the landlord not
being in the habit of supplying any. This system generally
prevails in Ireland. It is nearly universal in India, and in
most countries of the East; whether the government retains,
as it generally does, the ownership of the soil, or allows por-
tions to become, either absolutely or in a qualified sense, the
property of individuals. In India, however, things are so far
better than in Ireland, that the owner of land is in the habit
of making advances to the cultivators, if they cannot culti-
vate without them. For these advances the native landed
proprietor usually demands high interest; but the principal
landowner, the government, makes them gratuitously, reco-
vering the advance after the harvest, together with the rent.
The produce is here divided as before, between the same two
classes, the landowner and the labourer.

These are the principal variations in the classification of
those among whom the produce of agricultural labour is dis-
tributed. In the case of manufacturing industry there never
are more than two classes, the labourers and the capitalists.
The original artisans in all countries were either slaves, or
the women of the family. In the manufacturing establish-
ments of the ancients, whether on a large or on a small scale,
the labourers were the property of the capitalist. If any
manual labour was thought compatible with the dignity of a
freeman, it was only agricultural labour. The converse sys-
tem, in which the capital was owned by the labourer, was
coeval with free labour, and under it the first great advances
of manufacturing industry were achieved. The artizan owned
the loom or the few tools he used, and worked on his own
account ; or at least ended by doing so, though he usually


CLASSES WHO DIVIDE THE PRODUCE. 9283


worked for another, first as apprentice and next as journey-
man, for a certain number of years before he could be admit-
teda master. But the status of a permanent journeyman, all
his life a hired labourer and nothing more, had no place in
the crafts and guilds of the middle ages. In country villages,
where a carpenter or a blacksmith cannot live and support
hired labourers on the returns of his business, he is even now
his own workman ; and shopkeepers in similar circumstances
are their own shopmen, or shopwomen. But wherever the
extent of the market admits of it, the distinction is now
fully established between the class of capitalists, or employers
of labour, and the class of labourers; the capitalists, in


general, contributing no other labour than that of direction
and superintendence.


CHAPTER IV.


OF COMPETITION, AND CUSTOM.


§ 1. Under the rule of individual property, the division
of the produce is the result of two determining agencies:
Competition, and Custom. It is important to ascertain the
amount of influence which belongs to each of these causes,
and in what manner the operation of one is modified by the
other.

Political economists generally, and English political
economists aboye others, are accustomed to lay almost exclu-
sive stress upon the first of these agencies; to exaggerate
the effect of competition, and take into little account the
other, and conflicting principle. They are apt to express
themselves as if they thought that competition actually does,
in all cases, whatever it can be shewn to be the tendency of
competition to do. This is partly intelligible, if we consider
that only through the principle of competition has political
economy any pretension to the character of a science. So
far as rents, profits, wages, prices, are determined by compe-
tition, laws may be assigned for them. Assume competition :
to be their exclusive regulator, and principles of broad
generality and scientific precision may be laid down, accord-
ing to which’ they will be regulated. The political economist
justly deems this his proper business: and as an abstract or
hypothetical science, political economy cannot be required to
do anything more. But it would be a great misconception
of the actual course of human affairs, to suppose that com-
petition exercises in fact this unlimited sway. I am not
speaking of monopolies, either natural or artificial, or of any
interferences of authority with the liberty of production or
exchange. Such disturbing causes have always been allowed


COMPETITION AND CUSTOM. 285


for by political economists. I speak of cases in which there
is nothing to restrain competition ; no hindrance to it either
in the nature of the case or in artificial obstacles; yet in
which the result is not determined by competition, but by
custom or usage; competition either not taking place at all,
or producing its effect in quite a different manner from that
which is ordinarily assumed to be natural to it.


§ 2. Competition, in fact, has only become in any con-
siderable degree the governing principle of contracts, at a
comparatively modern period. The farther we look back
into history, the more we see all transactions and engage-


ments under the influence of fixed customs. The reason is


evident. Custom is the most powerful protector of the
weak against the strong; their sole protector where there
are no laws or government adequate to the purpose. Cus-
tom is a barrier which, even in the most oppressed condition
of mankind, tyranny is forced in some degree to respect.


To the industrious population, in a turbulent military com-
munity, freedom of competition is a vain phrase; they are
never in a condition to make terms for themselves by it:
there is always a master who throws his sword into the scale,
and the terms are such as he imposes. But though the law
of the strongest decides, it is not the interest nor in general
the practice of the strongest to strain that law to the utmost,
and every relaxation of it has a tendency to become a cus-
tom, and every custom to become a right. Rights thus
originating, and not competition in any shape, determine, in
a rude state of society, the share of the produce enjoyed by
those who produce it. The relations, more especially, be-
tween the landowner and the cultivator, and the payments
made by the latter to the former, are, in all states of society
but the most modern, determined by the usage of the coun-
try. Never until late times have the conditions of the occu-
paney of land been (as a general rule) an affair of com-


286 BOOK Il. CHAPTER Iv. § 2.


petition. The occupier for the time has very commonly
been considered to have a right to retain his holding, while
he fulfils the customary requirements ; and has thus become,
in a certain sense, a co-proprietor of the soil. ven where
the holder has not acquired this fixity of tenure, the terms of
4 occupation have often been fixed and invariable.

In India, for example, and other Asiatic communities
similarly constituted, the ryots, or peasant-farmers, are not
regarded as tenants at will, or even as tenants by virtue of a
lease. In most villages there are indeed some ryots on this .
precarious footing, consisting of those, or the descendants of
those, who have settled in the place at a known and com-
paratively recent period: but all who are looked upon as
descendants or representatives of the original inhabitants,
are thought entitled to retam their land, as long as they pay |
the customary rents. What these customary rents are, or
ought to be, has indeed, in most cases, become a matter of
obscurity ; usurpation, tyranny, and foreign conquest haying
to a great degree obliterated the evidences of them. But
when an old and purely Hindoo principality falls under the
dominion of the British Government, or the management of
its officers, and when the details of the revenue system come
to be inquired into, it is often found that although the de-
mands of the great landholder, the State, have been swelled
by fisca] rapacity until all limit is practically lost sight of
it has yet been thought necessary to have a distinct name
and a separate pretext for each increase of exaction; so that
the demand has sometimes come to consist of thirty or forty
different items, in addition to the nominal rent. This
circuitous mode of increasing the payments assuredly would
not have been resorted to, if there had been an acknowledged
right in the landlord to increase the rent. Its adoption 1s
a proof that there was once an effective limitation, a real
customary rent; and that the understood right of the ryot
to the land, so long as he paid rent according to custom, was


COMPETITION AND CUSTOM. 287


at some time or other more than nominal*. The British
Government of India always simplifies the tenure by con-
solidating the various assessments into one, thus making the
rent nominally as well as really an arbitrary thing, or at
least a matter of specific agreement: but it scrupulously
respects the right of the ryot to the land, though it seldom
leaves him much more than a bare subsistence.

In modern Europe the cultivators have gradually emerged
from a state of personal slavery. The barbarian conquerors
of the Western empire found that the easiest mode of man-
aging their conquests would be to leave the land in the
hands in which they found it, and to save themselves a
labour so uncongenial as the superintendence of troops of
slaves, by allowing the slaves to retain in a certain degree
the control of their own actions, under an obligation to fur-
nish the lord with provisions and labour. A common expe-
dient was to assign to the serf, for his exclusive use, as much
land as was thought sufficient for his support, and to make
him work on the other lands of his lord whenever required.
By degrees these indefinite obligations were transformed
into a definite one, of supplying a fixed quantity of provi-
sions or a fixed quantity of labour: and as the lords, in
time, became inclined to employ their income in the pur-
chase of luxuries rather than in the maintenance of retainers,


the payments in kind were commuted for payments in
money. Hach concession, at first voluntary, and revocable
at pleasure, gradually acquired the force of custom, and was
at last recognised and enforced by the tribunals. In this
manner the serfs progressively rose into a free tenantry, who
held their land in perpetuity on fixed conditions. The con-
ditions were sometimes very onerous, and the people very


“ Tho ancient law books of the Hindoos mention in some cases one-
sixth, in others one-fourth of the produce, as a proper rent; but there is no
evidence that the rules laid down in those books were, at any period of
history, really acted upon.


288 BOOK Il. CHAPTER Iv. § 3.


miserable. But their obligations were determined by the
usage or law of the country, and not by competition.

Where the cultivators had never been, strictly speaking,
in personal bondage, or after they had ceased to be so, the
exigencies of a poor and little advanced society gave rise to
another arrangement, which in some parts of Europe, even
highly improved parts, has been found sufficiently advan-
tageous to be continued to the present day. I speak of the
métayer system. Under this, the land is divided, in small
farms, among single families, the landlord generally supply-
ing the stock which the agricultural system of the country is
considered to require, and receiving, in lieu of rent and pro-
fit, a fixed proportion of the produce. This proportion,
which is generally paid in kind, is usually, (as is implied in
the words métayer, mezzaiuolo, and medietarius,) one-half.
There are places, however, such as the rich volcanic soil of
the Province of Naples, where the landlord takes two-thirds,
and yet the cultivator by means of an excellent agriculture
contrives to live. But whether the proportion is two-thirds
or one-half, it is a fixed proportion; not variable from farm
to farm, or from tenant to tenant. The custom of the coun-
try is the universal rule; nobody thinks of raising or lower-
ing rents, or of letting land on other than the customary
conditions. Competition, as a regulator of rent, has no
existence.


§ 3. Prices, whenever there was no monopoly, came
earlier under the influence of competition, and are much
more universally subject to it, than rents: but that influence
is by no means, even in the present state of intense compe-
tition, so absolute as 1s sometimes assumed. ‘There is no
proposition which meets us in the field of political economy
oftener than this—that there cannot be two prices in the
same market. Such undoubtedly is the natural effect of un-
impeded competition; yet every one knows that there are,
yery often, two prices in the same market. Not only are


.


COMPETITION AND CUSTOM.


there in every large town, and in almost every trade, cheap
shops and dear shops, but the same shop often sells the same
article at different prices to different customers: and, as a
general rule, each retailer adapts his scale of prices to the
class of customers whom he expects. The wholesale trade,
in the great articles of commerce, is really under the domi-
nion of competition. There, the buyers as well as sellers
are traders or manufacturers, and their purchases are not
influenced by indolence or vulgar finery, but are business
transactions. In the wholesale markets therefore it is true
as a general proposition, that there are not two prices at one
time for the same thing: there is at each time and place a
market price, which can be quoted in a price-current. But
retail price, the price paid by the actual consumer, seems
to feel very slowly and imperfectly the effect of competition ;
and when competition does exist, it often, instead of lower-
ing prices, merely divides the gains of the high price among
a greater number of dealers. Hence it is that, of the price
paid by the consumer, so large a proportion is absorbed by
the gains of retailers; and any one who inquires into the
amount which reaches the hands of those who made the
things he buys, will often be astonished at its smallness.
When indeed the market, being that of a great city, holds
out a sufficient inducement to large capitalists to engage in
retail operations, it is generally found a better speculation to
attract a large business by underselling others, than merely
to divide the field of employment with them. This influ-
ence of competition is making itself felt more and more
through the principal branches of retail trade in the large
towns; and the rapidity and cheapness of transport, by
making consumers less dependent on the dealers in their
immediate neighbourhood, are tending to assimilate more
and more the whole country to a large town: but hitherto it
is only in the great centres of business that retail transac-
tions have been chiefly, or even much, determined, by
competition. Elsewhere it rather acts, when it acts at all,
VOL. I. uy


290 BOOK II. GHAPTER Iv. § 3.


“


as an occasional disturbing influence; the habitual regulator
is custom, modified from time to time by notions existing m
the minds of purchasers and sellers, of some kind of equity
or justice. ‘

In many trades the terms on which business is done are

a matter of positive arrangement among the trade, who use
the means they always possess of making the situation of any
member of the body who departs from its fixed customs,
inconvenient or disagreeable. It is well known that the
bookselling trade is one of these, and that notwithstanding
the active spirit of rivalry in the trade, competition does not
produce its natural effect in breaking down the trade rules.
All professional remuneration is regulated by custom. The
fees of physicians, surgeons, and barristers, the charges of
attorneys, are nearly invariable. Not certainly for want of
abundant competition in those professions, but because the
competition operates by diminishing each competitor’s chance
of fees, not by lowering the fees themselves.

Since custom stands its ground against competition t
considerable an extent, even where, from the multitude of
competitors and the general energy in the pursuit of gain,
the spirit of competition is strongest, we may be sure that
this is much more the case where people are content with
smaller gains, and estimate their pecuniary interest at a
lower rate when balanced against their ease or their pleasure.
I believe it will often be found, in Continental Europe, that
prices and charges, of some or of all sorts, are much higher
in some places than in others not far distant, without its
being possible to assign any other cause than that it has
always been so: the customers are used to it, and acquiesce
in it. An enterprising competitor, with sufficient capital,
might force down the charges, and make his fortune during
the process; but there are no enterprising competitors; those
who have capital prefer to leave it where it is, or to make less
profit by it in a more quiet way.

These observations must be received as a general correc


0 SO


COMPETITION AND CUSTOM. 291


tion, to be applied whenever relevant, whether expressly
mentioned or not, to the conclusions contained in the subse-
quent portions of this treatise. Our reasonings must, in
general, proceed as if the known and natural effects of com-
petition were actually produced by it, in all cases in which
it is not restrained by some positive obstacle. Where com-
petition, though free to exist, does not exist, or where it
exists but has its natural consequences overruled by any
other agency, the conclusions will fail more or less of being
applicable. ‘To escape error, we ought, in applying the con-
clusions of political economy to the actual affairs of life, to
consider not only what will happen supposing the maximum
of competition, but how far the result will be affected if com-
petition falls short of the maximum.

The states of economical relation which stand first in
order, to be discussed and appreciated, are those in which
competition has no part, the arbiter of transactions being


either brute force or established usage. These will be the
subject of the next four chapters.


CHAPTER V.


hp OF SLAVERY.


§ 1. Amone the forms which society assumes under the
influence of the institution of property, there are, as I have
already remarked, two, otherwise of a widely dissimilar
character, but resembling in this, that the ownership of the
land, the labour, and the capital, is in the same hands. One
of these cases is that of slavery, the other is that of peasant
proprietors. In the one, the landowner owns the labour, in
the other the labourer owns the land. We begin with the
first.

In this system all the produce belongs to the landlord,
The food and other necessaries of his labourers are part of
his expenses. The labourers possess nothing but what he
thinks fit to give them, and until he thinks fit to take it back;
and they work as hard as he chooses, or is able, to compel
them. Their wretchedness is only limited by his humanity, or
his “ enlightened self-interest.” With the first consideration,
we have on the present occasion nothing to do. What the
second in so detestable a constitution of society may dic-
tate, depends on the facilities for importing fresh slaves. If

full-grown able-bodied slaves can be procured in sufficient
numbers, and imported at a moderate expense, enlightened
self-interest will recommend working the slaves to death, and
replacing them by importation, in preference to the slow and
expensive process of breeding them. Nor are the slayve-
owners generally backward in learning this lesson. It is
notorious that such was the practice in our own slave
colonies, while the slave-trade was legal; and it is said to be
so still in Cuba, and in those States of the American Union
which receive a regular supply of negroes from other States.


SLAVERY. 293


When, as among the ancients, the slave-market could
only be supplied by captives either taken in war, or kidnap-
ped from thinly-scattered tribes on the remote confines of the
known world, it was generally more profitable to keep up the
number by breeding, which necessitates a far better treatment
of them; and for this reason, joined with several others, the
condition of slaves, notwithstanding occasional enormities,
was probably much less bad in the ancient world, than in the
colonies of modern nations. The Helots are usually cited
as the type of the most hideous form of personal slavery, but
with how little truth, appears from the fact, that they were
regularly armed (though not with the panoply of the hoplite)
and formed an integral part of the military strength of the
State. They were doubtless an inferior and degraded caste,
but their slavery seems to have been one of the least onerous
varieties of serfdom. Slavery appears in far more frightful
colours among the Romans, during the period in which the
Roman aristocracy was gorging itself with the plunder of a
newly-conquered world. The Romans were a cruel people,
and the worthless nobles sported with the lives of their
myriads of slaves with the same reckless prodigality with
which they squandered any other part of their ill-acquired
possessions. Yet, slavery is divested of one of its worst
features when it is compatible with hope: enfranchisement
was easy and common ; enfranchised slaves obtained at once
the full rights of citizens, and instances were frequent of their
acquiring not only riches, but latterly even honours. By the
progress of milder legislation under the Emperors, much of
the protection of law was thrown round the slave, he became
capable of possessing property, and the eyil altogether
assumed a considerably gentler aspect.

Until, however, slavery assumes the mitigated form of
villenage, in which not only the slave has property and legal
rights, but his obligations are more or less limited by usage,
and he partly labours for his own benefit; his condition.is
seldom such as to produce a rapid growth of population.


294 BOOK II. CHAPTER v. § 2.


This cannot be from physical privation, for no slave-labourers
are worse fed, clothed, or lodged, than the free peasantry of
/ Ireland. The cause usually assigned, is the great dispropor-
1 tion of the sexes which almost always exists where slaves are
| / not bred but imported: this cannot however be the sole
a cause, as the negro population of our West India colonies
continued nearly stationary, after the slave-trade to those
colonies was suppressed. Whatever be the causes, a slave
population is seldom a rapidly increasing one. Slave
countries, unless of very small extent or limited natural
resources, are generally underpeopled in proportion to their
cultivable land. The labour of the slaves, therefore, under
any tolerable management, produces much more than is
sufficient for their support; especially as the great amount of
superintendence which their labour requires, preventing the
dispersion of the population, ensures some of the advantages
of combined labour: Hence, in a good soil and climate, and
with reasonable care of his own interests, the owner of many
slaves has the means of being rich.


§ 2. The influence, however, of such a state of society
on production, is perfectly well understood. It isa truism to
assert, that labour extorted by fear of punishment is inefii-
cient and unproductive. It is true that in some circum-
stances, human beings can be driven by the lash to attempt
and even to accomplish, things which they would not have
undertaken for any payment which it could have been worth
while to an employer to offer them. And it is likely that
productive operations which require much combination of
labour, the production of sugar for example, would not have
taken place so soon in the American colonies, if slavery had
not existed to keep masses of labour together. There are
also savage tribes so averse from regular industry, that in-
dustrial life is scarcely able to introduce itself among them
until they are either conquered or made slaves of, or become
conquerors and make others so. But after allowing the


SLAVERY. 295


full value of these considerations, it remains certain that
slavery, even in the most mitigated form, is incompatible
with any high state of the arts of life, and any real efficiency
of labour. For all products which require much skill, slave
countries are always dependent on foreigners. Hopeless
slavery effectually brutifies the intellect ; and intelligence in
the slaves, though often encouraged in the ancient world and
in the East, is in a more advanced state of society a source
of so much danger and an object of so much dread to the
masters, that in some countries it is a highly penal offence to
teach a slave to read. All processes carried on by slave
labour are conducted in the rudest and most unimproved
manner. And eyen the animal strength of the slave is, on
an average, not half exerted. The mildest form of slavery is
certainly the condition of the serf, who is attached to the
soil, supports himself from his allotment, and works a
certain number of days in the week for his lord. Yet there
is but one opinion on the extreme inefficiency of serf labour.
The following passage is from Professor Jones*, whose Essay
on the Distribution of Wealth (or rather on Rent), is a
copious repertory of valuable facts on the landed tenures of
different countries.

“The Russians, or rather those German writers who
have observed the manners and habits of Russia, state some
strong facts on this point. Two Middlesex mowers, they
say, will mow in a day as much grass as six Russian serfs,
and in spite of the dearness of provisions in England and
their cheapness in Russia, the mowing a quantity of hay
which would cost an English farmer half a copeck, will cost
a Russian proprietor three or four copecksy. The Prussian
counsellor of state Jacob is considered to have proved, that
in Russia, where everything is cheap, the labour of a serf is


i “Essay on the Distribution of Wealth and on the Sources of Taxation. By


the Rey. Richard Jones. Page 50. ’ iF
+ “Schmalz, Economie Politique, French translation, vol. i. p. 66.


Pea i Seats NO a Teer


296 BOOK II. CHAPTER Vv. § 2.

doubly as expensive as that of a labourer in England. M.
Schmalz gives a startling account of the unproductiveness of
serf labour in Prussia, from his own knowledge and observa-
tion*. In Austria, it is distinctly stated, that the labour of
a serf is equal to only one-third of that of a free hired
labourer. This calculation, made in an able work on agri-
culture, (with some extracts from which I have been favoured),
is applied to the practical purpose of deciding on the number
of labourers necessary to cultivate an estate of a given mag-
nitude. So palpable, indeed, are the ill effects of labour
rents on the industry of the agricultural population, that in
Austria itself, where proposals for changes of any kind do
not readily make their way, schemes and plans for the com-
mutation of labour rents are as popular as in the more
stirring German provinces of the North.”

What is wanting in the quality of the labour itself, is not
made up by any excellence in the direction and superintend-
ence. As the same writer} remarks, the landed proprietors
“are necessarily, in their character of cultivators of their
own domains, the only guides and directors of the industry
of the agricultural population,” since there can be no inter-
mediate class of capitalist farmers where the labourers are
the property of the lord. Great landowners are everywhere
an idle class, or if they labour at all, addict themselves only
to the more exciting kinds of exertion; that lion’s share
which superiors always reserve for themselves. “It would,”
as Mr. Jones observes, “be hopeless and irrational to expect,
that a race of noble proprietors, fenced round with privi-
leges and dignity, and attracted to military and political
pursuits by the advantages and habits of their station, should
ever become attentive cultivators as a body.” Even in
England, if the cultivation of every estate depended upon
its proprietor, any one can judge what would be the result-


* “Vol, ii. p. 107.”
+ Jones, pp. 53, 54,


‘


SLAVERY. 297


There would be a few cases of great science and energy, and
numerous individual mstances of moderate success, but the
general state of agriculture would be contemptible.


§ 3. Whether the proprietors themselves would lose by
the emancipation of their slaves, is a different question from
the comparative effectiveness of free and slave labour to the
community. There has been much discussion of this
question as an abstract thesis; as if it could possibly admit
of any universal solution. Whether slavery or free labour is
most profitable to the employer, depends on the wages of
the free labourer. These, again, depend on the numbers of
the labouring population, compared with the capital and the
land. Hired labour is generally so much more efficient than
slave labour, that the employer can pay a considerably greater
value in wages, than the maintenance of his slaves cost him
before, and yet be a gainer by the change: but he cannot do
this without limit. The decline of serfdom in Europe, and
its extinction in the Western nations, was doubtless hastened
by the changes which the growth of population must have
made in the pecuniary interests of the master. As popula-
tion pressed harder upon the land, without any improvement
in agriculture, the maintenance of the serfs necessarily
became more costly, and their labour less valuable. With
the rate of wages such as it is in Ireland, or in England
(where in proportion to its efficiency labour is quite as cheap
as in Ireland,) no one can for a moment imagine that slavery
could be profitable. If the Irish peasantry were slaves, their
masters would be as willing, as their landlords now are, to
pay large sums merely to get rid of them. In the rich and
underpeopled soil of the West India islands, there is just as
little doubt that the balance of profits between free and
slave labour was greatly on the side of slavery, and that the
compensation granted to the slave-owners for its abolition
was not more, but in all probability less, than an equivalent
for their loss.


298 BOOK II. CHAPTER vy. § 3.


More needs not be said here on a cause so completely
judged and decided as that of slavery. It will be curious to
see how long the other nations possessing slave colonies will
be content to remain behind England in a matter of such
concernment both to justice, which decidedly is not at pre-
sent a fashionable virtue, and to philanthropy, which cer-
tainly isso. Europe is far more inexcusable than America
in tolerating an enormity, of which she could rid herself with
so much greater ease. I speak of negro slavery, not of the
servage of the Slavonic nations, who have not yet advanced
beyond a state of civilization corresponding to the age of
villenage in Western Europe, and can only be expected to
emerge from it in the same gradual manner, however much
accelerated by the salutary influence of the ideas of more
advanced countries.


CHAPTER VI.


OF PEASANT PROPRIETORS.


$1. In the régime of peasant properties, as in that of
slavery, the whole produce belongs to a single owner, and
the distinction of rent, profits, and wages, does not exist.
In all other respects, the two states of society are the
extreme opposites of each other. The one is the state of
greatest oppression and degradation to the labouring class.
The other is that in which they are the most uncontrolled
arbiters of their own lot.

The advantage, however, of small properties in land, is
one of the most disputed questions in the range of political
economy. On the Continent, though there are some dis-
sentients from the prevailing opinion, the benefit of having a
numerous proprietary population exists in the minds of most
people in the form of an axiom. But English authorities
are either unaware of the judgment of Continental agricul-
turists, or are content to put it aside, on the plea of their
having no experience of large properties in favourable cir-
cumstances: the advantage of large properties being only
felt where there are also large farms; and as this, in arable
districts, implies a greater accumulation of capital than
usually exists on the Continent, the great Continental estates,
except in the case of grazing farms, are mostly let out for
cultivation in small portions. There is some truth in this;
but the argument admits of being retorted; for if the Con-
tinent knows little, by experience, of cultivation on a large
scale and by large capital, the generality of English writers
are no better acquainted practically with peasant proprietors,
and have almost always the most erroneous ideas of their
social condition and mode of life. Yet the old traditions


Q
Oo


00 BOOK lI. CHAPTER VI. § l.


even of England are on the same side with the general
opinion of the Continent. The “yeomanry” who were
vaunted as the glory of England while they existed, and
have been so much mourned over since they disappeared,
were either small proprietors or small farmers, and if they
were mostly the last, the character they bore for sturdy
independence is the more noticeable. There is a part of
England, unfortunately a very small part, where peasant
proprietors are still common; for such are the “ statesmen”
of Cumberland and Westmoreland, though they pay; I
believe, generally if not universally, certain customary dues,
which, being fixed, no more affect their character of proprie-
tors than the land-tax does. There-is but one voice, among
those acquainted with the country, on the admirable effects
of this tenure of land in those counties. No other agricul-
tural population in England could have furnished the ori-
ginals of Wordsworth’s peasantry *.


* In Mr. Wordsworth’s little descriptive work on the scenery of the
Lakes, he speaks of the upper part of the dales as having been for centuries
“a, perfect republic of shepherds and agriculturists, proprietors, for the
most part, of the lands which they occupied and cultivated. The plough of
each man was confined to the maintenance of his own family, or to the
occasional accommodation of his neighbour. ‘Two or three cows furnished
each family with milk and cheese. The chapel was the only edifice that
presided over these dwellings, the supreme head of this pure common-
wealth; the members of which existed in the midst of a powerful empire,
like an ideal society, or an organized community, whose constitution had
been imposed and regulated by the mountains which protected it. Neither
high-born nobleman, knight, nor esquire was here; but many of these
humble sons of the hills had a consciousness that the land which they
walked over and tilled had for more than five hundred years been pos-
sessed by men of their name and blood. . . Corn was grown in these vales
sufficient upon each estate to furnish bread for each family, no more. The
storms and moisture of the climate induced them to sprinkle their upland
property with outhouses of native stone, as places of shelter for their sheep;
where, in Lene nous weather, food was distributed to them. Every
family spun from its own flock the wool with which it was clothed; a
weaver was here and there found among them, and the rest of their wants
was supplied by the produce of the yarn, which they carded and spun in


PEASANT PROPRIETORS. 301


The general system, however, of English cultivation, afford-
ing no experience to render the nature and operation of pea-
sant properties familiar, and Englishmen being im general pro-
foundly ignorant of the agricultural economy of other countries,
the very idea of peasant proprietors is strange to the Knglish
mind, and does not easily find access to it. Even the forms
of language stand in the way: the familiar designation for
owners of land being “ landlords,” a term to which “tenants”
is always understood as a correlative. When, very recently,
the suggestion of peasant properties as a means of Jrish im-
provement found its way into parliamentary and newspaper
discussions, there were writers of pretension to whom the
word “proprietor” was so far from conyeying any distinct
idea, that they mistook the small holdings of Irish cottier
tenants for peasant properties. The subject being so little
understood, I think it important, before entering into the
theory of it, to do something towards shewing how the case
stands as to matter of fact; by exhibiting, at greater length
than would otherwise be admissible, some of the testimony
which exists respecting the state of cultivation, and the com-
fort and happiness of the cultivators, in those countries and
parts of countries, in which the greater part of the land has
neither landlord nor farmer, other than the labourer who tills
the soil.


§ 2. I lay no stress on the condition of North America
where, as is well known, the land, wherever free from the
curse of slavery, is almost universally owned by the same
person who holds the plough. A country combining the
natural fertility of America with the knowledge and arts of
modern Europe, is so peculiarly circumstanced, that scarcely


their own houses, and carried to market either under their arms, or more
frequently on packhorses, a small train taking their way weekly down. the
valley, or over the mountains, to the most commodious town.”—4 Description
of the Scenery of the Lakes in the North of England, 3rd edit. pp. 50 to 53
and 63 to 65.


tech alt


302 BOOK Il. CHAPTER VI. § 2.


anything, except insecurity of property or a tyrannical
government, could materially impair the prosperity of the
industrious classes. I might, with Sismondi, insist more
strongly on the case of ancient Italy, especially Latium, that
Campagna which then swarmed with inhabitants in the very
regions which under a contrary régime have become uninha-
bitable from malaria. But I prefer taking the evidence of
the same writer on things known to him by personal obser-
vation.

“C’est surtout la Suisse,” says M. de Sismondi, “qu’ll
faut parcourir, qu’il faut étudier, pour juger du bonheur des
paysans propriétaires. C’est la Suisse qu’il faut apprendre
A connaitre pour se convaincre que l’agriculture pratiquée par
ceux-la méme qui en recueillent les fruits suffit pour procurer
une grande aisance 4 une population trés nombreuse; une
grande indépendance de caractére, fruit de l’indépendance
des situations; un grand commerce de consommation, con-
séquence du bien étre de tous les habitans, méme dans un
pays dont le climat est rude, dont le sol est médiocrement
fertile, et ot les gelées tardives et l’inconstance des saisons
détruisent suivent Pespoir du laboureur. On ne saurait vor
sans admiration ces maisons de bois du moindre paysan, Si
vastes, si bien closes, si bien construites, si couvertes de
sculpture. Dans Vintérieur de grands corridors dégagent
chaque chambre de la nombreuse famille; chaque chambre
n’a qu’un lit, et il est abondamment pourvu de rideaux, de
couvertures, et du linge le plus blanc; des meubles soignés
VPentourent; les armoires sont remplies de linge, la laiterie
est vaste, aérée, et d’une netteté exquise; sous le méme toit
on trouve de grands approvisionnemens de blé, de viande
salée, de fromage et de bois; dans les étables on voit le bétail
le mieux soigné et le plus beau de PEurope; le jardin est
planté de fleurs, les hommes comme les femmes sont chaude-
ment et proprement habillés, les dernigres conservent avec
orgueil leur antique costume; tous portent sur leur visage
Pempreinte de la vigueur et dela santé. Que d’autres nations


PEASANT PROPRIETORS. 303


vantent leur opulence, la Suisse pourra toujours leur opposer
avec orgueil ses paysans*.”

The same eminent writer thus expresses his opinion on
peasant proprietorship in general.

“ Partout ot Pon retrouve les paysans propriétaires, on
retrouve aussi cette aisance, cette sécurité, cette confiance
dans Vayenir, cette indépendance qui assurent en méme
temps le bonheur et la vertu. Le paysan qui fait avec ses
enfans tout VPouvrage de son petit héritage, qui ne paie de
fermage a personne au-dessus de lui, ni de salaire 4 personne
au-dessous, qui régle sa production sur sa consommation, qui
mange son propre blé, boit son propre vin, se revét de son
chanvre et de ses laines, se soucie peu de connaitre les prix
du marché; car il a peu 4 vendre et peu a acheter, et il n’est
jamais ruiné par les révolutions du commerce. Loin de
craindre pour Vavenir, il le voit s’embellir dans son espé-
rance; car il met 4 profit peur ses enfans, pour les siécles
qui viendront, chacun des instans que ne requiert pas de lui
le travail de Pannée. Il lui a suffi de donner peu de momens
de travail pour mettre en terre le noyau qui dans cent ans
sera un grand arbre, pour creuser l’aquéduc qui séchera a
jamais son champ, pour former le conduit qui lui aménera
une source d’eau vive, pour améliorer par des soins souvent
répétés mais dérobés sur les instans perdus, toutes les espéces
@animaux et de végétaux dont il s’entoure. Son petit patri-
moine est une vraie caisse d’épargnes, toujours préte a rece-
voir tous ses petits profits, 4 utiliser tous ses momens de
loisir. La puissance toujours agissante de la nature les
féconde, et les lui rend au centuple. Le paysan a vivement
le sentiment de ce bonheur attaché a la condition de proprié-
taire. Aussi est-il toujours empressé d’acheter de la terre a
tout prix. II la paie plus qu’elle ne vaut, plus qu’elle ne lui
rendra peut-étre ; mais combien n’a-t-il pas raison d’estimer


* RBtudes sur V’ Economie Politique, Essai iii. See also to the same effect
Laing’s Notes of a Traveller, p. 354.


ee


ae


304 BOOK Il. CHAPTER VI. $ 2.


a un haut prix Payantage de placer désormais toujours avan-
tageusement son travail, sans étre obligé de Poffrir au rabais;
de trouver toujours au besoin son pain, sans étre obligé de le
payer a l’enchére.

“Le paysan propriétaire est de tous les cultivateurs celui
qui tire le plus de parti du sol; parceque c’est celui qui songe le
plus a Pavenir, tout comme celui qui a été le plus éclairé par
Vexpérience; c’est encore lui qui met le mieux a profit le
travail humain, parceque répartissant ses occupations entre
tous les membres de sa famille, il en réserve pour tous les
jours de V’année, de maniére 4 ce qu'il n’y ait de chomage
pour personne: de tous les cultivateurs il est le plus heureux,
et en méme temps, sur un espace donné, la terre ne nourrit
bien, sans s’€puiser, et n’occupe jamais tant d’habitans que
lorsqu’ils sont propriétaires ; enfin de tous les cultivateurs le
paysan propriétaire est celui qui donne le plus d’encourage-
ment au commerce et 4 Vindustrie, parcequ’il est le plus
mG esa

This picture of unwearied assiduity, and what may be
called affectionate interest in the land, is borne out in regard


* And in another work (Nouveaux Principes d’Economie Politique, liv. ill.,
ch. 3,) he says: “Quand on traverse la Suisse presqu’ entiére, plusieurs
provinces de France, d’Italie, et d’Allemagne, il n’est pas besoin de deman-
der, en regardant chaque partie de terre, si elle appartient & un cultivateur
propriétaire ou 4 un fermier. Les soins bien entendus, les jouissances pré-
parées au laboureur, la parure que la campagne a regue de ses mains, indi-
quent bien vite le premier. TI] est vrai qu’un gouvernement oppressif peut
détruire Vaisance et abrutir Vintelligence que devait donner la propriété,
que l’impot peut enlever le plus net du produit des champs, que Vinsolence
des agens du pouvoir peut troubler la sécurité des paysans, que Vimpossibi-
lité d’obtenir justice contre un puissant voisin peut jeter le découragement
dans l’ame, et que, dans le beau pays qui a été rendu 3 administration du
Roi de Sardaigne, un propri¢taire porte aussi bien qu’un journalier Puni-
forme de la misere.” He is here speaking of Savoy, where the peasants
are generally proprietors; and according to authentic accounts, extremely
miserable. But, as M. de Sismondi continues, “On a beau se conformer 4
une seule des régles de ’économie politique, elle ne peut pas opérer le bien
i elle seule; du moins elle diminue le mal,”


PEASANT PROPRIETORS. 305


to the more intelligent Cantons of Switzerland by English
observers. “In walking anywhere in the neighbourhood of
Zurich,” says Mr. Inglis, “in looking to the right or to the
left, one is struck with the extraordinary industry of the
inhabitants; and if we learn that a proprietor here has a
return of ten per cent, we are inclined to say, ‘he deserves
it.’ I speak at present of country labour, though I believe
that in every kind of trade also, the people of Zurich are
remarkable for their assiduity ; but in the industry they show
in the cultivation of their land I may safely say they are
unrivalled. When I used to open my casement between four
and five in the morning to look out upon the lake and the
distant Alps, I saw the labourer in the fields; and when I
returned from an evening walk, long after sunset, as late,
perhaps, as half-past eight, there was the labourer, mowing
his grass, or tying up his vines. . . . It is impossible to look
at a field, a garden, a hedging, scarcely even a tree, a flower,
or a vegetable, without perceiving proofs of the extreme care
and industry that are bestowed upon the cultivation of the
soil, If for example, a path leads through, or by the side
of a field of grain, the corn is not, as in England, permitted
to hang over the path, exposed to be pulled or trodden down
by every passer by; it is everywhere bounded by a fence,
stakes are placed at intervals of about a yard, and, about two
or three feet from the ground, boughs of trees are passed
longitudinally along. If you look into a field towards even-
ing, where there are large beds of cauliflower or cabbage, you
will find that every single plant has been watered. In the
gardens, which around Zurich are extremely large, the most
punctilious care is evinced in every production that grows.
The vegetables are planted with seemingly mathematical
accuracy ; not a single weed is to be seen, nor a single stone.
Plants are not earthed up as with us, but are planted in a
small hollow, into each of which a little manure is put, and
each plant is watered daily. Where seeds are sown, the
earth directly above is broken into the finest powder; every


VOL. 1. =


a
Hal


na


306 BOOK Il. CHAPTER VI. $ 2.


shrub, every flower is tied to a stake, and where there is
wall-fruit a trellice is erected against the wall, to which the
boughs are fastened, and there is not a single thing that has
not its appropriate resting place*.”

Of one of the remote valleys of the High Alps the same
writer thus expresses himself * :—

“In the whole of the Engadine the land belongs to the
peasantry, who, like the inhabitants of every other place
where this state of things exists, vary greatly in the extent of
their possessions. . . . Generally speaking, an Engadine pea-
sant lives entirely upon the produce of his land, with the ex-
ception of the few articles of foreign growth required in his
family, such as coffee, sugar, and wine. Flax is grown,
prepared, spun, and woven, without ever leaving his house.
He has also his own wool, which is converted into a blue
coat without passing through the hands of either the dyer or
the tailor. The country is incapable of greater cultivation
than it has received. All has been done for it that industry
and an extreme love of gain can devise. There is not a
foot of waste land in the Engadine, the lowest part of which
is not much lower than the top of Snowdon. Wherever
grass will grow, there it is; wherever a rock will bear a
blade, verdure is seen upon it; wherever an ear of rye will
ripen, there it is to be found. Barley and oats have also
their appropriate spots; and wherever it is possible to ripen
a little patch of wheat, the cultivation of it is attempted. In
no country in Europe will be found so few poor as in the
Engadine. In the village of Suss, which contains about six
hundred inhabitants, there is not a single individual who
has not wherewithal to live comfortably, not a single indivi-
dual who is indebted to others for one morsel that he eats.”

Notwithstanding the general prosperity of the Swiss


* Switzerland, the South of France, and the Pyrenees, in 1830. By H.
D. Inglis. Vol. i. ch. 2.


+ Ibid. ch, 8 and 10.


PEASANT PROPRIETORS. 307


peasantry, this total absence of pauperism and (it may almost
be said) of poverty, cannot be predicated of the whole coun-
try; the largest and richest canton, that of Berne, being an
example of the contrary; for although, in the parts of it
which are occupied by peasant proprietors, their industry is
as remarkable and their ease and comfort as conspicuous as
elsewhere, the canton is burthened with a numerous pauper
population, through the operation of the worst regulated
‘system of poor-law administration in Europe, except that of
England before the new Poor Law. Nor is Switzerland in
some other respects a favourable example of all that peasant
properties might effect. There exists a series of statistical
accounts of the Swiss cantons, drawn up mostly with great
care and intelligence, containing detailed information, of
tolerably recent date, respecting the condition of the land and
of the people. From these, the subdivision appears to be
often so minute, that it can hardly be supposed not to be
excessive; and the indebtedness of the proprietors in the
flourishing canton of Zurich “borders” as the writer ex-
Presses it, “on the incredible* :” so that “ only the intensest
industry, frugality, temperance, and complete freedom of
commerce enable them to stand their ground.’ Yet the
general conclusion deducible from these books is that since
the beginning of the century, and concurrently with the sub-
division of many great estates which belonged to nobles or


* “Hine an das unglaubliche granzende Schuldenmasse” is the ex-
pression. (Historisch-geographisch-statisches Gemiilde der Schweiz. Erster
Theil. Der Kanton Ziirich. Von Gerold Meyer von Knonan, 1834. pp. 80-1.)
There are villages in Zurich, he adds, in which there is nota single pro-
perty unmortgaged. It does not, however, follow that each individual
proprietor is deeply involyed because the aggregate mass of incumbrances
is large. In the Canton of Schaffhausen, for instance, it is stated that the
landed properties are almost all mortgaged, but rarely for more than one-
half their registered value (Zwilfter Theil, Der Kanton Schaffhausen, von
Edward Im-Thurn, 1840, p. 52,) and the mortgages are often for the im-
provement and enlargement of the estate. (Siebenzehnter Theil. Der Kanton
Thiirgau, von J. A. Pupikofer, 1837, p. 209.)

x-2


308 BOOK Il. CHAPTER vi. § 3.


to the cantonal governments, there has been a striking and
rapid improvement in almost every: department of agricul-
ture, as well as in the houses, the habits, and the food of the
people. The writer of the account of Thiirgau_ goes so far
as to say, that since the subdivision of the feudal estates
into peasant properties, it is not uncommon for a third or
a fourth part of an estate to produce as much grain, and
support as many head of cattle, as the whole estate did
before*.


§ 3. One of the countries in which peasant proprietors
are of oldest date, and most numerous in proportion to the
population, is Norway. Of the social and economical condition
of that country an interesting account has been given by
Mr. Laing. His testimony in favour of small landed pro-
perties both there and elsewhere, is given with great decision.
I shall quote a few passages.

«Tf small proprietors are not good farmers, it is not from
the same cause here which we are told makes them so in Scot-
Jand—indolence and want of exertion. The extent to which
irrigation is carried on in these glens and valleys shews a spirit
of exertion and co-operation” (I request particular attention
to this point) “to which the latter can shew nothing similar.
Hay being the principal winter support of live stock, and
both it and corn, as well as potatoes, liable, from the shallow
soil and powerful reflection of sunshine from the rocks, to be
burnt and withered up, the greatest exertions are made to
bring water from the head of each glen, along such a level as
will give the command of it to each farmer at the head of his
fields. This is done by leading it in’ wooden troughs (the
half of a tree roughly scooped) from the highest perennial


*« Denselben Erfolg hat die Vertheilung der ehemaligen grossen Lehen-
héfe in mehrere kleinere eigenthiimliche One Bs ist gar nicht
selten, dass ein Drittheil oder Viertheil eines lane Hofes nun eben
soviel Getreide liefert und eben s0 viel Stiick Vieh unterhiilt als yormals
der ganze Hof.” (Thiirgau, p. 72.)


PEASANT PROPRIETORS. 309


stream among the hills, through woods, across ravines, along
the rocky, often perpendicular, sides of the glens, and from
this main trough giving a lateral one to each farmer in pass-
ing the head of his farm. He distributes this supply by
moveable troughs among his fields ; and at this season wateis
each rig successively with scoops like those used by bleachers
in watering cloth, laying his trough between every two rigs.
One would not believe, without seeing it, how very large an
extent of land is traversed expeditiously by these artificial
showers. The extent of the main troughs is very great. In
one glen I walked ten miles, and found it troughed on both
sides: on one, the chain is continued down the main valley
for forty miles. Those may be bad farmers who do such
things; but they are not indolent, nor ignorant of the prin-
ciple of working in concert, and keeping up establishments
for common benefit. They are, undoubtedly, in these re-
spects, far in advance of any community of cottars in our
Highland glens. They feel as proprietors, who receive the
advantage of their own exertions. The excellent state of the
roads and bridges is another proof that the country is
inhabited by people who have a comnron interest to keep
under repair. There are no tolls.”

“Jt is, I am aware, a favourite and constant observation
of our agricultural writers, that these smail proprietors make
the worst farmers. It may be so; but a population may be
in a wretched condition, although their country is very well
farmed; or they may be happy, although bad cultivators. . . .
Good farming is a phrase composed of two words which have
no more application to the happiness or well-being of a
people than good weaving or good iron-founding. That the
human powers should be well applied, and not misapplied,
in the production of grain, or iron, or clothing, is, no doubt,
an object of great importance; but the happiness or well-
being of a people does not entirely depend upon it. J¢ has
more effect on their numbers than on their condition. The
producer of grain who is working for himself only, who is


se


310 BOOK II. CHAPTER VI. § 3.


owner of his land, and has not a third of its produce to pay
as rent, can afford to be a worse farmer by one-third, than a
tenant, and is, notwithstanding, in a preferable condition,
Our agricultural writers tell us, indeed, that labourers in
agriculture are much better off as farm-servants than they
would be as small proprietors. We have only the master’s
word for this. Ask the servant. The colonists told us the
same thing of their slaves. If property is a good and desir
able thing, I suspect that the smallest quantity of it Is good
and desirable; and that the state of society in which it is
most widely diffused is the best constituted*.”

On the effects of peasant proprietorship on the Continent
generally, the same writer expresses himself as follows t —

“If we listen to the large farmer, the scientific agricultu-
rist, the” [English] “ political economist, good farming must
perish with large farms; the very idea that good farming can
exist, unless on large farms cultivated with great capital, they
hold to be absurd. Draining, manuring, economical arrange
ment, cleaning the land, regular rotations, valuable stock and
implements, all belong exclusively to large farms, worked by
large capital, and by hired labour. This reads very well; but
if we raise our eyes from their books to their fields, and
coolly compare what we see in the best districts farmed in
large farms, with what we see in the best districts farmed in
small farms, we see, and there is no blinking the fact, better
crops on the ground in Flanders, East Friesland, Holstem,
in short on the whole line of the arable land of equal quality
of the Continent, from the Sound to Calais, than we see 0”
the line of British coast opposite to this line, and in the same
latitudes, from the Frith of Forth all round to Dover.
Minute labour on small portions of arable ground gives eyl-
dently, in equal soils and climate, a superior productiveness;
where these small portions belong in property, as in Flan-


* Laing’s Journal of a Residence in Norway, pp. 36—40-
+ Notes of a Traveller, pp. 299 et seqq.


PEASANT PROPRIETORS. 31]


ders, Holland, Friesland, and Ditmarsch in Holstein, to the
farmer. It is not pretended by our agricultural writers, that
our large farmers even in Berwickshire, Roxburghshire, or
the Lothians, approach to the garden-like cultivation, atten-
tion to manures, drainage, and clean state of the land, or in
productiveness from a small space of soil not originally rich,
which distinguish the small farmers of Flanders, or their
system. In the best-farmed parish in Scotland or England,
more land is wasted in the corners and borders of the fields
of large farms, in the roads through them, unnecessarily wide
because they are bad, and bad because they are wide, in
neglected commons, waste spots, useless belts and clumps of
sorry trees, and such unproductive areas, as would maintain
the poor of the parish, if they were all laid together and cul-
tivated. But large capital applied to farming is of course only
applied to the very best of the soils of a country. It cannot
touch the small unproductive spots which require more time
and labour to fertilize them than is consistent with a quick
return of capital. But although hired time and labour can-
not be applied beneficially to such cultivation, the owner’s
own time and labour may. He is working for no higher
returns at first from his land than a bare living. But in the
course of generations fertility and value are produced; 2
better living, and even very improved processes of hus-
bandry, are attained. Furrow draining, stall feeding all
summer, liquid manures, are universal in the husbandry of
the small farms of Flanders, Lombardy, Switzerland. Our
most improving districts under large farms are but beginning
to adopt them. Dairy husbandry even, and the manufacture
of the largest cheeses by the co-operation of many small
farmers *, the mutual assurance of property against fire and


* The manner in which the Swiss peasants combine to carry on cheese-
making by their united capital deserves to be noted. ‘Each parish in
Switzerland hires a man, generally from the district of Gruyére in the
canton of Freyburg, to take care of the herd, and make the cheese. One
cheeseman, one pressman or assistant, and one cowherd, are considered


= aa 3:


Sr Freee


oe


i
4
i


ae Raa


patie Tears


312 BOOK II. CHAPTER Vi. § 4.


hail-storms, by the co-operation of small farmers—the most
scientific and expensive of all agricultural operations in
modern times, the manufacture of beet-root sugar,—the
supply of the European markets with flax and hemp, by the
husbandry of small farmers,—the abundance of legumes,
fruits, poultry, in the usual diet even of the lowest classes
abroad, and the total want of such variety at the tables even
of our middle classes, and this variety and abundance essen-
tially connected with the husbandry of small farmers,—all
these are features in the occupation of a country by small
proprietor-farmers, which must make the inquirer pause
before he admits the dogma of our land doctors at home, that
large farms worked by hired labour and great capital can
alone bring out the greatest productiveness of the soil, and
furnish the greatest supply of the necessaries and con-
veniences of life to the inhabitants of a country.”


§ 4. Among the many flourishing regions of Germany in
which peasant properties prevail, I select the Palatinate, for
the advantage of quoting, from an English source, the results
of recent personal observation of its agriculture and its people.
Mr. Howitt, a writer whose habit it is to see all English objects
and English socialities en beaw, and who, in treating of the


necessary for every forty cows. The owners of the cows get credit each
of them, in a book daily, for the quantity of milk given by each cow. The
cheeseman and his assistants milk the cows, put the milk all together, and
make cheese of it, and at the end of the season each owner receives the
weight of cheese proportionable to the quantity of milk his cows haye
delivered. By this co-operative plan, instead of the small-sized unmarket-
able cheeses only, which each could produce out of his three or four cows’
mill, he has the same weight in large marketable cheese superior in quality,
because made by people who attend to no other business. ‘The cheeseman
and his assistants are paid so much per head of the cows, in money oF in


cheese, or sometimes they hire the cows, and pay the owners in money or
cheese.” Notes of a Traveller, p, 351,


aay A similar system exists in the
French Jura. One of the most remarkable points in this interesting case
of combination of labour, is the confidence w
experience must justify, in the integrity


hich it supposes, and which
of the persons employed.


PEASANT PROPRIETORS. Silo


Rhenish peasantry, certainly does not underrate the rudeness
of their implements and the inferiority of their ploughing,
nevertheless shows that under the invigorating influence of
the feelings of proprietorship, they make up for the imper-
fections of their apparatus by the intensity of their applica-
tion. “The peasant harrows and clears his land till it is in
the nicest order, and it is admirable to see the crops which
he obtains*.” “The peasantst are the great and ever-present
objects of country life. They are the great population of the
country, because they themselves are the possessors. This
country is, m fact, for the most part, in the hands of the
people. It is parcelled out among the multitude . . . .
The peasants are not, as with us, for the most part, totally
cut off from property in the soil they cultivate, totally depen-
dent on the labour afforded by others—they are themselves
the proprietors. It is perhaps from this cause that they are
probably the most industrious peasantry in the world. They
labour busily, early and late, because they feel that they are
labouring for themselves. . . . ‘The German peasants
work hard, but they have no actual want. Every man has
his house, his orchard, his roadside trees, commonly so heavy
with fruit, that he is obliged to prop and secure them all
ways, or they would be torn to pieces. He has his corn
plot, his plot for mangel-wurzel, for hemp, and so on. He is
his own master; and he, and every member of his family,
have the strongest motives to labour. You see the effect of
this in that unremitting diligence which is beyond that of the
whole world besides, and his economy which is still greater.
The Germans, indeed, are not so active and lively as the
English. You never see them in a bustle, or as though they
meant to knock off a vast deal in a little time. sais
They are, on the contrary, slow, but for ever doing. ‘They
plod on from day to day, and year to year—the most patient,


* Rural and Domestic Life of Germany, p. 27.
+ Ibid., p. 40.


314 BOOK II. CHAPTER VI. § 4.


untirable, and persevering of animals. The Nnglish peasant
is so cut off from the idea of property, that he comes habi-
tually to look upon it as a thing from which he is warned by
the laws of the large proprietors, and becomes, in conse-
quence, spiritless, purposeless. . . . The German bauer,
on the contrary, looks on the country as made for him and
his fellow-men. He feels himself a man; he has a stake in
the country, as good as that of the bulk of his neighbours;
no man can threaten him with ejection, or the workhouse, so
long as he is active and economical. He walks therefore with
a bold step: he looks you in the face with the air of a free
man, but of a respectful one.”

Of their industry, the same writer thus further speaks:
“There is not an hour of the year in which they do not find
unceasing occupation. In the depth of winter, when the
weather permits them by any means to get out of doors, they
are always finding something to do. They carry out their
manure to their lands while the frost is in them. If there is
not frost, they are busy cleaning ditches and felling old fruit
trees, or such as do not bear well. Such of them as are t00
poor to lay in a sufficient stock of wood, find plenty of work
in ascending into the mountainous woods, and bringing
thence fuel. It would astonish the English common people
to see the intense labour with which the Germans earn their
firewood. In the depth of frost and snow, go into any of
their hills and woods, and there you find them hacking Up
stumps, cutting off branches, and gathering, by all means
which the official wood police will allow, boughs, stakes, and
pieces of wood, which they convey home with the most in-
credible toiland patience.” After a description of their care-
ful and laborious vineyard culture, he continuesf, “ In England,
with its great quantity of grass lands and its large farms, So
soon as the grain is in, and the fields are shut up for hay


* Rural and Domestic Life of Germany, p. 44.
+ Ibid., p. 50.


PEASANT PROPRIETORS. 315


grass, the country seems in a comparative state of rest and
quiet. But here they are everywhere, and for ever, hoeing
and mowing, planting and cutting, weeding and gathering.
They have a succession of crops like a market-gardener.
They have their carrots, poppies, hemp, flax, saintfoin,
lucerne, rape, colewort, cabbage, rotabaga, black turnips,
Swedish and white turnips, teazles, Jerusalem artichokes,
mangel-wurzel, parsnips, kidney-beans, field-beans and peas,
vetches, Indian corn, buckwheat, madder for the manufacturer,
potatoes, their great crop of tobacco, millet—all, or the
greater part, under the family management, in their own
family allotments. They have had these things first to sow,
many of them to transplant, to hoe, to weed, to clear off
insects, to top; many of them to mow and gather in succes-
sive crops. They have their water-meadows, of which kind
almost all their meadows are, to flood, to mow, and reflood ;
watercourses to reopen and to make anew: their early
fruits to gather, to bring to market with their green crops of
vegetables; their cattle, sheep, calves, foals, most of them
prisoners, and poultry to look after; their vines, as they shoot
rampantly in the summer heat, to prune, and thin out the
leaves when they are too thick: and any one may imagine
what a scene of incessant labour it is.”’

This interesting sketch, to the general truth of which any
observant traveller in that highly cultivated and populous
region can bear witness, accords with the more elaborate deli-
neation by a distinguished inhabitant, Professor Rau, in his
little treatise “On the Agriculture of the Palatinate*.”
M. Rau bears testimony not only to the industry, but to the
skill and intelligence of the peasantry; their judicious em-
ployment of manures, and excellent rotation of crops; the
progressive improvement of their agriculture for generations
past, and the spirit of further improvement which is still


* Ueber die Landwirthschaft der Rheinpfalz, wnd insbesondere in der
Heidelberger Gegend, Von D. Karl Heinrich Rau, Heidelberg, 1830.


reermraagenree


316 BOOK II. CHAPTER vi. § 5.


active. ‘The indefatigableness of the country people, who
may be seen in activity all the day and all the year, and are
never idle, because they make a good distribution of their
labours, and find for every interval of time a suitable occupa-
tion, 1s as well known as their zeal is praiseworthy in enn
to use every circumstance which presents itself, in selzing
upon every useful novelty which offers, and even in searching
out new and advantageous methods. One easily perceives
that the peasant of this district has reflected much on his
occupation : he can give reasons for his modes of proceeding,
even if those reasons are not always tenable; he is as exact
an observer of proportions as it is possible to be from
memory, without the aid of figures; he attends to such
general signs of the times as appear to augur him either
benefit or harm*,”


$5. But the most decisive example in opposition to the
English prejudice against cultivation by peasant proprietors,
is the case of Belgium. The soil is originally one of the
worst in Europe. “The provinces,” says Mr. Maccullocht,
“of West and East Flanders, and Hainault, form a far
stretching plain, of which the luxuriant vegetation indicates
the indefatigable care and labour bestowed upon its cultiva-
tion; for the natural soil consists almost wholly of barren
sand, and its great fertility is entirely the result of very skilful
management and judicious application of various manures.”
There exists a carefully prepared systematic treatise on
Flemish Husbandry, in the Farmer’s Series of the Society
for the Diffusion of Useful Knowledge. The writer ob-
serves}, that the Flemish agriculturists “seem to want
nothing but a space to work upon: whatever be the quality
or texture of the soil, in time they will make it produce


* Ran, pp. 15,16.
+ Geographical Dictionary, ar


t. “ Belgium.”
+ Pp. 11—4. J


PEASANT PROPRIETORS. 317


somethmg. The sand in the Campine can be compared to
nothing but the sands on the sea-shore, which they probably
were originally. It is highly interesting to follow step by
step the progress of improvement. Here you see a cottage
and rude cow-shed erected on a spot of the most unpromi-
sing aspect. The loose white sand blown into irregular
mounds is only kept together by the roots of the heath: a
small spot only is levelled and surrounded by a ditch: part
of this is covered with young broom, part is planted with
potatoes, and perhaps a small patch of diminutive clover may
show itself:”? but manures, both solid and liquid, are collect-
ing, “and this is the nucleus from which, in a few years, a
little farm will spread around. . . . If there is no manure at
hand, the only thing that can be sown on pure sand, at first,
is broom: this grows in the most barren soils; in three years
is fit to cut, and produces some return in fagots for the
bakers and brickmakers. The leaves which haye fallen
have somewhat enriched the soil, and the fibres of the
roots have given a certain degree of compactness. It may
now be ploughed and sown with buckweat, or even with


rye without manure. By the time this is reaped some


manure may have been collected, and a regular course of
cropping may begin. As soon as cloyer and potatoes enable
the farmer to keep cows and make manure, the improvement
goes on rapidly; in a few years the soil undergoes a complete
change: it becomes mellow and retentive of moisture, and
enriched by the vegetable matter afforded by the decompo-
sition of the roots of clover and other plants. . . . After the
land has been gradually brought into a good state, and is culti-
vated in a regular manner, there appearsmuch less difference
between the soils which have been originally good, and those
which have been made so by labour and industry. At least
the crops in both appear more nearly alike at harvest, than is
the case in soils of different qualities in other countries.
This is a great proof of the excellency of the Flemish system;
for it shews that the land is in a constant state of improve-


‘


a se <3: =3


318 BOOK II. CHAPTER vi. § 5D.


ment, and that the deficiency of the soil is compensated
by greater attention to tillage and manuring, especially the
latter.”
The people who labour thus intensely, because labouring
for themselves, have practised for centuries those principles
of rotation of crops and economy of manures, which in Eng-
land are counted among modern discoveries; and even now
the superiority of their agriculture, as a whole, to that of Eng-
land, is admitted by competent judges. “The cultivation of
a poor light soil, or a moderate soil,” says the writer last
quoted*, “is generally superior in Flanders to that of the


3 Ses ae V7, -
most improved farms of the same kind in Britain. We sur


pass the Flemish farmer greatly in capital, in varied imple-
ments of tillage, in the choice and breeding of cattle and
sheep,” (though, according to the same authorityt, they are
much “before us in the feeding of their cows,”) “and the
British farmer is in general a man of superior education to
the Flemish peasant. But in the minute attention to the
qualities of the soil, in the management and application of
manures of different kinds, in the judicious succession of
crops, and especially in the economy of land, so that every
part of it shall be in a constant state of production, we have
still something to learn from the Flemings,” and not from an
instructed and enterprising Fleming here and there, but from
the general practice.

Much of the most highly cultivated part of the country
consists of peasant properties, managed by the proprietors,
always either wholly or partly by spade husbandryft. “ When
the land is cultivated entirely by the spade, and no horses are
kept, a cow is kept for every three acres of land, and entirely
fed on artificial grasses and roots. This mode of cultivation
is principally adopted in the Waes district, where properties
are very small. All the labour is done by the different mem-


* Flemish Husbandry, p. 3.


+ Ibid., p. 13. + Ibid., pp. 73 et seq.


PEASANT PROPRIETORS. 319


bers of the family ;” children soon beginning “to assist in


various minute operations, according to their age and strength,
such as weeding, hoeing, feeding the cows. If they can raise
rye and wheat enough to make their bread, and potatoes,
turnips, carrots, and clover, for the cows, they do well; and
the produce of the sale of their rape-seed, their flax, their
hemp, and their butter, after deducting the expense of
manure purchased, which is always considerable, gives them
a very good profit. Supposing the whole extent of the land
to be six acres, which is not an uncommon occupation, and
which one man can manage;” then (after describing the cul-
tivation), “if a man with his wife and three young children
are considered as equal to three and a half grown up men,
the family will require thirty-nine bushels of grain, forty-
nine bushels of potatoes, a fat hog, and the butter and milk
of one cow: an acre and a half of land will produce the grain
and potatoes, and allow some corn to finish the fattening of the
hog, which has the extra buttermilk: another acre in clover,
carrots, and potatoes, together with the stubble turnips, will
more than feed the cow; consequently two and a half acres
of land is sufficient to feed this family, and the produce of
the other three and a half may be sold to pay the rent or the
interest of purchase-money, wear and tear of implements,
extra manure, and clothes for the family. But these acres
are the most profitable on the farm, for the hemp, flax, and
colza are included; and by having another acre in clover and
roots, a second cow can be kept, and its produce sold. We
have, therefore, a solution of the problem how a family can
live and thrive on six acres of moderate land.” After show-
ing by calculation that this extent of land can be cultivated
in the most perfect manner by the family without any aid
from hired labour, the writer continues, “In a farm of fen
acres entirely cultivated by the spade, the addition of a man
and a woman to the members of the family will render all the


operations more easy ; and with a horse and cart to carry out
the manure, and bring home the produce, and occasionally


ak ee
ng GES


320 BOOK Il. CHAPTER VI. $§ 5.


draw the harrows, fifteen acres may be very well cultivated.
. . . Thus it will be seen,” (this is the result of some pages
of details and calculations*,) “that by spade husbandry, an
industrious man with a small capital, occupying only fifteen
acres of good light land, may not only live and bring up 2
family, paying a good rent, but may accumulate a consider-
able sum in the course of his life.” But the indefatigable
industry by which he accomplishes this, and of which so large
a portion is expended not in the mere cultivation, but in the
improvement, for a distant return, of the soil itself—has that
industry no connexion with not paying rent? Could it
exist, without presupposing, at least, a virtually permanent
tenure ?

As to their mode of living, “the Flemish farmers and
labourers live much more economically than the same class in
England: they seldom eat meat, except on Sundays and m
harvest: buttermilk and potatoes with brown bread is their
daily food.” It is on this kind of evidence that English tra-
vellers, as they hurry through Europe, pronounce the pea-
santry of every Continental country poor and miserable, its
agricultural and social system a failure, and the English the
only régime under which labourers are well off. It is, truly
enough, the only régime under which labourers, whether
well off or not, never attempt to be better. So little are
English observers accustomed to consider it possible that
a labourer should not spend all he earns, that they habitually
mistake the signs of economy for those of poverty. Observe
the true interpretation of the phenomena.

“ Accordingly they are gradually acquiring capital, and
their great ambition is to have land of their own. They
eagerly seize every opportunity of purchasing a small farm,
and the price is so raised by the competition, that land pays
little more than two per cent interest for the purchase
money. Large properties gradually disappear, and are


* Flemish Husbandry, p- 81.


PBASANT PROPRIETORS. 321


divided into small portions, which sell at a high rate. But
the wealth and industry of the population is continually
increasing, being rather diffused through the masses than
accumulated in individuals.’’

With facts like these, known and accessible, it is not a
little surprising to find the case of Flanders referred to not
in recommendation of peasant properties, but as a warning
against them; on no better ground than a presumptive
excess of population, inferred from the distress which existed
among the peasantry of Brabant and East Flanders in the
disastrous year 1846-47. The evidence which I have cited
from a writer conversant with the subject, and having no
economical theory to support, shows that the distress, what-
ever may have been its severity, arose from no insufficiency
in these little properties to supply abundantly, in any ordi-
nary circumstances, the wants of all whom they have to
maintain. It arose from the essential condition to which
those are subject who employ land of their own in growing
their own food, namely, that the vicissitudes of the seasons
must be borne by themselves, and cannot, as in the case of
large farmers, be shifted from them to the consumer. When
we remember the season of 1846, a partial failure of all
kinds of grain, and an almost total one of the potato, if is
no wonder that in so unusual a calamity the produce of six
acres, half of them sown with flax, hemp, or oil seeds, should
fall short of a year’s provision for a family. But we are not
to contrast the distressed Flemish peasant with an English
capitalist who farms several hundred acres of land. If the
peasant were an Englishman, he would not be that capitalist,
but a day labourer under a capitalist. And is there no dis-
tress, in times of dearth, among day labourers ? Was there
none, that year, in countries where small proprietors and
small farmers are unknown? Is there any reason whatever


to believe that the distress was greater 1n Belgium, than cor-


responds to the proportional extent of the failure of crops


compared with other countries ?


VOL. I.


Y


ceede utetas:


322 BOOK II. CHAPTER vi. § 6.


§ 6. It is from France, however, that impressions unfa-
vourable to peasant properties are generally drawn: it is in
France that the system is so often asserted to haye brought
forth its fruit, in the most wretched possible agriculture, and
to be rapidly reducing, if not to have already reduced the
peasantry, by subdivision of land, to the verge of starvation,
It is difficult to account for the general prevalence of impres-
sions so much the reverse of the truth. The agriculture of
France was wretched, and the peasantry in great indigence
before the Revolution. At that time they were not, generally
speaking, landed proprietors. There were, however, con-
siderable districts of France where the land, even then, was
to a great extent the property of the peasantry, and among
these were many of the most conspicuous exceptions to the
general bad agriculture and to the general poverty. An
authority, on this point, not to be disputed, is Arthur
Young, the inveterate enemy of small farms, the corypheus
of the modern English school of agriculturists; who yet,
travelling over nearly the whole of France in 1787, 1788,
and 1789, when he finds remarkable excellence of cultivation,
never hesitates to ascribe it to peasant property. « Leaving
Sauve,” says he*, “I was much struck with a large tract of
land, seemingly nothing but huge rocks; yet most of it
inclosed and planted with the most industrious attention.
Every man has an olive, a mulberry, an almond, or 4 peach
tree, and vines scattered among them; so that the whole
ground is covered with the oddest mixture of these plants
and bulging rocks, that can be conceived. The inhabitants
of this village deserve encouragement for their industry; and
if I were a French minister they should have it. They
would soon turn all the deserts around them into gardens.
ee ee
ietieiooe ae eee I suppose their own, wou

es, if animated by the same 0M


SAGs
Arthur Young’s Travels in France, vol, i. p. 50.


PEASANT PROPRIETORS. 323
nipotent principle.” Again*. ‘ Walk to Rossendal,’” (near
Dunkirk) “where M. le Brun has an improvement on the
Dunes, which he very obligingly showed me. Between the
town and that place is a great number of neat little houses,
built each with its garden, and one or two fields enclosed, of
most wretched blowing dune sand, naturally as white as snow,
but improved by industry. The magic of property turns
sand to gold.” And again}: “ Going out of Gange, I was
surprised to find by far the greatest exertion in irrigation
which I had yet seen in France; and then passed by some
steep mountains, highly cultivated in terraces. Much water-
ing at St. Lawrence. The scenery very interesting to a
farmer. From Gange, to the mountain of rough ground
which I crossed, the ride has been the most interesting
which I have taken in France; the efforts of industry the
most vigorous; the animation the most lively. An activity
has been here, that has swept away all difficulties before it,
and has clothed the very rocks with verdure. It would be a
disgrace to common sense to ask the cause; the enjoyment
of property must have done it. Give a man the secure pos-
session of a bleak rock, and he will turn it into a garden;
give him a nine years’ lease of a garden, and he will convert
it into a desert.”

In his description of the country at the foot of the
Western Pyrenees, he speaks no longer from surmise, but
from knowledge. Take} the road to Moneng, and come
presently to a scene which was so new to me in France, that
I could hardly believe my own eyes. A succession of many
well-built, tight, and comfortable farming cottages, built of
stone and covered with tiles; each having its little garden,
inclosed by clipt thorn-hedges, with plenty of peach and
other fruit trees, some fine oaks scattered in the hedges, and
young trees nursed up with so much care, that nothing but


* Vol. i. p. 88. + Ibid. p. 51.


+ Ibid. p. 56.
x 2


Haden Naa


a eee en a eee ee


ee te


ce ae


7
f|
J


324 BOOK II. CHAPTER vi. § 6.


the fostering attention of the owner could effect anything
like it. To every house belongs a farm, perfectly well
enclosed, with grass borders mown and neatly kept around
the corn-fields with gates to pass from one inclosure to
another. There are some parts of England (where small
yeomen still remain) that resemble this country of Béarn;
but we have very little that is equal to what I have seen in
this ride of twelve miles from Pau to Moneng. It is all in
the hands of little proprietors, without the farms being 80
small as to occasion a vicious and miserable population. An
air of neatness, warmth, and comfort breathes oyer the
whole. It is visible in their new built houses and stables; m
their little gardens; in their hedges; in the courts before
their doors; even in the coops for their poultry, and the sties
for their hogs. A peasant does not think of rendering his
pig comfortable, if his own happiness hang by the thread of
a nine years’ lease. We are now in Béarn, within a few
miles of the cradle of Henry IV. Do they inherit these
blessings from that good prince? The benignant genius of
that good monarch seems to reign still aver the country;
each peasant has the fowl in the pot.” He frequently notices
the excellence of the agriculture of French Flanders, where
the farms “are all small, and much in the hands of little
proprietors*.” In the Pays de Caux, also a country of small
properties, the agriculture was miserable; of which his eXx-
planation was that it “is a manufacturing country, and farm-
ing is but a secondary pursuit to the cotton fabric, which
spreads over the whole of it+.”? The same district is still a
seat of manufactures, and a country of small proprietors,
and is now, whether we judge from the appearance of the
crops or from the official returns, one of the best cultivated
in France. In “Flanders, Alsace, and part of Artois, 4
well as on the banks of the Garonne, France possesses 4


* Young, pp. 322—4.
+ Ibid, p, 325.


PEASANT PROPRIETORS. 325


husbandry equal to our own*.” These countries, and a
considerable part of Quercy, “are cultivated more like gar-
dens than farms. Perhaps they are too much like gardens,
from the smallness of properties+.” In those districts the
admirable rotation of crops, so long practised in Italy, but
at that time generally neglected in France, was already
universal. “The rapid succession of crops, the harvest of
one being but the signal of sowing immediately for a second,”
(the same fact which must strike all observers in the valley
of the Rhine,) “can scarcely be carried to greater perfec-
tion: and this is a point, perhaps, of all others the most
essential to good husbandry, when such crops are so justly
distributed as we generally find them in these provinces;
cleaning and ameliorating ones being made the preparation
for such as foul and exhaust.”

It must not, however, be supposed, that Arthur Young’s
testimony on the subject of peasant properties is uniformly
favourable. In Lorraine, Champagne, and elsewhere, he
finds the agriculture bad, and the small proprietors very
miserable, in consequence, as he says, of the extreme sub-
division of the land. His opinion is thus summed up {:—
“Before I travelled, I conceived that small farms, in pro-
perty, were very susceptible of good cultivation; and that
the occupier of such, haying no rent to pay, might be sufi-
ciently at his ease to work improvements, and carry on a
vigorous husbandry; but what I have seen in France, has
greatly lessened my good opinion of them. In Flanders, I
saw excellent husbandry on properties of 30 to 100 acres;
but we seldom find here such small patches of property as
are common in other provinces. In Alsace, and on the
Garonne, that is, on soils of such exuberant fertility as to
demand no exertions, some small properties also are well
cultivated. In Béarn, I passed through a region of little


* Young, vol. i. p. 357. + Ibid. p. 364.


t Ibid. p. 412.


326 BOOK II. CHAPTER VI. § 6.


farmers, whose appearance, neatness, ease, and happiness,
charmed me; it was what property alone could, on a small
scale, effect; but these were by no means contemptibly
small; they are, as I judged by the distance from house to
house, from 40 to 80 acres. Except these, and a very few
other instances, I saw nothing respectable on small proper-
ties, except a most unremitting industry. Indeed, it is
necessary to impress on the reader’s mind, that though the
husbandry I met with, in a great variety of instances on
little properties, was as bad as can well be conceived, yet the
industry of the possessors was so conspicuous, and so meri-
torious, that no commendations would be too great for it. It
was sufficient to prove that property in land is, of all others,
the most active instigator to severe and incessant labour.
And this truth is of such force and extent, that I know no
way so sure of carrying tillage to a mountain top, as by per
mitting the adjoining villagers to acquire it in property; in
fact, we see that in the mountains of Languedoc, &c., they
haye conveyed earth in baskets, on their backs, to form 4
soil where nature had denied it.”

The experience, therefore, of this celebrated agriculturist,
and apostle of Ja grande culture, may be said to be, that the
effect of small properties, cultivated by peasant proprietors,
is admirable, when they are not too small; so small, namely,
as not fully to occupy the time and attention of the family;
for he often complains, with great apparent reason, of the
quantity of idle time which the peasantry had on their hands
when the land was in very small portions, notwithstanding
the ardour with which they toiled to improve their little
patrimony m every way which their knowledge or ingenuity
could suggest. He recommends, accordingly, that a limit of
subdivision should be fixed by law; and this is by no means
an indefensible proposition in countries, if such there are,
where the morcellement, having already gone farther than the
state of capital and the nature of the staple articles of culti-
yation render advisable, still continues progressive. That


PEASANT PROPRIETORS. 327


each peasant should have a patch of land, even in full pro-
perty, if it is not sufficient to support him in comfort, is a
system with all the disadvantages, and scarcely any of the
benefits of small properties; since he must either live in
indigence on the produce of his land, or depend as habitually
as if he had no landed possessions, on the wages of hired
labour; which, besides, if all the lands surrounding him are
held in a similar manner, he has little prospect of finding.
The benefits of peasant properties are conditional upon their
not being too much subdivided; that is, upon their not being
required to maintain too many persons, in proportion to the
produce that can be raised from them by those persons.
The question resolves itself, like most questions respecting
the condition of the labouring classes, into one of population.
Are small properties a stimulus to undue multiplication, or a
check to it ?


CHAPTER VII.


CONTINUATION OF THE SAME SUBJECT.


§ 1. Brrore examining the influence of peasant pro-
perties on the ultimate economical interests of the labouring
class, as determined by the increase of population; let us
note the points respecting the moral and social influence of
that territorial arrangement, which may be looked upon as
established, either by the reason of the case, or by the facts
and authorities cited in the preceding chapter.

The reader new to the subject must have been struck
with the powerful impression made upon all the witnesses to
whom I have referred, by what a Swiss statistical writer calls
the “almost superhuman industry” of peasant proprietors*.
On this point, at least, authorities are unanimous. Those
who have seen only one country of peasant properties, always
think the inhabitants of that country the most industrious 1
the world. There is as little doubt among observers; with
what feature in the condition of the peasantry this pre-
eminent industry is connected. It is “the magic of pro-
perty ” which, in the words of Arthur Young, “turns sand
into gold.” The idea of property does not however neces-
sarily imply that there should be no rent, any more than
that there should be no taxes. It merely implies that the
rent should be a fixed charge, not liable to be raised against
the possessor by his own improvements, or by the will of a
landlord. A tenant ata quit rent is to all intents and pul
poses a proprietor; a copyholder is not less so than a free-
holder. What is wanted is perpetuity of possession on fixed


* “Fast ubermenschliche Fleiss.’ Der Canton Schaffhausen (ut supra)


p- 53.


PEASANT PROPRIETORS. O29


terms. “Give a man the secure possession of a bleak rock,
and he will turn it into a garden; give him a nine years’
lease of a garden, and he will convert it into a desert.”

The details which have been cited, and those, still more
minute, to be foundin the same authorities, concerning the
habitually elaborate system of cultivation, and the thousand
devices of the peasant proprietor for making every super-
fluous hour and odd moment instrumental to some increase
in the future produce and value of the land, will explain
what has been said in a previous chapter* respecting the
far larger gross produce which, with anything like parity of
agricultural knowledge, is obtained, from the same quality
of soil, on small farms, at least when they are the property
of the cultivator. The treatise on “Flemish Husbandry”
is especially instructive respecting the means by which
untiring industry does more than outweigh inferiority of
resources, imperfection of implements, and ignorance of
scientific theories. The peasant cultivation of Flanders and
Italy is affirmed to produce heavier crops, in equal circum-
stances of soil, than the best cultivated districts of Scotland
and England. It produces them, no doubt, with an amount
of labour which, if paid for by an employer, would make
the cost to him more than equivalent to the benefit; but to
the peasant it is not cost, it is the devotion of time which he
can spare, to a favourite pursuit, if we should not rather say
a ruling passiont+.


* Supra, Book I. ch. ix.

+ Read the graphic description by the historian Michelet, of the feelings
of a peasant proprietor towards his land.

«Si nous voulons connaitre la pensée intime, la passion du paysan de
France, cela est fort aisé. Promenons-nous le dimanche dans la campagne,
suivons-le. Le yoild qui s’en va li-bas devant nous. TI est deux heures ;
sa femme est 4 vépres; il est endimanché; je réponds qu’il va voir sa
maitresse.


© Quelle maitresse ? sa terre.
* Je ne dis pas quil y aille tout droit. Non, il est libre ce jour-la, ul est


330 BOOK Il. CHAPTER VII. § 2.


§ 2. Another aspect of peasant properties, in which it
is essential that they should be considered, is that of an
instrument of popular education. It is difficult to imagine
what theory of education that can be, which can attach no
importance to such aninstrument. Books and schooling are
absolutely necessary to education; but not all-sufficient.
The mental faculties will be most developed where they are
most exercised; and what gives more exercise to them than
the having a multitude of interests, none of which can be
neglected, and which can be provided for only by varied
efforts of will and intelligence? Some of the disparagers of
small properties lay great stress on the cares and anxieties
which beset the peasant proprietor of the Rhineland or Flan-
ders. It is precisely those cares and anxieties which tend to
make him a superior being to an English day labourer. It
is, to be sure, rather abusing the privilege of fair argument
to represent the condition of a day labourer as not an anxious
one. I can conceive no circumstances in which he is free
from anxiety where there is a possibility of being out of em-
ployment; unless he has access to a profuse dispensation of


maitre d’y aller ou de n’y pas aller. N’y va-t-il pas assez tous les jours ae
la semaine ? Aussi, il se détourne, il va ailleurs, il a affaire ailleurs. Ht
pourtant, il y va.

“Tl est vrai qu’il passait bien prés; c’était une occasion. I la regarde,
mais apparemment il n’y entrera pas; qu’y ferait-il?—Et pourtant iy
entre.

“Du moins, il est probable qu’il n’y travaillera pas; il est endimanché;
il a blouse et chemise blanches.—Rien n’empéche cependant d’6ter quelque
mauyaise herbe, de rejeter cette pierre. Il y a bien encore cette souche
qui géne, mais il n’a pas sa pioche, se sera pour demain.

“ Alors, il croise ses bras et s’arréte, regarde, sérieux, soucieux. I
regarde longtemps, trés-longtemps, et semble s’oublier. A la fin, s'il se
croit observé, s’il appercoit un passant, il s’éloigne 4 pas lents. A trente
pas encore, il s’arréte, se retourne, et jette sur sa terre un dernier regard,
regard profond et sombre ; mais pour qui sait bien voir, il est tout passionné,
ce regard, tout de cceur, plein de déyotion.”»—Le Peuple, par J. Michelet,
Ire partie, ch, 1.


PEASANT PROPRIETORS. 331


parish pay, and no shame or reluctance in demanding it:
then indeed he may feel with the old doggrel,


Hang sorrow, cast away care,
The parish is bound to find us.


But unless so shielded, the day labourer has, in the exist-
ing state of society and population, many of the anxieties
which have not an invigorating effect on the mind, and none
of those which have. The position of the peasant proprietor
of Flanders is the reverse. From the anxiety which chills
and paralyses—the uncertainty of having food to eat—few
persons are more exempt: it requires as rare a concurrence of
circumstances as the potato failure combined with an uni-
versal bad harvest, to bring him within reach of that danger.
His anxieties are the ordinary vicissitudes of more and less ;
his cares are that he takes his fair share of the business of
life; that he isa free human being, and not perpetually a
child, which seems to be the approved condition of the
labouring classes according to the prevailing philanthropy.
He is no longer a being of a different order from the middle
classes; he has pursuits and objects like those which occupy
them, and give to their intellects the greatest part of the cul-
tivation which they receive. If there is a first principle in
intellectual education, it is this—that the discipline which
does good to the mind is that in which the mind is active,
not that in which itis passive. The secret for developing
the faculties is to give them much to do, and much induce-
ment to do it. Few things surpass in this respect the occu-
pations and interests created by the ownership and cultiva-
tion of land. ‘This detracts nothing from the importance,
and even necessity, of other kinds of mental cultivation.
The possession of property will not prevent the peasant from
being coarse, selfish, and narrow-minded. These things
depend on other influences, and other kinds of instruction.
But this great stimulus to one kind of mental activity, in no
way impedes any other means of intellectual developement.


io}
332 BOOK II. CHAPTER VII. § 3.


On the contrary, by cultivating the habit of turning to prac-
tical use every fragment of knowledge acquired, it helps to
render that schooling and reading fruitful, which hee
some such auxiliary influence are in too many cases like see
thrown on a rock.


§ 3. It is not to the intelligence alone, that the ie
of a peasant proprietor is full of improving me i
no less propitious to the moral virtues of prudence, on
rance, and self-control. The labourer who POSSESSES a
perty, “whether he can read and write, or not, has, i mi
Laing remarks*, “an educated mind: he has foret nee i
caution, and reflection guiding every action ; he knows :
value of restraint, and is in the constant habitual pracuee 0
it.” It is remarkable how this general proposition 1s borne
out by the character of the rural population in almost Be
civilized country where peasant properties are frequent. ; ay
labourers, where the labouring class mainly consists of ee
are usually improvident: they spend carelessly to the
extent of their means, and let the future shift for itse it
This is so notorious, that many persons otherwise we
affected to the labouring classes, hold it as a fixed opinion,
that an increase of wages would do them little good, unless
accompanied by at least a corresponding improvement in
their tastes and habits. The tendency of peasant proprietors,
and of those who hope to become proprietors, is to the con-
trary extreme 3 to take even too much thought for the ie
row. They are oftener accused of penuriousness than ©
prodigality. They deny themselves reasonable indulgences,


and live wretchedly, in order to economize. In Switzerland,
almost everybody saves,


case of the Flemish farm
the French, though a p
self-indulgent people,


who has any means of saving; the
ers I have already noticed : among,
leasure-loving, and reputed to be 4
the spirit of thrift is diffused through


ee


* Residence in Norway, p. 20.


PEASANT PROPRIETORS. 333


the rural population in a manner most gratifying as a whole,
and which in individual instances errs rather on the side of
excess than defect. Among those who, from the hovels in
which they live, and the herbs and roots which constitute their
diet, are mistaken by travellers for proofs and specimens of
general indigence, there are numbers who have hoards in
leather bags, consisting of sums in five frane pieces, which
they keep by them perhaps a whole generation, unless
brought out to be expended in their most cherished gratifica-
tion—the purchase of land. If there is a moral inconveni-
ence attached to a state of society in which the peasantry
have land, it is the danger of their being too careful of their
pecuniary concerns ; of its making them crafty, and “ calcu-
lating” in the objectionable sense. The French peasant is
no simple countryman, no downright ‘ paysan du Danube;”
both in fact and in fiction he is now “le rusé paysan.”
That is the stage which he has reached in the progressive
developement which the constitution of things has imposed
on human intelligence and human emancipation. But some
excess in this direction is a small and a passing evil com-
pared with recklessness and improvidence in the labouring
classes, and a cheap price to pay for the inestimable worth of
the virtue of self-dependence, as the general characteristic of
a people: a virtue which is one of the first conditions of ex-
cellence in a human character—the stock on which if the
other virtues are not grafted, they have seldom any firm
root ; a quality indispensable in the case of a labouring class,
even to any tolerable degree of physical comfort; and by
which the peasantry of France, and of most European coun-
tries of peasant proprietors, are distinguished beyond any
other labouring population.


§ 4. Is it likely, that a state of economical relations so
conducive to frugality and prudence in eyery other respect,
should be prejudicial to it in the cardinal point of increase of
population? That it is so, is the opinion expressed by most


evens reey


4
a
:
q


ie '
i


Sia
>


334 BOOK Il. CHAPTER Vil. § 4.


of those English political economists who have written
anything about the matter. Mr. Macculloch’s opinion 1s well
known. Mr. Jones affirms*, that “a peasant population,
raising their own wages from the soil, and consuming them
in kind, are universally acted upon very feebly by internal
checks, or by motives disposing them to restraint. The con-
sequence is, that unless some external cause, quite indepen-
dent of their will, forces such peasant cultivators to slacken
their rate of increase, they will, in a limited territory, vely
rapidly approach a state of want and penury; and will be
stopped at last only by the physical impossibility of pro-
curing subsistence.” He elsewheret speaks of such a
peasantry as “exactly in the condition in which the animal
disposition to increase their numbers is checked by the
fewest of those balancing motives and desires which regulate
the increase of superior ranks or of more civilized people.”
The “causes of this peculiarity,” Mr. Jones promises ie
point out in a subsequent work, which has never yet made its
appearance: I am totally unable to conjecture from what
theory of human nature, and of the motives which influence
human conduct, he will derive them. Arthur Young assumes
the same “ peculiarity” as a fact; but, although not much am
the habit of qualifymg his opinions, he does not push his
doctrine to so violent an extreme as Mr. Jones; having,
we have seen, himself testified to various instances in which
peasant populations such as Mr. Jones speaks of, were not
tending to “a state of want and penury,” and were in no
danger whatever of coming in contact with “physical impos
sibility of procuring subsistence.”

That there should be discrepancy of experience on this
matter, is easily to be accounted for. Whether the labouring
people live by land or by wages, they have always hitherto
multiplied up to the limit set by their habitual standard of


* Essay on the Distribution of Wealth, p. 146.
+ Ibid. p. 68.


PEASANT PROPRIETORS, 335


comfort. When that standard was low, not exceeding a
scanty subsistence, the size of properties, as well as the rate
of wages, has been kept down to what would barely support
life. Extremely low ideas of what is necessary for subsis-
tence, are perfectly compatible with peasant properties; and
if a people have always been used to poverty, and habit has
reconciled them to it, there will be over-population, and ex-
cessive subdivision of land. But this is not to the purpose.
The true question is, supposing a peasantry to possess land
not insufficient but sufficient for their comfortable support,
are they more, or less, likely to fall from this state of comfort
through improvident multiplication, than if they were living
in an equally comfortable manner as hired labourers? All
a priori considerations are in favour of their being less likely.
The dependance of wages on population is a matter of specu-
lation and discussion. That wages would fall if population
were much increased, is often a matter of real doubt, and
always a thing which requires some exercise of the reflecting
faculty for its intelligent recognition. But every peasant can
satisfy himself, from evidence which he can fully appreciate,
whether his piece of land can be made to support several
families in the same comfort in which it supports one. Few
people like to leave to their children a worse lot in life than
their own. The parent who has land to leave, is perfectly
able to judge whether the children can live upon it or not:
but people who are supported by wages, see no reason why
their sons should be unable to support themselves in the
same way, and trust accordingly to chance. “In even the
most useful and necessary arts and manufactures,” says Mr.
Laing*, “the demand for labourers is not a seen, known,
steady, and appreciable demand: but it so in husbandry”
under small properties. ‘The labour to be done, the subsis-
tence that labour will produce out of his portion of land, are
seen and known elements in a man’s calculation upon his


* Notes of a Traveller, p. 46.


ae ee eel


336 BOOK II. CHAPTER vil. § 4.


means of subsistence, Can his square of land, or can it not,
subsist a family? Can he marry, or not? are questions
which every man can answer without delay, doubt, or specu-
lation. It is the depending on chance, where judgment has
nothing clearly set before it, that causes reckless, improvi-
dent marriages in the lower, as in the higher classes, and pro-
duces among us the evils of over-population; and chance
necessarily enters into every man’s calculations, when cel-
tainty is removed altogether; as it is, where certain subsis-
tence is, by our distribution of property, the lot of but a
small portion instead of about two-thirds of the people.”
There never has been a writer more keenly sensible of
the evils brought upon the labouring classes by excess of
population, than Sismondi, and this is one of the grounds of
his earnest advocacy of peasant properties. He had ample
opportunity, in more countries than one, for judging of their
effect on population. Let us see his testimony. “ In the
countries in which cultivation by small proprietors still con-
tinues, population increases recularly and rapidly until it has
attained its natural limits; that is to say, inheritances COD
tinue to be divided and subdivided among several sons, a8
long as, by an increase of labour, each family can extract
an equal income from a smaller portion of land. A father
who possessed a vast extent of natural pasture, divides it
among his sons, and they turn it into fields and meadows;
his sons divide it among their sons, who abolish fallows: each
improvement in agricultural knowledge admits of another
step in the subdivision of property. But there is no danger
lest the proprietor should bring up his children to make
beggars of them. He knows exactly what inheritance he has
to leaye them; he knows that the law will divide it equally
among them; he sees the limit beyond which this division
would make them descend from the rank which he has him-
self filled, and a just family pride, common to the peasant
and to the nobleman, makes him abstain from summoning
into life, children for whom he cannot properly provide. If


PEASANT PROPRIETORS. 337


more are born, at least they do not marry, or they agree
among themselves, which of several brothers shall perpetuate
the family. It is not found that in the Swiss Cantons, the
patrimonies of the peasants are ever so divided as to reduce
them below an honourable competence, although the habit
of foreign service, by opening to the children a career inde-
finite and uncaleulable, sometimes calls forth a superabun-
dant population*.”

There is similar testimony respecting Norway. Though
there is-no law or custom of primogeniture, and no
manufactures to take off a surplus population, the sub-
division of property is not carried to an injurious extent.
“The division of the land among children,” says Mr. Laingt,
“appears not, during the thousand years it has been in
operation, to have had the effect of reducing the landed
properties to the minimum size that will barely support
human existence. I have counted from five and twenty to
forty cows upon farms, and that in a country in which the
farmer must, for at least seven months in the year, have
winter provender and houses provided for all the cattle. It
is evident that some cause or other, operating on aggregation
of landed property, counteracts the dividing effects of par-
tition among children. That cause can be no other than
what I have long conjectured would be effective in such a
social arrangement; viz., that in a country where land is
held, not in tenancy merely, as in Ireland, but in full owner-
ship, its aggregation by the deaths of coheirs, and by the
marriages of female heirs among the body of landholders,
will balance its subdivision by the equal succession of
children. The whole mass of property will, I conceive, be
found in such a state of society to consist of as many estates
of the class of 1000/., as many of 100/., as many of 107.
a year, at one period as at another.” That this should
happen, supposes diffused through society a very efficacious


* Nouveaux Principes, Book III. ch, 3,
+ Residence in Norway, p. 18.


rt


338 BOOK I. CHAPTER vil. § 4.


prudential check to population; and it is reasonable to give
part of the credit of this prudential restraint to the peculiar
adaptation of the peasant-proprietary system for fostering it.
But the experience which most decidedly contradicts the
asserted tendency of peasant proprietorship to produce
excess of population, is the case of France. In that country
the experiment is not tried in the most favourable circum-
stances, a large proportion of the properties being too small,
The number of landed proprietors in France is not exactly
ascertained, but on no estimate does it fall much short of
five millions; which, on the lowest calculation of the number
of persons to a family, (and for France it ought to be a low
calculation.) shows much more than half the population as
either possessing, or entitled to inherit, landed property. A
majority of the properties are so small as not to afford a sub-
sistence to the proprietors, of whom, according to some con:
putations, as many as three millions are obliged to eke out
ie means of support either by working for hire, or by
taking additional land, generally on metayer tenure. When
the property possessed is not sufficient to relieve the poe
sessor from dependance on wages, the condition of a pro-
prietor loses much of its characteristic efficacy as # check
to overpopulation: and if the prediction 50 often made
# England had been realized, and France had become @
pauper warren,” the experiment would have proved no-
thing against the tendencies of the same system of agricul-
tural economy in other circumstances. But what is the
fact? That the rate of increase of the French population Is
ness to sudden abundar ee oe ses hopeless wre i ¥
took place. Buta pene prone au ncrease of pope aa
feces aoe pe has grown up, which, eS
2 ane eee oe has not learnt to ‘
conspicuously, in keeping See of thrift operat
he increase of national a increase of population wit)!
t 1ational wealth. In a table, drawn Up by


PEASANT PROPRIETORS. 339


Professor Rau*, of the rate of annual increase of the popu-


* The following is the table (see p. 168 of the Belgian translation of
M. Rau’s large work) :
United States i 2-99 Scotland... 1821-31 ego
Hungary (according to Rohrer) 2°40 | Saxony ... 1815-30 .... 1:15
England 1811-21 .... 1°78 | Baden .... 1820-30 (Heunisch) 1:13
1821-31 .... 1°60 | Bavaria ... .... 1814-28 .... 1:08
.. 1°30)| Naples’ =... va. 1814-24 .... 0°83
.. 1°54 | France .... 1817-27 (Mathieu) 0°63
. 1820-30 .... 1:37 | and more recently (Moreau de
1821-31 .... 1:27 Jonnés) 0:55
Netherlands 1821-28 .... 1:28
But the number given by Moreau de Jonnés, he adds, is not entitled to
implicit confidence.
The following table given by M. Quetelet (Sur ?Homme et le Developpe-
ment de ses Facultés, vol. i., ch. 7) also on the authority of Rau, contains
additional matter, and differs in some items from the preceding, probably


from the author’s having talxen, in those cases, an average of different years :
Per cent.


Percent. Per cent,

Treland..... .... 2.45 | Rhenish Prussia 133
Hungary “4 Austria : France
Spain ; Bavaria Sweden
England Netherlands Lombardy

A recent, and very carefully prepared statement, by M. Legoyt, in the
Journal des Economistes for May, 1847, which brings up the results for
France to the census of the preceding year 1846, is summed up in the fol-


lowing table :


According to

According | the excess
to the of births over
census, deaths.


According to

According | the excess
to the of births over
census. deaths.


per cent.| per cent,
Wurtemberg} 0°01 1:00
Holland .... 0:90 1:03
Belgium aed 0-76
Sardinia ae
Great Britain |
(exclusive
of Ireland)
France ........


Hanover . wy
Bayaria eee : United States


per cent.| per cent.
Sweden ..., 0°83 .
Norway 1°36
Denmark .... ae
Russia
Austria ....
Prussia
Saxony


340 BOOK Il. CHAPTER vir. § 4.


lations of various countries, that of France, from 1817 to
1827, is stated at 58%, per cent., that of England during a


similar decennial period being 158, annually, and that of the
United States nearly 3. According to the official returns
as analyzed by M. Legoyt*, the increase of the population,
which from 1801 to 1806 was at the rate of 1:28 per cent
annually, averaged only 0°47 per cent from 1806 to 1831:
from 1831 to 1836 it averaged 0°60 per cent, from 1836 to
1841, 0°41 per cent, and from 1841 to 1846, 0°68 per Han
but M. Legoyt is of opinion that the population was under-
stated in 1841, and the increase between that time and 1846
consequently overstated, and that the real increase during
the whole period was something intermediate between the
last two averages, or not much more than one in two hun-
dred. Even this slow increase is wholly the effect of a
diminution of deaths; the number of births not increasing
at all, while the proportion of the births to the population
is constantly diminishing+. This slow growth of the num-
bers of the people, while capital increases much more rapidly,
has caused a noticeable improvement in the condition of the


Journal des Economistes for March and May, 1847.
+ The following are the numbers :


: annual number : 3 of thers
From 1824 to 1828, { of births } 981,914, being 1 in 32°30 {polation

» 1829 to 1833, es 965,444, , 1in3400 »

» 1834 to 1838, 55 972,993, ,, lin 3449 »

» 1839 to 1843, 0 970,617, 4, 1 in 3527 ”

» 1844and1845, 5 983,573, , 1 in 35°58 »


Tn the last two years the births, according to M. Legoyt, were swelled


by the effects of a considerable immigration. “ Cette diminution des nals-
sances,” he observes, “en présence d’un accroissement constant, qn
ribu


peu rapide, de la population générale et des mariages, ne peut étre att
Ghia progres de l’esprit d’ordre et de prévision dans les familles.
Wailleurs la conséquence prévue de nos institutions civiles et sociales, 4%
en amenant chaque jour une plus grande subdivision de la fortune territo-
riale et mobiliére de la France, déyeloppent au sein des populations Jes
instincts de conservation et de bien-étre.”

In four departments, among which are two of the most thriving in
Normandy, the deaths actually exceed the births.


O’est


PEASANT PROPRIETORS. 341


labouring class. The circumstances of that portion of the
class who are landed proprietors are not easily ascertained
with precision, being of course extremely variable; but the
mere labourers, who derived no direct benefit from the
changes in landed property which took place at the Revo-
lution, have unquestionably much improved in condition
since that period*. M. Rau testifies to a similar fact in the
case of another country in which the subdivision of land is
really excessive; the Palatinatet.


* “les classes de notre population qui n’ont que leur salaire, celles qui,
par cette raison, sont les plus exposées & lindigence, sont aujourd’hui
beaucoup mieux pouryues des objets nécessaires A la nourriture, au loge-
ment et au vétement, qu’elles ne |’étaient au commencement du siécle. . .
On peut appuyer | ce fait] du témoignage de toutes les personnes qui ont
souvenir de la premiére des époques comparées. . , Svil restait des doutes
4 cet égard, on pourrait facilement Jes dissiper en consultant les anciens
cultivateurs et les anciens ouvriers, ainsi que nous l’avons fait nous-mémes
dans diverses localités, sans rencontrer un seul témoignage contradictoire ;
on peut invoquer aussi les renseignemens recueillis 4 ce sujet par un ob-
servateur exact, M. Villermé (Tableau de Etat Physique et Moral des
Ouvriers, liv. ii., ch. Ne) 2 From an intelligent work published in 1846,
Récherches sur les Causes de VIndigence, par A. Clément, pp. 84-5. The
same writer speaks (p. 118) of “la hausse considérable qui s’est manifestée
depuis 1789 dans le taux du salaire de nos cultivateurs journaliers ;” and
adds the following evidence of a higher standard of habitual requirements;
even in that portion of the town population, the state of which is usually
represented as most deplorable. ‘ Depuis quinze & vingt ans, un change-
ment considérable s’est manifesté dans les habitudes des ouvriers de nos
villes manufacturiéres : ils dépensent aujourd’hui beaucoup plus que par le
passé pour le vétement et la parure..... les ouvriers de certaines
classes, tels que les anciens canuts de Lyon,” (according to all representa-
tions, like their counterpart, our handloom weavers, the very worst paid
class of artisans,) “ne se montrent plus comme autrefois couverts de sales
haillons.” (Page 164.)

+ In his little book on the Agriculture of the Palatinate, already cited.
He says that the daily wages of labour, which during the last years of the
war were unusually high, and so continued until 1817, afterwards sank to
a lower money-rate, but that the prices of many commodities having fallen
in a still greater proportion, the condition of the people was unequivocally
improved. The food given to farm labourers by their employers has also
greatly improyed in quantity and quality, “Sie heutigen Tages bedeu-


=


anne a


Were baa


342 BOOK II. CHAPTER VII. § 5.


I am not aware of a single authentic instance which suy
ports the assertion that rapid multiplication is promoted by
peasant properties. Instances may undoubtedly be cited of
its not being prevented by them, and one of the principal of
these is Belgium; the prospects of which, in respect to popu-
lation, are at present a matter of considerable uncertainty.
Belgium has the most rapidly increasing population on the
Continent, and when the circumstances of the country require,
as they must soon do, that this rapidity should be checked,
there will be a considerable strength of existing habit to be
broken through. One of the unfayourable circumstances
the great power possessed over the minds of the people by the
Catholic priesthood, whose influence is everywhere strongly
exerted against restraining population. As yet, however, 1t
must be remembered that the indefatigable industry, and
great agricultural skill of the people, have rendered the
existing rapidity of increase practically innocuous ; the great
number of large estates still undivided, affording by ther
gradual dismemberment, a resource for the necessary aes
mentation of the gross produce; and there are, besides, me
thriving manufacturing towns, and mining and coal districts,
which attract and employ a large portion of the annual
mcerease of population.


§ 5. But even where peasant properties are accompanies

: = : We . ti
by an excess of numbers, this evil is not necessarily attende
with the additional economical disadvantage of too great a


tend besser ist, als vor ungefahr 40 Jahren, wo das Gesinde weniger Fleisch
und Mehlspeisen, keinen Kise zum Brote nu. del, erhielt.” (p- 20-) “Such
an increase of wages” (adds the Professor) ‘ ch must be estimated not
in money, but in the quantity of necessaries and conveniences which the
labourer is enabled to procure, is by universal admission a proof that the
mass of capital must haye increased.” It proves not only this, put also
that the labouring population has not increased in an equal degree ; and
that in this instance as well as in France, the morcellement of the land, even
when excessive, has been compatible with a strengthening of the prudential
checks to population.


PEASANT PROPRIETORS. 343


subdivision of the land. It does not follow because landed
property is minutely divided, that farms will be so. As large
properties are perfectly compatible with small farms, so are
small properties with farms of an adequate size; and a sub-
division of occupancy is not an inevitable consequence of
even undue multiplication among peasant proprietors. As
might be expected from their admirable intelligence in
things relating to their occupation, the Flemish peasantry
have long learnt this lesson. “The habit of not dividing
properties,” says M. Rau*, “and the opinion that this is
advantageous, have been so completely preserved in Flanders,
that even now, when a peasant dies leaving several children,
they do not think of dividing his patrimony, though it be
neither entailed nor settled in trust; they prefer selling it
entire, and sharing the proceeds, considering it as a jewel
which loses its value when it is divided.” That the same
feeling must prevail widely even in France, is shown by the
great frequency of sales of land, amounting in ten years to a
fourth part of the whole soil of the country: and M. Passy,
in his tract “On the Changes in the Agricultural Condition
of the Department of the Eure since the year 1800+,” states
other facts tending to the same conclusion. “The example,”
says he, “of this department attests that there does not
exist, as some writers have imagined, between the distribu-
tion of property and that of cultivation, a connexion which
tends invincibly to assimilate them. In no portion of it
have changes of ownership had a perceptible influence on
the size of holdings. While, in districts of small farming,
lands belonging to the same owner are ordinarily distributed


among many tenants, so neither is 1f uncommon, m places


n. He cites as an authority,


i. 185.

e appeared in the Journal des
ists
M.


* Page 334 of the Brussels translatio
Schwerz, Landwirthschaftliche Mittheilungen,


+ One of the important papers which hav: : \t
Economistes, the monthly organ of most of the enlightened political econom


of France, and doing great honour to their knowledge and abilities.
g
Passy’s essay has been reprinted separately as a pamphlet.


344 BOOK Il. CHAPTER VII. § 5.


where the grande culture prevails, for the same farmer to
rent the lands of several proprietors. In the plains of Vexin,
in particular, many active and rich cultivators do not content
themselves with a single farm; others add to the lands of
their principal holding, all those in the neighbourhood which
they are able to hire, and in this manner make up a total
extent which in some cases reaches or exceeds two hundred
hectares” (five hundred English acres). “The more the
estates are dismembered, the more frequent do this sort of
arrangements become; and as they conduce to the interest
of all concerned, it is probable that time will confirm them.”
Undue subdivision, and excessive smallness of holdings»
are undoubtedly a prevalent evil in some countries of peasant
proprietors, and particularly in parts of Germany and Franc®
The governments of Bavaria and Nassau have thought it nec”
sary to impose a legal limit to subdivision, and the Prussia?
Government unsuccessfully proposed the same, to the State
of its Rhenish Provinces. But I do not think it will anywhe?
be found that the petite culture is the system of the peasant
and the grande culture that of the great landlords: on tb?
contrary, wherever the small properties are divided amo¥3
too many proprietors, I believe it to be true that the lars?
properties also are pareelled out among too many farmers?
and that the cause is the same in both cases, a backward
state of capital, skill, and agricultural enterprise. There 18
reason to believe that the subdivision in France is not m0!
excessive than is accounted for by this cause; that it 16
diminishing, not mereasing; and that the terror express¢
an ee eee
If Berar properties me “ eS Pee ze
Pare J any effect in promoting sub-
division beyond the degree which corres a sical
tural practices of the country he ie to hea
: y, and which is customary
its large estates, the cause must le in one of eae e. 5
he salute


* d
See the Appendix to the Present volume


PEASANT PROPRIETORS. 345


influences of the system; the eminent degree in which it
promotes providence on the part of those who, not being yet
peasant proprietors, hope to become so. In England, where
the labourer has no investment for his savings but the savings’
bank, and no position to which he can rise by any exercise
of economy, except perhaps that of a petty shopkeeper, with
its chances of bankruptcy, there is nothing at all resembling
the intense spirit of thrift which takes possession of one
who, from being a day labourer, can raise himself by saving
to the condition of a landed proprietor. According to almost
all authorities, the real cause of the morcellement is the higher
price which can be obtained for land by selling it to the
peasantry, as an investment for their small accumulations,
than by disposing of it entire to some rich purchaser who
has no object but to live on its income without improving it.


The hope of obtaining such an investment is the most power-
ful of inducements, to those who are without land, to prac-
tise the industry, frugality, and self-restraint, on which their


success in this object of rational ambition is dependent. In
Flanders, according to Mr. Fauche, the British Consul at
Ostend*, “‘ farmers’ sons and those who have the means to
become farmers will delay their marriage until they get pos-
session of a farm.” Once a farmer, the next object is to
become a proprietor. ‘‘ The first thing a Dane does with his
savings,” says Mr. Browne, the Consul at Copenhagent,
‘is to purchase a clock, then a horse and cow, which he
hires out, and which pays a good interest. Then his ambi-
tion is to become a petty proprietor; and this class of per-
sons is better off than any in Denmark. Indeed I know of
no people in any country who have more easily within their
reach all that is really necessary for life than this class,
which is very large in comparison with that of labourers.”
As the result of this enquiry into the direct operation


* Tn a communication to the Commissioners of Poor Law Enquiry, p.
640 of their Foreign Communications, Appendix F to their First Report.
+ Ib, 268.


346 BOOK II. CHAPTER VII. § 5.


and indirect influences of peasant properties, I conceive it
to be established, that there is no necessary connexion
between this form of landed property and an imperfect state
of the arts of production; that it is favourable in quite as
many respects as it is unfavourable, to the most effective use
of the powers of the soil; that no other existing state of
agricultural economy has so beneficial an effect on the in-
dustry, the intelligence, the frugality and prudence of the
population, nor tends on the whole so much to discourage
an improvident increase of their numbers; and that no other,
therefore, is on the whole so favourable, in the present state
of their education, both to their moral and their physical
welfare. Whether and in what these considerations admit
of useful application to any of the social questions of our
time, will be considered in a future chapter.


CHAPTER VIII.


OF METAYERS.


§1. From the case in which the produce of land and
labour belongs undividedly to the labourer, we proceed to
the cases in which it is divided, but between two classes
only, the labourers and the landowners; the character of
capitalist merging in the one or the other, as the case may
be. It is possible indeed to conceive that there might be
only two classes of persons to share the produce, and that a
class of capitalists might be one of them; the character of
labourer and that of landowner being united to form the
other. This might occur in two ways. The labourers,
though owning the land, might let it to a tenant, and work
under him as hired servants. But this arrangement, even in
the very rare cases which could give rise to it, would not
require any particular discussion, since it would not differ, in
any material respect, from the threefold system, of labourers,
capitalists, and landlords. The other case is the not uncom-
mon one, in which a peasant proprietor owns and cultivates
the land, but taises the little capital required, by a mortgage
upon it. Neither does this case present any important pecu-
liarity. There is but one person, the peasant himself, who has
any right or power of interference in the management. He
pays a fixed annuity as interest to a capitalist, as he pays
another fixed sum in taxes to the government. Without
dwelling further on these cases, we pass to those which do


present marked features of peculiarity.

When the two parties sharing in the produce are the
labourer, or labourers, and the landowner, it is not a very
material circumstance in the case, which of the two furnishes
the stock, or whether, as sometimes happens, they furnish


348 BOOK Il. CHAPTER Vill. $§ I.


it, in a determinate proportion, between them. The essen-
tial difference does not lie in this, but in another circum-
stance, namely, whether the division of the produce between
the two, is regulated by custom, or by competition. We
will begin with the former case; of which the metayer cul-
ture is the principal, and in Europe almost the sole,
example.

The principle of the metayer system is that the labourer,
or peasant, makes his engagement directly with the land-
owner, and pays, not a fixed rent, either in money orin
kind, but a certain proportion of the produce, or rather of
what remains of the produce after deducting what is consi-
dered necessary to keep up the stock. The proportion is
usually, as the name imports, one-half; but in several dis-
tricts in Italy itis two-thirds. Respecting the supply of stock,
the custom varies from place to place: in some places the
landlord furnishes the whole, in others half, in others some
particular part, as for instance the cattle and seed, the
labourer providing the implements*. This connexion,”
says Sismondi, speaking chiefly of Tuscanyt, “is often the


* In France, before the Revolution, according to Arthur Young (i. 403)
there was great local diversity in this respect. In Champagne, “ the land-
lord commonly finds half the cattle and half the seed, and the metayer
labour, implements, and taxes; but in some districts the landlord bears a
share of these. In Roussillon, the landlord pays half the taxes; and m
Guienne, from Auch to Fleuran, many landlords pay all. Near Aguillon,
on the Garonne, the metayers furnish half the cattle. At Nangis, in the
Isle of France, I met with an agreement for the landlord to furnish live
stock, implements, harness, and taxes; the metayer found labour and his
own capitation tax : the landlord repaired the house and gates ; the metayer
the windows: the landlord provided seed the first year, the metayer the
last ; in the intervening years they supply half and half. In the Bour-
bonnois the landlord finds all sorts of live stock, yet the metayer sells,
changes and buys at his will; the steward Keeping an account of these
mutations, for the landlord has half the product of sales, and pays half the
purchases.” In Piedmont, he says, “the landlord commonly pays the


taxes and repairs the buildings, and the tenant provides cattle, implements,
and seed.” (ii. 151.)


+ Eludes sur 1 Economie Politique,


6me essai: De la condition des Cul-
tivateurs en Toscane,


METAYERS. 349


subject of a contract, to define certain services and certain
occasional payments to which the metayer binds himself:
nevertheless the differences in the obligations of one such
contract and another are inconsiderable; usage governs alike
all these engagements, and supplies the stipulations which
have not been expressed: and the landlord who attempted
to depart from usage, who exacted more than his neighbour,
who took for the basis of the agreement anything but the
equal division of the crops, would render himself so odious,
he would be so sure of not obtaining a metayer who was an
honest man, that the contract of all the metayers may be
considered as identical, at least in each province, and never
gives rise to any competition among peasants in search of
employment, or any offer to cultivate the soil on cheaper
terms than one another.” To the same effect Chateauvieux*,


speaking of the metayers of Piedmont. “They consider it”
(the farm) “as a patrimony, and never think of renewing


the lease, but go on from generation to generation, on the
same terms, without writings or registries.”


§ 2. When the partition of the produce is a matter of
fixed usage, not of varying conyention, political economy
has no laws of distribution to investigate. It has only to
consider, as in the case of peasant proprietors, the effects of
the system, first, on the condition of the peasantry, morally
and physically, and secondly, on the efficiency of the labour.


* Letters from Italy. I quote from Dr. Rigby’s translation (p. 22).

+ This virtual fixity of tenure is not however universal even in Italy ;
and it is to its absence that Sismondi attributes the inferior condition of
the metayers in some provinces of Naples, in Lucca, and in the Riviera of
Genoa ; where the landlords obtain a larger (though still a fixed) share of
the produce. In those countries the cultivation is splendid, but the people
wretchedly poor. ‘ The same misfortune would probably have befallen the
people of Tuscany, if public opinion did not protect the cultivator ; but a
proprietor would not dare to impose conditions unusual in the country, and
even in changing one metayer for another, he alters nothing in the terms of
the engagement.” (Nowveauw Principes, liv. ili. ch. 5.)


aoe 350 BOOK Il. CHAPTER Vilr. § 2.


fae In both these particulars the metayer system has the charac-
teristic advantages of peasant properties, but has them ina
less degree. The metayer has less motive to exertion than
2 the peasant proprietor, since only half the fruits of his indus-
‘Behe s try, instead of the whole, are his own. But he has a much


Ha. by { . .
in i ; stronger motive than a day labourer, who has no other mte-
i i it rest in the result than not to be dismissed. If the metayer
eh ae


; cannot be turned out except for some violation of his con-
ite tract, he has a stronger motive to exertion than any tenant-
i farmer who has not a lease. The metayer is at least his
at gh | landlord’s partner, and a half-sharer in their joint gains.
Where, too, the permanence of his tenure is guaranteed by :
custom, he acquires local attachments, and much of the feel-
ings of a proprietor. I am supposing that his half produce
is sufficient to yield him a comfortable support. Whether it
tit is so, depends (in any given state of agriculture) on the
degree of subdivision of the land; which depends on the

operation of the population principle. A multiplication of

: people, beyond the number that can be properly supported
ay on the land or taken off by manufactures, is incident even to
ee ay a peasant proprietary, and of course not less but rather more
incident to a metayer population. The tendency, however,
which we noticed in the proprietary system, to promote prt
dence on this point, is in no small degree common to it with
the metayer system. There, also, it is a matter of easy :
ath t and exact calculation whether a family can be supported or
Ugg! a not. If it is easy to see whether the owner of the whole
produce can increase the production so as to maintaim a
greater number of persons equally well, it is a not less simple


problem whether the owner of half the produce can do so*.


* A high authority among French political economists, M. Frédéric
Bastiat, affirms that even in France, incon testably the least favourable exam-
ple of the metayer system, its effect in repressing population is conspicuous.

“Un fait bien constaté, c’est que la tendance X une multiplication
désordonnée se manifeste principalement au sein de cette classe d’ hommes
qui vit de salaires. Cette prévoyance qui retarde les mariages a sur elle


lege


Fa


METAYBERS. 351


There is one check which this system seems to offer, over
and above those held out even by the proprietary system ;
there is a landlord, who may exert a controlling power, by
refusing his consent to a subdivision. I do not, however,
attach great importance to this check, because the farm may
be loaded with superfluous hands without being subdivided ;
and because, so long as the increase of hands increases the
gross produce, which is almost always the case, the landlord,
who receives half the produce, is an immediate gainer, the
imconyenience falling only on the labourers. The landlord is
no doubt liable in the end to suffer from their poverty, by
bemg forced to make advances to them, especially in bad
seasons ; and a foresight of this ultimate inconvenience may
operate beneficially on such landlords as prefer future
security to present profit.

The characteristic disadvantage of the metayer system is
very fairly stated by Adam Smith. After pointing out that
metayers “have a plain interest that the whole produce
should be as great as possible, in order that their own pro-
portion may be so,” he continues*, “it could never, how-
ever, be the interest of this species of cultivators to lay out,
in the further improvement of the land, any part of the little
stock which they might save from their own share of the


peu d’empire, parce que les maux qui résultent de l’excés de concur-
rence ne lui apparaissent que trés-confusément, et dans un lointain en ap-
parence peu redoutable. C’est donc Ja circonstance la plus favorable pour
un pays d’étre organisé de maniére a exclure le salariat. Dans les pays de
métairies, les mariages sont déterminés principalement par les besoins de
la culture; ils se multiplient quand, par quelque circonstance, les métairies
offrent des vides nuisibles aux travaux; ils se ralentissent quand les places
sont remplies. Ici, un état de choses facile 4 constater, savoir, le rapport
entre l’étendue du domaine et le nombre des bras, opére comme la prévoy-
ance et plus s(irement qu’elle. Aussi voyons-nous que si aucune circon-
stance n’intervient pour ouvrir des débouchés a une population surnumé-
raire, elle demeure stationnaire. Nos départements méridionaux en sont
la preuve.”— Considerations sur le Métayage, Journal des Economistes for
February, 1846.

* Wealth of Nations, book: ili. ch. 2.


352 BOOK Il. CHAPTER VIII. $ 3.


produce, because the lord, who laid out nothing, was to get
one-half of whatever it produced. The tithe, which is but a
tenth of the produce, is found to be a very great hindrance
to improvement. A tax, therefore, which amounted to one-
half, must have been an effectual bar to it. It might be the
interest of a metayer to make the land produce as much as
could be brought out of it by means of the stock furnished
by the proprietor; but it could never be his interest to mix
any part of his own with it. In France, where five parts out
of six of the whole kingdom are said to be still occupied by
this species of cultivators, the proprietors complain that their
metayers take every opportunity of employing the master’s
cattle rather in carriage than in cultivation ; because m the
one case they get the whole profits to themselves, m the
other they share them with their landlord.”

It is indeed implied in the very nature of the tenure, that
all improvements which require expenditure of capital, must
be made with the capital of the landlord. This however 1s
essentially the case even in England, whenever the farmers
are tenants-at-will; or (if Arthur Young is right) even on4
“nine years’ lease.’ If the landlord is willing to provide
capital for improvements, the metayer has the strongest
interest in promoting them, since half the benefit of them
will accrue to himself. As, however, the perpetuity of tenure
which, in the case which we are discussing, he enjoys by
custom, renders his consent a necessary condition 5 the spirit
of routine, and dislike of innoyation, characteristic of an
agricultural people when not corrected by education, are n0
doubt, as the advocates of the system seem to admit, a serious
hindrance to improvement.


§ 3. The metayer system has met with no mercy from
-English authorities. “There is not.one word to be said in
pee Nat PAGCOR. 7 ,
favour of the practice,” says Arthur Young*, “and a thou-


* Travels, vol. i. pp. 404—5,


METAYERS., 353


sand arguments that might be used against it. The hard
plea of necessity can alone be urged in its favour; the
poverty of the farmers being so great, that the landlord must
stock the farm, or it could not be stocked at all: this is a
most cruel burthen to a proprietor, who is thus obliged to
run much of the hazard of farming in the most dangerous of
all methods, that of trusting his property absolutely in the
hands of people who are generally ignorant, many care-
less, and some undoubtedly wicked. . . . In this most
miserable of all the modes of letting land, the defrauded
landlord receives a contemptible rent; the farmer is in the
lowest state of poverty ; the land is miserably cultivated ;
and the nation suffers as severely as the parties themselves.
- + + Wherever* this system prevails, it may be taken
for granted that a useless and miserable population is found.

Wherever the country (that I saw) is poor and
unwatered, in the Milanese, it is in the hands of metayers :”
they are almost always in debt to their landlord for seed or
food, and “their condition is more wretched than that of a
day labourer. .* . . Theret are but few districts” (in
Italy) “where lands are let to the occupying tenant at a
money-rent; but wherever it is found, their crops are
greater; a clear proof of the imbecility of the metaying
system.” ‘‘ Wherever it,” (the metayer system) “has been
adopted,” says Mr. Maccullocht, it has put a stop to all
improvement, and has reduced the cultivators to the most
abject poverty.” Mr. Jones§ shares the common opinion,
and quotes ‘Turgot and Destutt-Tracy in support of it. The
impression, however, of all these writers (notwithstanding
Arthur Young’s occasional references to Italy) seems to be
chiefly derived from France, and France before the Revolu-


Travels, vol. ii. 151—3.

Tbid., ii. 217.

Principles of Political Economy, 3rd ed., p. 471.

Essay on the Distribution of Wealth, pp. 102—4,
QA


354 BOOK II. CHAPTER VIII. § 3.


tion®. Now the situation of French metayers under the old
régime by no means represents the typical form of the con-
tract. It is essential to that form, that the proprietor pays
all the taxes. But in France the exemption of the noblesse
from direct taxation had led the Government to throw the
whole burthen of their ever increasing fiscal exactions upon
the occupiers: and it is to these exactions that Turgot
ascribed the extreme wretchedness of the metayers: 4
wretchedness in some cases so excessive, that) in Limousin
and Angoumois (the provinces which he administered) they
had seldom more, according to him, after deducting all bur-
thens, than from twenty-five to thirty livres (20 to 24 shil
lings) per head for their whole annual consumption: “je ne
dis pas en argent, mais en comptant tout ce qu’ils consom-
ment en nature sur ce qu’ils ont récoltét.” When we add
that they had not the virtual fixity of tenure of the metayers
of Italy, (“in Limousin,” says Arthur Young{, “the metayers
are considered as little better than menial servants, removable


* M. de Tracy is partially an exception, inasmuch as his experi
reaches lower down than the revolutionary period : but he admits (as Mr.
Jones has himself stated in another place) that he is acquainted only with
a limited district, of great subdivision and unfertile soil. sta

M. Passy is of opinion, that a French peasantry must be in indigence
and the country badly cultivated on a metayer system, because the Ds
portion of the produce claimable by the landlord is too high, it bemg only
in more favourable climates that any land, not of the most exuberant
fertility, can pay half its gross produce in rent and leaye enough to pea-
sant farmers to enable them to grow successfully the more expensive and
valuable products of agriculture. (Systémes de Culture, p. 35.) This 18 an
objection only toa particular numerical proportion, which ig indeed the
common one, but is not essential to the system.

+ See the “ Mémoire sur la Surcharge des Impositions qu’éprou
Généralité de Limoges, adress¢é au Conseil d’Etat en 1766,” pP- 260-304
of the fourth volume of Turgot’s Works. The occasional engagements of
landlords (as mentioned by Arthur Young) to pay a part of the taxes,
were, according to Turgot, of recent origin, under the compulsion of actual
necessity. “Le propriétaire ne s’y préte qu’autant qu’il ne peut trouver
de métayer autrement; ainsi, méme dans ce cas-la, le métayer est toujours
réduit 4 ce qu’il faut précisément pour ne pas mourir de faim.” (P. 275.)
+ Vol. i., p. 404.


vait la


METAYERS. 355


at pleasure, and obliged to conform in all things to the will
of the landlords”) it is evident that their case affords no
argument against the metayer system in its better form. A
population who could call nothing their own, who, like the
Insh cottiers, could not in any contingency be worse off, had
nothing to restrain them from multiplying, and subdividing
the land, until stopped by actual starvation.

We shall find a very different picture, by the most
accurate authorities, of the metayer cultivation of Italy. In
the first place, as to subdivision. In Lombardy, according
to Chateauvieux*, there are few farms which exceed sixty
acres, and few which have less than ten. These farms are
all occupied by metayers at half profit. They invariably
display “an extent} and a richness in buildings rarely known
in any other country in Europe.” Their plan “affords. the
greatest room with the least extent of building ; is best
adapted to arrange and secure the crop, and is, at the same
time, the most economical, and the least exposed to accidents
by fire.” The court-yard “exhibits a whole so regular and
commodious, and a system of such care and good order, that
our dirty and ill-arranged farms can convey no adequate idea
of.” The same description applies to Piedmont. The rota-
tion of crops is excellent. “I should think { no country can
bring so large a portion of its produce to market as Pied-
mont.” Though the soil is not naturally very fertile, “the
number of cities is prodigiously great.” The agriculture
must therefore be eminently favourable to the net as well as
to the gross produce of the land. ‘Each plough works
thirty-two acres in the season. . . . Nothing can be
more perfect or neater than the hoeing and moulding up the
maize, when in full growth, by a single plough, with a pair of
oxen, without injury to a single plant, while all the weeds
are effectually destroyed.” So much for agricultural skill.


® Letters from Italy, translated by Rigby, p. 16.
+ Ibid. pp. 19, 20. t Ibid., pp. 24—31.
2a 2


356 BOOK Il. CHAPTER VIII. §3.


“Nothing can be so excellent as the crop which precedes
and that which follows it.” The wheat “is threshed bya
cylinder, drawn by a horse, and guided by a boy, while the
labourers turn over the straw with forks. This process lasts
nearly a fortnight; it is quick and economical, and com-
pletely gets out the grain. In no part of the world
are the economy and the management of the land better un-
derstood than in Piedmont, and this explains the phenome-
non of its great population, and immense export of pro-
visions.’ All this under metayer cultivation.

Of the valley of the Arno, in its whole extent, both
above and below Florence, the same writer thus speaks*:—
« Forests of olive-trees covered the lower parts of the moun-
tains, and by their foliage concealed an infinite number of
small farms, which peopled these parts of the mountains;
chestnut-trees raised their heads on the higher slopes; their
healthy verdure contrasting with the pale tint of the olive-
trees, and spreading a brightness over this amphitheatre.
The road was bordered on each side with village-houses, not
more than a hundred paces from each other. - + They
are placed at a little distance from the road, and separated
from it by a wall, and a terrace of some feet in extent. On
the wall are commonly placed many vases of antique forms,
in which flowers, aloes, and young orange-trees are growing.
The house itself is completely covered with vines. + * *
Before these houses we saw groups of peasant females
dressed in white linen, silk corsets, and straw-hats orna-
mented with flowers. These houses being sO near
each other, it is evident that the land annexed to them must
be small, and that property, in these valleys, must be very
much divided ; the extent of these domains being from three
hOcten ACIES. The land lies round the houses, and is divided
into fields by small canals, or rows of trees, some of sapran
are mulberry-trees, but the greatest number poplars; the


* Pp. 789,


METAYERS. 357


leaves of which are eaten by the cattle. Each tree supports
avine. . . . These divisions, arrayed in oblong squares,
are large enough to be cultivated by a plough without wheels,
and a pair of oxen. There is a pair of them between ten or
twelve of the farmers; they employ them successively in the
cultivation of all the farms. . . . Almost every farm
maintains a well-looking horse, which goes in a small two-
wheeled cart, neatly made, and painted red; they serve for
all the purposes of draught for the farm, and also to convey
the farmer’s daughters to mass and to balls. Thus, on holi-
days, hundreds of these little carts are seen flying in all
directions, carrying the young women, decorated with flowers


and ribbons.”

This is not a picture of poverty; and so far as agriculture
is concerned, it effectually redeems metayer cultivation, as
existing in these countries, from the reproaches of English
writers ; bat with respect to the condition of the cultivators,


Chateauvieux’s testimony is, in some points, not so fayour-
able. “It.is* neither the natural fertility of the soil, nor
the abundance that strikes the eye of the traveller, which
constitute the well-being of its inhabitants. It is the number
of individuals among whom the total produce is divided, which
fixes the portion that each is enabled to enjoy. Here it is
very small. I have thus far, indeed, exhibited a delightful
country, well watered, fertile, and covered with a perpetual
vegetation; I have shown it divided into countless inclosures,
which, like so many beds in a garden, display a thousand
varying productions; I have shown, that to all these in-
closures are attached well-built houses, clothed with vines,
and decorated with flowers; but, on entering them, we
find a total want of all the conveniences of life, a table more
than frugal, and a general appearance of privation.” Is not
Gliatentniens here Rconseioudle contrasting the condition of
the metayers with that of the farmers of other countries,


Sop: 73—6.


358 BOOK IJ. CHAPTER VIII. § 3.


when the proper standard with which to compare it is that
of the agricultural day-labourers ?

Arthur Young says*, “I was assured that these metayers
are (especially near Florence), much at their ease; that on
holidays they are dressed remarkably well, and not without
objects of luxury, as silver, gold, and silk; and live well, on
plenty of bread, wine, and legumes. In some instances this
may possibly be the case, but the general fact is contrary. It
is absurd to think that metayers, upon such a farm as is
cultivated by a pair of oxen, can live at their ease; and a
clear proof of their poverty is this, that the landlord, who
provides half the live stock, is often obliged to lend the
peasant money to procure his half. . . The metayers,
not in the vicinity of the city, are so poor, that landlords
even lend them corn to eat: their food is black bread, made
of a mixture with vetches; and their drink is very little
wine, mixed with water, and called aquurolle; meat on Sun-
days only; their dress very ordinary.” Mr. Jones admits
the superior comfort of the metayers near Florence, and
attributes it partly to straw-platting, by which the women
of the peasantry can earn, according to Chateauvieuxt, from
fifteen to twenty pence a day. But even this fact tells in
favour of the metayer system ; for in those parts of England
in which either straw-platting or lace-making is carried on
by the women of the labouring class, as in Bedfordshire and
Buckinghamshire, the condition of the class is not better, but
rather worse than elsewhere, the wages of agricultural labour
being depressed by a full equivalent.

In spite of Chateauvieux’s statement respecting the
poverty of the metayers, his opinion, in respect to Italy at
least, 1s given in favour of the system. “It occupiest and
constantly interests the proprietors, which is never the case
with great proprietors who lease their estates at fixed rents.


. Travels, Vol. ii. p. a : + Letters from Italy, p. 19
$ Ibid., pp. 295—6.


METAYERS. 359


It establishes a community of interests, and relations of kind-
ness between the proprietors and the metayers; a kindness
which I have often witnessed, and from which result great
advantages in the moral condition of society. The pro-
prietor, under this system, always interested in the success
of the crop, never refuses to make an advance upon it, which
the land promises to repay with interest. It is by these
advances, and by the hope thus inspired, that the nich pro-
prietors of land have gradually perfected the whole rural
economy of Italy. Itis to them that it owes the numerous
systems of irrigation which water its soil, as also the esta-
blishment of the terrace culture on the hills: gradual but
permanent improvements, which common peasants, for want
of means, could never have effected, and which could never
haye been accomplished by the farmers, nor by the great
proprietors who let their estates at fixed rents, because they
are not sufficiently interested. Thus the interested system
forms of itself that alliance between the rich proprietor,
whose means provide for the improvement of the culture,
and the metayer, whose care and labours are directed, by a
common interest, to make the most of these advances.”

But the testimony most favourable to the system is that
of Sismondi, which has the advantage of being specific, and
from accurate knowledge; his information being not that of
a traveller, but of a resident proprietor, intimately acquainted
with rural life. His statements apply to Tuscany generally,
and more particularly to the Val di Nievole, in which his
own property lay, and which is not within the supposed
privilesed circle immediately round Florence. It is one of
the districts in which the size of farms appears to be the
smallest. The following is his description of the dwellings
and mode of life of the metayers of that district *.

“Cette maison, batie en bonnes murailles 4 chaux et a
ciment, a toujours au moins un étage, quelquefois deux, au-


* From his Sixth Essay, formerly referred to.


Seti


Aad


Tee tocol Seta


~ ae ee: na re oe a an TE eae cada


en cect nteeeces ean entecienrrneenr amuse


Seem oor nearer


360 BOOK Il. CHAPTER Vill. § 3.


dessus du rez-de-chaussée. Le plus souvent on trouve a ce
rez-de-chaussée la cuisine, une étable pour deux betes a come,
et le magasin, qui prend son nom, tinaia, des grandes cuyes
(tint) ou Von fait fermenter le vin, sans le soumettre au
pressoir: c’est 1a encore que le métayer enferme sous clé ses
tonneaux, son huile, et son blé. Presque toujours il possede
encore un hangar appuyé contre la maison, pour qu'il puisse
y travailler 4 couvert 4 raccommoder ses outils, ou a hacher
le fourrage pour son bétail. Au premier et au second étage
sont deux, trois, et souvent quatre chambres a lita caeeeoe
plus spacieuse et la mieux aérée de ces chambres est en
général destinée par le métayer, pendant les mois de Mai et
de Juin, 4 l’éducation des vers 4 soie: de grands coffres pour
enfermer les habits et le linge, et quelques chaises de bois,
sont les principaux meubles de ces chambres; mais une
nouvelle épouse y apporte toujours sa commode de bois de
noyer. Les lits sont sans rideaux, sans tour de lit; mais
sur chacun, outre un bon garde-paille rempli de la paille
élastique du blé de Turquie, on voit un ou deux matelas en
laine, ou, chez les plus pauvres, en étoupe, une bonne cou-
verture piquée, des draps de forte toile de chanvre, et sur le
meilleur lit de la famille, un tapis de bourre de soie qu’on
étale les jours de féte. I] n’y a de cheminée qu’a la cuisine ;
dans la méme piéce ou trouve toujours la grande table de
bois ot dine la famille, avec ses banes; le grand coffre, qui
sert en méme temps d’armoire pour conserver le pain et les
provisions, et de pétrin; un assortiment assez complet et fort
peu cofiteux de pots, de plats et d’assiettes en terre cuites
mneou deux lampes de laiton, un poids 4 la romaine, et au
moins deux cruches en cuivre rouge pour pulser et pour
conserver | eau. Tout le linge et tous les habits de travail
de la famille ont été filés par les femmes de la maison. Ces
bit fur es homies ae pout es em sn
cae ana si elle est épaisse, mold si
sawupes lorem Se toae fil ou de chanvre ou

: ine ou de coton; elle est


METAYERS. 361


teinte par les mémes paysannes qui Vont filée. On se
figurerait difficilement combien, par un travail assidu, les
paysannes savent accumuler et de toile et de mezza lana;
combien de draps se trouvent au dépdt commun: combien
chaque membre de la famille a de chemises, de vestes, de
pantalons, de jupons, et de robes. Pour le faire comprendre,
nous joignons en note une partie de V’inventaire de la famille
de paysans que nous connaissons le mieux; elle n’est ni
parmi les plus pauvres ni parmi les plus riches, et elle vit
heureuse par son travail sur la moitié des récoltes de moins
de dix arpens de terre*. Cette épouse avait eu 50 écus de
dot, dont 20 payés comptant, et le reste A terme, a 2 écus
par année. L7’écu de Toscane vaut 6 francs. La dot la plus
commune pour les paysannes, dans le reste de la Toscane
ou les métairies sont plus grandes, est de 100 écus, 600
francs.”

Is this: poverty, or consistent with poverty? When a
common, M. de Sismondi even says the common, marriage
portion of a metayer’s daughter is 24/7. English money, equi-
valent to at least 50/7. in Italy and in that rank of life; when
one whose dowry is only half that amount, has the trousseau


* “Tnventaire du trousseau de Jeanne, fille de Valente Papini, 4 son
mariage avec Giovacchino Landi, le 29 Avril 1835, 4 Porta Vecchia, prés
Pescia :

“28 chemises, 3 robes de bourre de soie en couleur, 4 robes de fleuret
de soie en couleur, 7 robes d’Indienne ou toile de coton, 2 robes de travail
Whiver (mezza lana), 3 robes et jupons de travail d’été (mola), 3 jupes
blanches, 5 tabliers de toile peinte, 1 tablier de soie noire, 1 tablier de
mérinos noir, 9 tabliers de travail (mola) en couleur, 4 mouchoirs blancs,
8 mouchoirs en couleur, 3 mouchoirs de soie, 2 voiles brodés et 1 voile de
tulle, 3 essuie-mains, 14 paires de bas, 2 chapeaux, l’un de feutre, l’autre de
paille fine : 2 camées d’or, 2 boucles d’oreilles en or, 1 chapelet avec deux
piastres romaines, | collier de corail avec sa croix d’or..... Toutes les
épouses plus riches ont de plus /a veste x SLES la grande robe de toilette, de
sole, qu’elles ne portent que quatre ou cing fois dans leur vie.

“ Les hommes n’ont point de trousseau: l’époux en se mariant n’avait
que 14 chemises, et le reste en proportion. Tl n’a encore a présent que 13
paires de draps, tandis que dans la famille de sa femme il y en a 30 paires.”


362 BOOK Il. CHAPTER VIII. § 3.


just described, which is represented by Sismondi as a fair
average; must not the class be fully comparable, in general
condition, to a large proportion even of capitalist farmers in
other countries? and incomparably above the day labourers
of any country, except a new colony, or the United
States. Very little can be inferred, against such evidence,
from a trayeller’s impression of the poor quality of their food.
Its unexpensive character may be rather the effect of eco-
nomy than of necessity. Costly feeding is not the favourite
luxury of a southern people; their diet, in all classes, 1s
principally vegetable, and no peasantry on the Continent has
the superstition of the English labourer respecting white
bread. But the nourishment of the Tuscan peasant, accord-
ing to Sismondi, “is wholesome and various: its basis 1s an
excellent wheaten bread, brown, but pure from bran and
from all mixture.” ‘Dans la mauvaise saison, il ne fait que
deux repas par jour: a dix heures du matin il mange
pollenta, 4 Pentrée de la nuit il mange la soupe, puis du pain
avec quelque assaisonnement (companatico). En été il fait
trois repas, 4 huit heures, 4 une heure, et au soir, mais il
n’allume de feu qu'une seule fois par jour, pour son diner,
que se compose de soupe, puis d’un plat ou de viande salée,
ou de poisson sec, ou de haricots, ou d’herbages, qu’il mange
avec du pain. la viande salée n’entre que pour une quan-
tité bien minime dans cet ordinaire, car il estime que quarante
livres de pore salé par individu suffisent amplement a son
provision de l’année: il en met deux fois par semaine un
petit morceau dans son potage. Le dimanche il a toujours
sur sa table un plat de viande fraiche, mais une morceau qu
ne pese qu’une livre ou une livre et demie suffit a toute la
famille, quelque nombreuse qu’elle soit. I] ne faut point
oublier que le paysan Toscan récolte en général de Vhuile
olive pour son usage: il s’en sert, non seulement pour
s’éclairer, mais pour assaisonner tous les végétaux quil
appréte pour sa table, et qui deviennent ainsi bien plus
sayoureux et plus nutritifs. A déjetiner il mange du pain, et


METAYERS. 363


quelquefois du fromage et des fruits; a souper, du pain et de
la salade. Sa boisson se compose du vin inférieur du pays,
et de la vinelle ou piquette faite d’eau fermentée sur le marc
du raism. I] réserve cependant toujours quelque peu de son
meilleur vin pour le jour ot il battra son grain, et pour
quelques fétes qui se célébrent en famille. Il estime a dix
barils de vinelle par année (environ cinquante bouteilles) et
a cing sacs de froment (environ mille livres de pain) la por-
tion requise pour un homme fait.”

The remarks of Sismondi on the moral influences of this
state of society are not less worthy of attention. The rights
and obligations of the metayer being fixed by usage, and all
taxes and rates being paid by the proprietor, “le métayer a
les avantages de la propriété sans Pinconvénient de la défendre.
Cest au propriétaire qu’avec la terre appartient la guerre:
pour lui il vit en paix avec tous ses voisins; il n’a a leur
égard aucun motif de rivalité ou de défiance: il conserve la
bonne harmonie avec eux, comme avec son maitre, avec le
fisc et avec Péglise: il vend peu, il achéte peu, il touche peu
@argent, mais personne ne lui en demande. On a souvent
parlé du caractére doux et bienveillant des Toscans, mais on
na point assez remarqué la cause qui a le plus contribué a
préserver cette douceur: c’est celle qui a soustrait tous les
agriculteurs, formant plus des trois quarts de la population,
a presque toute occasion de querelle.” The fixity of tenure
which the metayer, so long as he fulfils his known obligations,
possesses by usage although not by law, gives him the local
attachments, and almost the strong sense of personal inte-
rest, characteristic of a proprietor, “Le métayer vit sur sa
métairie comme sur son héritage, Vaimant d’affection,
travaillant 4 la bonifier sans cesse, se confiant dans l’avenir,
et comptant bien que ses champs seront travaillés aprés lui
par ses enfans et les enfans de ses enfans. En effet, le plus
grand nombre des métayers vivent de génération en généra-
tion sur la méme terre; ils la connaissent en détail avec une
précision que le sentiment seul de la propriété peut donner. . .


364 BOOK Il. CHAPTER VIII. § 3.


Les champs élevés en terrasses les uns au-dessus des autres
n’ont souvent pas plus de quatre pieds de largeur, mais il n’y
en a pas un dont le métayer n’ait étudié en quelque sorte le
caractére. Celui-ci est sec, celui-la froid et humide; ici la
terre est profonde, 14 ce n’est qu’une crotite qui couvre a
peine le roc; le froment prospére mieux sur lun, le seigle
sur autre; ici ce serait peine perdue de semer du ble de
Turquie, ailleurs la terre se refuse aux féves et aux lupins,
plus loin le lin viendra 4 merveille, et le bord de ce ruisseau
sera propre au chanyre: ainsi ’on apprend du métayer, avec
étonnement, que dans un espace de dix arpens, le sol, les
aspects, et inclinaison du terrain, présentent plus de variété
qwun riche fermier n’en sait en général distinguer dans une
ferme de cing cents acres d’étendue. C’est que le dernier
sent qu’il n’est 1A que de passage, que de plus il doit se con-
duire par des régles générales, et negliger les détails. Mais le
métayer, avec l’expérience du passe, a senti son intelligence
éveillée par intérét et l’affection pour devenir le meilleur des
obseryateurs, et avec tout l’avenir devant lui, il ne songe pas
A lui seulement, mais a ses enfans et 4 ses petits enfans.
Aussi lorsqu’il plante Polivier, arbre séculaire, et qu’il ménage
au fond du creux qu’il fait pour lui un écoulement aux eaux
qui pourraient lui nuire, il étudie toutes les couches de


terrain qu’il est appelé a défoncer*.”


* Of the intelligence of this most interesting people, M. de Sismondi
speaks in the most favourable terms. Few of them can read; but there 18
often one member of the family destined for the priesthood, who reads to
them on winter evenings. Their language differs little from the purest
Italian. The taste for improvisation in verse is general. “ Les paysans as
val de Nievole fréquentent le spectacle les jours de féte, en été, de neuf a
onze heures du soir: leur admission ne leur cofite guére que cing sols de
France. Alfieri est leur auteur de prédilection ; toute Phistoire des Atrides
est familiére 4 ces hommes qui ne savent [pas lire, et qui vont demander 4
ce poéte austere un délassement de leurs rudes travaux.” Unlike most
rustics, they find pleasure in the beauty of their country. “Dans les col-
lines du val de Nievole on trouve devant chaque maison, l’aire pour battre
le blé, qui a rarement plus de vingt-cing a trente toises carrées, c’est le plus
souvent le seul espace de niveau qu’on rencontre dans toute la métairie-


METAYERS, 365


$4. Ido not offer these quotations as evidence of the
intrinsic excellence of the metayer system; but they surely
suffice to prove that neither “land miserably cultivated” nor
a people in “the most abject poverty,’ have any necessary
connexion with it, and that the unmeasured vituperation
lavished upon the system by English writers, is grounded on
an extremely narrow view of the subject. I look upon the
rural economy of Italy as simply so much additional evidence
in favour of small occupations with perpetuity of tenure. It
is an example of what can be accomplished by those two
elements, even under the disadvantage of the peculiar nature
of the metayer contract, in which the motives to exertion on
the part of the tenant are only half as strong as if he farmed
the land on the same footing of perpetuity at a money rent,
either fixed, or varying according to some rule which would
leave to the tenant the whole benefit of his own exertions.
The metayer tenure is not one which we should be anxious
to introduce where the exigencies of society had not natu-
rally given birth to it; but neither ought we to be eager to
abolish it, on a mere @ priori view of its disadvantages. If
the system, in Tuscany, works as well in practice as it is
represented to do, with every appearance of minute know-
ledge, by so competent an authority as Sismondi; if the
mode of living of the people, and the size of farms, have for
ages maintained and still maintain themselves* such as they


En méme temps c’est une terrasse qui domine les plaines et la vallée, et
dow la vue s’étend sur un pays ravissant, Presque jamais je ne m’y suis
arrété pour l’admirer, sans que le métayer soit venu jouir de mon admira-
tion, et m’indiquer du doigt les beautés qu’il croyait pouvoir m’avoir
échappé.”

* “Qn ne voit jamais,” says Sismondi, “une famille de métayers pro-
poser & son maitre de partager sa métairie, 2 moins que le travail ne soit
réellement supérieur a ses forces, et qu’elle ne sente la certitude de conser-
yer les mémes jouissances sur un moindre espace dentermin en Onmorat
jamais dans une famille plusieurs fils se marier en méme temps, et former
autant de ménages nouveaux ; un geul prend une femme et se charge des
soins du menage; aucun de ses fréres ne se marie, } moins que lui-méme


Fa ge MTD


i

by
>
S oe
Rit
t

r!


366 BOOK II, CHAPTER vill. § 4.


are said to be by him, it were to be regretted that a state of
rural well being so much beyond what is realized in most
Kuropean countries, should be put to hazard by an attempt
to introduce, under the guise of agricultural improvement, a
system of money rents and capitalist farmers. Even where
the metayers are poor, and the subdivision great, it is not to
be assumed as of course, that the change would be for the
better. The enlargement of farms, and the introduction of
what are called agricultural improvements, usually diminish
the number of labourers employed on the land; and unless
the growth of capital in trade and manufactures affords an
opening for the displaced population, or unless there are re-
claimable wastes on which they can be located, competition
will so reduce wages, that they will probably be worse off as
day-labourers than they were as metayers.

Mr. Jones very properly objects against the French Eco-
nomists of the last century, that in pursuing their favourite
object of introducing money rents, they turned their minds
solely to putting farmers in the place of metayers, instead
of transforming the existing metayers into farmers; which,
as he justly remarks, can scarcely be effected, unless, to enable
the metayers to save and become owners of stock, the pro-
prietors submit for a considerable time to a diminution of
income, instead of expecting an increase of it, which has
generally been their immediate motive for making the attempt.
If this transformation were effected, and no other change
made in the metayer’s condition; if, preserving all the other
rights which usage ensures to him, he merely got rid of the
landlord’s claim to half the produce, paying in lieu of it a
moderate fixed rent; he would be so far in a better position
than at present, as the whole, instead of only half the fruits
of any improvement he made, would now belong to himself;
but even so, the benefit would not be without alloy; for


n’ait pas d’enfans, ou que l’on n’offre & cet autre frére une nouvelle mé-
tairie.”—Nouveaux Principes, liv. iii., ch. 5.


METAYERS. 367


a metayer, though not himself a capitalist, has a capitalist
for his partner, and has the use, in Italy at least, of a consi-
derable capital, as is proved by the excellence of the farm
buildings: and it is not probable that the landowners would
any longer consent to peril their moveable property on the
hazards of agricultural enterprise, when assured of a fixed
money income without it. Thus would the question stand
even if the change left undisturbed the metayer’s . virtual
fixity of tenure, and converted him, in fact, into a peasant
proprietor at a quit rent. But if we suppose him converted
into a mere tenant, displaceable at the landlord’s will, and
lable to have his rent raised by competition to any amount
which any unfortunate being in search of subsistence can be
found to offer or promise for it; he would lose all the features
in his condition which preserve it from being deteriorated :
he would be cast down from his present position of a kind
of half-proprietor of the land, and would sink into a cottier
tenant.


CHAPTER IX.


OF COTTIERS.


§ 1. By the general appellation of cottier tenure I shall
designate all cases without exception in which the labourer
makes his contract for land without the intervention of a
capitalist farmer, and in which the conditions of the contract,
especially the amount of rent, are determined not by custom
but by competition. The principal European example of
this tenure is Ireland, and it is from that country that the
term cottier is derived*. Nearly the whole agricultural
population of Ireland may be said to be cottier-tenants; ex-
cept so far as the Ulster tenant-right constitutes an exception,
There is, indeed, a numerous class of labourers who (we may
presume through the refusal either of proprietors or of
tenants in possession to permit any further sub- division.) have
been unable to obtain even the smallest patch of land as per-
manent tenants. But, from the deficiency of capital, the
custom of paying wages in land is so universal, that even
those who work as casual labourers for the cottiers or for
such larger farmers as are found in the country, are usually
paid not in money, but by permission to cultivate for the
season a piece of ground, which is generally delivered to
them by the farmer ready manured, and is known by the
name of conacre. For this they agree to pay a money rent,
often of several pounds an acre, but no money actually


passes, the debt being worked out in labour, at a money
valuation.


* In its original acceptation the word “cottier » designates a class of
sub-tenants, who rent a cottage and an acre or two of land from the small
farmers. But the usage of writers has long since stretched the term to include


those small farmers themselves, and generally all peasant farmers whose
rents are determined by competition.


COTTIERS. 369


The produce, on the cottier system, being divided into two
portions, rent, and the remuneration of the labourer ; the one
is evidently determined by the other. The labourer has
whatever the landlord does not take: the condition of the
labourer depends on the amount of rent. But rent, being
regulated by competition, depends upon the relation between
the demand for land, and the supply of it. The demand for
land depends on the number of competitors, and the com-
petitors are the whole rural population. The effect, there-
fore, of this tenure, is to bring the principle of population
to act directly on the land, and not as in England, on capital.
Rent, in this state of things, depends on the proportion
between population and land. As the land isa fixed quan-
tity, while population has an unlimited power of increase;
unless something checks that increase, the competition for
land soon forces up rent to the highest point, consistent with
keeping the population alive. The effects, therefore, of
cottier tenure depend on the extent to which the capacity of
Population to increase is controlled, either by custom, by in-
dividual prudence, or by starvation and disease.

It would be an exaggeration to affirm, that cottier tenancy
is absolutely incompatible with a prosperous condition of the
labouring class. If we could suppose it to exist among a
people to whom a high standard of comfort was habitual ;
whose requirements were such, that they would not offer a
higher rent for land than would leave them an ample sub-
sistence, and whose moderate increase of numbers left no
unemployed population to force up rents by competition,
save when the increasing produce of the land from increase
of skill would enable a higher rent to be paid without incon-
venience; the cultivating class.might be as well remunerated,


might have as large a share of the necessaries and comforts
of life, on this system of tenure as on any other. They
would not, however, while their rents were arbitrary, enjoy
any of the peculiar advantages which metayers on the Tuscan
system derive from their connexion with the land. ‘I hey


2B


VOL. I.


370 BOOK Il. CHAPTER Ix. § l.


would neither have the use of a capital belonging to their
landlords, nor would the want of this be made up by the
intense motives to bodily and mental exertion which act
upon the peasant who has assurance of a perpetuity. On
the contrary, any increased value given to the land by the
exertions of the tenant, would have no effect but to raise the
rent against himself, either the next year, or at farthest when
his lease expired. The landlords might have justice or good
sense enough not to avail themselves of the advantage which
competition would give them; and different landlords would
do so in different degrees. But it is never safe to expect
that a class or body of men will act contrary to their imme-
diate pecuniary interest; and even a doubt on the subject
would be almost as fatal as a certainty, for when a person is
considering whether he shall undergo a present exertion or
sacrifice for a comparatively remote future, the scale is turned
by a very small probability that the fruits of the exertion ot
of the sacrifice will be taken away from him. The only, safe-
guard against these uncertainties would be the growth of a
custom, insuring a permanence of tenure in the same 0¢C0-
pant, without liability to any other increase of rent, than
might happen to be sanctioned by the general sentiments of
the community. The Ulster tenant-right is such a custom,
The very considerable sums which outgoing tenants obtain
from their successors, for the goodwill of their farms*, in the
first place actually limit the competition for land to persons
who have such sums to offer: while the same fact also
proves that full advantage is not taken by the landlord of
eyen that more limited competition, since the landlord’s rent


, “Tt is not uncommon for a tenant without a lease to sell the bare
privilege of occupancy or possession of his farm, without any visible sign of
improvement having been made by him, at om ten to sixteen, up to
twenty and even forty years’ purchase of the rent »__ (Digest of Evidence
eee best Devon's Commission. Introductory Gas) The compiler
adds, 1e comparative tranquilli ; istri
be mainly attributable to Ale oe See aaa Copter) ee a


COTTIERS. 371


does not amount to the whole of what the incoming tenant
not only offers but actually pays. He does so in the full
confidence that the rent will not be raised; and for this he
has the guarantee of a custom, not recognized by law, but
deriving its binding force from another sanction, perfectly
well understood in Ireland*. Without one or other of these
Supports, a custom limiting the rent of land is not likely
to grow up in any progressive community. If wealth and
population were stationary, rent also would generally be
stationary, and after remaining a long time unaltered, would
probably come to be considered unalterable. But all pro-
gress in wealth and population tends to a rise of rents.
Under a metayer system there is an established mode in
which the owner of land is sure of participating in the
increased produce drawn from it. But on the cottier system
he can only do so by a readjustment of the contract, while
that readjustment, in a progressive community, would almost
always be to his advantage. His interest, therefore, would
be decidedly opposed to the growth of any custom com-
muting rent into a fixed demand.


§ 2. Where the amount of rent is not limited, either by
law or custom, a cottier system has the disadvantages of the
Worst metayer system, with scarcely any of the advantages
by which, in-the best forms of that tenure, they are com-
pensated. It is searcely possible that cottier agriculture
Should be other than miserable. There is not the same
necessity that the condition of the cultivators should be so.


* “Tt is in the great majority of cases not a reimbursement for outlay
incurred, or improvements effected on the land, but a mere life insurance
or purchase of immunity from outrage.”—(Digest, ut supra.) “ The present
tenant-right of Ulster,” (the writer judiciously remarks,) “is an embryo
copyhold.” “ Even there, if the tenant-right be disregarded, and a tenant
be ejected without having received the price of his good-will, outrages are
generally the consequence.”—(Ch. viii.) “ The disorganized state of Tip-
perary, and the agrarian combination throughout Ireland, are but a metho-


dized war to obtain the Ulster tenant-right.” 2
BZ


aS Se a =


»


372 BOOK IJ, CHAPTHR Ix. § 2.


Since by a sufficient restraint on population competition for
land could be kept down, and extreme poverty prevented;
habits of prudence and a high standard of comfort, once
established, would have a fair chance of maintaining them-
selves: although even in these favourable circumstances the
motives to prudence would be considerably weaker than in
the case of metayers, protected by custom (like those of Tus-
cany) from being deprived of their lands: since a metayer
family, thus protected, could not be impoverished by any
other improvident multiplication than their own, but a
cottier family, however prudent and self-restraiming, may
have the rent raised against it by the consequences of the
multiplication of other families. Any protection to the
cottier against this evil could only be derived from @ salutary
sentiment of duty or dignity, pervading the class. From
this source, however, he might derive considerable pro-
tection. If the habitual standard of requirement among the
class were high, a young man might not choose to offer a
rent which would leave him in a worse situation than the
preceding tenant; or it might be the general custom, as it
actually is in some countries, not to marry until a farm was
vacant,

But it is not where a high standard of comfort has rooted
itself in the habits of the labouring class, that we are eve?
called upon to consider the effects of a cottier system. That
system is found only where the habitual requirements of the
rural labourers are the lowest possible; where, as long as
they are not actually starving they will multiply; and popt-
lation is only checked by the diseases, and the shortness of
life, consequent on insufficiency of mere physical necessaries.
This is unhappily the state of the largest portion of the Irish
Peasaninye When a people have sunk into this state, and
still EOS when they have been in it from time immemorial,
the cottier system is an almost insuperable obstacle to their
emerging from it. When the habits of the people are such
that their increase is never checked but by the impossibility


COTTIERS. 373


of obtainmg a bare support, and when this support can
only be obtained from land, all stipulations and agreements
respecting amount of rent are merely nominal; the compe-
tition for land makes the tenants undertake to pay more than
it is possible they should pay, and when they have paid all
they can, more almost always remains due.

“As it may fairly be said of the Irish peasantry,” says
Mr. Revans, the Secretary to the Irish Poor Law Enquiry
Commission*, “that every family which has not sufficient
land to yield its food has one or more of its members sup-
ported by begging, it will easily be conceived that every
endeavour is made by the peasantry to obtain small holdings,
and that they are not influenced in their biddings by the
fertility of the land, or by their ability to pay the rent, but
solely by the offer which is most likely to gain them pos-
session. The rents which they promise, they are almost
invariably incapable of paying; and consequently they
become indebted to those under whom they hold, almost as
soon as they take possession. They give up, in the shape
of rent, the whole produce of the land with the exception
of a sufficiency of potatoes for a subsistence; but as this is
rarely equal to the promised rent, they constantly have
against them an increasing balance. In some cases, the
largest quantity of produce which their holdings ever yielded,
or which, under their system of tillage, they could in the
most favourable seasons be made to yield, would not be
equal to the rent bid; consequently, if the peasant fulfilled
his engagement with his landlord, which he is rarely able to
accomplish, he would till the ground for nothing, and give
his landlord a premium for being allowed to till it. On the
sea-coast, fishermen, and in the northern counties those who
have looms, frequently pay more in rent than the market


* Ruils of the State of Treland, their Causes and their Remedy. Page 10.
A pamphlet, containing, among other things, an excellent digest and selec-
tion of evidence from the mass collected by the Commission presided over
by Archbishop Whately.


374 BOOK II. CHAPTER IX. $3.


value of the whole produce of the land they hold. It might
be supposed that they would be better without land under
such circumstances. But fishing might fail during a week
or two, and so might the demand for the produce of the
loom, when, did they not possess the land upon which their
food is grown, they might starve. The full amount of the
rent bid, however, is rarely paid. The peasant remains con-
stantly in debt to his landlord; his miserable possessions—
the wretched clothing of himself and of his family, the two
or three stools, and the few pieces of crockery, which his
wretched hovel contains, would not, if sold, liquidate the
standing and generally accumulating debt. The peasantry
are mostly a year in arrear, and their excuse for not paying
more is destitution. Should the produce of the holding, mn
any year, be more than usually abundant, or should the
peasant by any accident become possessed of any property,
his comforts cannot be increased; he cannot indulge in
better food, nor in a greater quantity of it. His furniture
cannot be increased, neither can his wife or children be
better clothed. The acquisition must go to the person under
whom he holds. The accidental addition will enable him to
reduce his arrear of rent, and thus to defer ejectment, But
this must be the bound of his expectation.”

As an extreme instance of the intensity of competition
for land, and of the monstrous height to which it occasion-
ally forces up the nominal rent, we may cite from the evi-
dence taken by Lord Devon’s Commission*, a fact attested
by Mr, Hurly, Clerk of the Crown for Kerry: “I have
known a tenant bid for a farm that I was perfectly well
acquainted with, worth 507. a-year: I saw the competition
get ap to such an extent, that he was declared the tenant at
450l.


§ 3. In such a condition, what can a tenant gain by any


” Evidence, p, 851,


COTTIERS. 375


amount of industry or prudence, and what lose by any reck-
lessness? If the landlord at any time exerted his full legal
rights, the cottier would not be able even to live. If by
extra exertion he doubled the produce of his bit of land, or
if he prudently abstained from producing mouths to eat it
up, his only gain would be to have more left to pay to his
landlord; while, if he had twenty children, they would still
be fed first, and the landlord could only take what was left.
Almost alone among mankind the Irish cottier is in this
condition, that he can scarcely be either better or worse off
by any act of his own. If he was industrious or prudent,
nobody but his landlord would gain; if he is lazy or intem-
perate it is at his landlord’s expense. A situation more
devoid of motives to either labour or self-command, imagi-
nation itself cannot conceive. The inducements of free
human beings are taken away, and those of a slave not sub-
stituted. He has nothing to hope, and nothing to fear,
except being dispossessed of his holding, and against this he
protects himself by the ultima ratio of a defensive civil war.
Rockism and Whiteboyism are the determination of a people,
who have nothing that can be called theirs but a daily meal
of the lowest description of food, not to submit to being
deprived of that for other people’s convenience.

Is it not, then, a bitter satire on the mode in which
Opinions are formed on the most important problems of
‘human nature and life, to find grave public instructors im-
puting the backwardness of Irish industry, and the want of
energy of the Irish people in improving their condition, to a
peculiar indolence and insouciance in the Celtic race? Of all
vulgar modes of escaping from the consideration of the effect
of social and moral influences on the human mind, the most
vulgar is that of attributing the diversities of conduct and
character to inherent natural differences. What race would


not be indolent and insouciant when things are so arranged,
ve no advantage from forethought or exertion ?


that they deri 4 : 3 :
angements mM the midst of which they live


If such are the arr


376 BOOK II. CHAPTER Ix. §4.


and work, what wonder if the listlessness and indifference so
engendered are not shaken off the first moment an oppor-
tunity offers when exertion would really be of use? It is
very natural that a pleasure-loving and sensitively organised
people like the Irish, should be less addicted to steady
routine labour than the English, because life has more
excitements for them independent of it; but they are not
less fitted for it than their Celtic brethren the French, not
less so than the Tuscans, or the ancient Greeks. An excit-
able organization is precisely that in which by adequate
inducements it is easiest to kindle a spirit of animated exer-
tion. It speaks nothing against the capacities of industry
in human beings, that they will not exert themselves when
they have no motive. No labourers work harder, in Eng-
land or America, than the Irish; but not under a cottier
system.


§ 4. The multitudes who till the soil of India, are ma
condition sufficiently analogous to the cottier system, and at
the same time sufficiently different from it, to render the
comparison of the two a source of some instruction. In
most parts of India there are, and have always been, only two
contracting parties, the landlord, and the peasant: the land-
lord being generally the sovereign, except where he has, by
a special instrument, conceded his rights to an individual,
who becomes his representative. The payments, however,
of the peasants, or ryots as they are termed, have seldom if
ever been regulated, as in Ireland, by competition. Though
the customs locally obtaining were infinitely various, and
though practically no custom existed against the sovereign’s
will, there was always a rule of some sort, common to a neigh-
bourhood: the collector did not make his separate bargain
with every peasant, but assessed each aceording to the rule
adopted for the rest. The idea was thus kept a of a right
of property in the tenant, or at all events, of a right to per-
manent possession; and the anomaly arose of a fixity of


COTTIERS. 377


tenure in the peasant-farmer, co-existing with an arbitrary
power of increasing the rent.

When the Mogul Government substituted itself through-
out the greater part of India for the Hindoo rulers, it pro-
ceeded on a different principle. A minute survey was made
of the land, and upon that survey an assessment was founded,
fixing the specific payment due to the government from
each field. If this assessment had never been exceeded, the
tyots would have been in the comparatively advantageous
position of peasant proprietors, subject to a heavy but a
fixed quit-rent. The absence however of any real protection
against illegal extortions, rendered this improvement in their
condition rather nominal than real; and, except during the
occasional accident of a humane and vigorous local adminis-
trator, the exactions had no practical limit but the inability
of the ryot to pay more.

It was to this state of things that the English rulers of
India succeeded ; and they were, at an early period, struck
with the importance of putting an end to this arbitrary
character of the land-revenue, and imposing a fixed limit to
the government demand. ‘They did not attempt to go back
to the Mogul valuation. It has been in general the very
rational practice of the English Government in India, to pay
little regard to what was laid down as the theory of the
native institutions, but to inquire into the rights which existed
and were respected in practice, and to protect and enlarge
those. For a long time, however, it blundered grievously
about matters of fact, and grossly misunderstood the usages
and rights which it found existing. Its mistakes arose from
the inability of ordinary minds to imagine a state of social
relations fundamentally different from those with which they
are practically familiar. England being accustomed to great
estates and great landlords, the English rulers took it for
granted that India must possess the like; and looking
round for some set of people who might be mistaken for the
objects of their search, they pitched upon a sort of tax-


a


rartunielinnslineeenermenmeanenr se


tit
CHE
We
NE

|


|
3


ae


t.


378 BOOK II. CHAPTER Ix. §4.


gatherers called Zemindars. “The zemindar,” says the
philosophical historian of India*, “had some of the attributes
which belong to a landowner; he collected the rents of a
particular district, he governed the cultivators of that dis-
trict, lived in comparative splendour, and his son succeeded
him when he died. The zemindars, therefore, it was inferred
without delay, were the proprietors of the soil, the landed
nobility and gentry of India. It was not considered that the
zemindars, though they collected the rents, did not keep
them; but paid them all away, with a small deduction, to
the government. It was not considered that if they
governed the ryots, and in many respects exercised over
them despotic power, they did not govern them as tenants
of theirs, holding their lands either at will or by contract
under them. The possession of the ryot was an hereditary
possession ; from which it was unlawful for the zemindar to
displace him: for every farthing which the zemindar drew
from the ryot, he was bound to account: and it was only by
fraud, if out of all that he collected, he retained an ana mote
than the small proportion which, as pay for collection, he
was permitted to receive.”

“There was an opportunity in India,” continues the his-
torian, “to which the history of the world presents not a
parallel. Next after the sovereign, the immediate cultivators
had, by far, the greatest portion of interest in the soil. For
the rights (such as they were) of the zemindars, a complete
compensation might have easily been made. The generous
resolution was adopted, of sacrificing to the improvement of
the country, the proprietary rights of the sovereign. The
motives to improvement which property gives, and of which
the power was so justly appreciated, might have been
bestowed upon those upon whom they would have operated
with a force incomparably greater than that with which they
could operate upon any other class of men: they might have


* Mill’s History of British India, book vi. ch, 5.


COTTIERS. 379
been bestowed upon those from whom alone, in every coun-
try, the principal improvements in agriculture must be de-
rived, the immediate cultivators of the soil. And a measure
worthy to be ranked among the noblest that ever were taken
for the improvement of any country, might have helped to
compensate the people of India, for the miseries of that mis-
government which they had so long endured. But the
legislators were English aristocrats; and aristocratical preju-
dices prevailed.”

The measure proved a total failure, as to the main
effects which its well-meaning promoters expected from it.
Unaccustomed to estimate the mode in which the operation
of any given institutions is modified even by such variety of
circumstances as exists within a single kingdom, they
flattered themselves that they had created, throughout the
Bengal provinces, English landlords, and it proved that they
had only created Irish ones. The new landed aristocracy
disappointed every expectation built upon them. They did
nothing for the improvement of their estates, but everything
for their own ruin. The same pains not being taken, as has
been taken in Ireland, to enable landlords to defy the conse-
quences of their improvidence, the whole land of Bengal had
to be sequestrated and sold, for debt or arrears of revenue,
and in one generation the ancient zemindars had ceased to
exist. Other families, mostly the descendants of Calcutta
money dealers, now occupy their place; and live as useless


drones upon the soil which has been given up to them.
Whatever the government has sacrificed of its pecuniary
claims, for the creation of such a class, has at the best been
wasted,

But in this ill judged measure there was one redeeming
point, to which may probably be ascribed all the progress
which the Bengal provinces have since made in production
and in amount of revenue. The ryots were reduced, indeed,
to the rank of tenants of the zemindar; but tenants with


fixity of tenure. The rents were left to the zemindars to


aera i Bien tree ane


eee 2


380 BOOK II. CHAPTER Ix. §4.


fix at their discretion; but once fixed, were never more to
be altered. This is now the law and practice of landed
tenure, in the most flourishing part of the British Indian
dominions.

In the parts of India into which the British rule has been
more recently introduced, the blunder has been ayoided of
endowing a useless body of great landlords with gifts from
the public revenue; but along with the evil, the good also
has been left undone. The government has done less for
the ryots than it has required to be done for them by the
landlords of its creation. In the greater part of India, the
immediate cultivators have never yet obtained a perpetuity :
of tenure at a fixed rent. The government manages the
land on the principle on which a good Irish landlord manages
his estate; not putting it up to competition, not asking the
cultivators what they will promise to pay, but determining
for itself what they can afford to pay, and defining its demand
accordingly. In some places it makes its arrangements with
the ryots individually, in others with the village communities,
leaving them to apportion the demand according to usage
or agreement. Sometimes the rent is fixed only for one
year, sometimes for three, or five; but the tendency of recent
policy is towards long leases, extending, in the northern pro-
vinces of India, to a term of thirty years, with conditional
renewal for twenty more. This arrangement has not existed
for a sufficient time to have shewn by experience, how far
the motives which the long lease creates in the minds of the
cultivators, fall short of the beneficial influence of a perpe
tual settlement. But the two plans, of annual settlements
and of short leases, are irrevocably condemned. They can
only be said to have succeeded, in comparison with the
unlimited oppression which existed before. They are ap-
proved by nobody, and were never looked upon in any other
light than as temporary arrangements, to be abandoned when
a more complete knowledge of the capabilities of the coun-
try should afford data for something more permanent.


CHAPTER X.


MEANS OF ABOLISHING COTTIER TENANCY.


§ 1. Tue question, what is to be done with a cottier
population? which in any case would have been a fit subject
for consideration in a work like the present, is to the English
Government at this time the most urgent of practical ques-
tions. The majority of a population of eight millions, having
long grovelled in helpless inertness and abject poverty
under the cottier system; reduced by its operation to
mere food, of the cheapest description, and to an inca-
pacity of either doing or willing anything for the im-
provement of their lot; have at last, by the failure of that
lowest quality of food, been plunged into a state in which
the alternative is death, or to be permanently supported
by other people, or a radical change in the economical
arrangements under which it has hitherto been their mis-
fortune to live. Such an emergency has compelled attention
to the subject from the legislature and from the nation, but
it can hardly as yet be said, with much result; for, the evil
having originated in a system of land tenancy which with-
drew from the people every motive to industry or thrift
except the fear of starvation, the remedy provided by Par-
liament was to take away even that, by conferrmg on them a
legal claim to eleemosynary support: while, towards correct-
ing the cause of the mischief, nothing was done, beyond
vain complaints, though at the price to the national treasury


of ten millions sterling for one year’s delay. :
I presume it is needless so expend any argument Be
proving that the very foundation of the economical evils of
Ireland is the cottier system: that while peasant rents fixed
by competition are the practice of the country, to expect


382 BOOK II. CHAPTER x. $1.


industry, useful activity, any restraint on population but
death, or any the smallest diminution of poverty, is to look
for figs on thistles and grapes on thorns. If our practical
statesmen are not ripe for the recognition of this fact; or if
while they acknowledge it in theory, they have not a sufli-
cient feeling of its reality, to be capable of founding upon
it any course of conduct; there is still another, and a purely
physical consideration, from which they will find it impossible
to escape. If the one crop on which the people have hitherto
supported themselves continues to be precarious, either some
new and great impulse must be given to agricultural shall
and industry, or the soil of Ireland can no longer feed any
thing like its present population. The whole produce of the
western half of the island, leaving nothing for rent, will not
now keep permanently in existence the whole of its people:
and they will necessarily remain an annual charge on the
taxation of the empire, until they are reduced either by
emigration or by starvation to a number corresponding with
the low state of their industry, or unless the means are found
of making that industry much more productive.

Cottiers, therefore, must cease to be. Nothing can be
done for Ireland without transforming her rural population
from cottier tenants into something else. But into what?
Those who, knowing neither Ireland nor any foreign country,
take as their sole standard of social and economical excel-
lence English practice, propose as the single remedy for
Irish wretchedness, the transformation of the cottiers into
hired labourers. I contend that the object should be their
transformation, as far as circumstances admit, into landed
proprietors. Either, indeed, would be a most desirable
exchange from the present nuisance; but as a practical object
the latter of the two seems to me preferable in an almost


incalculable degree to the former, both as the most desirable
in itself, and very much the easiest to effect.


9 : : : : .
§ 2. To convert the cottiers into hired labourers 18


MEANS OF ABOLISHING COTTIER TENANCY. 383


rather a scheme for the improvement of Irish agriculture,
than of the condition of the Irish people. The status of a
day labourer has no charm for infusing forethought, frugality
or self-restraint into a people devoid of them. It is not
necessarily injurious to those qualities where they exist, but it
seldom engenders them where they are absent. If the Irish
peasantry could be instantaneously changed into receivers
of wages, the wages being no higher than they now are, or
than there is any reason to hope that they would be, and
the present habits and mental characteristics of the people
remaining, we should merely see five or six millions of
people living as day labourers in the same wretched manner
in which as cottiers they lived before; equally passive in the
absence of every comfort, equally reckless in multiplication,
and even, perhaps, equally listless at their work; since they
could not be dismissed en masse, and if they could, dismissal
would now be simply remanding them to the poor-rate. Far
other would be the effect of making them peasant pro-
prietors. A people who in industry and providence have
everything to learn—who are confessedly among the most
backward of European populations in the industrial virtues
—require for their regeneration the most powerful incite-
ments by which those virtues can be stimulated: and there
is no stimulus comparable to property in land. A per-
manent interest in the soil to those who till it, is almost a
guarantee for the most unwearied laboriousness; against
over-population, though not infallible, it is the best pre-
Servative yet known; and where it failed, any other plan
would probably fail much more egregiously; the evil would
be beyond the reach of merely economical remedies. Having
already insisted so strongly on these topics, I feel it needless
to argue any further, that the conversion of the Irish pea-
santry, or of some considerable portion of them, into small
landed proprietors, is a more beneficial object than the trans-
formation of all of them indiscriminately into labourers for
hire.


ae ae


384. BOOK II. CHAPTER x. § 2.


But besides being more desirable, it is, above all, more
attainable. The other plan, as a measure standing by itself,
is wholly impracticable. It involves contradictory con-
ditions. The conversion of the cottiers into hired labourers
implies the introduction, all over Ireland, of capitalist far-
mers, in lieu of the present small tenants. These farmers, or
their capital at least, must come from England. But to in-
duce capital to come in, the cottier population must first be
peaceably got rid of: in other words, that must be already
accomplished, which English capital is proposed as the means
of accomplishing. Why is Ireland the only country in the
world to which English capital does not go? Because it
cannot go to any purpose without turning out the people, and
the people refuse to be turned out. I presume it is not
seriously proposed that they should be turned out en masse,
without being otherwise provided for. With their own con-
sent they never will be dislodged from their holdings untl
something better is given to them. They will not be got rid
of by merely telling them that something better will follow.

It is necessary however in the next place to consider,
what is the condition of things which would follow. The
ineffective Irish agriculture is to be converted into an effec-
tive English agriculture, by throwing together the small hol-
dings into large farms, cultivated by combined labour, with
the best modern improvements. On the supposion of suc-
cess, Ireland would be assimilated, in her agriculture, to the
most improved parts of England. But what are the most
improved parts of England? Those in which fewest
labourers are employed, in proportion to the extent of the
soil. Taking the number of Irish peasants to the square
mile, and the number of hired labourers on an equal space
in the model counties of Scotland or England, the former
number is commonly computed to be about three times the
latter. Two-thirds, therefore, of the Irish peasantry, would
be absolutely dispensed with. What is to be done with
them? Is it supposed that they would find employment in


MEANS OF ABOLISHING COTTIER TENANCY. 385


manufacturing labour? They are at present unfit for it; and
even if fit, capital would require to be imported for that pur-
pose too; and is it likely that manufacturing capital will
resort to Ireland, abandoning Leeds and Manchester? Under
a more efficient cultivation of her soil, Ireland would require
a greatly increased amount of manufactured goods, but these
would still be most advantageously manufactured in Lanca-
shire or Yorkshire; and even if Ireland became, as to agri-
cultural improvement, an English county, she would be but a
larger Devonshire, drawing everything which she consumed,
except the products of agriculture, from elsewhere. All the
excess of Irish population above the Devonshire standard
would be a local surplus, which must migrate to England, or
to America, or subsist on taxation or on charity, or must be
enabled to raise its own food from its own soil. The plan
therefore of turning the cottiers into labourers for wages, even
if it fulfilled its utmost promise, only disposes of a third of
the population; with respect to the remaining two-thirds,
the original difficulty recurs in its full force.

The question, what system of agriculture is best in itself,
is, for Ireland, of purely theoretical interest: the people are
there, and the problem is not how to improve the country,
but how it can be improved by and for its present inhabi-
tants. It is not probable that England will undertake a
simultaneous removal of two millions—the smallest number
which in the opinion of any person acquainted with the sub-
ject, would make a clear field for the introduction of English
agriculture. But unless she does, the soil of Ireland must
continue to employ and feed the people of Ireland: and
since it cannot do this on the English system, or on any
system whatever of large farming, all idea of that species of


agricultural improvement as an exclusive thing must be aban-
doned: the petite culture in some one of its shapes will con-
tinue, and a large proportion of the peasants, if they do not


become small proprietors, will remain small farmers. In the
5 «i we ; res P og Ta se
few cases in which comprehensive measures of agricultural
9
2aG
VOW. Le


386 BOOK Ii. CHAPTER x. $2:


improvement have been undertaken by large capitals, the
capitalists have not, as some perhaps might suppose, employed
themselves in creating large farms, and cultivating them by
hired labour; their farms are of a size only sufficient fora
single family: it was by other expedients that the improve-
ment, which was to render the enterprize profitable, was
brought about: these were, advances of capital, and a tempo-
rary security of tenure. There is a Company called the Inish
Waste Land Improvement Society, of whose operations, In
1845, the following report was made, by their intelligent
manager, Colonel Robinson*.

“Two hundred and forty-five tenants, many of whom
were a few years since in a state bordering on pauperism, the
occupiers of small holdings of from ten to twenty plantation
acres each, have, by their own free labour, with the Society's
aid, improved their farms to the value of 4,396/.; 6051. having
been added during the last year, being at the rate of 17/. 185.,
per tenant for the whole term, and 2/. 9s., for the past year
the benefit of which improvements each tenant will enjoy
during the unexpired term of a thirty-one years’ lease.

“These 245 tenants and their families have, by spade
husbandry, reclaimed and brought into cultivation 1,032 plan-
tation acres of land, previously unproductive mountain waste,
upon which they grew, last year, crops valued by competent
practical persons at 3,896/., being in the proportion of 15. 18s.
each tenant; and their live stock, consisting of cattle, horses,
sheep, and pigs, now actually upon the estates, is yalued,
according to the present prices of the neighbouring markets,
at 4,162/., of which 1,3047. has been added since February
1844, being at the rate of 16. 19s., for the whole period, and
5/. 6s., for the last year; during which time their stock has
thus increased in value a sum equal to their present annual
rent; and by the statistical table and returns referred tom
previous reports, it is proved that the tenants, in general,


* In the Appendix to the Report of Lord Devon's Commission, P+ g4.


MEANS OF ABOLISHING COTTIER TENANCY. 387


improve their little farms, and increase their cultivation and
crops, in nearly direct proportion to the number of available
working persons of both sexes of which their families con-
sist.”

There cannot be a stronger testimony to the superior
amount of gross produce raised by small farming, under any
tolerable system of landed tenure: and it is worthy of atten-
tion, that the industry and zeal are greatest among the smal-
ler holders: Colonel Robinson noticing as exceptions to the
remarkable and rapid progress of improvement, some tenants
“who are occupants of larger farms than twenty acres, a class
too often deficient in the enduring industry indispensable
for the successful prosecution of mountain improvements.”


§3. The case of Ireland is similar in its requirements
to that of India. In India though great errors have from
time to time been committed, no one ever proposed, under
the name of agricultural improvement, to eject the ryots or
peasant farmers from their possessions; all the improvement
that has been looked for, has been through making their
tenure more secure to them, and the sole difference of opi-
nion is between those who contend for a perpetuity, and those
who think that long leases will-suffice. The same question
may exist as to Ireland; and with the case of the Waste
Lands Improvement Society before us, as well as many other
instances of reclamation of land, recorded by Lord Devon’s
Commission, it would be idle to deny that long leases, under
such landlords as are sometimes to be found, do effect won-
ders, even in Ireland. But then, they must be leases at a
low rent. Long leases are in no way to be relied on for
getting rid of cottierism. During the existence of cottier
tenancy, leases have always been long; twenty-one years and
three lives concurrent, was a usual term. But the rent
being fixed by competition, at a higher amount than could be
paid, so that the tenant neither had, nor could by any exer-


tion acquire, a beneficial interest in the land, the advantage
$}
2c2


388 BOOK Il. CHAPTER xX. § 3.


of a lease was merely nominal. In India, the government is
able to prevent this evil, because, being itself the landlord, it
ean fix the rent according to its own judgment ; but under
individual landlords, while rents are fixed by competition,
and the competitors are a peasantry struggling for subsist-
ence, nominal rents are inevitable, unless the population is so
thin that the competition itself is only nominal. The majority
of landlords will grasp at immediate money and immediate
power; and so long as they find cottiers eager to offer them
every thing, it is useless to rely on them for tempering the
vicious practice by a considerate self-denial.

A perpetuity is a preferable tenure to a long lease; it isa
far stronger stimulus to improvement : not only because the
longest lease, before coming to an end, passes through all the
varieties of short leases down to no lease at all; but for more
fundamental reasons. It is very shallow, even in pure
economics, to take no account of the influence of imagina-
tion: there is a virtue in “for ever” beyond the longest


term of years; even if the term is long enough to include


children, and all whom a person individually cares for, he will


not exert himself with the same ardour to increase the value
of an estate, his interest in which diminishes in value every
year. A lease, therefore, is never a complete substitute for
a perpetuity. But where a country is under cottier tenure;
the question of perpetuity is quite secondary to the more
important point, a limitation of the rent. Rent paid bya
capitalist, who farms for profit and not for bread, may safely
be abandoned to competition; rent paid by labourers cannot,
unless the labourers were in a state of civilization and 1m
provement which labourers have nowhere yet reached, and
cannot easily reach under such a tenure. Peasant rents ought
never to be arbitrary, never at the discretion of the landlord:
either by custom or law it is imperatively necessary that they
should be fixed; and where no mutually advantageous cus-
tom, such as the metayer system of Tuscany, has established
itself, reason and experience recommend that they should be


MEANS OF ABOLISHING COTTIER TENANCY. 389


fixed in perpetuity ; thus changing the rent into a quit-rent, i
and the farmer into a peasant proprietor. i
,


|
§ 4. Let us then examine what means are afforded by the H i
economical circumstances of Ireland, for carrying this change a
into effect on a sufficiently large scale to accomplish the com-
plete abolition of cottier tenancy. The mode which first |
Suggests itself is the obvious and direct one, of doing the
thing outright by Act of Parliament ; making the whole land i
of Ireland the property of the tenants, subject to the rents Hil
now really paid (not the nominal rents), as a fixed rent Hi
a charge. , This, under the name of “fixity of tenure,” was
one of the demands of the Repeal Association during the
most successful period of their agitation: and was better
expressed by Mr. Conner, its earliest, most enthusiastic, and
most indefatigable apostle*, by the words, “a valuation and { i
a perpetuity.” In this measure there would not, strictly |
speaking, be any injustice, provided the landlords were com-
pensated for the present value of the chances of increase )
which they would be prospectively required to forego. The
rupture of existing social relations would hardly be more
violent than that effected by the ministers Stein and Harden- i}
berg, when by a series of edicts, in the early part of the pre-
sent century, they revolutionized the state of landed property
in the Prussian monarchy, and left their names to posterity HE
among the greatest benefactors of their country. To en-
hghtened foreigners writing on Ireland, Von Raumer and
Gustave de Beaumont, a remedy of this sort seems so exactly
and obviously what the disease requires, that they have some
difficulty in comprehending how it is that the thing is not i
yet done. int


* Author of numerous pamphlets, entitled “True Political Economy of Hi
Treland,”? “Letter to the Earl of Devon,” “ Two Letters on the Rackrent it
Oppression of Ireland,
the subject since 1832.


” and others, Mr. Conner has been an-agitator on


ee ee ete
oat rome
*


390 BOOK II. CHAPTER X. 9 5.


But though this measure is not beyond the competence
of a just legislature, and would be no infringement of pro-
perty if the landlords had the option allowed them of giving
up their lands at the full value, reckoned at the ordinary
number of years’ purchase ; it is only fit to be adopted if the
nature of the case admitted of no milder remedy. In the
first place, it isa complete expropriation of the higher classes
of Ireland: which, if there 1s any truth in the principles we
have laid down, would be perfectly warrantable, but only if it
were the sole means of effecting a great public good. In the
second place, that there should be none but peasant propre:
tors, is in itself far from desirable. Large farms, cultivated
by large capitals, and owned by persons of the best education
which the country can give, persons qualified by instruction
to appreciate scientific discoveries, and able to bear the delay
and risk of costly experiments, are an important part of a
good agricultural system. Many such landlords there are
eyen in Ireland; and it would be a public misfortune to
drive them from their post. Other objections might be
added: a large proportion of the present holdings are too
small, to try the proprietary system under the greatest
advantages: nor are the tenants always the persons one
would desire to select, as the first occupants of peasant pro-
perties. There are numbers of them on whom it would
have a more beneficial effect to give them the hope of acquit
ing a landed property by industry and frugality, than the
property itself in immediate possession.


§ 5. Some persons who desire to avoid the term fixity of
tenure, but who cannot be satisfied without some measure
co-extensive with the whole country, have proposed the unl-
versal adoption of “tenant right.” Under this equivocal
phrase, two things are confounded. What it commonly
stands for in Irish discussion, is the Ulster practice, which is
in fact, fixity of tenure. It supposes a customary; though
not a legal, limitation of the rent: without which the tenant


MEANS OF ABOLISHING COTTIER TENANCY. 391


evidently could not acquire a beneficial and saleable interest.
Its existence is highly salutary, and is one principal cause of
the superiority of Ulster in efficiency of cultivation and in
the comfort of the people, notwithstanding a minuter subdi-
vision of holdings than in the other provinces. But to con-
vert this customary limitation of rent into alegal one, and to
make it universal, would be to establish a fixity of tenure by
law, the objections to which have already been stated.

The same appellation (tenant right) has of late years been
applied, more particularly in England, to something altogether
different, and falling as much short of the exigency, as the
enforcement of the Ulster custom would exceed it. This
English tenant right, with which a high agricultural authority
has connected his name by endeavouring to obtain for it
legislative sanction, amounts to no more than this, that on the
expiration of a lease, the landlord should make compensation
to the tenant for “unexhausted improvements.” This is
certainly very desirable, but provides only for the case of
capitalist farmers, and of improvements made by outlay of
money; of the worth and cost of which, an experienced land
agent or a jury of farmers couldaccurately judge. Theim-
provements to be looked for from peasant cultivators are
the result not of money but of their labour, applied at such
various times and in such minute portions as to be incapable
of judicial appreciation. For such labour, compensation
could not be given on any principle but that of paying to the
tenant the whole difference between the value of the property
when he received it, and when he gave it up: which would
as effectually annihilate the right of property of the landlord,
as if the rent had been fixed in perpetuity, while it would
not offer the same inducements to the cultivator who improves
from affection and passion as much as from calculation, and
to whom his own land is a widely different thing from the
most liberal possible pecuniary compensation for it.


§ 6. There are then strong objections, as well as great


392 BOOK II. CHAPTER X. § 6.


Aeicber Stirs oer


difficulties, opposed to the attempt to make peasant properties
universal. But, fortunately, that they should be universal is
not necessary to their usefulness. There is no need to extend
them to all the population, or all the land. It is enough if
there be land available, on which to locate so great a portion
of the population, that the remaining area of the country
shall not be required to maintain greater numbers than are
compatible with large farming and hired labour. For this
purpose there is an obvious resource in the waste lands;
which are happily so extensive, and a large proportion of
them so improveable, as to afford a means by which, without
making the present tenants proprietors, nearly the whole sur-
plus population might be converted into peasant proprietors
elsewhere. This plan Has been strongly pressed upon the
public by several writers: but the first to bring it promi-
nently forward in England was Mr. William Thornton, in
a work* honourably distinguished from most others which
have been recently published, by its rational treatment of the
ereat questions affecting the economical condition of the
labouring classes.

The detailed estimate of an irrefragable authority, Mr.
Griffith, annexed to the Report of Lord Devon’s Commis-
sion, shows nearly a million and a half of acres reclaimable
for the spade or plough, some of them with the promise of
great fertility, and about two millions and a half more re-
claimable for pasture}: the greater part being in most con-
venient proximity to the principal masses of destitute popu-
lation. Besides these four millions of acres, there are above
two millions and a halft, pronounced by Mr. Griffith to be
unimprovable ; but he is only speaking of reclamation for
profit: it is doubtful if there be any land, in a temperate


SIS ASE en


nie


Rane:
SLR aadabr, et tae re
‘


eis =
an
sel at AS Sa a ah Bich
apnea Sia eta


Ost Ate) wa a


* Over Population and its Remedy. By William Thomas Thornton,
pp- 429—34.

+ Mx. Griffith’s numbers are 1,425,000 and 2,330,000. See p. 53 of the
Report. 2

t 2,535,000.


MEANS OF ABOLISHING COTTIER TENANCY. 393


climate, which cannot be reclaimed and rendered productive
by labourers themselves, under the inducement of a perma-
nent property. Confining ourselves to the one and a half
million of arable first mentioned, it would furnish properties
averaging five acres each to three hundred thousand persons,
which at the rate of five persons to a family, a rather low rate
for Ireland, answers to a population of fifteen hundred thou-
sand, Suppose such a number drafted off to a state of inde-
pendence and comfort, together with a very moderate addi-
tional relief by emigration ; and the introduction of English
capital and farming, over the remaining surface of Ireland,
would at once cease to be chimerical*.

“The improvement of wastes,’ Mr. Thornton observes,
“may perhaps be thought to require a good deal of capital;
but capital is principally useful for its command of labour, and
the Irish peasantry have quite labour enough at their own dis-
posal. Their misfortune is, that they have so much. Their
labour would not be the worse applied because they worked
for themselves, instead of for a paymaster. So far is


* If instead of throwing small farms into large, and exchanging peasant
for capitalist farmers, the “clearing” were limited to such a consolidation
of small holdings as would make them correspond in size to the admirable
small farms of Belgium, the adequacy of the resource is still more clear
and unquestionable. “There are at present,” says the Digest of Evidence
to Lord Devon’s Report, (p. 399,) “326,084 occupiers of land (more than
one-third of the total number returned in Ireland) whose holdings vary
from seven acres to less than one acre, and are therefore inadequate to sup-
port the families residing upon them.” It is shewn by calculation, “ that
the consolidation of these small holdings, up to eight acres, would require
the removal of about 192,368 families, and that the first class of improvable
waste land in Ireland would furnish to those removed families locations of
about eight acres each; or the first and second qualities of improvable
waste land, taken together, would furnish them with locations of about
twenty acres each.” It is computed (p. 565) that by these arrangements
500,000 labourers, equivalent to at least two millions and a half of popu-
lation, would be abstracted from competition in the labour market, while,
on the waste land alone, an addition of nearly twenty-iwo millions sterling
would be made to the gross produce of the country ; “and that the first three
or four years crops would return the cost requisite to bring about this change.”


=


{ ; Aen 394 BOOK Il. CHAPTER x. §6.
ia
eet [large] capital from being indispensable for the cultivation
ip ne é
i iH is of barren tracts, that schemes of this kind, which could
: re ; only bring loss to a rich speculator, are successfully achieved |
ri, Hi by his pennyless rival. A capitalist must have a certain


return for the money he lays out, but the poor man expends
nothing but his own superabundant labour, which would be
valueless if not so employed, so that his returns, however
small, are all clear profit. No man in his senses would ever
haye thought of wasting money upon the original sand of the
Pays de Waes; but the hard-working boors who settled there
two hundred years ago, without any other stock than their
industry, contrived to enrich both themselves and the land,
and indeed to make the latter the richest in Europe. There
is no soil so worthless that an English labourer will not
eagerly accept an allotment of it; and while the green
valley, from which some Highland community has been
driven, is fast relapsing under the superintendence of a
wealthy sheep-farmer into its primitive wildness, its former


ei GMA ETE NO LMI


age IF] tenants are forming new patches of arable land on the rock-

} t BY it strewn moors along the sea-coast.”
eon | act eh “The profit of reclaiming waste land,” says the Digest of
rel Kyidence to Lord Deyon’s Commission*, “ will be best un-


derstood from a practice not uncommon in Ireland, to which
farmers sometimes resort. This consists in giving the use of
a small portion of it to a poor cottier or herdsman for the
first three crops, after which this improved portion is given
ar el Eanh: up to the farmer, and a fresh piece of the waste land is taken

' on the same terms by the cottier.”? Well may the compiler
say, “ Here we have the example of the very poorest class m
Treland obtaining a livelihood by the cultivation of waste


4 land under the most discouraging and the least remunerative
ita circumstances that can well be imagined.”

; ‘ i It is quite worthy of the spirit which pervades the

i f wretched attempts as yet made to do good to Ireland, that

{ this spectacle of the poorest of mankind making the land


eheo70%


MEANS OF ABOLISHING COTTIER TENANCY. 395


valuable by their labour for the profit of other people, who
have done nothing to assist them, does not once strike Lord
Devon and his Commission as a thing which ought not to be.
Mr. Thornton strongly urges the claims of common justice
and common sense.

“The colonists ought to be allowed to retain permanent
possession of the spots reclaimed by them. To employ
them as labourers, in bringing the land into a remunerative
condition, (see Report of Land Occupation Commissioners),
in order that it may then be let to some one else, while
they are sent to shift for themselves where they can, may be
an excellent mode of enriching the landlord, but must
eventually aggravate the sufferings of the poor. It is pro-
bably because this plan has been generally practised, that
the reclamation of waste land has hitherto done nothing for
the benefit of the Irish peasantry. If the latter are to
derive any advantage from it, such of them as may be
located on the waste, should receive perpetual leases of their
respective allotments—should be made freeholders, in fact, or
at least perpetual tenants at a quit-rent. Such an appropri-
ation of waste land would of course require that compensation
should be made to all who previously possessed any interest
in it. But the value of a legal interest in land which cannot
be enclosed or cultivated without permission of the legisla-
ture, can only be proportionate to the actual yearly produce;
and as land in a natural state yields little or nothing, all
legal claims upon it might be bought up at a trifling ex-
pense, or might be commuted for a very small annual pay-
ment to be made by the settlers. Of the perfect competence
of Parliament to direct some arrangement of this kind, there
can be no question. An authority which compels individuals
to part with their most valued property on the slightest pre-
text of public convenience, and permits railway projectors to
throw down family mansions and cut up favourite pleasure
grounds, need not be very scrupulous about forcing the sale
of boggy meadows or mountain pastures, in order to obtain


396 BOOK Il. CHAPTER Xx. § 7.


the means of curing the destitution and misery of an entire
people.”

It would be desirable, and in most cases necessary, that
the tracts of land should be prepared for the labours of the
peasant, by being drained and intersected with roads at
the expense of Government; the interest of the sums 0
expended, and of the compensation paid for existing rights
to the waste land, being charged on it when reclaimed as a
perpetual quit-rent, redeemable at a moderate number of
years’ purchase. The state would thus incur no loss, while
the advances made would give that immediate employment
to the surplus labour of Ireland, which if not given im this
manner, will assuredly have to be given in some other, not
only less useful, but far less likely to repay its cost. The
millions lavished during the famine in the almost nominal
execution of useless works, without any result but that of
keeping the people alive, would, if employed in a great
operation on the waste lands, have been quite as effectual
for relieving immediate distress, and ‘would have laid the
foundation broad and deep for something really deserving
the name of social improvement. But, as usual, if was
thought better to throw away money and exertion ina beaten
track, than to take the responsibility of the most adyan-
tageous investment of them in an untrodden one.


§ 7. If after the superabundant evidence elicited in the
Irish inquiries, of the extent and capability of improvement
of the waste lands, the reader can doubt their sufficiency for
home colonization on such a scale as to effect with benefit to
everybody the “clearing” of all Ireland; there are yet other
means, by which not a little could be done in the dissemina-
tion of peasant proprietors over even the existing area of
cultivation. There is at the present time an experiment in
progress, in more than one part of England, for the creation
of peasant proprietors. The project is of Chartist origin,
and its first colony is now in full operation near Rickmans-


MEANS OF ABOLISHING COTTIER TENANCY. 397


worth, in Hertfordshire. The plan is as follows:—Funds
were raised, in shares, by a joint stock company. With part
of these funds an estate of several hundred acres was bought.
This estate was divided into portions of two, three, and four
acres, on each of which a house was erected by the Asso-
ciation. These holdings were let to select labourers, to
whom also such sums were advanced as were thought to
amount to a sufficient capital for cultivation by spade labour:
An annual payment, affording to the Company an interest
of five per cent on their outlay, was laid on the several
holdings as a fixed quitrent, never in any circumstances to
be raised. The tenants were thus proprietors from the first,
and their redemption of the quitrent, by saving from the
produce of their labour, is desired and calculated upon.
Should the issue of this experiment be unfavourable,
which at present there seems no reason to believe, the cause
of failure will be in the details of management, not in the
principle. These well-conceived arrangements afford a mode
in which private capital may co-operate in renovating the
social and agricultural economy of Ireland, not only without
sacrifice but with considerable profit to its owners. The
remarkable success of the Waste Land Improvement So-
ciety, which proceeded on a plan far less advantageous to
the tenant, is an instance of what an Irish peasantry can be
stimulated to do, by a sufficient assurance that what they do
will be for their own advantage. It is not indispensable to
begin at once with a perpetuity; long leases at moderate
rents, like those of the Waste Land Society, would suftice,
if a prospect were held out to the farmers of being allowed
to purchase their farms with the capital which they might
acquire, as the Society’s tenants were so rapidly acquiring
under the influence of its beneficent system. It would bea
boon to allow them to become purchasers of the land even
at the value given to it by their own labour: and though, on
the part of government, to take such an advantage of their
exertions eealel be most ungenerous and illiberal, it would


Pee ett ewe


398 BOOK Il. CHAPTER xX. § 8.


be allowable in private capitalists undertaking a work of
national benefit as an advantageous investment of capital,
When the lands were sold, the funds of the association would
be liberated, and it might recommence operations in some
other quarter.

Nor is it only by joint-stock associations, and the intro-
duetion of English capital, that this system might be acted
upon: it would be most advantageous to every individual
landowner in the: distressed counties, who has any funds
which he can freely dispose of. Under the new Irish poor
law, there are no means for the landlords of escaping ruin,
unless, by some potent stimulant to the industrial energies
of the people, they can largely increase the produce of agri-
culture: and since there is no stimulant available, so potent
as a permanent interest in the soil, either the present land-
lords, or those English mortagees to whom the estates of the
more impoverished landowners must inevitably pass, would
find it to their advantage, if not to grant at once this perma-
nent interest to their tenants, at least to hold out to them the
prospect of acquiring it. The government, too, into whose
hands no small portion of the land of Ireland may be ex-
pected to fall, im consequence of unrepaid advances, either
past or yet to come, will have a noble opportunity of render-
ing the acquisition instrumental to the formation of a peasant
proprietary: but, to the state, it would be most discreditable
to seek for profit at the expense of the peasantry; and
whether the ownerships were granted immediately or only
held out in prospect, the rent or price should be no more
than sufficient to repay the state for its advances.


§ 8. When the formidable difficulties in which the
government of this country is becoming more and more
deeply involved by the condition of Ireland, shall be met
instead of evaded, by men capable of rising superior both
to their own indolence and prejudices and to those of
others; we may hope to see, from the present lazy, apathetic,


MEANS OF ABOLISHING COTTIER TENANCY. 399


reckless, improvident, and lawless Ireland, a new Ireland
arise, consisting of peasant proprietors with something to
lose, and of hired labourers with something to gain; the
former attached to peace and law through the possession of
property, the latter through the hope of it; while the agri-
culture of one-half of Ireland would be conducted on the best
system of small cultivation, and that on the other half on
the best principles of large farming,and combination of labour.
Would it be too much to hope, that when the number of
hired labourers was duly proportioned to the soil on which
they were employed, and a peaceful “clearing” had made the
country safe for English capital to dwell in, the rate of wages
would be sufficient to establish a tolerably high standard of
living—and the spirit of saving, fostered by the desire of
acquiring land, would prevent that standard from being again
depressed through an imprudent increase of population ?

In the complication of human affairs, the actual effects
of causes, whether salutary or injurious, remain always far
short of their tendencies. But history is not without exam-
ples of changes, similar in kind to that which I have been
sketching, and the results of them are not uninstructive.
Three times during the course of French history, the pea-
santry have been purchasers of land; and these times imme-
diately preceded the three principal eras of French agricul-
tural prosperity.

“Aux temps les plus mauvais,” says the historian
Michelet*, “aux moments de pauvreté universelle, ou le
riche méme est pauvre et vend par force, alors le pauvre se
trouve en état d’acheter; nul acquéreur ne se présentant, le
paysan en guenilles arrive avec sa piece dor, et il acquiert
un bout de terre. Ces moments de désastre ot le paysan a
pu acquérir la terre 4 bon marché, ont toujours été suivis
@un élan subit de fécondité qu’on ne s’expliquait pas. Vers
1500, par exemple, quand la France €puisée par Louis XI.
semble achever sa ruine en Italie, la noblesse qui part est


* Te Peuple, lre partie, ch. 1,


aos ¥
se
a Be) inl ee ape


Aa ates aT ae aod


write et
+.


coh silent


SEAR Beara;


aay
ete
tia
: ;
pein il
- 7 ” Hh
e 4
i 7
i
ait
i af

; a
aun
hii

}

+

+


400 BOOK Il. CHAPTER Xx. § 8,


obligée de vendre; la terre, passant a de nouvelles mains,
refleurit tout-a-coup; on travaille, on batit. Ce beau mo-
ment (dans le style de histoire monarchique) s’est appele
le bon Louis XII,

“Tl dure peu, malheureusement. La terre est a peme
remise en bon état, le fisc fond dessus; les guerres de religion
arrivent, qui semblent raser tout jusqu’au sol, miséres hor-
ribles, famines atroces ou les méres mangeaient leurs enfants.
Qui croirait que le pays se reléve de 1a? Eh bien, la guerre
finit a peine, de ce champ ravagé, de cette chaumiére encore
noire et brilée, sort l’épargne du paysan. II achéte; en
dix ans, la France a changé de face; en vingt ou trente, tous
les biens ont double, triplé de valeur. Ce moment encore
baptisé d’un nom royal, s’appelle de bon Henri IV et le grand
Richelieu.”

Of the third era it is needless to speak: it was that of
the Revolution.

Whoever would study the reverse of the picture, may
compare these historic periods, characterized by the dismem-
berment of large and the construction of small properties, with
the wide-spread national suffering which accompanied, and
the permanent deterioration of the condition of the labourmg
classes which followed, the “ clearing” away of small yeomen to
make room for large grazing farms, which was the grand eco-
nomical event of English history during the sixteenth century.

I have concluded a discussion, which has already occu-
pied a space almost disproportioned to the dimensions of

tis work; and I here close the examination of those simpler
forms of social economy in which the produce of the land
either belongs undividedly to one class, or is shared only
between two classes. We now proceed to the hypothesis of
a threefold division of the produce, among labourers, land-
lords, and capitalists: and in order to connect the coming
discussions as closely as possible with those which have noW
for some time occupied us, I shall commence with the subject
of Wages.


CHAPTER XI.


OF WAGES.


§ 1. Unprr the head of Wages are to be considered,
first, the causes which determine or influence the wages of
labour generally, and secondly, the differences that exist
between the wages of different employments. It is con-
venient to keep these two classes of considerations separate ;
and in discussing the law of wages, to proceed in the first
instance as if there were no other kind of labour than com-
mon unskilled labour, of the average degree of hardness and
disagreeableness.

Wages, like other things, may be regulated either by
competition or by custom: but the last is not a common
case. A custom on the subject, even if established, could
not easily maintain itself unaltered in any other than a sta-
tionary state of society. An increase or a falling off in the
demand for labour, an increase or diminution of the labour-
ing population, could hardly fail to engender a competition
which would break down any custom respecting wages, by
giving either to one side or the other a strong direct interest
in infringing it. We may at all events speak of the wages
of labour as determined, in ordinary circumstances, by com-
petition.

Wages, then, depend upon the demand and supply of
labour; or, as it is often expressed, on the proportion
between population and capital. By population is here
meant the number only of the labouring class, or rather of
those who work for hire; and by capital, only circulating
capital, and not even the whole of that, but the part which
is expended in the direct purchase of labour. To this, how-
ever, must be added all funds which, without forming a part


9
VOL. I. ae


402 : BOOK Il. CHAPTER XI. § 2.


of capital, are paid in exchange for labour, such as the wages
of soldiers, domestic servants, and all other unproductive
labourers. There is unfortunately no mode of expressing
by one familiar term, the aggregate of what may be called
the wages-fund of a country; and as the wages of productive
labour form nearly the whole of that fund, it is usual to


overlook the smaller and less important part, and to say that
Tt will be con-


to
he


wages depend on population and capital.
venient to employ this expression, remembering, however;
consider it as elliptical, and not as a literal statement of t
entire truth.

With these limitations of the terms, wages not only
depend upon the relative amount of capital and population,
but cannot be affected by anything else. Wages (meaning,
of course, the general rate) cannot rise, but by ap increase
of the aggregate funds employed in hiring labourers, oF a
diminution in the number of the competitors for hire; nor


fall, except either by a diminution of the funds devoted to
paying labour, or by an increase in the number of labourers to
be paid.


§ 2. There are, however, some facts in apparent con-
tradiction to this doctrine, which it is incumbent on Us to
consider and explain.

For instance, if is a common saying that wages are high
when trade is good. The demand for labour in any pal
ticular employment is more pressing, and higher wages are
paid, when there is a brisk demand for the commodity pr
duced; and the contrary when there is what is called a
stagnation: then workpeople are dismissed, and those who
are retained must submit to a reduction of wages: although
in these cases there is neither more nor es capital than
before. This is true; and is one of those complications in
the concrete phenomena, which obscure and disguise the
operation of general causes; but it is not really inconsistent
with the principles laid down. Capital which the owner


WAGES. 403


does not employ in purchasing labour, but keeps idle in his
hands, is the same thing to the labourers, for the time being,
as if it did not exist. All capital is, from the variations of
trade, occasionally in this state. A manufacturer, finding
a slack demand for his commodity, forbears to employ
labourers in increasing a stock which he finds it difficult to
dispose of; or if he goes on until all his capital is locked up
in unsold goods, then at least he must of necessity pause
until he can get paid for some of them. But no one expects
either of these states to be permanent; if he did, he would
at the first opportunity remove his capital to some other
occupation, in which it would still continue to employ labour.
The capital remains unemployed for a time, during which
the labour market is overstocked, and wages fall. Afterwards
the demand revives, and perhaps becomes unusually brisk,
enabling the manufacturer to sell his commodity even faster
than he can produce it: his whole capital is then brought
into complete efficiency, and if he is able, he borrows
capital in addition, which would otherwise have gone into
some other employment. At such times wages, in his par-
ticular occupation, rise. If we suppose, what in strictness is
not absolutely impossible, that one of these fits of briskness
or of stagnation should affect all occupations at the same
time, wages altogether might undergo a rise or a fall. These,
however, are but temporary fluctuations: the capital now
lying idle will next year be in active employment, that which
is this year unable to keep up with the demand will in its
turn be locked up in crowded warehouses; and wages in
these several departments will ebb and flow accordingly: but
nothing can permanently alter general wages, except either an

increase or a diminution of capital itself (always meaning by

the term, the funds of all sorts, destined for the payment of
labour) compared with the quantity of labour offering itself

to be hired.

Again, it is another common notion, that high prices make
high wages; because the producers and sents none better
2p 2


FS bey afb Tih iden i


4
:


404 BOOK IJ. CHAPTER xi. § 2.


off, can afford to pay more to their labourers. I have already
said that a brisk demand, which causes temporary high
prices, causes also temporary high wages. But high prices,
in themselves, can only raise wages if the dealers, recelv-
ing more, are induced to save more, and make an add
to their capital, or at least to their purchases of labour.
This is indeed likely enough to be the case; and if the
high prices came direct from heaven, or even from abroad,
the labouring class might be benefited, not by the high prices
themselves, but by the increase of capital occasioned by
them. ‘The same effect however is often attributed to a high
price which is the result of restrictive laws, or which is in
some way or other to be paid by the remaining members of
the community ; they having no greater means than before
to pay it with. High prices of this sort, if they benefit one


do soat the expense of others;
abled to


hases


ition


class of labourers, can only
since if the dealers by receiving high prices are en
make greater savings, or otherwise increase their pure
of labour, all other people by paying those high prices have
their means of saving, or of purchasing labour, reduced in an
equal degree; and it is a matter of accident whether the one
alteration or the other will have the greatest effect on the
labour market. Wages will probably be temporarily higher
in the employment in which prices have risen, and somewhat
lower in other employments: in which case, while the first half
of the phenomenon excites notice, the other is generally over-
looked, or if observed, is not ascribed to the cause which really
produced it. Nor will the partial rise of wages last long: for
though the dealers in that one employment gain more, it does
not follow that there is room to employ a greater amount of
savings in their own business: their increasing capital will
probably flow over into other employments, and there coun
terbalance the diminution previously made in the demand for
labour by the diminished savings of other classes.

Another opinion often maintained is, that wages Vary
with the price of food; rising when it rises, and falling when


WAGES. 405


it falls. This opinion is, I conceive, only partially true; and
m So far as true, in no way affects the dependence of wages
on the proportion between capital and labour; since the price
of food, when it affects wages at all, affects them through that
law. Dear or cheap food caused by variety of seasons
does not affect wages (unless they are artificially adjusted to
it by law or charity): or rather, it has some tendency to affect
them in the contrary way to that supposed; since in times of
scarcity people generally work harder, and lower the labour
market against themselves. But dearness or cheapness of
food, when of a permanent character, and capable of being
calculated on beforehand, may affect wages. In the first
place, if the labourers have, as is often the case, no more
than enough to keep them in working condition and enable
them barely to support the ordinary number of children, it
follows that if food grows permanently dearer without a rise
of wages, a greater number of the children will prematurely
die; and thus wages will ultimately be higher, but only
because the number of people will be smaller, than if food
had remained cheap. But, secondly, even though wages
were high enough to admit of food’s becoming more costly
without depriving the labourers and their families of neces-
saries; though they could bear, physically speaking, to be
worse off, perhaps they would not consent to be so. They
may have habits of comfort which are to them as necessaries,
and sooner than forego which, they would put an additional
restraint on their power of multiplication ; so that wages
would rise, not by increase of deaths but by diminution of
births. In these cases, therefore, wages do adapt themselves
to the price of food, though after an interval of almost a
generation. Mr. Ricardo considers these two cases to com-
prehend all cases. He assumes, that there is everywhere a
minimum rate of wages: either the lowest with which it is
physically possible to keep up the population, or the lowest
with which the people will choose to do so. To this mini-
mum, he assumes that the general rate of wages always tends;


406 BOOK Il. CHAPTER XI. § 2.


that they can never be lower, beyond the length of time re-
quired for a diminished rate of increase’ to make itself felt,
and can never long continue higher. This assumption con-
tains sufficient truth to render it admissible for the purposes
of abstract science; and the conclusion which Mr. Ricardo
draws from it, namely that wages in the long run rise and fall
with the permanent price of food, is, like almost all his con-
clusions, true hypothetically, that is, granting the suppositions
from which he sets out. But in the application to practice,
it is necessary to consider that the minimum of which he
speaks, especially when it is not a physical, but what may be
termed a moral minimum, is itself liable to vary. If wages
were previously so high that they could bear reduction, to
which the obstacle was a high standard of comfort habitual
among the labourers, a rise of the price of food, or any other
disadvantageous change in their circumstances, may operate
in two ways: it may correct itself by a rise of wages, brought
about through a gradual effect on the prudential check to
population; or it may permanently lower thé standard of
living of the class, in case their previous habits in respect of
population prove stronger than their previous habits in Te
pect of comfort. In that case the injury done to them will
be permanent, and their deteriorated condition will become a
new minimum, tending to perpetuate itself as the more ample
minimum did before. It is to be feared that of the two
modes in which the cause may operate, the last is the most
frequent, or at all events sufficiently so, to render all propos
tions ascribing a self-repairing quality to the calamities which
befall the labouring classes, practically of no validity. There
is considerable evidence that the circumstances of the agt-
cultural labourers in England have more than once in our
history sustained great permanent deterioration, from causes
which operated by diminishing the demand for labour, and
which, if population had exercised its power of self-adjust-
ment in obedience to the previous standard of comfort, could
only have had a temporary effect: but unhappily the poverty


eS-


WAGES. 404


in which the class was plunged during a long series of years
brought that previous standard into disuse; and the next
generation, growing up without having possessed those pris-
tine comforts, multiplied in turn without any attempt to
retrieve them*.

The converse case occurs when, by improvements in agri-
culture, the repeal of corn laws, or other such causes, the
necessaries of the labourer are cheapened, and he is enabled,
with the same wages, to command greater comforts than before.
Wages will not fall immediately; it is even possible that
they may rise; but they will fall at last, so as to leave the
labourers no better off than before, unless during this interval
of prosperity the standard of comfort regarded as indis-
pensable by the class, is permanently raised. Unfortunately
this salutary effect is by no means to be counted upon: it is
a much more difficult thing to raise, than to lower, the scale
of living which the labourers will consider as more indis-
pensable than marrying and havinga family. If they content
themselves with enjoying the greater comfort while it lasts,
but do not learn to require it, they will people down to their
old scale of living. If from poverty their children had pre-
viously been insufficiently fed or improperly nursed, a greater
number will now be reared, and the competition of these,
when they grow up, will depress wages, probably in full
proportion to the greater cheapness of food, If the effect is
not produced in this mode, it will be produced by earlier and
more numerous marriages, or by an increased number of
births to a marriage. According to all experience, a great
increase invariably takes place in the number of marriages, in
seasons of cheap food and full employment. I cannot,
therefore, agree in the importance so often attached to the
repeal of the corn laws, considered merely as a labourers’


question, or to any of the schemes, of which MoTneXGRCINE


ketch of the condition of the English peasantry,


ease historical s > En;
natn uthorities by Mr. Thornton, in his work on Over-


prepared from the best a
Population.


otis


Sued brabiiieldhss aii adeh cade ethos sikttena baie ate oe


a=


408 BOOK II. CHAPTER XI. § 2.


other is at all times in vogue, for making the labourers a
very little better off. Things which only affect them a very
little, make no permanent impression upon their habits and
requirements, and they soon slide back into their former
state. To produce permanent advantage, the temporary
cause operating upon them must be sufficient to make a great
change in their condition—a change such as will be felt for
many years, notwithstanding any stimulus which it may give
during one generation to the increase of people. When,
indeed, the improvement is of this signal character, and a
generation grows up which has always been used tonau
improved scale of comfort, the habits of this new generation
in respect to population become formed upon @ higher
minimum, and the improvement in their condition becomes
permanent. Of cases in point, the most remarkable 1s
France after the Revolution. The majority of the popula-.
tion being suddenly raised from misery, to independence
and comparative comfort; the immediate effect was that
population, notwithstanding the destructive wars of the
period, started forward with unexampled rapidity, partly
because improved circumstances enabled many children to be
reared who would otherwise have died, and partly from
increase of births. The succeeding generation however gtW
up with habits entirely altered; and though the country Was
never before in so prosperous a state, the annual number of
births is now nearly stationary*, and the increase of population
extremely slowy.


* Supra, pp. 338 to 340.

+ A similar, though not an equal improvement in the standard of
living took place among the labourers of England during the remarkable
fifty years from 1715 to 1765, which were distinguished by such an extra-
ordinary succession of fine harvests (the years of decided deficiency not
exceeding five in all that period) that the average price of wheat during
those years was much lower than during the previous half century. Mr.
Malthus computes that on the average of sixty years preceding 1720, the
labourer could purchase with a day’s earnings only two-thirds of a peck 0
wheat, while from 1720 to 1750 he could purchase a whole peck. The


WAGES. 409


§ 3. Wages depend, then, on the proportion between the
number of the labouring population, and the capital or other
funds devoted to the purchase of labour; we will say, for
shortness, the capital. If wages are higher at one time or
place than at another, if the subsistence and comfort of the
class of hired labourers are more ample, it is, and can be, for
no other reason, than because capital bears a greater propor-
tion to population. It is not the absolute amount of accu-
mulation or of production, that is of importance to the
labouring class; it is not the amount even of the funds
destined for distribution among the labourers: it is the pro-
portion between those funds and the numbers among whom
they are shared. The condition of the class can be bettered
m no other way than by altering that proportion to their
advantage: and every scheme for their benefit, which does
not proceed on this as its foundation, is, for all permanent
purposes, a delusion.

In countries like North America and the Australian
colonies, where the knowledge- and arts of civilized life, and
a high effective desire of accumulation, co-exist with a bound-
less extent of unoccupied land, the growth of capital easily
keeps pace with the utmost possible increase of population,
and is chiefly retarded by the impracticability of obtaining
labourers enough. All, therefore, who can possibly be born,
can find employment without overstocking the market:


average price of wheat, according to the Eton tables, for fifty years ending
with 1715, was 41s, 73d. the quarter, and for the last twenty-three of these,
45s. 8d., while for the fifty years following it was no more than 34s. 11d,
So considerable an improvement in the condition of the labouring class,
though arising from the accidents of seasons, yet continuing for more than
a generation, had time to work a change in the habitual requirements of the
labouring class; and this period is always noted as the date of “a marked
improvement of the quality of the food consumed, and a decided elevation


in the standard of their comforts and conveniences. ”-—-(Malthus, Principles


of Political Economy, p. 255.) For the character of the period, see Mr.
Tooke’s excellent History of Prices, yol, i. pp. 38 to 61, and for the prices of


corn, the Appendix to that work.


410 BOOK Il. CHAPTER xI. § 3.


every labouring family enjoys in abundance the necessaries,
many of the comforts, and some of the luxuries of life ; and,
unless in case of individual misconduct, or actual inability to
work, poverty does not, and dependence needs not, exist, A
similar advantage, though in a less degree, is occasionally
enjoyed by some special class of labourers in old countries,
from an extraordinarily rapid growth, not of capital gene-
rally, but of the capital employed in a particular occupation.
So gigantic has been the progress of the cotton manufacture
since the inventions of Watt and Arkwright, that the capital
engaged in it has probably quadrupled in the time which
population requires for doubling. While, therefore, it has
attracted from other employments nearly all the hands which
geographical circumstances and the habits or inclinations of
the people rendered available; and while the demand it
created for infant labour has enlisted the immediate pect
niary interest of the operatives in favor of promoting; instead
of restraining, the increase of population; nevertheless wages


‘ a tat in the great seats of the manufacture are still so high, that
Vie 2p the collective earnings of a family amount to a very satisfac-
' Rt hh tory sum; and there is, as yet, no sign of decrease, while the


effect has also been felt in raising the general standard of
agricultural wages in the surrounding country. :
But those circumstances of a country, or of an occupation;
in which population can with impunity increase at its utmost
rit rate, are rare, and transitory. Very few are the countries
presenting the needful union of conditions. Hither the
industrial arts are backward and _ stationary, and capital
therefore increases slowly ; or the effective desire of accumu-
i lation being low, the increase soon reaches its limit; 0%
bite though both these elements are at their highest known
Ai : degree, the increase of capital is checked, because there
Sit is not fresh land to be resorted to, of as good a quality
|
i


even


as that already occupied. Though capital should for 4 time
double itself simultaneously with population, if all this capital
and population are to find employment on the same Jana;


WAGES. 411


they cannot without an unexampled succession of agricultural
inventions continue doubling the produce; therefore, if
wages did not fall, profits must ; and when profits fall, in-
crease of capital is slackened. Besides, even if wages did not
fall, the price of food (as will be shown more fully hereafter)
would in these circumstances necessarily rise; which is
equivalent to a fall of wages.

Except, therefore, in the very peculiar cases which I have
just noticed, of which the only one of any practical import-
ance is that of a new colony, or a country in circumstances
equivalent to it; it is impossible that population should
increase at its utmost rate, without lowering wages. Nor
will the fall be stopped at any point, short of that which
either by its physical or its moral operation, checks the in-
crease of population. In no old country, therefore, does
population increase at anything like its utmost rate; in most,
at a very moderate rate; in some countries, not at all. These
facts are only to be accounted for in two ways. Either the
whole number of births which nature admits of, and which
happen in some circumstances, do not take place ; or, if they
do, a large proportion of those who are born, die. The
retardation of increase results either from mortality or pru-
dence; from Mr. Malthus’s positive, or from his preventive
check: and one or the other of these must and does exist,
and very powerfully too, in all old societies. Wherever
population is not kept down by the prudence either of in-
dividuals or of the state, it is kept down by starvation or
disease.

Mr. Malthus has taken great pains to ascertain, for almost
every country in the world, which of these checks it is that
operates ; and the evidence which he collected on the subject,
ation, may even now be read with ad-
vantage. Throughout Asia, and formerly in most European


countries’ in which the labouring classes were not in personal
5 e is, or was, no restrainer of population but
>


in his Essay on Popul


bondage, ther


;


.
412 BOOK If. CHAPTER xI. § 3.


death. The mortality was not always the result of poverty;
much of it proceeded from unskilful and careless manage-
ment of children, from uncleanly and otherwise unhealthy
habits of life among the adult population, and from the
almost periodical occurrence of destructive pestilences.
Throughout Europe these causes of shortened life have
much diminished, but they have nowhere ceased to exist.
Until a period not very remote, hardly any of our large
towns kept up their population, independently of the stream
always flowing into them from the rural districts: this was
still true of Liverpool until very recently, and even m
London, the mortality is larger, and the ayerage duration
of life shorter, than in rural districts where there is much
greater poverty. In Ireland, epidemic fevers, and deaths
from the exhaustion of the constitution by insufficient
nutriment, accompany even the most moderate deficiency
of the potato crop. Nevertheless, it cannot now be said
that in any part of Europe, population is principally
kept down by disease, still less by starvation, either in
a direct or an indirect form. The agency by which it
is limited is preventive, not (in the Janguage of Mr. Mal-
thus) positive. But the preventive remedy seldom, I be-
lieve, consists in the unaided operation of prudential mo-
tives on a class wholly or mainly composed of labourers
for hire, and looking forward to no other lot. In Eng-
land, for example, I much doubt if the generality of agri-
cultural labourers practise any prudential restraint what-
ever. They generally marry as early, and have as many
children to a marriage, as they would or could do if they
were settlers in the United States. During the generation
which preceded the enactment of the present Poor Law,
they received the most direct encouragement to this sort of
improvidence; being not only assured of support, on easy
terms, whenever out of employment, but even when in
employment, very commonly receiving from the parish a


WAGES, 413


weekly allowance proportioned to their number of children;
and the married with large families being always, from a
shortsighted economy, employed in preference to the un-
married; which last premium on population still exists.
Under such prompting, the rural labourers acquired habits of
recklessness, which are so congenial to the uncultivated mind
that in whatever manner produced, they in general long sur-
vive their immediate causes. There are so many new
elements at work in society, even in those deeper strata which
are inaccessible to the mere movements on the surface, that
it is hazardous to affirm anything positive on the mental
state or practical impulses of classes and bodies of men,
when the same assertion may be true to day, and may require
great modification in five years’ time. It does however seem,
that if the rate of increase of population depended solely on
the agricultural labourers, it would, as far as dependent on
births, and unless repressed by deaths, be as rapid in the
southern counties of Hngland as in America. The restraining
principle lies in the very great proportion of the population
composed of the middle classes and the skilled artisans, who
in this country almost equal in number the common labourers,
and on whom prudential motives do, in a considerable degree,
operate.


§ 4. Where a labouring class who have no property but
their daily wages, and no hope of acquiring it, refrain from
over-rapid multiplication, the cause, I believe, has always
hitherto been, either actual legal restraint, or a custom of
some sort which, without tention on their part, insensibly
moulds their conduct, or affords immediate inducements not
to marry. It is not generally known in how many countries
of Europe direct legal obstacles are opposed to improvident
marriages. ‘The communications made to the original Poor
Law Commission by our foreign ministers and consuls in
different parts of Europe, contain a considerable amount of


414 BOOK Ii. CHAPTER XI, § 4.


information on this subject. Mr. Senior, in his preface to
those communications*, says that in the countries which
recognize a legal right to relief, “marriage on the part of
persons in the actual receipt of relief appears to be every-
where prohibited, and the marriage of those who are not
likely to possess the means of independent support 1s
allowed by very few. Thus we are told that in Norway no
one can marry without ‘showing, to the satisfaction of the
clergyman, that he is permanently settled in such a manner
as to offer a fair prospect that he can maintain a family.’

“In Mecklenburg, that ‘marriages are delayed by con-
scription in the twenty-second year, and military service for
six years; besides, the parties must have a dwelling, without
which a clergyman is not permitted to marry them. The
men marry at from twenty-five to thirty, the women not
much earlier, as both must first gain by service enough to
establish themselves.’ :

“In Saxony, that ‘a man may not marry before he 1s
twenty-one years old, if liable to serve in the army. In
Dresden, professionists (by which word artisans are probably
meant) may not marry until they become masters in their
trade.’

“Tn Wurtemberg, that ‘no man is allowed to marry till
his twenty-fifth year, on account of his military duties, unless
permission be especially obtained or purchased: at that age
he must also obtain permission, which is granted on proving
that he and his wife would have together sufficient to main-
tain a family or to establish themselves; in large towns, Say
from 800 to 1000 florins (from 66/. 13s. 4d. to 84J. 3s. 4d.);
in smaller, from 400 to 500 florins; in villages, 200 florins
(162. 13s. 4d.)’

The minister at Munich says, “The great cause why the


* Forming an Appendix (F) to the General Report of the Commis-
sioners, and also published by authority as a separate volume.
+ Preface, p. XXxix.


WAGES. 415


number of the poor is kept so low in this country arises from
the prevention by law of marriages in cases in which it can-
not be proved that the parties have reasonable means of
subsistence; and this regulation is in all places and at all
times strictly adhered to. The effect of a constant and firm
observance of this rule has, it is true, a considerable influence
in keeping down the population of Bavaria, which is at pre-
sent low for the extent of country, but it has a most salutary
effect In averting extreme poverty and consequent misery*.”

At Lubeck, “marriages among the poor are delayed by
the necessity a man is under, first, of previously proving that
he is in a regular employ, work, or profession, that will
enable him to maintain a wife: and secondly, of becoming a
burgher, and equipping himself in the uniform of the burgher
guard, which together may cost him nearly 47.47? At Frank-
fort, “the government prescribes no age for marrying, but the
permission to marry is only granted on proving a liveli-
hoodt.”?

The allusion, in some of these statements, to military
duties, points out an indirect obstacle to marriage, mterposed
by the laws of some countries in which there is no direct
legal restraint. In Prussia, for instance, the institutions
which compel every able-bodied man to serve for several
years in the army, at the time of life at which imprudent
marriages are most likely to take place, are probably a full
equivalent, in effect on population, for the legal restrictions
of the smaller German states.


§ 5. Where there is no general law restrictive of mar-
riage, there are often customs equivalent to it. When the
guilds, or trade corporations of the middle ages were in
vigour, their bye-laws or regulations were conceived with avery
vigilant eye to the advantage which the trade derived from


* Preface, p. xxxiii., or p. 554 of the Appendix itself,
+ Appendix, p. 419. Ibid. p. 567.


ces


si SOY wasp TL LST CEN
iH


segs


416 BOOK Il. CHAPTER xI. § 5.


limiting competition: and they made it very effectually the
interest of artisans not to marry until after passing through
the two stages of apprentice and journeyman, and attaining
the rank of master*. In Norway, where the labour is chiefly


* “Wn général,” says Sismondi, “le nombre des maitres était fixé dans
chaque communauté, et le maitre pouvait seul tenir boutique, acheter et
vendre pour son compte. Chaque maitre ne pouvait former qu’un certain
nombre d@’apprentis, auxquels il enseignait son métier ; et dans plusieurs
communautés, il n’en pouvait tenir qu’un seul. Chaque maitre pouvait de
méme tenir un nombre limité d’ouvriers, qui portaient le nom de com:
pagnons; et, dans les métiers ou l’on ne pouvait avoir qu’un seul apprenti,
on ne pouyait avoir non plus qu’un seul, ou que deux compagnons. Aucul
homme ne pouvait acheter, vendre, ou travailler dans un métier, s'il n’était
apprenti, compagnon, ou maitre; aucun homme ne pouvait deyenir com-
pagnon s’il n’avait servi un nombre d'années déterminé comme apprenti, ou
devenir maitre s’il n’avait servi un nombre égal d’années comme compagnon;
et s'il n’avait de plus fait son chef-d’@uvre, ou exécuté un travail désigné
dans son métier, qui devait étre jugé par sa jurande. On voit que cette
organisation mettait entiérement dans la main des mattres le renouvellement
des corps de métier. Hux seuls pouvaient recevoir des apprentis ; mais ils
n’étaient point obligés 4 en prendre; aussi se faisaient-ils payer cette faveur,
et souvent 4 un prix trés-éleyé; en sorte qu’un jeune homme ne pouyait
entrer dans un métier s'il n’avait, au préalable, la somme qu'il fallait payer
pour son apprentissage, et celle qui lui était nécessaire pour se sustenter
pendant la durée de cet apprentissage ; car, pendant quatre, cinq, ou sept ans,
tout son travail appartenait Xson maitre, Sadépendance de ce maitre était
tout aussi longtemps absolue; car un seul acte de la volonté, ou méme du
caprice de celui-ci, pouvait lui fermer l’entrée des professions lucratives,
L’apprenti, devenu compagnon, acquérait un peu plus de liberté ; il pouvait
s’engager avec quel maitre il voulait, passer de un 4 lautre; et comme
Yentrée au compagnonage n’était ouverte que par Vapprentissage, il com:
mencait 4 profiter du monopole dont il avait souffert, et il était h peu pres
sfir de se faire bien payer un travail que personne ne pouvait faire, si ce
n’est Jui. Cependant il dépendait de la jurande pour obtenir la mattrise ;
eae ae comme assuré de son sat commntg ayant

ery Gee as a bea quil ne fat. passé ma
ment des corps de métier aaa Pe or hae thgorie, ane : énhae
population surabondante. D’aprés th naire a eee ott
métier, un homme ne ponvait étre : oe = Ee Be 1s i

+5 s'il n’avait peecneane Jeeps maitre qu’aprés vingt-cind ans;
ue es ut pas un capital a lui, s'il n’avait jas fait des économie ssufii-

santes, il continuait bien plus ee ; ait as fait des cond’
gtemps 4 trayailler comme compagnon ;


WAGES. 417


agricultural, it is forbidden by law to engage a farm-servant
for less than a year; which was the general English practice
until the poor laws destroyed it, by enabling the farmer
to cast his labourers on parish pay whenever he did not
immediately require their labour. In consequence of this
custom, and of its enforcement by law, the whole of the
rather limited class of agricultural labourers in Norway have
an engagement for a year at least, which if the parties are
content with one another, naturally becomes a permanent
engagement: hence it is known in every neighbourhood
whether there is, or is likely to be, a vacancy, and unless
there is, a young man does not marry, knowing that he could
not obtain employment. The custom still exists in Cum-
berland and Westmoreland, except that the term is half
a year instead of a year; and seems to be still attended with
the same consequences. ‘The farm servants “ are lodged and
boarded in their master’s houses, which they seldom leave
until, through the death of some relation or neighbour, they
succeed to the ownership or lease of a cottage farm. What
is called surplus labour does not here exist*.’ I have men-
tioned in another chapter the check to population in England
during the last century, from the difficulty of obtaining a
Separate dwelling place. Other customs restrictive of popu-
lation might be specified: in some parts of Italy, it is the
practice according to Sismondi among the poor, as itis well
known to be in the higher ranks, that all but one of the sons
remain unmarried. But such family arrangements are not
likely to exist among day labourers. They are the resource


plusieurs, et peut-étre le plus grand nombre des artisans, demeuraient com-
pagnons toute leur vie. I était presque sans exemple, cependant, qwils se
Mariassent avant d’étre recus maitres; quand ils auraient été assez im-
prudens pour le désirer, aucun pére n’aurait voulu donner sa fille } un
homme qui n’avait point d’état.’—Nouveaue Principes, book iv. ch. 10.
See also Adam Smith, book i. ch. 10. part 2.

* See Thornton on Qver-Population, p. 18, and the authorities there
cited,

+ Supra, p. 191.

VO be ae 2


}

t
tii
{
|
H


if
|

pit
e


herr pre LEBER ESS


%


FF aA eked eda aA ag APGh ican icek te a hCG ES,


418 BOOK II. CHAPTER xi. § 6.


of small proprietors and metayers, for preventing too minute
a subdivision of the land.

In England generally there is now scarcely a relic of
these indirect checks to population; except that in parishes
owned by one or a very small number of landowners, the
increase of resident labourers is still occasionally obstructed,
by preventing cottages from being built, or by pulling down
those which exist; thus restraining the population liable to
become locally chargeable, without any material effect on
population generally, the work required in those parishes
being performed by labourers settled elsewhere. The sur-
rounding districts always feel themselves much aggrieved by
this practice, against which they cannot defend themselves
by similar means, since a single acre of land owned by any
one who does not enter into the combination, enables him to
defeat the attempt, very profitably to himself, by covering
that acre with cottages. To meet these complaints it has
already been under the consideration of Parliament to abolish
parochial settlements, and make the poor rate a charge not
on the parish but on the whole union. If this proposition
be adopted, which for other reasons is very desirable, it will
remove the small remnant of what was once a check to
population: the value of which, however, from the narrow
limits of its operation, must now be considered very trifling.


§ 6. In the case, therefore, of the common agricultural
labourer, the checks to population may almost be considered
as non-existent. If the growth of the towns, and of the
capital there employed, by which the factory operatives are
maintained at their present average rate of wages notwith-
standing their rapid increase, did not also absorb a great
part of the annual addition to the rural population, there
seems no reason in the present habits of the people why
they should not fall into as miserable a condition as the
Irish; and if the market for our manufactures should, I do
not say fall off, but even cease to expand at the rapid rate


WAGES, 419


of the last fifty years, there is no certainty that this fate may
not be in reserve for us; especially considering how much
the Irish themselves contribute to it, by migrating to this
country and underbidding its native inhabitants. Without
carrying our anticipations forward to such a calamity, which
the great and growing intelligence of the factory population
would, it may be hoped, avert, by an adaptation of their
habits to their circumstances; the existing condition of the
labourers of some of the most exclusively agricultural coun-
ties, Wiltshire, Somersetshire, Dorsetshire, Bedfordshire,
Buckinghamshire, is sufficiently painful to contemplate. The
labourers of these counties, with large families, and seven
or perhaps eight shillings for their weekly wages when in full
employment, have lately become one of the stock objects of
Popular compassion: it is time that they had the benefit also
of some application of common sense.

Unhappily, sentimentality rather than common sense is
the genius that usually presides over the discussion of these
subjects; and while there is a growing sensitiveness to the
hardships of the poor, and a ready disposition to admit
claims in them upon the good offices of other people, there
is an all but universal unwillingness to face the real difficulty
of their position, or advert at all to the conditions which
nature has made indispensable to the improvement of their
physical lot. Discussions on the condition of the labourers,
lamentations over its wretchedness, denunciations of all who
are supposed to be indifferent to it, projects of one kind or
another for improving it, were in no country and in no time
of the world, so rife as at present: but there is a tacit agree-
ment to ignore totally the law of wages, or to dismiss it in a
parenthesis, with such terms as ‘“‘hard-hearted Malthu-
Sianism ;” as if it were not a thousand times more hard-
hearted to tell human beings that they may, than that they
may not, call into existence swarms of creatures who are
sure to be miserable, and most likely to be depraved; and
forgetting that the conduct, which it is reckoned so cruel to


2) mh 2


a


%


bt AM. be 7
teres ~rrer mnt
PRGA, rele nee


(ai obe asl eh Ae ada ke


srabeber fis ney: “abn obec


420 BOOK Il. CHAPTER XI. § 6.


disapprove, is a degrading slavery to a brute instinct in one
of the persons concerned, and most commonly, in the other,
helpless submission to a revolting abuse of power.

It is not wonderful that the working classes themselves
should cherish error on this subject. They obey a common
ing the blame of their misfortunes, and the


propensity, in lay
on any shoulders but


responsibility of providing remedies,
their own. They must be above the average level of huma-
nity if they chose the more disagreeable opinion, when
nearly all their professed teachers, both in their own and in
every other class, either silently reject or noisily declaim


The true theory of the causes of poverty seems
Those who share the


content with the place
by what are called the
he neces-


against it.
to answer nobody’s peculiar purpose.

growing and certainly well-grounded dis
filled and the part performed in society
higher classes, seem to think that acknowledging t
sary dependence of wages on population is removing some
blame from those classes, and acquitting them at the bar of
public opinion for doing so little for the people ; as if any-
thing they could do, either in their present relation to them
or in any other, could be of permanent use to the people in
their material interests, unless grounded on a recognition of
all the facts on which their condition depends. To this
class of opponents, the accidents of personal politics have


latterly added nearly the whole effective literary strength
Conservative of exist-


of the party who proclaim themselves
hom the cause of


ing social arrangements. Any one with w

the poor is a principle, and not a pretence, or @ mere freak of

sensibility, must contemplate with unfeigned bitterness the

conduct, during ten important years, of a large portion of
mM “ * . a ° 5

the Tory party, including nearly all its popular organs; who


have studiously fostered the prejudices and inflamed the
hich demo-


passions of the democracy, on the points on W
he


cratic opinion is most liable to be dangerously wrong; for t
paltry advantage of turning into a handle of popular decla-
mation against their Whig rivals, an enactment most salutary


WAGES. 421


in principle, in which their own party had concurred, but of
which those rivals were almost accidentally the nominal
authors.

So long as mankind remained in a semi-barbarous state,
with the indolence and the few wants of the savage, it pro-
bably was not desirable that population should be restrained;
the pressure of physical want may haye been a necessary
stimulus, in that stage of the human mind, to the exertion
of labour and ingenuity required for accomplishing that
greatest of all past changes in human modes of existence, by
which mdustrial life attained predominance over the hunting,
the pastoral, and the military or predatory state. Want, in
that age of the world, had its uses, as even slavery had; and
there may: be corners of the earth where those uses are not
yet superseded, though they might easily be so were a helping
hand held out by more civilized communities. But im Eu-
rope the time, if it ever existed, is long past, when a life
of privation had the smallest tendency to make men either
better workmen or more civilized beings. It is, on the con-
trary, evident, that if the agricultural labourers were better
off, they would both work more efficiently, and be better
citizens. I ask, then, is it true or not, that if their numbers
were fewer they would obtain higher wages? ‘This is the
question, and no other: and it is idle to divert attention from
it, by attacking any incidental position of Malthus or some
other writer, and pretending that to refute that, is to disprove
the principle of population. Some, for instance, have
achieved an easy victory over a passing remark of Mr.
Malthus, hazarded chiefly by way of illustration, that the
increase of food may perhaps be assumed to take place in an
arithmetical ratio, while population increases in a geome-
trical: when every candid reader knows that Mr. Malthus
laid no stress on this unlucky attempt to give numerical pre-
cision to things which do not admit of it, and every person
easoning must see that it is wholly superfluous to


capable of r
Others have laid immense stress upon a


his argument.


429 BOOK Il. CHAPTER xI. § 6.


correction which more recent political economists have made
in the mere language of the earlier followers of Mr. Malthus,
Several writers had said that it is the tendency of population
to increase faster than the means of subsistence. ‘The asser-
tion was true in the sense in which they meant it, namely
that population would in most circumstances increase faster
than the means of subsistence, if it were not checked either
by mortality or by prudence. But inasmuch as these checks
act with unequal force at different times and places, it was
possible to interpret the language of these writers as if they
had meant that population is usually gaining ground upon
subsistence, and the poverty of the people becoming greater
Under this interpretation of their meaning, it was urged that
the reverse is the truth: that as civilization advances, the
prudential check tends to become stronger, and population
to slacken its rate of increase, relatively to subsistence; and
that it is an error to maintain that population, in any 1mprov-


ing community, tends to increase faster than, or even so fast


as, subsistence. 'The word tendency is here used in a totally
different sense from that of the writers who affirmed the


proposition : but waving the verbal question, is it not allowed


on both sides, that in old’ countries, population presses too
closely upon the means of subsistence? And although its
pressure diminishes, the more the ideas and habits of the
poorest class of labourers can be improved, to which it is to
be hoped that there is always some tendency in a progressive
country, yet since that tendency has hitherto been, and still
is, extremely faint, and (to descend to particulars) has not
yet extended to giving to the Wiltshire labourers higher
wages than eight shillings a week, the only thing which it is
necessary to consider is, whether that is a sufficient and
suitable provision for a labourer? for if not, population does,
as an existing fact, bear too great a proportion to the means
of subsistence; and whether it pressed still harder oF not
quite so hard at some former period, is practically of no
moment, except that, if the ratio is an improving one, there


WAGES. 423


is the better hope that by proper aids and encouragements it
may be made to improve more and faster.

It is not, however, against reason, that the argument on
this subject has to struggle ; but against a feeling of dislike,
which will only reconcile itself to the unwelcome truth,
when every device is exhausted by which the recognition of
that truth can be evaded. It is necessary, therefore, to enter
into a detailed examination of these devices, and to force
every position which is taken up by the enemies of the
population principle, in their determination to find some
refuge for the labourer, some plausible means of improving
his condition, without requiring the exercise, either enforced
or voluntary, of any self-restraint, or any greater control
than at present over the animal power of multiplication.
This will be the object of the next chapter.


abe


sa $e


SIR ARG vas am


CHAPTER XII.


OF POPULAR REMEDIES FOR LOW WAGES.


§ 1. Tue simplest expedient which can be imagined for:
keeping the wages of labour up to the desirable point, would
be to fix them by law: and this is virtually the object aimed
at in a variety of plans which have at different times been, or
still are, current, for remodelling the relation between
labourers and employers. No one probably ever suggested
that wages should be absolutely fixed; since the interests of
all concerned, often require that they should be variable; but
some have proposed to fix a minimum of wages, leaving the
variations above that point to be adjusted by competition.
Another plan, which has found many advocates among the
leaders of the operatives, is that councils should be formed,
which in England have been called local boards of trade,
France “conseils de prud’hommes,” and other names; CON-
sisting of delegates from the workpeople and from the
employers, who, meeting in fair conference, should agree
upon a rate of wages, and promulgate it from authority,
to be binding generally on employers and workmen; the
ground of decision being, not the state of the labour-
market, but natural equity; to provide that the workmen
shall have reasonable wages, and the capitalist reasonable
profits.

Others again (but these are rather philanthropists in-
teresting themselves for the labouring classes, than the
labouring people themselves) are shy of admitting the in-
terference of authority in contracts for labour: they fear
that if law intervened, it would intervene rashly and ign0-
rantly ; they are convinced that two parties, with opposite
interests, attempting to adjust those interests by negotiation


POPULAR REMEDIES FOR LOW WAGES. 425


through their representatives on principles of equity, when
no rule could be laid down to determine what was equitable,
would merely exasperate their differences instead of healing
them; but what it is useless to attempt by the legal sanction,
these persons desire to compass by the moral. Every em-
ployer, they think, ought to give sufficient wages; and if he
does it not willingly, should be compelled to it by general
opinion ; the test of sufficient wages being their own feelings,
or what they suppose to be those of the public. This is, I
think, a fair representation of a considerable body of existing
opinion on the subject.

I desire to confine my remarks to the principle involved
in all these suggestions, without taking into account practical
difficulties, serious as these must at once be seen to be. I
shall suppose that by one or other of these contrivances,
wages could be kept above the point to which they would
be brought by competition. This is as much as to say,
above the highest rate which can be afforded by the existing
capital, consistently with employing all the labourers. For
it is a mistake to suppose that competition merely keeps
down wages. It is equally the means by which they are
kept up. When there are any labourers unemployed, these,
unless maintained by charity, become competitors for hire, and
wages fall; but when all who were out of work have found
employment, wages will not, under the freest system of com-
petition, fall lower. There are strange notions afloat con-
cerning the nature of competition. Some people seem to
imagine that its effect is something indefinite; that the com-
petition of sellers may lower prices, and the competition of


labourers may lower wages, down to. zero, or some unassign-


able minimum. Nothing can be more unfounded. Goods


can only be lowered in price by competition, to the point
which calls forth buyers sufficient to take them off; and
wages can only be lowered by competition until room is
made to admit all the labourers to a share in the distribution


of the wages-fund. If they fell below this point, a portion
OS -


426 BOOK II. CHAPTER XII. § 2.


of capital would remain unemployed for want of labourers;
a counter-competition would commence on the side of capi-
talists, and wages would rise.

Since, therefore, the rate of wages which results from
competition distributes the whole wages-fund among the
whole labouring population; if law or opinion succeeds
in fixing wages above this rate, some labourers are kept
out of employment; and as it is not the intention of
the philanthropists that these should starve, they must be
provided for by a forced increase of the wages-fund; bya
compulsory saving. It is nothing to fix a minimum of
wages, unless there be a provision that work, or wages at
least, be found for all who apply for it. This, accordingly,
is always part of the scheme; and is consistent with the
ideas of more people than would approve of either a legal or
a moral minimum of wages. Popular sentiment looks upon
it as the duty of the rich, or of the state, to find employment
for all the poor. If the moral influence of opinion does
not induce the rich to spare from their consumption enough
to set all the poor to work at “reasonable wages,” it is sup-
posed to be incumbent on the state to lay on taxes for the
purpose, either by local rates or votes of public money. The
proportion between labour and the wages-fund would thus be
modified to the advantage of the labourers, not by restriction
of population, but by an increase of capital.


§ 2. If this claim on society could be limited to the
existing generation; if nothing more were necessary than 4
compulsory accumulation, sufficient to provide permanent
employment at ample wages for the existing numbers of the
people; such a proposition would have no more strenuous
supporter than myself. Society mainly consists of those
who live by bodily labour; and if society, that is, if the
labourers, lend their physical force to protect individuals in
the enjoyment of superfiuities, they are entitled to do so; and
have always done so, with the reservation of a power to tax


POPULAR REMEDIES FOR LOW WAGES. 427


those superfluities for purposes of public utility; among which
purposes the subsistence of the people is the foremost.
Since no one is responsible for having been born, no pecu-
niary sacrifice is too great to be made by those who have
more than enough, for the purpose of securing enough to all
persons already in existence.

But it is another thing altogether, when those who have
produced and accumulated are called upon to abstain from
consuming until they have given food and clothing, not only
to all who now exist, but to all whom these or their descen- i
dants may think fit to call into existence. Such an obligation
acknowledged and acted upon, would suspend all checks, both
positive and preventive; there would be nothing to hinder
population from starting forward at its rapidest rate; and as the
natural increase of capital would, at the best, not be more
rapid than before, taxation, to make up the growing deficiency,
must advance with the same gigantic strides. The attempt
would of course be made to exact labour in exchange for
Support. But experience has shewn the sort of work to be
expected from recipients of public charity. When the pay
is not given for the sake of the work, but the work found for
the sake of the pay, inefficiency is a matter of certainty: to
extract real work from day-labourers without the power of
dismissal, is only practicable by the power of the lash. But


let them work ever so efficiently, the increasing population
could not, as we have so often shewn, increase the produce
proportionally: the surplus after all were fed, would bear a
less and less proportion to the whole produce and to the
population: and the increase of people going on in a constant
ratio, while the increase of produce went on in a diminishing .
ratio, the surplus would in time be wholly absorbed ; taxation i}
for the support of the poor would engross the whole income }
of the country;the payers and the receivers would be Ht
melted down into one mass. The check to population either
by death or prudence, could not then be staved off any 1)
longer, but must come into operation suddenly and at once; i}


428 BOOK II. CHAPTER xiI. § 2.


everything which places mankind above a nest of ants ora
colony of beavers, having perished in the interval.

These consequences have been so often and so clearly
pointed out by celebrated authors, in writings known and
accessible, that ignorance of them on the part of educated
persons is no longer pardonable. It is doubly discreditable
im any person setting up for a public teacher, to ignore these
considerations; to dismiss them silently, and discuss or de-
claim on wages and poor-laws, not as if these arguments
ig could be refuted, but as if they did not exist. Yet such has «
fi been the tone of popular and newspaper discussion for some
years past.
Ha Every one has a right to live. We will suppose this
granted. But no one has a right to bring creatures into
life, to be supported by other people. Whoever means
HI to stand upon the first of these rights must renounce all
eit peel | pretension to the last. If a man cannot support even

be Pa ee | himself unless others help him, those others are entitled
sae HL to say that they do not also undertake the support of all the
offspring which it is physically possible for him to sum-
Rr d| mon into the world. Yet there are abundance of Wnluels
Sil i and public speakers, including many of most ostentatious
pretensions to high feeling, whose views of life are so truly
ie hal brutish, that they see hardship in preventing paupers from
‘at breeding hereditary paupers in the very workhouse itself.

AER Posterity will one day ask with astonishment, what sort of
er H Miy people it could be among whom such preachers could find

. proselytes.

It is conceivable that the state might guarantee em-
ployment at ample wages to all who are born. But if it
“Hf does this, it is bound in self-protection, and for the sake
of every purpose for which government exists, to provide


that no person shall be born without its consent. If the
ordinary and natural motives to self-


others must be substituted,


Way


restraint are removed,
Restrictions on marriage, at
least equivalent to those existing in some of the German


POPULAR REMEDIES FOR LOW WAGES. 429


States, or severe penalties on those who have children when
unable to support them, would then be indispensable. So-
ciety may feed the necessitous, if it takes their multiplication
under its control; or it may leave the last to their discretion,
if it abandons the first to their own care. But it cannot
take half of the one course, and half of the other. Let it
choose that, which circumstances or the public sentiment
render most expedient. But it cannot with impunity take
the feeding upon itself, and leave the multiplying free.

To give profusely to the people, whether under the name
of charity or of employment, without placing them under such
influences that prudential motives shall act powerfully upon
them, is to lavish the means of benefitting mankind, without
attaming the object. eave the people in a situation in
which their condition manifestly depends upon their num-
bers, and the greatest permanent benefit may be derived
from any sacrifice made to improve the physical well-being
of the present generation, and raise, by that means, the
habits of their children. But remove the regulation of their
wages from their own control; guarantee them a certain
payment, either by law, or by the feeling of the community ;
and no amount of comfort that you can give them will make
either them or their descendants look to their own self-
restraint as the proper means for preserving them in that
state. You will only make them indignantly claim the con-
tinuance of your guarantee, to themselves and their full
complement of possible posterity.

On these grounds some writers have altogether con-
demned the English poor-law, and any system of relief to the
able-bodied, at least when uncombined with systematic legal
precautions against over-population. The famous Act of
43 Elizabeth undertakes, on the part of the public, to pro-
vide work and wages for all the destitute able-bodied: and
there is little doubt that if the intent of that Act had been
fully carried out, and no means had been adopted by the
administrators of relief to neutralize its natural tendencies,


ae


as


TST tp Si AT


Sateen ee da aca ee


TOT


> .
Mette


ETS


430 BOOK II. CHAPTER XII. § 2.


the poor rate would by this time have absorbed the whole
net produce of the land and labour of the country. It is
not at all surprising, therefore, that Mr. Malthus and others
should at first have concluded against all poor-laws whatever.
It required much experience and careful examination of dif ,
ferent modes of poor-law management, to give assurance that
the admission of an absolute right to be supported at the
cost of other people, could exist in law and in fact, without
fatally relaxing the springs of industry and the restraints of
prudence. This, however, was fully substantiated, by the
investigations of the original Poor Law Commissioners.
Hostile as they are unjustly accused of being to the principle
of legal relief, they are the first who fully proved the compa-
tibility of any Poor Law, in which a right to relief was
recognized, with the permanent interests of the labouring
class and of posterity. By acollation of facts, experimen-
tally ascertained in parishes scattered throughout England,
it was shown that the guarantee of support could be freed
from its injurious effects upon the minds and habits of the
people; if the relief, though ample in respect to necessaries,
was accompanied with conditions which they disliked, con-
sisting of some restraints on their freedom, and the privation
of certain indulgences. Under this proviso, it may be
regarded as irrevocably established, that the fate of no mem-
ber of the community needs be abandoned to chance; that
society can and therefore ought to ensure every individual
belonging to it against the extreme of want; that the condi-
tion even of those on the lowest step of the social ladder,
needs not be one of physical suffering, or the dread of it,
but only of restricted indulgence, and enforced rigidity of
discipline. This is surely something gained for humanity;
important in itself, and still more so asa step to something
beyond; and humanity has no worse enemies than those
who lend themselves, either knowingly or unintentionally, to
bring odium on this law, or on the principles in which it
originated.


POPULAR REMEDIES FOR LOW WAGES. 431


§ 3. Next to the attempts to regulate wages, and provide
artificially that all who are willing to work shall receive an
adequate price for their labour, we have to consider another
class of popular remedies, which do not profess to interfere
with freedom of contract; which allow wages to be what the
competition of the market makes them, but, when they are
considered insufficient, endeavour by some subsidiary resource
to make up to the labourers for the insufficiency, Of this
nature was the expedient resorted to by parish authorities dur-
ing thirty or forty years previous to 1834, generally known
as the Allowance System. This was first introduced, when,
through a succession of bad seasons, and consequent high
prices of food, the wages of labour had become imadequate
to afford to the families of the agricultural labourers the
degree of support to which they had been accustomed.
Sentiments of humanity, joined with the idea then inculcated
in high quarters, that people ought not to be allowed to
suffer for having enriched their country with a multitude of
inhabitants, induced the magistrates of the rural districts to
commence giving parish relief to persons already in private
employment: and when the practice had once been sanc-
tioned, the immediate interests of the farmers, whom it
enabled,to throw part of the support of their labourers upon
the other inhabitants of the parish, led to a great and rapid
extension of it. The principle of this scheme bemg avowedly
that of adapting the means of every family to its necessities,

. it was a natural corollary that more should be given to the
married than to the single, and to those who had large fami-
lies than to those who had not: in fact, an allowance was
usually granted for every child. So direct and positive an
encouragement to population is not, however, inseparable
from the scheme: the allowance in aid of wages might be a
fixed thing, given to all labourers alike, and as this is the
least objectionable form which the system can assume, we
will give it the benefit of the supposition.

It is obvious that this is merely another mode of fixing a


raat


SP) 0 ea ee


432 BOOK Il. CHAPTER XII. $ 3.


minimum of wages, no otherwise differing from the direct
mode, than in allowing the employer to buy the labour at its
market price, the difference being made up to the labourer
from a public funds The one kind of guarantee is open to
all the objections which have been urged against the other.
It promises to the labourers that they shall all have a certain
amount of wages, however numerous they may be: and
removes, therefore, alike the positive and the prudential
obstacles to an unlimited increase. But besides the objec-
tions common to all attempts to regulate wages without
regulating population, the allowance system has a peculiar
absurdity of its own. This is, that it inevitably takes from
wages with one hand what it adds to them with the other.
There is a rate of wages, either the lowest on which the
people can, or the lowest on which they will consent, to live.
We will suppose this to be seven shillings a week. Shocked
at the wretchedness of this pittance, the parish authorities
humanely make it up to ten. But the labourers are accus-
tomed to seven, and though they would gladly have more,
will live on that (as the fact proves) rather than restrain the
instinct of multiplication. Their habits will not be altered
for the better by giving them parish pay. Receiving three
shillings from the parish, they will be as well off as before
though they should increase sufficiently to bring down wages
to four shillings. They will accordingly people down to that
point; or perhaps, without waiting for an increase of num-
bers, there are unemployed labourers enough in the work-
house to produce the effect at once. It is well known that
the allowance system did practically operate in the mode
described, and that under its influence wages sank to a lower
rate than had been known in England before. During the last
century, under a rather rigid administration of the poor laws,
population increased slowly, and agricultural wages were
considerably above the starvation point. Under the allow-
ance system the people increased so fast, and wages sunk so
low, that with wages and allowance together, families were


POPULAR REMEDIES FOR LOW WAGES. 433


worse off than they had been before with wages alone. When
the labourer depends solely on wages, there is an absolute
minimum. Anything less than what will absolutely support
him he will not take, for if he is to starve, he may as well do
so without working as with it. But if the deficiency is to be
made up bya forced contribution from all who have anything
to give, wages may fall below starvation point; they may fall
almost to zero. This deplorable system, worse than any
other form of poor law abuse yet invented, inasmuch as it
pauperizes not merely the unemployed part of the popula-
tion but the whole, has now been abolished, and of this one
abuse at least it may be said that nobody professes to wish for
itsrevival, Even the agitators against the New Poor Law have
hitherto stopped short of patronizing the Allowance System.


§ 4. But while this is (it is to be hoped) exploded, there
is another mode of relief in aid of wages, which is at the
height of popularity; a mode greatly preferable, morally
and socially, to parish allowance, but tending, it is to be
feared, to a very similar economical result: I mean the much
boasted Allotment System. This, too, is a contrivance to
compensate the labourer for the insufficiency of his wages,
by giving him something else as a supplement to them: but
instead of having them made up from the poor rate, he is
enabled to make them up for himself, by renting a small
piece of ground, which he cultivates like a garden by spade
labour, raising potatoes and other vegetables for home con-
sumption, with perhaps some additional quantity for sale.
If he hires the ground ready manured, he sometimes pays for
it at as Ingh a rate as eight pounds an acre: but getting his
own labour and that of his family for nothing, he is able to
gain several pounds by it even at so high a rent*. The
patrons of the system make it a great point that the allot-


* See the Evidence on the subject of Allotments, collected by the Com-
missioners of Poor Law Enquiry.
VOL. I.


op


onetime ieee


Tester


t
is
i
t

|

}
bi


434 BOOK II. CHAPTER XII. § 4.


ment shall be in aid of wages, and not a substitute for them;
that it shall not be such as a labourer can live on, but only
sufficient to occupy the spare hours and days of a man in
tolerably regular agricultural employment, with assistance
from his wife and children. They usually limit the extent
of a single allotment to a quarter, or something between a
quarter and half an acre. If it exceeds this, without being
enough to occupy him entirely, it will make him, they say, @
bad and uncertain workman for hire: if it is sufficient to
take him entirely out of the class of hired labourers, and to
become his sole means of subsistence, it will make him an
Irish cottier; for which assertion, at the enormous rents
usually demanded, there is some foundation. But in their
precautions against cottierism, these well-meaning persons
do not perceive, that if the system they patronize is not a
cottier system, it is, in essentials, neither more nor less than a
system of conacre.

There is no doubt a material difference between eking
out insufficient wages by a fund raised by taxation, and doing
the same thing by means which make a clear addition to the
gross produce of the country. There is also a difference
between helping a labourer by means of his own industry,
and subsidizing him in a mode which tends to make him
careless and idle. On both these points, allotments have
an unquestionable advantage over parish allowances. But in
their effect on wages and population, I see no reason why
the two plans should substantially differ. All subsidies m
aid of wages enable the labourer to do with less remuneration,
and therefore ultimately bring down the price of labour by
the full amount, unless a change be wrought in the ideas and
requirements of the labourer; an alteration in the relative
value which he sets upon the gratification of his instincts, and
upon the increase of his comforts and the comforts of those
connected with him.” That any such change in his character
should be produced by the allotment system, appears to me a
thing not to be expected. The possession of land, we are


POPULAR REMEDIES FOR LOW WAGES. 435


sometimes told, renders the labourer provident. Property in
land does so; or what is equivalent to property, occupation
on fixed terms and on a permanent tenure. But mere hiring
from year to year was never found to have any such effect.
Does possession of land render the Irishman provident ?
Testimonies, it is true, abound, and I do not seek to
discredit them, of the beneficial change produced in the
conduct and condition of labourers, by receiving allot-
ments. Such an effect is to be expected while those who
hold them are a small number; a privileged class, haying a
Status above the common level, which they are unwilling to
lose. They are also, no doubt, almost always, originally a
select class, composed of the most favourable specimens of
the labouring people: which, however, is attended with the
mconyenience that the persons to whom the system facilitates
marrying and having a family, are precisely those who would
otherwise be the most likely to practise prudential restraint.
As affecting the general condition of the labouring class, the
scheme, as it seems to me, must be either nugatory or mis-
chievous. If only a few labourers have allotments, they are
naturally those who could do best without them, and no
good is done to the class: while, if the system were general,
and every or almost every labourer had an allotment, I
believe the effect would be much the same as when every
or almost every labourer had an allowance in aid of wages.
I think there can be no doubt that if, at the end of the last
century, the Allotment instead of the Allowance system had
been generally adopted in England, it would equally have
broken down the practical restraints on population which at
that time did really exist; population would have started
forward exactly as in fact it did; and in twenty years, wages
plus the allotment would have been, as wages plus the allow-
ance actually were, no more than equal to the former wages
without any allotment. The only difference in favour of
allotments would have been, that they make the people grow


their own poor rates.


436 BOOK Il. CNAPTER xi. § 4.


I am at the same time quite ready to allow, that in some
circumstances, the possession of land at a fair rent, even with-
out ownership, by the generality of labourers for hire,
operates as a cause not of low, but of high wages. This,
however, is when their land renders them, to the extent of
actual necessaries, independent of the market for labour.
There is the greatest difference between the position of people
who live by wages, with land as an extra resource, and of
people who can, in case of necessity, subsist entirely on their
land, and only work for hire to add to their comforts. Wages
are likely to be high where none are compelled by necessity
to sell their labour. “ People who have at home some kind
of property to apply their labour to, will not sell their labour
for wages that do not afford them a better diet than potatoes
and maize, although in saving for themselves. they may live
very much on potatoes and maize. We are often surprised
in travelling on the Continent, to hear of a rate of day’s
wages very high, considering the abundance and cheapness
of food. It is want of the necessity or inclination to take
work, that makes day labour scarce, and, considering the
price of provisions, dear, in many parts of the Continent,
where property in land is widely diffused among the people.”
Thus says Mr. Laing*, and his remark is certainly just.
There are parts of the Continent where, even of the inha-
bitants of the towns, scarcely one seems to be exclusively
dependent on his ostensible employment ; and nothing else
can explain the high price they put on their services, and the
carelessness they evince as to whether they are employed at
all. But the effect would be far different if their land ot
other resources gave them only a fraction of a subsistence,
leaving them under an undiminished necessity of selling their
labour for wages in an overstocked market. Their land
would then merely enable them to exist on smaller wages
and to carry their multiplication so much the further before


* Notes of a Traveller, p. 456.


POPULAR REMEDIES FOR LOW WAGES. 437


teaching the point below which they either could not, or
would not, descend.

To the view I have taken of the effect of allotments, I
See no argument which can be opposed, but that employed
by Mr. Thornton *, with whom on this subject I am at issue.
His defence of allotments is grounded on the general prin-
ciple, that it is only the very poor who multiply without
Tegard to consequences, and that if the condition of the
existing generation could be greatly improved, which he
thinks might be done by the allotment system, their succes-
sors would grow up with an increased standard of require-
ments, and would not have families until they could keep
them in as much comfort as they had been brought up them-
selves. Tagreein as much of this argument as goes to prove
that a sudden and very great improvement in the condition
of the poor, has always, through its effect on their habits of
life, a chance of becoming permanent. What happened at the
time of the French Revolution is an example.. But I cannot
think that the addition of a quarter or even half an acre to
every labourer’s cottage, and that too at a rack rent, would
(after the fall of wages which would be necessary to absorb
the already existing mass of pauper labour) make so great a
difference in the comforts of the family for a generation to
come, as to raise up from childhood a labouring population
with a really higher permanent standard of requirements and
habits. So small a portion of land could only be made a
permanent benefit, by holding out encouragements to acquire
by industry and saving, the means of buying it outright: a
permission which, if extensively made use of, would be a
kind of education in forethought and frugality to the entire
class, the effects of which might not cease with the occasion.
The benefit would however arise not from what was given,


but from what they were stimulated to acquire.
No remedies for low wages have the smallest chance of


* See Thornton on Over-Population, ch. viii.


pasate. Saeelitipae eee


arena


438 BOOK IJ. CHAPTER XII. § 4.


being efficacious, which do not operate on and through the
minds and habits of the people. While these are unaffected,
any contrivance, even if successful, for temporarily improving
the condition of the very poor, would but let slip the reins
by which population was previously curbed; and could only,
therefore, continue to produce its effect, if, by the whip and
spur of taxation, capital were compelled to follow at an
equally accelerated pace. But this process could not possibly
continue for long together, and whenever it stopped it would
leave the country with an increased number of the poorest
class, and a diminished proportion of all except the poorest,
or, if it continued long enough, with none at all. For “to
this complexion must come at last” all social arrangements,
which remove the natural checks to population without sub-
stituting any others.


CHAPTER XIII.


THE REMEDIES FOR LOW WAGES FURTHER CONSIDERED.


§1. By what means, then, is poverty to be contended
against? How is the evil.of low wages to be remedied? If
the expedients usually recommended for the purpose are not
adapted to it, can no others be thought of? Is the problem
incapable of solution? Can political economy do nothing,
but only object to everything, and demonstrate that nothing
can be done?

If this were so, political economy might have a needful,
but would have a melancholy, and a thankless task. If the
bulk of the human race are always to remain as at present,
slaves to toil in which they have no interest, and therefore feel
no interest—drudging from early morning till late at night
for bare necessaries, and with all the intellectual and moral
deficiencies which that implies—without resources either in
mind or feelings—untaught, for they cannot be better taught
than fed ; selfish, for all their thoughts are required for them-
selves; without interests or sentiments as citizens and mem-
bers of society, and with a sense of injustice rankling in their
minds, equally for what they have not, and for what others
have; I know not what there is which should make a person
with any capacity of reason, concern himself about the des-
tinies of the human race. There would be no wisdom for any
one but in extracting from life, with Epicurean indifference,
as much personal satisfaction for himself and those with whom
he sympathizes, as it can yield without injury to any one, and
letting the unmeaning bustle of so-called civilized existence


roll by unheeded, But there is no ground for such a view


of human affairs. Poverty, like most social evils, exists


because men follow their brute instincts without due consi-


=a


440 ; BOOK II. CHAPTER X1II. § 1.


deration. But society is possible, precisely because man is
not necessarily a brute. Civilization in every one of its
aspects is a struggle against the animal instincts. Over some
even of the strongest of them, it has shewn itself capable of
acquiring abundant control. It has artificialized large por-
tions of mankind to such an extent, that of many of their
most natural inclinations they have scarcely a vestige or a
remembrance left. If it has not brought the instinct of
population under as much restraint as is needful, we must
remember that it has never seriously tried. What efforts it
has made, have mostly been in the contrary direction.
Religion, morality, and statesmanship have vied with one
another in incitements to marriage, and to the multiplication
of the species, so it be but in wedlock. Religion has not
even yet discontinued its encouragements. The Roman
Catholic clergy (of any other clergy it is unnecessary to
speak, since no other have any considerable influence over
the poorer classes) everywhere think it their duty to promote
marriage, in order to prevent fornication. There is still in
many minds a strong religious prejudice against the true
doctrine. The rich, provided the consequences do not touch
themselves, think it impugns the wisdom of Providence to
suppose that misery can result from the operation of a natural
propensity : the poor think that “God never sends mouths
but he sends meat.” No one would guess from the language
of either, that man had any voice or choice in the matter.
So complete is the confusion of ideas on the whole subject;
owing in a great degree to the mystery in which it 1s shrouded
by a spurious delicacy, which prefers that right and wrong
should be mismeasured and confounded on one of the sub-
jects most momentous to human welfare, rather than that the
subject should be freely spoken of and discussed. People
are little aware of the cost to mankind of this scrupulosity of
speech. The diseases of society can, no more than corporal
maladies, be prevented or cured without being spoken about
in plain language. All experience shews that the mass of


REMEDIES FOR LOW WAGES. 44]


mankind never judge of moral questions for themselves,
never see anything to be right or wrong until they have been
frequently told it ;and who tells them that they have any duties
in the matter in question, while they keep within matrimo-
nial limits? Who meets with the smallest condemnation, or
rather, who does not meet with sympathy and benevolence, for
any amount of evil which he may have brought upon himself
and those dependent on him, by this species of incontinence?
While a man who is intemperate in drink, is discountenanced
and despised by all who profess to be moral people, is it not
to this hour the favourite recommendation for any parochial
office bestowed by popular election, to have a large family and
to be unable to maintain them? Do not the candidates
placard their intemperance on walls, and publish it through
the town in circulars?

One cannot wonder that silence on this great department
of human duty should produce unconsciousness of moral
obligations, when it produces oblivion of physical facts.
That it‘is possible to delay marriage, and to live in abstinence
while unmarried, most people are willing to allow; but when
persons are once married, the idea, in this country, never
seems to enter any one’s mind that haying or not haying a
family, or the number of which it shall consist, is at all
amenable to their own control. One would imagine that
children were rained down upon married people, direct from
heaven, without their being art or part in the matter; that it
was really, as the common phrases have it, God’s will, and
not their own, which decided the numbers of their offspring.
Let us see what is a Continental philosopher’s opinion on
this point; a man among the most benevolent of his time,
and the happiness of whose married life has been cele-
brated.

«“ Lorsque des préjugés dangereux,” says Sismondi ogee
sont point accrédités, lorsqu’une morale contraire a nos vrais


* Nouveaue Principes, liv. vil. ch. 5,


theyre:


sn Yvan ae
eae Y= SITS Vive ane Per ace


Seat ae Se


ow *
PM Hate paint a


SEMPER RSET S FC-8


4492 BOOK Il. CHAPTER XIII. § 2.


devoirs envers les autres et surtout envers les créatures qui
nous doivent la vie, n’est point enseignée au nom de lauto-
rité la plus sacrée, aucun homme sage ne se marie avant de
se trouver dans une condition qui lui donne un moyen assure
de vivre; aucun pére de famille n’a plus d’enfans qu'il n’en
peut convenablement élever. Ce dernier compte a bon droit
que ses enfans devront se contenter du sort dans lequel il a
vécu; aussi doit-il désirer que la génération naissante repré-
sente exactement celle qui s’en va; qu’un fils et une fille
arrivés a Page nubile remplacent son pére et sa mere; que
les enfans de ses enfans le remplacent a son tour avec sa
femme; que sa fille trouve dans une autre maison, précisé-
ment le sort qu’il donnera a la fille d’une autre maison dans
la sienne, et que le revenu qui suffisait aux péres suffise aux
enfans.” In a country increasing in wealth something more
than this would be allowable, but that is a question of detail,
not of principle. “Une fois que cette famille est formee, la
justice et Phumanité exigent qu'il s’impose la méme con-
trainte 4 laquelle se soumettent les célibataires. Lorsqu’on
voit combien est petit, en tout pays, le nombre des enfans
naturels, on doit reconnaitre que cette contrainte est suffisam-
ment efficace. Dans un pays ot la population ne peut pas
s’accroitre, ou du moins dans lequel son progrés doit étre si
lent qu’il soit 4 peine perceptible, quand il n’y a point de
places nouvelles pour de nouveaux établissemens, un pére qui
a huit enfans doit compter, ou que six de ses enfans mourront
en bas Age, ou que trois de ses contemporains et trois de ses
contemporaines, et dans la génération suivante, trois de ses
fils et trois de ses filles ne se marieront pas a cause de lui.”


§ 2. Those who think it hopeless that the labouring
classes should be induced to practise a sufficient degree of
prudence in regard to the increase of their families, because
they have hitherto stopt short of that point, show an inability
to estimate the ordinary principles of human action. Nothing
more would probably be necessary to secure that result, than


REMEDIES FOR LOW WAGES. 443


an opinion generally diffused that it was desirable. As a
moral principle, such an opinion has never yet existed in any
country: it is curious that it does not so exist in countries in
which, from the spontaneous operation of individual fore-
thought, population is, comparatively speaking, efficiently
repressed. What is practised as prudence, is still not recog-
nized as duty; the talkers and writers are mostly on the
other side, even in France, where a sentimental horror of
Malthus is almost as rife as in this country. Many causes
may be assigned, besides the modern date of the doctrine,
for its not having yet gained possession of the general
mind. Its truth has, in some respects, been its detriment.
One may be permitted to doubt whether, except among the
poor themselves (for whose prejudices on this subject there
is no difficulty in accounting) there has ever yet been, in any
class of society, a sincere and earnest desire that wages should
be high. There has been plenty of desire to keep down the
poor rate; but, that done, ‘people have been very willing
that the working classes should be ill off. Nearly all who
are not labourers themselves, are employers of labour, and
are not sorry to get the commodity cheap. It is a fact, that
even Boards of Guardians, who are supposed to be official
apostles of anti-population doctrines, will seldom hear
patiently of anything which they are pleased to designate as
Malthusianism. Boards of Guardians principally consist of
farmers, and farmers, it is well known, in general dislike even
allotments, as making the labourers “too independent.”
From the gentry, who are in less immediate contact and

collision of interest with the labourers, better things might be

expected, and the gentry of England are usually charitable.

But charitable people have human infirmities, and would,

very often, be secretly not a little dissatisfied if no one needed

their charity: it is from them one oftenest hears the base

doctrine, that God has decreed there shall always be poor.


When one adds to this, that nearly every person who has had
in him any active spring of exertion for a social object, has
a


Fateh Vee ae SESS


iy
at
a


ser)


Wiliams see:


444 BOOK II. CHAPTER XIII. $ 2.


had some favourite reform to effect, which he thought the
admission of this great principle would throw into the shade;
has had corn laws to repeal, or taxation to reduce, or small
notes to issue, or the charter to carry, or the church and the
aristocracy to pull down, and looked upon every one as an
enemy who thought anything important except his object; it
is scarcely wonderful that since the population doctrine was
first promulgated, nine-tenths of the talk has always been
against it, and the remaining tenth only audible at intervals;
and that it has not yet penetrated far among those who
might be expected to be the least willing recipients of it, the
labourers themselves.

But let us try to imagine what would happen if the
idea became general among the labouring class, that the
competition of too great numbers was the principal cause
of their poverty; so that every labourer looked (with Sis-
mondi) upon every other who had more than the number of
children which the circumstances of society allowed to each,
as doing him a wrong—as fillg up the place which he was
entitled to share—as helping to prevent him from having
the number of children who would not be a burthen but an
advantage to him. Any one who supposes that this state of
opinion would not have a great effect on conduct, must be
profoundly ignorant of human nature; can never haye con-
sidered how large a portion of the motives which induce the
generality of men to take care even of their own interest, is
derived from regard for opinion—from the expectation of
being disliked or despised for not doing it. We are often
told that the most thorough perception of the dependence of
wages on population will not influence the conduct of @
labouring man, because it is not the children he himself
can have that will produce any effect in generally depressing
the labour market. True: and it is also true, that one
soldier’s running away will not lose the b
is not that consideration which keeps e
it is the disgrace which natur


attle ; accordingly it
ach soldier in his rank:
ally and inevitably attends on


REMEDIES FOR LOW WAGBS. 445


conduct by any one individual, which if pursued by a
majority, everybody can see would be fatal. Men are seldom
found to brave the general opinion of their class, unless sup-
ported either by some principle higher than regard for
opinion, or by some strong body of opinion elsewhere.

It must be borne in mind also, that the opinion here in
question, as soon as it attained any prevalence, would have
powerful auxiliaries in the great majority of women. It is
never by the choice of the wife that families are too nume-
rous; on her devolves (along with all the physical suffering
and at least a full share of the privations) the whole of the
intolerable domestic drudgery resulting from the excess. To
be relieved from it would be hailed as a blessing by multitudes
of women who now never venture to urge such a claim, but
who would urge it, if supported by the moral feelings of the
community. Among the barbarisms which law and morals
have not yet ceased to sanction, the most disgusting surely is,
that any human being should be permitted to consider him-
self as having a right to the person of another.

If the opinion were once generally established among the
labouring class, that their welfare required a due regulation
of the numbers of families, the respectable and well-con-
ducted of the body would conform to the prescription, and
only those would exempt themselves from it, who were in
the habit of making light of social obligations generally ; and
it is then that a justification would exist for converting the
moral obligation against bringing children into the world who


are a burthen to the community, into a legal one; just as in


many other cases of the progress of opinion, the law ends


by enforcing against recalcitrant minorities, obligations which
to be useful must be general, and which, from a sense of
large majority have voluntarily consented to


their utility, a :
Whether a legal sanction would


take upon themselves.
be ultimately required, or moral sanctions, and the indirect


influence of law and policy, would suffice—and if legal mea-
sures were necessary, of what nature it would be advanta-


coe


446 BOOK II. CHAPTER XIIl, § 2.


geous that they should be, it would be premature, in the
present state of the question, to discuss *.

The prospects, then, of the existing system of society,
depend upon this: What chance is there that opinions and
feelings, grounded on the law of the dependence of wages
on population, will arise among the labouring classes? and
by what means can such opinions and feelings be called
forth? Before considering the grounds of hope on this sub-
ject, a hope which many persons, no doubt, will be ready
without consideration to pronounce chimerical, I will remark,
that on the possibility of making a satisfactory answer to
these two questions, depends the acquittal or the condemna-
tion of the industrial system prevailing in this country, and
regarded by many writers as the ne plus ultra of civilization
—the permanent dependence of the whole labouring class of
the community on the wages of hired labour. The question
we are considering is, whether, of this state of things, ovel-
population and a degraded condition of the labouring class
are the inevitable consequence. If a prudent regulation of
population were not reconcilable with the system of hired
labour, the conclusion would be that the system is a nuisance,
and that the grand object of economical statesmanship should
be, (by whatever arrangements of property and alterations
the modes of applying industry) to bring the labouring people
under the influence of stronger and more obvious induce-
ments to this kind of prudence, than the relation of work-
men and employers could afford.

There is, however, no such incompatibility. -The causes
of poverty are not so obvious at first sight to a population of


% : : ‘
Although, in this place, where the subject under discussion is the

CAUSES and);ramedies of low wages, the question of population is treated

chiefly as _a labourer’s question, the principle contended for includes not


only the labouring classes, but all persons, except the fe


i ir offspri w who being able
to give to their offspring


the means of independent support during the


whole of life, do not leave them to swell the competition for employ-
ment.


REMEDIES FOR LOW WAGES, 447


hired labourers, as to one of proprietors, but they are in no
way mysterious. ‘The dependence of wages on the number
of the competitors for employment, is so far from hard of
comprehension, or unintelligible to the labouring classes, that
by great bodies of them it is already recognized and habi-
tually acted on. It is familiar to all Trades Unions: every
successful combination to keep up wages, owes its success to
contrivances for restricting the number of the competitors ;
all skilled trades are anxious to keep down their own num-
bers, and many impose, or endeavour to impose, as a condi-
tion upon employers, that they shall not take more than a
prescribed number of apprentices. There is, of course, a
great difference between limiting their numbers by excluding
other people, and doing the same thing by a restraint imposed
on themselves ; but the one as much as the other shows a clear
, Perception of the relation between their numbers and their
remuneration. The principle is understood in its application
to any one employment, but not to the general mass of
employment. For this there are several reasons: first, the
operation of causes is more easily and distinctly seen in the
more circumscribed field: secondly, skilled artisans are a
more intelligent class than ordinary manual labourers ; and
the habit of concert, and of passing in review their general
condition as a trade, keeps up a better understanding of their
collective interests: thirdly and lastly, they are the most
provident, because they are the best off, and have the most
to preserve. What, however, is clearly perceived and ad-
mitted in particular mstances, it cannot be hopeless to see
understood and acknowledged as a general truth. Its recog-
nition, at least in theory, seems a thing which must neces-
sarily and immediately come to pass, when the minds of the
labouring classes become capable of taking any rational view


of their own aggregate condition. Of this the majority of


them have until now been incapable, either from the unculti-


vated state of their intelligence, or from poverty, which
leaving them neither the fear of worse, nor the smallest hope


oe
gt
ae


448 BOOK Il. CHAPTER XIII. § 3.


of better, makes them careless of the consequences of their
actions, and without thought for the future.


§ 3. For the purpose therefore of altering the habits of
the labouring people, there is need of a twofold action,
directed simultaneously upon their intelligence and their
poverty. An effective national education of the children of
the labouring class, is the first thing needful ; and, coinci-
dently with this, a system of measures which shall (as the
Revolution did in France) extinguish extreme poverty for
one whole generation.

This is not the place for discussing, even in the most
general manner, either the principles or the machinery of
National Education. Of the little which is fit to be said on
such a subject in a treatise like the present, the smallest
portion only can be alluded to in this part of it. But it is to
be hoped that opinion on the subject is advancing, and that
an education of mere words would not now satisfy us, slow
as our progress is towards giving anything better even to
those for whom we profess to do our very best. Without
entering into disputable points, it may be asserted without
scruple, that the aim of all intellectual training for the mass
of the people, should be to cultivate common sense; to qua-
lify them for forming a sound practical judgment of the cir-
cumstances by which they are surrounded. Whatever, in the
intellectual department, can be superadded to this, is chiefly


ornamental; while this is the indispensable groundwork on -


which education must rest. Let this object be acknowledged
and kept in view as the thing to be first aimed at, and there
will be little difficulty in deciding either what to teach, or 1n
what manner to teach it.

An education directed to diffuse good sense among the
people, with such knowledge as would qualify them to judge
of the tendencies of their actions, would be certain, even
without any direct inculcation, to raise up a public opinion
by which intemperance and improvidence of every kind


REMEDIES FOR LOW WAGES. 449


would be held discreditable, and the improvidence which
overstocks the labour market would be severely _con~
demned, as an offence agdinst the common weal. But though
the sufficiency of such a state of opinion, supposing it
formed, to keep the increase of population within proper
limits, cannot, I think, be doubted ; yet for the formation of
the opinion, it would not do to trust to education alone.
Education is not compatible with extreme poverty. It is
impossible effectually to teach an indigent population. And
it is difficult to make those feel the value of comfort who
have never enjoyed it, or those appreciate the wretchedness
of a precarious subsistence, who have been made reckless, by
always living from hand to mouth. Individuals often struggle
upwards into a condition of ease; but the utmost that can
be expected from a whole people is to maintain themselves
in it; and improvement in the habits and requirements of the
Mass of unskilled day-labourers will be difficult and tardy,
unless means can be contrived of raising the entire body to a
State of tolerable comfort, and maintaining them in it until a
new generation grows up.

Towards effecting this object there are two resources
available, without wrong to any one, without any of the
liabilities of mischief attendant on voluntary or legal charity,
and not only without weakening, but on the contrary strength-
ening, every incentive to industry and every motive to fore-
thought.


§ 4. The first is, a great national measure of colonization.
I mean, a grant of public money, sufficient to remove at
once, and establish in the colonies, a considerable fraction of
the youthful agricultural population. By giving the prefer-
ence, as Mr. Wakefield proposes, to young couples, or when
these cannot be obtained, to families with children nearly
grown up, the expenditure would be made to go the farthest
possible towards accomplishing the end, while the colonies


would be supplied with the greatest amount of what is there


26
VOL. I.


restroom


a es


rT Fy


igh SK % Siapepaartget we rome ms 2 ieee
= hemes 6: n <P fis eR eS Ty


450 BOOK II. CHAPTER XIII. § 4.


in deficiency, and here in superfluity, present and prospective
labour. It has been shown by others, and the grounds of
the opinion will be exhibited in 4 subsequent chapter of
the present work, that colonization on an adequate scale
might be so conducted as to cost the country nothing, or
nothing that would not be certainly repaid; and that the
funds required, even by way of advance, would not be drawn
from the capital employed in maintaining labour, but from
that surplus which cannot find employment at such profit
as constitutes an adequate remuneration for the abstinence
of the possessor, and which is therefore sent abroad for in-
vestment, or wasted at home in reckless speculations. That
portion of the income of the country which is habitually
ineffective for any purpose of benefit to the labouring class,
would bear any draught which it could be necessary to make
on it for the amount of emigration which is here in view.
To the case of Ireland, in her present crisis of transition,
colonization, as the exclusive remedy, is, I conceive, unsuit-
able. The Irish are nearly the worst adapted people in
Europe for settlers in the wilderness: nor should the founders
of nations destined perhaps to be the most powerful in the
world, be drawn principally from the least civilized and least
improved inhabitants of old countries. It is most fortunate
therefore that the unoccupied lands of Ireland herself afford
a resource so nearly adequate to the emergency, as reduces
emigration to a rank merely subsidiary. In England and
Scotland, with a population much less excessive, and better
adapted to a settler’s life, colonization must be the chief
resource for easing the labour market, and improving the
condition of the existing generation of labourers so materially
as to raise the permanent standard of habits in the generation
following. But England too has waste lands, though less
extensive than those of Ireland; and the second resource
would be, to devote all common land, hereafter brought into
cultivation, to raising up a class of small proprietors. It has
long enough been the practice to take these lands from public


REMEDIES FOR LOW WAGES. 451


use, for the mere purpose of adding to the domains of the
Tich. It is time that what is left of them should be retained
as an estate sacred to the benefit of the poor. The machinery
for administering it already exists, having been created by
the General Inclosure Act. What I would propose (though,
I confess, with small hope of its being soon adopted) is, that
in all future cases in which common land is permitted to be
inclosed, such portion should first be sold or assigned as is
sufficient to compensate the owners of manorial or common
tights, and that the remainder should be divided into sec-
tions of five acres or thereabouts, to be conferred in
absolute property on families of the labouring class who
would reclaim and bring them into cultivation by their own
labour. The preference should be given to such families,
and there are many of them, as had saved enough to main-
tain them until their first crop was got in, or whose character
was such as to induce some responsible person to advance them
the requisite amount on their personal security. The tools,
the manure, and in some cases the subsistence also, might
be supplied by the parish, or by the state; interest for the
advance, at the rate yielded by the public funds, being laid
on as a perpetual quitrent, with power to the peasant to
redeem it at any time for a moderate number of years’ pur-
chase. These little landed estates might, if it were thought
necessary, be made indivisible by law; though, if the plan
worked in the manner designed, I should not apprehend any
objectionable degree of subdivision. In case of intestacy,
and in default of amicable arrangement among the heirs, they
might be bought by government at their value, and re-
granted to some other labouring family which could give
security for the price. The desire to possess one of these
small properties would probably become, as on the Continent,
an inducement to prudence and economy pervading the whole
labouring population ; and that great desideratum among @
people of hired labourers would be provided, an intermediate


class between them and their employers ; affording them the
= 2G2


Oto


“


at Sed inhale ao A


1 gine EES RAL Cie Sal aha Pn Se ASS
Fpl 5 er ats


+
%
t


452 BOOK IJ. CHAPTER XIII. § 4.


double advantage, of an object for their hopes, and, as there
would be good reason to anticipate, an example for their
imitation.

It would, however, be of little avail that either or both of
these measures of relief should be adopted, unless on such a
scale, as would enable the whole body of hired labourers
remaining on the soil to obtain not merely employment, but
a large addition to the present wages—such an addition as
would enable them to live. and bring up their children in a
degree of comfort and independence to which they have
hitherto been strangers. When the object is to raise the
permanent condition of a people, small means do not merely
produce small effects, they produce no effect at all. Unless
comfort can be made as habitual to a whole generation as
indigence is now, nothing is accomplished, and feeble half-
measures do but fritter away resources, far better reserved
until the improvement of public opinion and of education
shall raise up politicians who will not think that merely be-
cause a scheme promises much, the part of statesmanship 18
to have nothing to do with it,


CHAPTER XIV.


OF THE DIFFERENCES OF WAGES IN DIFFERENT
EMPLOYMENTS,


§ 1. In treating of wages, we have hitherto confined
ourselves to the causes which operate on them generally, and
en masse; the laws which govern the remuneration of ordi-
nary or average labour; without reference to the existence of
different kinds of work which are habitually paid at different
rates, depending in some degree on different laws. We
will now take into consideration these differences, and
examine in what manner they affect or are affected by the
conclusions already established.

A well known and very popular chapter of Adam Smith*
contains the best exposition yet given of this portion of the
Subject. I cannot indeed think his treatment so complete
and exhaustive as it has sometimes been considered; but as
far as it goes, his analysis is on the whole successful.

The differences, he says, arise partly from the policy of
Europe, which nowhere leaves things at perfect liberty, and
partly “from certain circumstances in the employments
themselves, which either really, or at least in the imagina-
tions of men, make up for a small pecuniary gain in some,
and counterbalance a great one in others.” These circum-
stances he considers to be: ‘First, the agreeableness or
disagreeableness of the employments themselves; secondly,
the easiness and cheapness, or the difficulty and expense of
learning them; thirdly, the constancy or inconstancy of em-
ployment in them; fourthly, the small or great trust which
must be reposed in those who exercise them ; and fifthly,
the probability or improbability of success in them.”


* Wealth of Nations, book i. ch, 10,


;
Py
|
'
ty i
i
iii
t


454 BOOK Il. CHAPTER xiv. § l.


Several of these points he has very copiously illustrated:
though his examples are sometimes drawn from a state of
facts now no longer existing. “The wages of labour vary
with the ease or hardship, the cleanliness or dirtiness, the
honourableness or dishonourableness of the employment.
Thus, in most places, take the year round, a journeyman
tailor earns less than a journeyman weaver. His work is
much easier.” Things have much altered, as toa weayer’s
remuneration, since Adam Smith’s time; and the artisan
whose work was more difficult than that of a tailor, can
never, I think, have been the common weaver. “ A journey-
man weaver earns less than a journeyman smith. His work
is not always easier, but it is much cleanlier.”? A more
probable explanation is, that it requires less bodily strength.
“ A journeyman blacksmith, though an artificer, seldom earns:
so much in twelve hours as a collier, who is only a labourer,
does in eight. His work is not quite so dirty, is less danger-
ous, and is carried on in daylight, and above ground. Honour
makes a great part of the reward of all honourable profes-
sions. In point of pecuniary gain, all things considered,”
their recompense is, in his opinion, below the average.
“Disgrace has the contrary effect. The trade of a butcher
is a brutal and an odious business; but it is in most places
more profitable than the greater part of common trades. The
most detestable of all employments, that of public execu-
tioner, is, in proportion to the quantity of work done, better
paid than any common trade whatever.”

One of the causes which make hand-loom weavers cling
to their occupation in spite of the scanty remuneration
which it now yields, is said to be a peculiar attractiveness;
arising from the freedom of action which it allows to the
workman. “ He can play or idle,” says a recent authority”;
“as feeling or inclination lead him ; rise early or late, apply


*Mr, Muggeridge’s Report to the Handloom Weavers’ Inquiry Com-
mission,


DIFFERENCES OF WAGES. 455


himself assiduously or carelessly, as he pleases, and work up
at any time, by increased exertion, hours previously sacri-
ficed to indulgence or recreation. There is scarcely another
condition of any portion of our working population thus free
from external control. The factory operative is not only
mulcted his wages for absence, but, if of frequent occurrence,
discharged altogether from his employment. The brick-
layer, the carpenter, the painter, the joiner, the stonemason,
the outdoor labourer, have each their appointed daily hours
of labour, a disregard of which would lead to the same result.”
Accordingly, “ the weaver will stand by his loom while it will
enable him to exist, however miserably ; and many, induced
temporarily to quit it, have returned to it again, when work
was to be had.”

There is no difficulty in understanding the operative
principle in all these cases. If, with complete freedom of
competition, labour of different degrees of desirableness
were paid alike, competitors would crowd into the more
attractive employments, and desert the less eligible, thus
lowering wages in the first, and raising them in the second,
until there would be such a difference of reward as to balance
in common estimation the difference of eligibility. Under
the unobstructed influence of competition, wages tend to
adjust themselves in such a manner, that the situation and
prospects of the labourers in all employments shall be, in
the general estimation, as nearly as possible on a par.

“Employment is much more constant,” continues Adam
Smith, “in some trades than in others. In the greater part
of manufactures, a Journeyman may be pretty sure of em-
ployment almost every day in the year that he is able to
work ” (the interruptions of business arising from overstocked
markets, or from a suspension of demand, or from a commercial
crisis, must be excepted). “ A mason or bricklayer, on the
contrary, can work neither in hard frost nor in foul Segara
and his employment at all other times depends upon the
occasional calls of his customers. He is liable, in consequence,


SA See sla sons


sr
eT eT


i
q


3)

Gy

EAT ABEL
SRE e |
|
Bed) fag ie
LSE |

¥ ld


456 BOOK Il. CHAPTER XIv. $§ 1.


to be frequently without any. What he earns, therefore,
while he is employed, must not only maintain him while he
is idle, but make him some compensation for those anxious
and desponding moments which the thought of so precarious
a situation must sometimes occasion. When the computed
earnings of the greater part of manufacturers, accordingly,
are nearly upon a level with the day wages of common
labourers, those of masons and bricklayers are generally from
one-half more to double those wages. No species of skilled
labour, however, seems more easy to learn than that of
masons and bricklayers. The high wages of those workmen,
therefore, are not so much the recompense of their skill, as
the compensation for the imnconstancy of their employ-
ment.

“When the inconstancy of the employment is combined
with the hardship, disagreeableness, and dirtiness of the work,
it sometimes raises the wages of the most common labour
above those of the most skilful artificers. A collier working
by the piece is supposed at Newcastle to earn commonly
about double, and in many parts of Scotland about three
times, the wages of common labour. His high wages arise
altogether from the hardship, disagreeableness, and dirtiness
of his work. His employment may, upon most occasions, be
as constant as he pleases. The coal-heavers in London
exercise a trade which in hardship, dirtiness, and disagreea-
bleness, almost equals that of colliers; and from the unayoid-
able irregularity in the arrivals of coalships, the employment
of the greater part of them is necessarily very inconstant.
If colliers, therefore, commonly earn double and triple the
wages of common labour, it ought not to seem unreasonable
that coal-heavers should sometimes earn four or five times
those wages. In the enquiry made into their condition a few
years ago, it was found that at the rate at which they were
then paid, they could earn about four times the wages of
common labour in London. How extravagant soever these
earnings may appear, if they were more than sufficient to


ee


DIFFERENCES OF WAGES. A57


compensate all the disagreeable circumstances of the business,
there would soon be so great a number of competitors as,
ina trade which has no exclusive privilege, would quickly
reduce them to a lower rate.”

One of the points best illustrated by Adam Smith, is the
influence exercised on the remuneration of an employment
by the uncertainty of success in it. If the chances are
great of total failure, the reward in case of success must be
sufficient to make up, in the general estimation, for -those
adverse chances. But, owing to another principle of human
nature, if the reward comes in the shape of a few great
prizes, it usually attracts competitors in such numbers, that
the average remuneration may be reduced not only to zero,
but even to a negative quantity. The success of lotteries
proves that this is possible: since the aggregate body of
adventurers in lotteries necessarily. lose, otherwise the under-
takers could not gain. The case of certain professions is
considered by Adam Smith to be similar. ‘The probability
that any particular person shall ever be qualified for the em-
ployment to which he is educated, is very different in
different occupations. In the greater part of mechanic
trades, success is almost certain, but very uncertain in the
liberal professions. Put your son apprentice to a shoemaker,
there is little doubt of his learning to make a pair of shoes:
but send him to study the law, it is at least twenty fo one if
ever he makes such proficiency as will enable him to live by
the business. Ina perfectly fair lottery, those who draw the
prizes ought to gain all that is lost by those who draw the
blanks. In a profession where twenty fail for one that
succeeds, that one ought to gain all that should have been
gained by the unsuccessful twenty. The counsellor-at-law
who, perhaps, at near forty years of age, begins to make
Something by his profession, ought to receive the retribution,
not only of his own so tedious and expensive education, but
of that of more than twenty others who are neyer likely to
make anything by it. How extravagant soeyer the fees of


eminent tetera ss


458 BOOK Il. CHAPTER xiv. § 1.


counsellors-at-law may sometimes appear, their real retmibu-
tion is never equal to this. Compute in any particular place
what is likely to be annually gained, and what is likely to be
annually spent, by all the different workmen in any common
trade, such as that of shoemakers or weavers, and you will
find that the former sum will generally exceed the latter.
But make the same computation with regard to all the coun-
sellors and students of law, in all the different inns of court,
and you will find that their annual gains bear but a small pro-
portion to their annual expense, even though you rate the


former as high, and the latter as low, as can well be


done.”

Whether this is true in our own day, when the gains of
the few are incomparably greater than in the time of Adam
Smith, but also the unsuccessful aspirants much more nume-
rous, those who have the appropriate information must
decide. It does not, however, seem to be sufficiently consi-
dered by Adam Smith, that the prizes which he speaks of,
comprise not the fees of counsel only, but the places of
emolument and honour to which their profession gives access,
together with the coveted distinction of a conspicuous posi-
tion in the public eye.

Even where there are no great prizes, the mere love of
excitement is sometimes enough to cause an adventurous
employment to be overstocked. This is apparent “in the
readiness of the common people to enlist as soldiers, or to
go to sea..... The dangers and hair-breadth escapes of a
life of adventures, imstead of disheartening young people,
seem frequently to recommend a trade to them. A tender
mother, among the inferior ranks of people, is often afraid to
send her son to school at a sea-port town, lest the sight of
the ships and the conversation and adventures of the sailors
should entice him to go to sea. The distant prospect of
hazards, from which we can hope to extricate ourselves by
courage and address, is not disagreeable to us, and does not
raise the wages of labour in any employment, It is otherwise


‘


DIFFERENCES OF WAGES. 459


with those in which courage and address can be of no ayail.
In trades which are known to be very unwholesome, the wages
of labour are always remarkably high. Unwholesomeness is
a species of disagreeableness, and its effects upon the wages
of labour are to be ranked under that general head.”


§2. All these are cases in which inequality of remune-
ration is necessary to produce equality of attractiveness, and
are examples of the equalizing effect of free competition.
The following are cases of real inequality, and arise from a
different principle. ‘The wages of labour vary according to
the small or great trust which must be reposed in the work-
men. ‘The wages of goldsmiths and jewellers are everywhere
superior to those of many other workmen, not only of equal,
but of much superior ingenuity; on account of the precious
materials with which they are intrusted. We trust our health
to the physician, our fortune and sometimes our life and
reputation to the lawyer and attorney. Such confidence
could not safely be reposed in people of a very mean or low
condition. Their reward must be such, therefore, as may
give them that rank in society which so important a trust
requires.”

The superiority of reward is not here the consequence of
competition, but of its absence: not a compensation for dis-
advantages inherent in the employment, but an extra advan-
tage ; a kind of monopoly price, the effect not of a legal, but
of what has been termed a natural monopoly. If all labourers
were trustworthy, it would not be necessary to give extra pay
to working goldsmiths on account of the trust. The degree
of integrity required being supposed to be uncommon, those
who can make it appear that they possess it are able to take
advantage of the peculiarity, and obtain higher pay in pro-
portion to its rarity. ‘This opens a class of considerations
which Adam Smith, and most other political economists,
have taken into far too little account, and from inattention to


eset Be stn:


Patani cee: ft


zat = .


460 BOOK I. CHAPTER XIV. § 2.


which, he has given a most imperfect exposition of the wide
difference between the remuneration of common labour and
that of skilled employments.

Some employments require a much longer time to learn,
and a much more expensive course of instruction than others;
and to this extent there is, as explained by Adam Smith, an
inherent reason for their being more highly remunerated.
If an artisan must work several years at learning his trade
before he can earn anything, and several years more before
becoming sufficiently skilful for its finer operations, he must
have a prospect of at last earning enough to pay the wages
of all this past labour, with compensation for the delay of
payment, and an indemnity for the expenses of his educa-
tion. His wages, consequently, must yield, over and above
the ordinary amount, an annuity sufficient to repay these
sums, with the common rate of profit, within the number of
years he can expect to live and be in working condition.
This, which is necessary to place the skilled employments,
all circumstances taken together, on the same level of advan-
tage with the unskilled, is the smallest difference which can
exist for any length of time between the two remunerations,
since otherwise no one would learn the skilled employments.
And this amount of difference is all which Adam Smith’s
principles account for. When the disparity is greater, he
seems to think that it must be explained by apprentice laws,
and the rules of corporations which restrict admission into
many of the skilled employments. But, independently of
these or any other artificial monopolies, there is a natural
monopoly in favour of skilled labourers against the unskilled,
which makes the difference of reward exceed, sometimes ina
manifold proportion, what is sufficient merely to equalize
their advantages. If unskilled labourers had it in their
power to compete with skilled, by merely taking the ‘trouble
of learning the trade, the difference of wages could not
exceed et would compensate them for that trouble at the


DIFFERENCES OF WAGES. 461


ordinary rate at which labour is remunerated. But the fact
that a course of instruction is required, of even a low degree
of costliness, or that the labourer must be maintained for a
considerable time from other sources, suffices everywhere to
exclude the great body of the labouring people from the pos-
sibility of any such competition. Until lately, all employ-
ments which required even the humble education of reading
and writing, could be recruited only from a select class, the
majority having no opportunity of acquiring those attain-
ments. All such employments, accordingly, were immensely
overpaid, as measured by the ordinary remuneration of labour.
Since reading and writing have been brought within the
reach of the multitude, the monopoly price of the lower
grade of educated employments has greatly fallen, the com-
petition for them having increased in an almost incredible
degree. There is still, however, a much greater disparity
than can be accounted for on the principle of competition.
A clerk from whom nothing is required but the mechanical
labour of copying, gains more than an equivalent for his mere
exertion if he receives the wages of a bricklayer’s labourer.
His work is not a tenth part as hard, it is quite as easy to
learn, and his condition is less precarious, a clerk’s place
being generally a place for life. The higher rate of his remu-
neration, therefore, must be partly ascribed to monopoly, the
small degree of education required being not even yet so
generally diffused as to call forth the natural number of com-
petitors ; and partly to the remaining influence of an ancient

custom, which requires that clerks should maintain the dress

and appearance of a more highly paid class. In some manual

employments, requiring a nicety of hand which can only be

acquired by long practice, it is difficult to obtain at any cost

workmen in sufficient numbers, who are capable of the most

delicate kind of work; and the wages paid to them are only

limited by the price which purchasers are willing to give for

the commodity they produce. This is the case with some

working watchmakers, and with the makers of astronomical


462 BOOK II. CHAPTER XIv. § 2.


and optical instruments. If workmen competent to such
employments were ten times as numerous as they are, there
would be purchasers for all which they could make, not indeed
at the present prices, but at those lower prices which would be
the natural consequence of lower wages. Similar considera-
tions apply in a still greater degree to employments which it
is attempted to confine to persons of a certain social rank,
such as what are called the liberal professions; into which a
person of what is considered too low a class of society,
is not easily admitted, and if admitted, does not easily
succeed.
So complete, indeed, has hitherto been the separation, so
iH strongly marked the line of demarcation, between the different
Fi pa grades of labourers, as to be almost equivalent to an here-
i ditary distinction of caste; each employment being chiefly
ee aM recruited from the children of those already employed in it,
Bae aes or in employments of the same rank with it in social estima-
tion, or from the children of persons who, if originally of a


i iat lower rank, have succeeded in raising themselves by their

Oh abe Pees exertions. The liberal professions are mostly supplied by

ty ei% 4 et the sons of either the professional, or the idle classes:

i | the more highly skilled manual employments are filled

eet rm up from the sons of skilled artisans, or of the class

a dH Ba of tradesmen who rank with them: the lower classes of

Agathe skilled employments are in a similar case; and unskilled
labourers, with occasional exceptions, remain from father to


son in their pristine condition. Consequently the wages of
. Bene! each class have hitherto been regulated by the merease of its
own population, rather than of the general population of the

nt country. If the professions are overstocked, it is because

a the class of society from which they have always mainly

been supplied, has greatly increased in number, and because
most of that class have numerous families, and bring up some
at least of their sons to professions. If the wages of arti-
sans remain so much higher than those of common labourers,
it is because artisans are a more prudent class, and do not


DIFFERENCES OF WAGES. 463


marry so early or so inconsiderately. The changes, however,
now so rapidly taking place in usages and ideas, are under-
mining all these distinctions; the habits or disabilities which
chained people to their hereditary condition are fast wearing
away, and every class is exposed to increased and increasing
competition from at least the class immediately below it.
The general relaxation of conventional barriers, and the
increased facilities of education which already are, and will
be in a much greater degree, brought within the reach of all,
tend to produce, among many excellent effects, one which
is the reverse; they tend to bring down the wages of skilled
labour. The inequality of remuneration between the skilled
and the unskilled is, without doubt, much greater than is
justifiable, but it is desirable that this should be remedied by
raising the unskilled, not by lowering the skilled. If, how-
ever, the other changes taking place in society, are not
accompanied by a strengthening of the check to population
on the part of labourers generally, there will be a ten-
dency to bring the lower grades of skilled labourers under
the influence of a rate of increase regulated by a lower
standard of living than their own, and thus to deteriorate
their condition, without raising that of the general mass;
the stimulus given to the multiplication of the lowest class
being sufficient to fill up without difficulty the additional
space gained by them from those immediately above.


§ 3. A modifying circumstance still remains to be noticed,
which interferes to some extent with the operation of the
principles thus far brought to view. While it is true, asa
general rule, that the earnings of skilled labour, and espe-
cially of any labour which requires school education, are at a
monopoly rate, from the impossibility, to the mass of the
people, of obtaining that education; it is also true that the
policy of nations has almost everywhere done much to coun-
teract the effect of this limitation of competition, by offering
eleemosynary instruction to a much larger class of persons


es


|)
;
{
Hii


ae


array eee


be. resent


mee


naantea la
wr


RD Tie 80m, Stn asce


ges ESF


ie


San sipnemnn yo eer pee EES acm tlk See


xi Tape
br eres


“tReet


is


~
ame


Sez


wae
18 ee Sopp area Ss


a ern


464 BOOK II. CHAPTER xiv. § 3.


than could have obtained the same advantages by paying their
price. Adam Smith has pointed out the operation of this
cause in keeping down the remuneration of scholarly or bookish
occupations generally, and in particular of clergymen, literary
men, and schoolmasters or other teachers of youth. I
cannot better set forth this part of the subject than in his
words.

“Tt has been considered as of so much importance that a
proper number of young people should be educated for cer-
tain professions, that sometimes the public, and sometimes
the piety of private founders, have established many pensions,
scholarships, exhibitions, bursaries, &c., for this purpose;
which draw many more people into those trades than
could otherwise pretend to follow them. In all Christian
countries, I believe, the education of the greater part of
churchmen is paid for in this manner. Very few of them
are educated altogether at their own expense. The long,
tedious, and expensive education, therefore, of those who are,
will not always procure them a suitable reward, the church
being crowded with people who, in order to get employment,
are willing to accept of a much smaller recompense than what
such an education would otherwise have entitled them to;
and in this manner the competition of the poor takes away
the reward of the rich. It would be indecent, no doubt, to
compare either a curate or a chaplain with a journeyman in
any common trade. The pay of a curate or chaplain, how-
ever, may very properly be considered as of the same nature
with the wages of a journeyman. They are, all three, paid
for their work according to the contract which they may
happen to make with their respective superiors. Till after
the middle of the fourteenth century, five marks, containing
as much silver as ten pounds of our present money, was in
England the usual pay of a curate or a stipendiary parish
priest, as we find it regulated by the decrees of several
different national councils. At the same period fourpence a
day, containing the same quantity of silver as a shilling of


DIFFERENCES OF WAGES. 465


our present money, was declared to be the pay of a master-
mason, and three pence a day, equal to nine pence of our
present money, that of a journeyman mason*. The wages
of both these labourers, therefore, supposing them to have
been constantly employed, were much superior to those of
the curate. The wages of the master-mason, supposing him
to have been without employment one-third of the year,
would have fully equalled them. By the 12th of Queen
Anne, c. 12, it is declared ‘That whereas for want of suffi-
clent maintenance and encouragement to curates, the cures
have in several places been meanly supplied, the bishop is
therefore empowered to appoint by writing under his hand
and seal a sufficient certain stipend or allowance, not exceed-
ing fifty and not less than twenty pounds a year.’ Forty
pounds a year is reckoned at present very good pay for a
curate, and notwithstanding this act of parliament, there are
many curacies under twenty pounds a year. This last sum
does not exceed what is frequently earned by common
labourers in many country parishes. Whenever the law has
attempted to regulate the wages of workmen, it has always
been rather to lower them than to raise them. But the law
has upon many occasions attempted to raise the wages of
curates, and for the dignity of the Church, to oblige the rectors
of parishes to give them more than the wretched maintenance
which they themselves might be willing to accept of. And
in both cases the law seems to have been equally ineffectual,
and has never either been able to raise the wages of curates
or to sink those of labourers to the degree that was intended,
because it has never been able to hinder either the one from
being willing to accept of less than the legal allowance, on
account of the indigence of their situation and the multitude
of their competitors; or the other from receiving more, on
account of the contrary competition of those who expected to
derive either profit or pleasure from employing them.”


* See the Statute of Labourers, 25 Edw. m1.”
WOT ns 2u


=


“i eon
Boece


aie
me


Berea orrcrees


RS
os sige:


*


Solis aaa el cea. Lie
om


i
|
4
;


466 BOOK IJ. CHAPTER XIv. § 3.


“In professions in which there are no benefices, such as
law (?) and physic, if an equal proportion of people were
educated at the public expense, the competition would soon
be so great, as to sink very much their pecuniary reward,
It might then not be worth any man’s while to educate his
son to either of those professions at his own expense. They
would be entirely abandoned to such as had been educated
by those public charities; whose numbers and necessities
would oblige them in general to content themselves with a
very miserable recompense.

“That unprosperous race of men, commonly called men
of letters, are pretty much in the situation which lawyers
and physicians probably would be in upon the foregoing sup-
position. In every part of Europe, the greater part of them
have been educated for the church, but have been hindered
by different reasons from entering into holy orders. They
have generally, therefore, been educated at the public expense,
and their numbers are everywhere so great as to reduce
the price of their labour to a very paltry recompense.

“Before the invention of the art of printing, the only
employment by which a man of letters could make anything
by his talents, was that of a public or private teacher, or by
communicating to other people the curious and useful know-
ledge which he had acquired himself: and this is still surely
a more honourable, a more useful, and in general even a more
profitable employment than that other of writing for a book-
seller, to which the art of printing has given occasion. ‘The
time and study, the genius, knowledge, and application
requisite to qualify an eminent teacher of the sciences, are at
least equal to what is necessary for the greatest practitioners
in law and physic. But the usual reward of the eminent
teachers bears no proportion to that of the lawyer or physi-
cian ; because the trade of the one is crowded with indigent
people who have been brought up to it at the public expense,
whereas those of the other two are encumbered with very few
who have not been educated at their own. The usual recom-


i


DIFFERENCES OF WAGES. 467


pense, however, of public and private teachers, small as it
may appear, would undoubtedly be less than it is, if the com-
petition of those yet more indigent men of letters who write
for bread was not taken out of the market. Before the in-
vention of the art of printing, a scholar and a beggar seem to
have been terms very nearly synonymous. The different
governors of the universities before that time appear to have
often granted licenses to their scholars to beg.”


§ 4. The demand for literary labour has so greatly in-
creased since Adam Smith wrote, while the provisions for
eleemosynary education have nowhere been much added to,
and in the countries which have experienced revolutions
have been much diminished, that little effect in keeping
down the recompense of literary labour can now be ascribed
to the influence of those institutions. But an effect nearly
equivalent is now produced by a cause somewhat similar—the
competition of persons who, by analogy with other arts, may
be called amateurs. Literary occupation is one of those pur-
suits in which success may be attained by persons the
greater part of whose time is taken up by other employ-
ments; and the education necessary for it, is the common
education of all cultivated persons. The inducements to
it, independently of money, in the present state of the
world, to all who have either vanity to gratify, or per-
sonal or public objects to promote, are extremely strong.
These motives now attract into this career a great and
increasing number of persons who do not need its pecu-
niary fruits, and who would equally resort to it if it
afforded no remuneration at all. In our own country (to
cite known examples), the most influential, and on the whole
most eminent philosophical writer of recent times (Bentham),
the greatest political economist (Ricardo), the most ephe-
merally celebrated, and the really greatest poets (Byron and
Shelley), and the most successful writer of prose fiction
(Scott), were none of them authors by profession ; and only


2H 2


pai sestenetrtattteeeetennsienememeannememes


anaainmennates


i: SIRENS ~ FEN


463 BOOK II. CHAPTER XIv. § 4.


two of the five, Scott and Byron, could have supported
themselves by the works which they wrote. Nearly all the
higher departments of authorship are, to a great extent,
similarly filled. In consequence, although the highest
pecuniary prizes of successful authorship are incomparably
greater than at any former period, yet on any rational
calculation of chances, in the existing competition, no
writer can hope to gain a living by books, and to do so
by magazines and reviews becomes daily more difficult. Itis
only the more troublesome and disagreeable kinds of literary
labour, and those which confer no personal celebrity, such as
most of those connected with newspapers, or with the smaller
periodicals, on which an educated person can now rely for
subsistence. Of these, the remuneration is, on the whole,
decidedly high ; because, though exposed to tke competition
of what used to be called “ poor scholars,” (persons who had
received a learned education from some public or private
charity), they are exempt from that of amateurs, those who
haye other means of support being seldom candidates for
such employments. Whether these considerations are not
connected with something radically amiss in the idea of
authorship as a profession, and whether any social arrange-
ment under which the teachers of mankind consist of persons
giving out doctrines for bread, is suited to be, or can possibly
be, a permanent thing—would be a subject well worthy of the
attention of thinkers.

The clerical, like the literary profession, is frequently
adopted by persons of independent means, either from
religious zeal, or for the sake of the honour or usefulness
which may belong to it, or for a chance of the high prizes
which it holds out: and it is now principally for this reason
that the salaries of curates are so low; those salaries,
although considerably raised by the influence of public
opinion, being still generally insufficient as the sole means of
support for one who has to maintain the externals expected
from a clergyman of the established church.


DIFFERENCES OF WAGES. 469


When an occupation is carried on chiefly by persons who
derive the main portion of their subsistence from other
sources, its remuneration may be lower, almost to any extent,
than the wages of equally severe labour in other employ-
ments. The principal example of the kind is domestic
manufactures. When spinning and knitting were carried on
m every cottage, by families deriving their principal support
from agriculture, the price at which their produce was sold
(which constituted the remuneration of the labour) was often
so low, that there would have been required great perfection
of machinery to undersell it. ‘The amount of the remune-
ration in such a case, depends chiefly upon whether the quan-
tity of the commodity, produced by this description of labour,
suffices to supply the whole of the demand. If it does not,
and there is consequently a necessity for some labourers who
devote themselves entirely to the employment, the price of
the article must be sufficient to pay those labourers at the
ordinary rate, and to reward therefore very handsomely the
domestic producers. But if the demand is so limited that
the domestic manufacture can do more than satisfy it, the
price is naturally kept down to the lowest rate at which
peasant families think it worth while to continue the pro-
duction. It is, no doubt, because the Swiss artisans do not
depend for the whole of their subsistence upon their looms,
that Zurich is able to maintain a competition in the Euro-
pean market even with English capital, and English fuel and


~ machinery*. Thus far, as to the remuneration of the sub-


sidiary employment; but the effect to the labourers, of


having this additional resource; is almost certain to be is
less peculiar counteracting causes intervene) a proportiona


* Four-fifths of the manufacturers of the Canton of Zurich as Sues
farmers, generally proprietors of their farms. The ee mae a o
occupies either wholly or partially 23,000 people, neal y ae ee
the population; and they consume a greater quantity of co : bis 2
bitant than either France oF England. See the statistical a


Zurich, formerly cited, pp- 109, 108, 110.


if
i)
a
;

ie
H


470 BOOK II. CHAPTER xiv. § 4.


diminution of the wages of their main occupation. The
habits of the people (as has already been so often remarked)
everywhere require some particular scale of living, and no
more, as the condition under which they are willing to bring
up afamily. Whether the income which maintains them in
this condition comes from one source or from two, makes no
difference: if there is a second source of income, they will
require less from the first; and will multiply (at least this
has always hitherto been the case) to a point which leaves
them no more from both employments, than they would
probably have had from either if it had been their sole
occupation.

For the same reason it is found that, ceteris paribus,
those trades are by far the worst paid, in which the wife and
children of the artisan aid in the work. The income which
the habits of the class demand, and down to which they are
almost sure to multiply, is made up, in those trades, by the
earnings of the whole family, while in others the same income
must be obtained by the labour of the man alone. It is even
probable that their collective earnings will amount to a smaller
sum than those of the man alone in other trades; because the
prudential restraint on marriage is unusually weak when the
only consequence immediately felt is an improvement of cir-
cumstances, the joint earnings of the two going further in
their domestic economy after marriage than before. Such
accordingly is the fact, in the case of hand-loom weavers. In
most kinds of weaving, women can and do earn as much as
men, and children may be and are employed at a very eatly
age; but the aggregate earnings of a family are lower than
in almost any other kind of industry, and the marriages
earlier, It is noticeable also that there are certain branches
of hand-loom weaying in which wages are much above the
rate common in the trade, and that these are the branches in
which, from the degree of bodily strength requisite, neither
women ‘nor young persons are employed. These facts were
authenticated by the inquiries of the Hand-loom Weavers’


DIFFERENCES OF WAGES. 471


Commission, which made its report in 1841. The case of
factory women and children may be quoted on the other side
of the question; but that case is an exception to ordinary
principles, inasmuch as from successive improvements in
machinery, and a consequent progressive cheapening of the
manufactured article, the expansion of factory employment
has for half a century outstripped even the rapid growth of
the factory population.


§ 5. It deserves consideration, why the wages of women
are generally lower, and very much lower, than those of men.
They are not universally so. Where men and women work
at the same employment, if it be one for which they are
equally fitted in pot of physical power, it does not appear
that they are in general unequally paid. Women, in facto-
ries, earn as much as men; and so they do in handloom
Weaving, which, being paid by the piece, brings their effi-
ciency to a sure test. If the pay is unequal where the effi-
ciency is equal, the only explanation that can be given is
custom; grounded either in a prejudice, or in the present
constitution of society, which, making almost every woman,
socially speaking, an appendage of some man, enables men
to take systematically the lion’s share of whatever belongs to
both. When an employment (as is the case with many
trades) is divided into several parts, of some of which men
alone are considered capable, while women or children are
employed in the others, it is natural that those who cannot
be dispensed with, should be able to make better terms for
themselves than those who can. But the principal question
relates to the peculiar employments of women. The remune-
ration of these is always, I believe, greatly below that of


employments of equal skill and equal disagreeableness, carried
The explanation of this must be, that they are


on by men.
that although so much smaller a number of


Overstocked :
women, than of
occupations which law


men, support themselves by wages, the
and custom make accessible to them


eit


Pain|


472 BOOK Il. CHAPTER XIv. § 5.


are comparatively so few, that the field of their employment
is still more overcrowded. It must be observed, that as
matters now stand, a sufficient degree of overcrowding may
depress the wages of women to a much lower minimum than
those of men. The wages, at least of single women, must be
equal to their support; but need not be more than equal to
it; the minimum, in their case, is the pittance absolutely
requisite for the sustenance of one human being. Now the
lowest point to which the most superabundant competition
can permanently depress the wages of a man, is always some-
what more than this. Where the wife of a labouring man
does not by general custom contribute to his -earnings, the
man’s wages must be at least sufficient to support himself, a
wife, and a number of children adequate to keep up the
population, since if it were less, the population would not be
kept up. And even if the wife earns something, their joint
wages must be sufficient to support, not only themselves, but
(at least for some years) their children also. The ne plus
ultra of low wages, therefore, (except during some transitory
crisis, or in some decaying employment,) can hardly occur in
any occupation which the person employed has to live by;
except the occupations of women.


§ 6. Thus far, we have, throughout this discussion,
proceeded on the supposition that competition is free, so far
as regards human interference; being limited only by natural
causes, or by the unintended effect of general social cireum-
stances. But law or custom may interfere to limit competi-
tion. If apprentice laws, or the regulations of corporate
bodies, make the access to a particular employment slow,
costly, or difficult, the wages of that employment may be
kept much above their natural proportion to the wages of
common labour. They might be so kept without any assign-
able limit, were it not that wages which exceed the usual rate
require corresponding prices, and that there is a limit to the
price at which even a restricted number of producers can dis-


DIFFERENCES OF WAGES. 473


pose of all they produce. Jn most civilized countries, the
restrictions of this kind which once existed have been either
abolished or very much relaxed, and will, no doubt, soon dis-
appear entirely. In some trades, however, and to some extent,
the combinations of workmen produce a similar effect. Those
combinations always fail to uphold wages at an artificial rate,
unless they also limit the number of competitors. But they
do occasionally succeed in accomplishing this. In several
trades the workmen have been able to make it almost imprac-
ticable for strangers to obtain admission either as journeymen
or as apprentices, except in limited numbers, and under such
restrictions as they choose to impose. It was given in evi-
dence to the Handloom Weavers’ Commission, that this is
one of the hardships which aggravate the grievous condition
of that depressed class. Their own employment is over-
stocked and almost ruined; but there are many other trades
which it would not be difficult for them to learn: to this,
however, the combinations of workmen in those other
trades, are said to interpose an obstacle hitherto insur-
mounable.

Notwithstanding, however, the cruel manner in which
the exclusive principle of these combinations operates ina
case of this peculiar nature, I find it impossible to wish, in
the present state of the general habits of the people, that no
such combinations existed. Acts of atrocity are sometimes
committed by them, in the way of personal outrage or inti-
midation, which cannot be too rigidly repressed: and even


their legitimate liberty of refusing to work unless their own
d to them, they not unfrequently exercise


unenlightened manner, ultimately very
But in so far as they do succeed in
ade by limiting its numbers,


terms are concede
in an injudicious,
injurious to themselves.


keeping up the wages of any tr i :
I look upon them as simply intrenching round a particular


spot against the inroads of over-population, and making their
wages depend upon their own rate of increase, instead of
5


depending on that of a more reckless and improvident class
5


ia ne


ee Eee


£0) wee mecsetien


A


474 BOOK Il. CHAPTER XIv. § 6.


than themselves. And I should rejoice if by trade regula-
tions, or even by trades unions, the employments thus spe-
cially protected could be multiplied to a much greater extent
than experience has shown to be practicable. What at first
sight seems the injustice of excluding the more numerous
class from sharing the gains of a comparatively few, dis-
appears when we consider that by being admitted they would
not be made better off, for more than a short time: the only
permanent effect which their admission would produce, would
be to lower the others to their own level. If indeed the
general mass of the people were so improved in their stan-
dard of living, as not to press closer against the means of
employment than those trades do; if, in other words, there
were no greater degree of overcrowding outside the barrier,
than within it—there would be no need of a barrier, and if it
had any effects at all, they must be bad ones; but in that
case the barrier would fall of itself, since there would no
longer be any motive for keeping it up. On similar grounds,
if there were no other escape from that fatal immigration of
Irish, which has done and is doing so much to degrade the
condition of our agricultural, and some classes of our town
population, I should see no injustice, and the greatest possible
expediency, in checking that destructive inroad by prohibitive
laws. But there is a better mode of putting an end to this
mischief, namely, by improving the condition of the Irish
themselves; and England owes an atonement to Ireland for
past injuries, which she ought to suffer almost any inconve-
nience rather than fail to make good, by using her power im
as determined a manner for the elevation of that unfortunate
people, as she used it through so many dreary centuries for
their abasement and oppression,


§ 7. To conclude this subject, I must repeat an observa-
tion already made, that there are kinds of labour of which the
wages are fixed by custom and not by competition. Such
are the fees or charges of professional persons; of physicians,


DIFFERENCES OF WAGES. 475


surgeons, barristers, and even attornies. These, as a general
rule, do not vary, and although competition operates upon
those classes as much as upon any others, it is by dividing the
business, not, in general, by diminishing the rate at which it
is paid. The cause of this, no doubt, is an opinion prevailing
in the community, that such persons are more trustworthy if
paid highly in proportion to the work they perform: insomuch
that if a lawyer or a physician offered his services at less than
the ordinary rate, instead of gaining more practice, he would
probably lose that which he already had. For analogous
reasons it is usual to pay greatly beyond the market price of
their labour, all persons in whom the employer wishes to
place peculiar trust, or from whom he requires something
besides their mere services. For example, most persons who
can afford it, pay to their domestic servants higher wages
than would purchase in the market the labour of persons
fully as competent to the work required. They do this, not
from mere ostentation, but from reasonable motives ; because
they desire that those they employ should serve them cheer-
fully, and be anxious to remain in their service; because
they do not like to drive a hard bargain with people whom

they are in constant intercourse with; and because they dis-
like to have near their persons, and continually in their
sight, people with the appearance and habits which are the
usual accompaniments of a mean remuneration. Similar
feelings operate in the minds of persons in business, with

respect to their clerks and other employés. Liberality,

generosity, and the credit of the employer, are motives

which, to whatever extent they operate, preclude taking the

utmost advantage of competition : and doubtless such motives

en now do, operate on employers of labour in

artments of industry; and most desirable is

But they can never raise the average


might, and ey
all the great dep


it that they should.
wages of labour beyond the ratio of population to capital. By


giving more to each person employed, they limit the power


476 BOOK II. CHAPTER XIvy. § 7.


of giving employment to numbers; and however excellent


: : their moral effect, they do little good economically, unless
} . : the pauperism of those who are shut out, leads indirectly to
iF | ; a readjustment by means of an increased restraint on popu-
i lation.

ae

re :


~


erataihe


& i
4
' : aed
‘ #
iM biidotd
j uh) if
t Hid et


iM i i}
ta
: i
ey
ii!


CHAPTER XV.


OF PROFITS.


§ 1. Havrne treated of the labourer’s share of the pro-
duce, we next proceed to the share of the capitalist; the
profits of capital or stock; the gains of the person who
advances the expenses of production—who, from funds in his
possession, pays the wages of the labourers, or supports
them during the work; who supplies the requisite buildings,
materials, and tools or machinery; and to whom, by the
usual terms of the contract, the produce belongs, to be dis-
posed of at his pleasure. After indemnifying him for his
outlay, there commonly remains a surplus, which is his
profit ; the net income from his capital; the amount which
he can afford to expend in necessaries or pleasures, or from
which by further saving he can add to his wealth.

As the wages of the labourer are the remuneration of
labour, so the profits of the capitalist are properly, according
to Mr. Senior’s well-chosen expression, the remuneration of
abstinence. They are what he gains by forbearing to con-
Sume his capital for his own uses, and allowing it to be con-
sumed by productive labourers for their uses. For this
forbearance he requires a recompense. Very often in per-
sonal enjoyment he would be a gainer by squandering his
capital, the capital amounting to more than the sum of the
profits which it will yield during the years he can expect to
live. But while he retains it undiminished, he has always
the power of consuming it if he wishes or needs; he can
bestow it upon others at his death; and in the meantime he
derives from it an income, which he can without impoverish-
ment apply to the satisfaction of his own wants or incli-


nations.


478 BOOK Il. CHAPTER xv. § l.


Of the gains, however, which the possession of a capital
enables a person to make, a part only is properly an equiva-
lent for the use of the capital itself; namely, as much as
another person would be willing to pay for the loan of it.
This, which as everybody knows is called interest, is all that
a person is enabled to get by merely abstaining from the
immediate consumption of his capital, and allowing it to be
used for productive purposes by others. The remuneration
which is obtained in any country for mere abstinence, is
measured by the current rate of interest on the best security;
such security as precludes any appreciable chance of losing
the principal. What a person expects to gain, who superin-
tends the employment of his own capital, is always more, and
generally much more, than this. The rate of profit greatly
exceeds the rate of interest. The surplus is partly compen-
sation for risk. By lending his capital on unexceptionable
security, he runs little or no risk. But if he embarks in
business on his own account, he always exposes his capital
to some, and in many cases to very great, danger of total or
partial loss. For this danger he must be compensated,
otherwise he will not incur it. He must likewise be remu-
nerated for the devotion of his time and labour. The con-
trol of the operations of industry usually belongs to the
person who supplies the whole or the greatest part of the
funds by which they are carried on, and who, according to
the ordinary arrangement, is either alone interested, or is the
person most interested (at least directly), in the result. To
exercise this control with efficiency, if the concern is large and
complicated, requires great assiduity, and often, no ordinary
skill. This assiduity and skill must be remunerated.

The gross profits from capital, the gains returned to those
who supply the funds for production, must suffice for these
three purposes. They must afford a sufficient reward for
abstinence, indemnity for risk, and remuneration for the
labour and skill required for superintendence. These different
compensations may be either paid to the same, or to different


PROFITS. 479


persons. The capital, or some part of it, may be borrowed ;
may belong to some one who does not undertake the risks or
the trouble of business. In that case, the lender, or owner,
is the person who practises the abstinence ; and is remunerated
for it by the interest paid to him, while the difference between
the interest and the gross profit remunerates the exertions and
risks of the undertaker*. Sometimes, again, the capital, or
a part of it, is supplied by what is called a sleeping partner ;
who shares the risks of the employment, but not the trouble,
and who, in consideration of those risks, receives not a mere
interest, but a stipulated share of the gross profits. Some-
times the capital is supplied and the risk incurred by one
person, and the business carried on exclusively in his name,
while the trouble of management is made over to another,
who is engaged for that purpose at a fixed salary. Manage-
ment, however, by hired servants, who have no interest in
the result but that of preserving their salaries, is proverbially
inefficient, unless they act under the inspecting eye, if not
the controlling hand, of the person chiefly interested ; and
prudence almost always recommends giving to a manager
not thus controlled, a remuneration partly dependent on the
profits ; which virtually reduces the case to that of asleepimg
partner. Or finally, the same person may own the capital,
and conduct the business; adding, if he will and can, to the
management of his own capital, that of as much more as the
owners may be willing to trust him with. But under any
or all of these arrangements, the same three things require
their remuneration, and must obtain it from the gross profit:
abstinence, risk, exertion. And the three parts into which
profit may be considered as resolving itself, may be described
respectively as interest, insurance, and wages of superinten-
dence.


* It is to be regretted that this word, in this sense, is not familiar to an
English ear French political economists enjoy a great advantage in being
able to speak currently of les profits de Ventrepreneur.


480 BOOK lI. CHAPTER xv. § 2.


§ 2. The lowest rate of profit- which can permanently
exist, is that which is barely adequate, at the given place and
time, to afford an equivalent for the abstinence, risk, and
exertion implied in the employment of capital. From the
gross profit has first to be deducted as much as will form a
fund sufficient on the average to cover all losses incident to
the employment. Next, it must afford such an equivalent to
the owner of the capital for forbearing to consume it, as is
then and there a sufficient motive to him to persist in his
abstinence. How much will be required to form this equiva-
lent, depends on the comparative value placed, in the given
society, upon the present and the future: or, (in the words
formerly used) on the strength of the effective desire of
accumulation. Further, after covering all losses, and remu-
nerating the owner for his self-denial, there must be some-
thing left to recompense the labour and skill of the person
who devotes his time to the business. This recompense too
must be sufficient to enable at least the owners of the larger
capitals to receive for their trouble, or to pay to some
manager for his, what to them or him will be a sufficient
inducement for undergoing it. If the surplus is no more
than this, none but large masses of capital will be employed
productively ; and if it did not even amount to this, capital
would be withdrawn from production, and unproductively
consumed, until, by an indirect consequence of its diminished
amount, to be explained hereafter, the rate of profit was raised.

Such, then, is the minimum of profits; but that minimum
is exceedingly variable, and at some times and places ex-
tremely low; on account of the great variableness of two out
of its three elements. That the rate of necessary remune-
ration for abstinence, or in other words the effective desire
of accumulation, differs widely in different states of society
and civilization, has been seen in a former chapter. There is
a still wider difference in the element which consists in com-
pensation for risk. I am not now speaking of the differ-
ences in point of risk between different employments of


PROFITS. 481


capital in the same society, but of the very different degrees
ot security of property in different states of society. Where,
as In most of the governments of Asia, property is in per-
petual danger of spoliation from a tyrannical government or
from its rapacious and ill-controlled officers; where to possess
or to be suspected of possessing wealth, is to be a mark not
only for plunder, but perhaps for personal ill-treatment to
extort the disclosure and surrender of hidden valuables; or
where, as in the Kuropean middle ages, the weakness of the
sovernment, even when not itself inclined to oppress, left its
Subjects exposed without protection or redress to active
spoliation, or audacious withholding of just rights, by any
powerful individual; the rate of profit which persons of
average dispositions will require, to make them forego the
immediate enjoyment of what they happen to possess, for
the purpose of exposing it and themselves to these perils,
must be something very considerable. And these contin-
gencies affect those who live on the mere interest of their
capital, in common with those who personally engage in
production. In a generally secure state of society, the risks
which may be attendant on the nature of particular employ-
ments seldom fall on the person who lends his capital, if he
lends on good security; but in a state of society like that of
Asia, no security (except perhaps the actual pledge of gold
or jewels) is good: and the mere possession of a hoard, when
known or suspected, exposes it and the possessor to risks,
for which scarcely any profit he could expect to obtain would
be an equivalent; so that there would be still less accumu-
lation than there is, if a state of insecurity did not also mul-

tiply the occasions on which the possession of a treasure

may be the means of saving life or averting serious calamities.
Those who lend, under these wretched governments, do it at

the utmost peril of never being paid. In most of the native

states of India, the lowest terms on which any one will lend

money even to the government, are such that if the interest

is paid only for a few years, and the principal not at all, the


VOL. I. 21


|
?
)


Hi
|


seats eo


a
= ee s


482 BOOK Il. CHAPTER xv. § 3.


=


lender is tolerably well indemnified. If the accumulation of
principal and compound interest is ultimately compromised
at a few shillings in the pound, he has generally made an


advantageous bargain.


§ 3. The remuneration of capital in different employ-
ments, like the remuneration of labour, varies according to
the circumstances which render one employment more
attractive, or more repulsive, than another. The profits,
for example, of retail trade, in proportion to the capital em-
ployed, exceed those of wholesale dealers or manufacturers,
for this reason among others, that there is less consideration
attached to the employment. The greatest, however, of these
differences, is that caused by difference of risk. The profits of
a gunpowder manufacturer must be considerably greater than
the average, to make up for the peculiar risks to which he
and his property are constantly exposed. When, however,
as in the case of marine adventure, the peculiar risks are
capable of being, and commonly are, commuted for a fixed
payment, the premium of insurance takes its regular place
among the charges of production, and the compensation
which the owner of the ship or cargo receives for that pay-
ment, does not appear in the estimate of his profits, but is
included in the replacement of his capital.

The portion, too, of the gross profit, which forms the
remuneration for the labour and skill of the dealer or pro-
ducer, is very different in different employments. This is
the explanation always given of the extraordinary rate of
apothecaries’ profit: the greatest part, as Adam Smith ob-
serves, being frequently no more than the reasonable wages
of professional attendance ; for which, until a late alteration
of the law, the apothecary could not demand any remune-
ration, except in the prices of his drugs. Some occupations
require a considerable amount of scientific or technical edu-
cation; and can only be carried on by persons who combine
with that education a considerable capital: such is the busi-


PROFITS. 483


ness of an engineer, both in the original sense of the term, a
machine-maker, and in its popular or derivative sense, an
undertaker of public works. These are always the most
profitable employments. There are cases, again, in which
a considerable amount of labour and skill are required to
conduct a business, necessarily of limited extent. In such
cases, a higher than common rate of profit is necessary to
yield only the common rate of remuneration. “ In a small
sea-port town,” says Adam Smith, “a little grocer will make
forty or fifty per cent upon a stock of a single hundred
pounds, while a considerable wholesale merchant in the
same place will scarce make eight or ten per cent upon a
stock of ten thousand. The trade of the grocer may be
necessary for the conveniency of the inhabitants, and the
harrowness of the market may not admit the employment of
a larger capital in the business. The man, however, must
not only live by his trade, but live by it suitably to the
qualifications which it requires. Besides possessing a little
capital, he must be able to read, write, and account, and
must be a tolerable judge too of perhaps fifty or sixty dif-
ferent sorts of goods, their prices, qualities, and the markets
where they are to be had cheapest. Thirty or forty pounds a
year cannot be considered as too great a recompense for the
labour of a person so accomplished. Deduct this from the
Seemingly great profits of his capital, and little more will
remain, perhaps, than the ordinary profits of stock. The
greater part of the apparent profit is, in this case too, real
wages.”

All the natural monopolies (meaning thereby those which
are created by circumstances, and not by law) which produce
or aggravate the disparities in the remuneration of different


kinds of labour, operate similarly between different employ-


ments of capital. If a business can only be advantageously


carried on by a large capital, this in most countries limits so
narrowly the class of persons who can enter into the employ-
ment, that they are enabled to keep their rate of profit above
212
12


A484 BOOK Il. CHAPTER xv. § 4.


the general level. A trade may also, from the nature of the
case, be confined to so few hands, that profits may admit of
being kept up by a combination among the dealers. It is
well known that even among so numerous a body as the
London booksellers, this sort of combination exists; though
individual interest is often too strong for its rules, nor indeed
does the combination itself include the whole trade. I have
already mentioned the case of the gas and water companies.


§ 4. After due allowance is made for these various
causes of inequality, namely, differences in the risk or agree
ableness of different employments, and natural or artificial
monopolies; the rate of profit on capital in all employments
tends to an equality. Such is the proposition usually laid
down by political economists, and under proper explanations
it is true.

That portion of profit which is properly interest, and
which forms the real remuneration for abstinence, 1s strictly
the same, at the same time and place, whatever be the
employment. The rate of interest, on equally good security,
does not vary according to the destination of the principal.
though it does vary from time to time very much, according
to the circumstances of the market. There is no employ-
ment in which, in the present state of industry, competition
is so active and incessant as in the lending and borrowing of
money. All persons in business are occasionally, and most
of them constantly, borrowers: while all persons not in busi-
ness, who possess monied property, are lenders. Between
these two great bodies there is a numerous, keen, and intel-
ligent class of middlemen, composed of bankers, stockbrokers,
discount brokers, and others, alive to the slightest breath of
probable gain. The smallest circumstance, or the most tran-
sient impression on the public mind, which tends to an
increase or diminution of the demand for loans either at the
time or prospectively, Operates immediately on the rate of
interest: and circumstances in the general state of trade,


PROFITS, 485


really tending to cause this difference of demand, are con-
tinually occurring, sometimes to such an extent, that the rate
of interest on the best mercantile bills has been known to
vary within a year, (even without the occurrence of the great
derangement called a commercial crisis,) from less than four
to more than six per cent. But, at the same time and place,
the rate of interest is the same, to all who can give equally
good security. The market rate of interest is at all times a
known and definite thing.

It is far otherwise with gross profit; which, though (as
will presently be seen) it does not vary much from employ-
ment to employment, varies very greatly from individual to
individual, and can scarcely be in any two cases the same.
It depends on the knowledge, talents, economy, and energy
of the capitalist himself, or of the agents whom he employs ;
on the accidents of personal connexion ; and even on chance.
Hardly any two dealers in the same trade, even if their
commodities are equally good and equally cheap, carry on
their business at the same expense, or turn over their capital
in the same time. That equal capitals give equal profits, as
a general maxim of trade, would be as false as that equal age
or size gives equal bodily strength, or that equal reading or
experience gives equal knowledge. The effect depends as
much upon twenty other things, as upon the single cause
specified.

But though profits thus vary, the parity, on the whole, of
different modes of employing capital (in the absence of any
natural or artificial monopoly,) is, in a certain, and a very
important sense, maintained. On an average (whatever may
be the occasional fluctuations,) the various employments of
capital, are on sucha footing as to hold out, not equal profits,


but equal chances of profit, to persons of average abilities
By equal, I mean after making compensa-


and advantages.
tion for any inferiority in the agreeableness or safety of an
employment. If the case were not so; if there were, evi-


dently, and to common experience, more favourable chances


assassin lsuntne sete w-acancnmr tern :


AGRE


crea


eet tees connate


486 BOOK Il. CHAPTER xv. § 4.


of pecuniary success in one business than in others, more
persons would engage their capital in the business, or would
bring up their sons to it; which in fact always happens when
a business, like that of an engineer at present, or like any
newly established and prosperous manufacture, is seen to be
a growing and a thriving one. If, on the contrary, a business
is not considered thriving; if the chances of profit in it are
thought to be inferior to those in other employments ; capital
gradually leaves it, or at least new capital is not attracted to
it: and by this change in the distribution of capital between
the less profitable and the more profitable employments, @
sort of balance is restored. The expectations of profit,
therefore, in different employments, cannot long continue
very different: they tend to a common average, although
they are generally oscillating from one side to the other side
of the medium.

This equalizing process, commonly described as the
transfer of capital from one employment to another, 1s not
necessarily the onerous, slow, and almost impracticable
operation which it is very often represented to be. In the
first place, it does not always imply the actual removal of
capital already embarked in an employment. In a rapidly
progressive state of capital, the adjustment often takes place
by means of the new accumulations of each year, which direct
themselves in preference towards the more thriving trades.
Even when a real transfer of capital is necessary, it is by no
means implied that any of those who are engaged in the un-
profitable employment, relinquish business and break up their
establishments. The numerous and multifarious channels of
credit, through which in commercial nations unemployed
capital diffuses itself over the field of employment, flowing
over in greater abundance to the lower levels, are the means
by which the equalization is accomplished. , The process
consists ina limitation by one class of dealers or producers,
and an extension by the other, of that portion of their busi-
ness which is carried on with borrowed capital. There 1s


PROFITS. 487


scarcely any dealer or producer on a considerable scale, who
confines his business to what can be carried on by his own
funds. When trade is good, he not only uses to the utmost his
own capital, but employs, in addition, much of the credit which
that capital obtains for him. When, either from oversupply or
from some slackening in the demand for his commodity, he
finds that it sells more slowly or at alower price, he contracts
his operations, and does not apply to bankers or other money
dealers for a renewal of their advances to the same extent as
before. A business which is increasing, holds out, on the
contrary, a prospect of profitable employment for a larger
amount of this floating capital than previously, and those
engaged in it become applicants to the money dealers for
larger advances, which, from their improving circumstances,
they have no difficulty in obtaining. A different distribution
of floating capital between two employments, has as much
effect in restoring their profits to an equilibrium, as if the
owners of an equal amount of capital were to abandon the
one trade and carry their capital into the other. This easy
and as it were spontaneous method of accommodating pro-
duction to demand, is quite sufficient to correct any me-


qualities arising from the fluctuations of trade, or other


causes of ordinary occurrence. In the case of an altogether


declining trade, in which it is necessarythat the production
should be, not occasionally varied, but greatly and perma-
nently diminished, or perhaps stopped altogether, the process
of extricating the capital is, no doubt, tardy and difficult, and
almost always attended with considerable loss; much of the
capital fixed in machinery, buildings, permanent works, &c.,
being either not applicable to any other purpose, or only
applicable after expensive alterations, and time being seldom
given for effecting the change in the mode in which it would
be effected with least loss, namely, by not replacing the fixed
capital as it wears out. There is besides, in totally changing
the destination of a capital, so great a sacrifice of established
connexion, and of acquired skill and experience, that people


;
i
|


486 BOOK II. CHAPTER xv. § 4.


of pecuniary success in one business than in others, more
persons would engage their capital in the business, or would
bring up their sons to it; which in fact always happens when
a business, like that of an engineer at present, or like any
newly established and prosperous manufacture, is seen to be
a growing and a thriving one. If, on the contrary, a business
is not considered thriving; if the chances of profit in it are
thought to be inferior to those in other employments ; capital
gradually leaves it, or at least new capital is not attracted to
it: and by this change in the distribution of capital between
the less profitable and the more profitable employments, 2
sort of balance is restored. The expectations of profit,
therefore, in different employments, cannot long continue
very different: they tend to a common average, although
they are generally oscillating from one side to the other side
of the medium.

This equalizing process, commonly described as the
transfer of capital from one employment to another, 1s not
necessarily the onerous, slow, and almost impracticable
operation which it is very often represented to be. In the
first place, it does not always imply the actual removal of
capital already embarked in an employment. In a rapidly
progressive state of capital, the adjustment often takes place
by means of the new accumulations of each year, which direct
themselves in preference towards the more thriving trades.
Eyen when a real transfer of capital is necessary, it is by no
means implied that any of those who are engaged in the un-
profitable employment, relinquish business and break up their
establishments. The numerous and multifarious channels of
credit, through which in commercial nations unemployed
capital diffuses itself over the field of employment, flowing
over in greater abundance to the lower levels, are the means
by which the equalization is accomplished. , The process
consists ina limitation by one class of dealers or producers,
and an extension by the other, of that portion of their busi-
ness which is carried on with borrowed capital. There is


PROFITS. 487


scarcely any dealer or producer on a considerable scale, who
confines his business to what can be carried on by his own
funds. When trade is good, he not only uses to the utmost his
own capital, but employs, in addition, much of the credit which
that capital obtains for him. When, either from oversupply or
from some slackening in the demand for his commodity, he
finds that it sells more slowly or at alower price, he contracts
his operations, and does not apply to bankers or other money
dealers for a renewal of their advances to the same extent as
before. A business which is increasing, holds out, on the
contrary, a prospect of profitable employment for a larger
amount of this floating capital than previously, and those
engaged in it become applicants to the money dealers for
larger advances, which, from their improving circumstances,
they have no difficulty in obtaining. A different distribution
of floating capital between two employments, has as much
effect in restoring their profits to an equilibrium, as if the
owners of an equal amount of capital were to abandon the
one trade and carry their capital into the other. This easy
and as it were spontaneous method of accommodating pro-
duction to demand, is quite sufficient to correct any ine-


qualities arising from the fluctuations of trade, or other


causes of ordinary occurrence. In the case of an altogether


declining trade, in which it is necessarythat the production
should be, not occasionally varied, but greatly and perma-
nently diminished, or perhaps stopped altogether, the process
of extricating the capital is, no doubt, tardy and difficult, and
almost always attended with considerable loss; much of the
capital fixed in machinery, buildings, permanent works, &c.,
being either not applicable to any other purpose, Or only
applicable after expensive alterations, and time being seldom
given for effecting the change in the mode in which it would
be effected with least loss, namely, by not replacing the fixed
capital as it wears out. There is besides, in totally changing
the destination of a capital, so great a sacrifice of established
connexion, and of acquired skill and experience, that people


488 BOOK Il. CHAPTER xv. § 4.


are always very slow in resolving upon it, and hardly ever do
so unless a change of fortune has become quite hopeless.
These however are distinctly exceptional cases, and even in
these the equalization is at last effected. It may also happen
that the return to equilibrium is considerably protracted,
when, before one inequality has been corrected, another cause
of inequality arises; which is said to have been continually
the case during a long series of years, with the production of
cotton in the Southern States of North America; the com-
modity having been upheld at what was virtually a monopoly
price, because the increase of demand, from successive im-
provements in the manufacture, went on with a rapidity so
much beyond expectation that for many years the supply
never completely overtook it. But it is not often that a
succession of disturbing causes, all acting in the same direc-
tion, are known to follow one another with hardly any interval.
Where there is no monopoly, the profits of a trade are likely
to range sometimes above and sometimes below the general
level, but tending always to return to it; like the oscillations
of the pendulum.

In general, then, although profits are very different to
different individuals, and to the same individual in different
years, there cannot be much diversity at the same time and
place in the average profits of different employments, (other
than the standing differences necessary to compensate for
difference of attractiveness), except for short periods, or
when some great permanent revulsion has overtaken a patti-
cular trade. If any popular impression exists that some
trades are more profitable than others, independently of
monopoly or of such rare accidents as have been noticed in
regard to the cotton trade, the impression must in all pro-
bability be fallacious, since if it were shared by those who
have greatest means of knowledge and motives to accurate
examination, there would take place such an influx of capital
as would soon lower the profits to the common level. It is
true that, to persons with the same amount. of original


PROFITS. 489


means, there is more chance of making a large fortune in
some employments than in others. But it would be found
that in those same employments bankruptcies also are more
frequent, and that the chance of greater success is balanced
by a greater probability of complete failure. Very often it is
more than balanced: for, as was remarked in another case, the
chance of great prizes operates with a greater degree of
strength than arithmetic will warrant, in attracting competi-
tors; and I doubt not that the average gains, in a trade in
which large fortunes may be made, are lower than in those in
which gains are slow, though comparatively sure, and in
which nothing is to be ultimately hoped for beyond a com-
petency. The timber trade of Canada is one example of an
employment of capital, partaking of much of the nature of
a lottery, as to make it an accredited opinion that, taking the
adventurers in the ageregate, there is more money lost by the
trade than gained by it; m other words, that the average
rate of profit is less than nothing. In such poits as this,
much depends on the characters of nations, according as
they partake more or less of the adventurous, or, as it is
called when the intention is to blame it, the gambling, spirit.
This spirit is much stronger in the United States than in
Great Britain; and in Great Britain, than in any country of
the Continent. In some Continental countries the tendency
is so much the reverse, that safe’ and quiet employments pro-
bably yield a less average profit to the capital engaged in
them, than those which, at the price of greater hazards, offer
greater gains.

It must not however be forgotten, that even in the
countries of most active competition, custom also has a con-
siderable share in determining the profits of trade. There is
sometimes an idea afloat as to what the profit of an employ-
ment should be, which although not adhered uD by all the
dealers, nor perhaps rigidly by aye still ae a Gentain
influence: oven ther operations. There is in England a kind
of notion, how widely prevailing I know not, that fifty per


490 BOOK II. CHAPTER Xv. § 5.


cent is a proper and suitable rate of profit in retail transac-
tions: understand, not fifty per cent on the whole capital,
but an advance of fifty per cent on the wholesale prices:
from which have to be defrayed bad debts, shop rent, the pay
of clerks, shopmen, and agents of all descriptions, in short all
the expenses of the retail business. If this custom were
universal, and strictly adhered to, competition indeed would
still operate, but the consumer would not derive any benefit
from it ; the way in which it would diminish the advantages
of those engaged in retail trade, would be by a greater sub-
division of the business. The intensity however of modern
competition, in England at least, is tending to break
down all customs of this description. In almost all trades, (at
least in the great emporia of trade,) there are now numerous
dealers whose motto is, “small gains and frequent”—a great
business at low prices, rather than high prices and few trans-
actions ; and by turning over their capital more rapidly, and
adding to it by borrowed capital when needed, these dealers
often obtain individually higher profits; though they neces-
sarily lower the profits of those among their competitors, who
do not adopt the same principle.


§5. The preceding remarks have, I hope, sufficiently
elucidated what is meant by the common phrase, “the ordi-
nary rate of profit ;” and the sense in which, and the limita-
tions under which, this ordinary rate has a real existence. It
now remains to consider, what causes determine its amount.

I assume, throughout, the state of things, which, where
the labourers and capitalists are separate classes, prevails,
with few exceptions, universally ; namely, that the capitalist
advances the whole expenses, including the entire remunera-
tion of the labourer. That he should do so, is not a matter
of inherent necessity; the labourer might wait until the pro-
duction is complete, for all that part of his wages which
exceeds mere necessaries ; and even for the whole, if he has
funds in hand, sufficient for his temporary support. But


PROFITS. 491


in the latter case, the labourer is to that extent really a
capitalist, investing capital in the concern, by supplying a
portion of the funds necessary for carrying it on; and even
in the former case he may be looked upon in the same light,
since, contributing his labour at less than the market price,
he may be regarded as lending the difference to his employer,
and receiving it back with interest (on whatever principle
computed) from the proceeds of the enterprise.

The capitalist, then, may be assumed to make all the
advances, and receive all the produce. His profit consists of
the excess of the produce above the advances; his rate of
profit is the ratio which that excess bears to the amount
advanced. But what do the advances consist of ?

It is, for the present, necessary to suppose, that the
capitalist does not pay any rent; has not to purchase the use
of any appropriated natural agent. This indeed is scarcely
ever the exact truth. The agricultural capitalist, except
when he is the owner of the soil he cultivates, always, or


almost always, pays rent; and even in manufactures, (not to
mention ground-rent), the materials of the manufacture have
generally paid rent, in some stage of their production. The
nature of rent, however, we have not yet taken into con-
sideration; and it will hereafter appear, that no practical
error, on the question we are now examining, is produced by


disregarding it. pire
If, then, leaving rent out of the question, we inquire in


what it is that the advances of the capitalist, for purposes of


production, consist, we shall find that they consist of wages


of labour. oe
A large portion of the expenditure of every capitalist


consists in the direct payment of wages. What does not con-
sist of this, is composed of materials and implements, including
buildings. But materials and implements are produced by
labour; and as our supposed capitalist is not meant to repre-
sent a single employment, but to be a type of the productive
industry of the whole country, we may suppose that he


492 BOOK II. CHAPTER xv. § 6.


makes his own tools, and raises his own materials. He does
this by means of previous advances, which, again, consist
wholly of wages. If we suppose him to buy the materials
and tools instead of producing them, the case is not altered:
he then repays to a previous producer the wages which that
previous producer has paid. It is true, he repays it to him
with a profit; and if he had produced the things himself, he
himself must have had that profit, on this part of his outlay
as well as on every other part. The fact, however, remains,
that in the whole process of production, beginning with the
materials and tools and ending with the finished product, all
the advances have consisted of nothing but wages; except
that certain of the capitalists concerned have, for the sake of
general convenience, had their share of profit paid to them
before the operation was completed. Whatever, of the ulti-
mate product, is not profit, is repayment of wages.


§ 6. It thus appears that the two elements on which,
and which alone, the gains of the capitalists depend, are, first,
the magnitude of the produce, in other words, the productive
power of labour; and secondly, the proportion of that pro-
duce obtained by the labourers themselves; the ratio, which
the remuneration of the labourers bears to the amount they
produce. These two things form the data for determining
the gross amount divided as profit among all the capitalists
of the country: but the rate of profit, the percentage on the
capital, depends only on the second of the two elements, the
labourers’ proportional share, and not on the amount to be
shared. If the produce of labour were doubled, and the
labourers obtained the same proportional share as before, that
is, if their remuneration was also doubled, the capitalists, it
is true, would gain twice as much; but as they would also
have had to advance twice as much, the rate of their profit
would be only the same as before.

We thus arrive at the conclusion of Ricardo and others,
that the rate of profits depends upon wages ; rising as wages


H
i
i
|


PROFITS. 493


fall, and falling as wages rise. In adopting, however, this
doctrine, I must insist upon making a most necessary altera-
tion in its wording. Instead of saying that profits depend
on wages, let us say (what Ricardo really meant) that they
depend on the cost of labour.

Wages, and the cost of labour; what labour brings in to
the labourer, and what “it costs to the capitalist; are ideas
quite distinct, and which it is of the utmost importance to
keep so. For this purpose it is essential not to designate
them, as is almost always done, by the same name. Nothing
is more common than to say that wages are high or low,
meaning only that the cost of labour is high or low. The
Teverse of this would be oftener the truth: the cost of labour
is frequently at its highest where wages are lowest. This
may arise from two causes. In the first place, the labour,
though cheap, may be inefficient. In no European country
are wages so low as in Ireland: the remuneration of an
agricultural labourer in the west of Ireland, is not more than
half the wages of even the lowest-paid Hnglishman, the
Dorsetshire labourer. But if, from inferior skill and in-
dustry, two days labour of an Irishman accomplish no more
work than an English labourer performs in one, the Irish-
man’s labour costs as much as the Englishman’s, though it
brings in so much less to himself. The capitalist’s profit is
determined by the former of these two things, not the latter.
That a difference, to this extent, really exists in the efficiency
oft ie Teen fe proved not only by abundant testimony, but
by the fact, that notwithstanding the lowness of wages, profits
of capital are not higher in Ireland than in England.

The other cause which renders wages, and the cost of
labour, no real criteria of one another, is the varying costli-
ness of the articles which the labour consumes. If these
are cheap, wages, in the sense which is of importance to the
labourer, may be high, and yet the cost of labour may be
low: if dear, the labourer may be wretchedly off, although
his labour may cost much to the capitalist. This last is the


494 BOOK II. CHAPTER xv. § 6.


condition of a country over-peopled in relation to its land;
in which, food being dear, the poorness of the labourer’s
real reward does not prevent labour from costing much to
the purchaser, and low wages and low profits co-exist. The
opposite case is exemplified in the United States of America.
The labourer there enjoys a greater abundance of comforts
than in any other country in the world, except some of our
newest colonies ; but, owing to the cheap price at which these
comforts can be obtained (combined with the great efficiency
of the labour), the cost of labour to the capitalist is con-
siderably lower than in Europe. It must be so, since the
rate of profit is higher; as indicated by the rate of interest,
which is six per cent at New York when it is three or three
and a quarter per cent in London.

The cost of labour, then, is, in the language of mathe-
matics, a function of three variables: the efficiency of labour;
the wages of labour (meaning thereby the real reward of the
labourer); and the greater or less cost at which the articles
composing that real reward can be produced or purchased.
It is plain that the cost of labour to the capitalist must be
influenced by each of these three circumstances; and cannot
be affected by any others. These, therefore, are also the
circumstances which determine the rate of profit; and it can-
not be in any way affected except through one or other of
them. If labour generally became more efficient, without
being more highly rewarded ; if, without its becoming less
efficient, its remuneration fell, no increase taking place in the
cost of the articles composing that remuneration ; or if those
articles became less costly, without the labourer’s obtaining
more of them; in any one of these three cases, profits would
rise. If, on the contrary, labour became less efficient (as it
might do from diminished bodily vigour in the people, or
from deteriorated education); or if the labourer obtained a
higher remuneration, without any increased cheapness in the
things composing it; or if, without his obtaining more, that
which he did obtain became more costly; profits, in all these


PROFITS, 495


cases, would suffer a diminution, And there is no other
combination of circumstances, in which the general rate of
profit of a country, in all employments indifferently, can either
fall or rise.

The evidence of these propositions can only be stated
generally, though, it is hoped, conclusively, in this stage of
our subject. It will come forth in greater fulness and force
when, having taken into consideration the theory of Value
and Price, we shall be enabled to exhibit the law of profits in
the conerete—in the complex entanglement of circumstances
in which it actually works. This can only be done in the
ensuing Book. One topic still remains to be discussed in
the present one, so far as it admits of being treated inde-
pendently of considerations of Value; the subject of Rent:
to which we now proceed.


oie F
ENTE i


CHAPTER XVI.


OF RENT.


§ 1. Tue requisites of production being labour, capital,
and natural agents; the only person, besides the labourer
and the capitalist, whose consent is necessary to production,
and who can claim a share of the produce as the price of that
consent, is the person who, by the arrangements of society,
possesses exclusive power over some natural agent. The
land is the principal of the natural agents which are capable
of being appropriated, and the consideration paid for its use
is called rent. Landed proprietors are the only class, of any
numbers or importance, who have a claim to a share in the
distribution of the produce, through their ownership of
something which neither they nor any one else have pro-
duced. If there be any other cases of a similar nature, they
will be easily understood, when the nature and laws of rent
are comprehended.

It is at once evident, that rent is the effect of a mono-
poly; though the monopoly is a natural one, which may be
regulated, which may even be held as a trust for the commu-
nity generally, but which cannot be prevented from existing.
The reason why landowners are able to require rent for their
land, is that it is a commodity which many want, and which
no one can obtain but from them. If all the land of the
country belonged to one person, he could fix the rent at his
pleasure. The whole people would be dependent on his will
for the necessaries of life, and he might make what conditions
he chose. This is the actual state of things in those Oriental
kingdoms in which the land is considered the property of the
state. Rent is then confounded with taxation, and the despot
may exact the utmost which the unfortunate cultivators have


RENT. 497


to give. Indeed, the exclusive possessor of the land of a
country could not well be other than despot of it. The
effect would be much the same if the land belonged to so
few people that they could, and did, concert together as one
man, and fix the rent by agreement among themselves.
This case, however, is nowhere known to exist : and the only
remaining supposition is that of free competition ; the land-
owners being supposed to be, as in fact they are, too nume-
rous to combine.


§ 2. A thing which is limited in quantity, even though
its possessors do not act in concert, is still a monopolized
article. But even when monopolized, a thing which is the
gift of nature, and requires no labour or outlay as the condi-
tion of its existence, will, if there be competition among the
holders of it, command a price, only if it exists in less quan-
tity than the demand. If the whole land of a country were
Tequired for cultivation, all of it might yield a rent. But in
no country of any extent do the wants of the population
require that all the land, which is capable of cultivation,
should be cultivated. The food and other agricultural pro-
duce which the people need, and which they are willing and
able to pay for at a price which remunerates the grower, may
always be obtained without cultivating all the land; some-
times without cultivating more than a small part of it; the
most fertile lands, or those in the most convenient situations,
being of course preferred. There is always, therefore, some
land which cannot, in existing circumstances, pay any rent;
and no land ever pays rent, unless, in point of fertility
or situation, it belongs to those superior kinds which exist in
less quantity than the demand—which cannot be made to
yield all the produce required for the community, unless
on terms still less advantageous than the resort to less
favoured soils.

There is land, such as the deserts of Arabia, which will yield
nothing to any amount of labour; and there is land, like


Oe
VOL. I. sexs


—-
“


*
HY
'


a
1
re
if


498 BOOK Il. CHAPTER Xvi. § 2.


some of our hard sandy heaths, which would produce some-
thing, but, in the present state of the soil, not enough to
defray the expenses of production. Such lands, unless by
some application of chemistry to agriculture still remaining
to be invented, cannot be cultivated for profit, unless some
one actually creates a soil, by spreading new ingredients
over the surface, or mixing them with the existing materials.
If ingredients fitted for this purpose exist in the subsoil, or
close at hand, the improvement even of the most unpromis-
ing spots may answer as a speculation: but if those ingre-
dients are costly, and must be brought from a distance, it
will seldom answer to do this for the sake of profit, though
the “magic of property” will sometimes effect it. Land
which cannot possibly yield a profit, is sometimes cultivated
at a loss, the cultivators having their wants partially supplied
from other sources; as in the case of paupers, and some
monasteries or charitable institutions, among which may be
reckoned the Poor Colonies of Belgium. The worst land
which can be cultivated as a means of subsistence, is that
which will just replace the seed, and the food of the labourers
employed on it, together with what Dr. Chalmers calls their
secondaries ; that is, the labourers who supply them with
tools, and with the remaining necessaries of life. Whether any
given land is capable of doing more than this, is not a ques-
tion of political economy, but of physical fact. The suppo-
sition leaves nothing for profits, nor anything for the labourers
except necessaries: the land, therefore, can only be culti-
vated by the labourers themselves, or else at a pecuniary
loss: and @ fortiori, cannot in any contingency afford a rent.
The worst land which can be cultivated as an investment for
capital, is that which, after replacing the seed, not only feeds
the agricultural labourers and their secondaries, but affords
them the current rate of wages, which may extend to much
more than mere necessaries ; and leaves for those who have
advanced the wages of these two classes of labourers, a sur-
plus equal to the profit they could have expected from any


eye eee ee Te


RENT. 499


other employment of their capital. Whether any given land
can do more than this, is not merely a physical question, but
depends partly on the market value of agricultural produce.
What the land can do for the labourers and for the capitalist
beyond feeding all whom it directly or indirectly employs, of
course depends upon what the remainder of the produce can
be sold for. The higher the market value of produce, the
lower are the soils to which cultivation can descend, consis-
tently with affording to the capital employed, the ordinary
rate of profit.

As, however, differences of fertility slide into one another
by insensible gradations ; and differences of accessibility, that
is, of distance from markets, obviously do the same; and
since there is land so barren that it could not pay for its
cultivation at any price; it is evident that, whatever the price
may be, there must in any extensive region be some land
which at that price will just pay the wages of the cultivators,
and yield to the capital employed the ordinary profit, and no
more. Until, therefore, the price rises higher, or until
some improvement raises that particular land to a higher
place in the scale of fertility, it cannot pay any rent. It is
evident, however, that the community needs the produce of
this quality of land; since if the lands more fertile or better
situated than it, could have sufficed to supply the wants of
society, the price would not have risen so high as to render
its cultivation profitable. This land, therefore, will be culti-
vated; and we may lay it down as a principle, that so long as
any of the land of a country which is fit for cultivation is not
cultivated, the worst land in actual cultivation (in point of
fertility and situation together) pays no rent.


§ 3. If, then, of the land in cultivation, the part which
yields least return to the labour and capital employed on it,
gives only the ordinary profit of capital, without leaving any-
thing for rent; a standard is afforded for estimating the
amount of rent which will be yielded by all other land. Any
2x2


=


i
if
i
i
t


4
i


—_


eed


petit ir ea ates hearer


ae ena nn amar at = -sa0s


500 BOOK Il. CHAPTER xvi. § 3.


land yields just as much more than the ordinary profits of
stock, as it yields more than what is returned by the worst
land in cultivation. The surplus is what the farmer can
afford to pay as rent to the landlord; and since, if he did not
so pay it, he would receive more than the ordinary rate of
profit, the competition of other capitalists, that competition
which equalizes the profits of different capitals, will enable
the landlord to appropriate it. The rent, therefore, which any
land will yield, is the excess of its produce, beyond what would
be returned to the same capital if employed on the worst
land in cultivation. This is not, and never was pretended to
be, the limit of metayer rents, or of cottier rents ; but if is
the limit of farmer’s rents. No land rented to a capitalist
farmer will permanently yield more than this ; and if it ever
yields less, it must be because the landlord foregoes a part of
what, if he chose, he could obtain.

This is the theory of rent, first propounded at the end of
the last century by Dr. Anderson, and which, neglected at
the time, was almost simultaneously rediscovered, twenty
years after, by Sir Edward West, Mr. Malthus, and Mr.
Ricardo. It is one of the cardinal doctrines of political
economy ; and until it was understood, no consistent expla-
nation could be given of many of the more complicated in-
dustrial phenomena. The evidence of its truth will be
manifested with a great increase of clearness, when we come
to trace the laws of the phenomena of Value and Price.
Until that is done, it is not possible to free the doctrine
from every difficulty which may present itself, nor perhaps to
convey, to those previously unacquainted with the subject,
more than a general apprehension of the reasoning by which
the theorem is arrived at. Some, however, of the objections
commonly made to it, admit of a complete answer even in
the present stage of our inquiries.

It has been denied that there can be any land in cultiva-
tion which pays no rent; because landlords (it is contended)
would not allow their land to be occupied without payment.


RENT. 501


Those who lay any stress on this as an objection, must
think, that land of the quality which can but just pay for its
cultivation, lies together in large masses, detached from any
land of better quality. If an estate consisted wholly of this
land, or of this and still worse, it is likely enough that the
owner would not give the use of it for nothing; he would
probably (if a rich man) prefer keeping it for other purposes,
as for exercise, or ornament, or perhaps as a game preserve.
No farmer could afford to offer him anything for it, for pur-
poses of culture; though something would probably be
obtained for the use of its natural pasture, or other spon-
taneous produce. Even such land, however, would not
necessarily remain uncultivated. It might be farmed by the
proprietor : no unfrequent case even in England. Portions
of it might be granted as temporary allotments to labouring
families, either from philanthropic motives, or to save the
poor rate ; or occupation might be allowed to squatters, free
of rent, in the hope that their labour might give it value at
some future period. Both these cases are of quite ordinary
occurrence. So that even if an estate were wholly composed
of the worst land capable of profitable cultivation, it would
not necessarily lie uncultivated because it could pay no rent,
Inferior land, however, does not usually occupy, without in-
terruption, many square miles of ground; it is dispersed
here and there, with patches of better land intermixed, and
the same person who rents the better land, obtains along
with it the inferior soils which alternate with it. He pays a
rent, nominally for the whole farm, but calculated on the
produce of those parts alone (however small a portion of the
whole) which are capable of returning more than the common
rate of profit. It is thus scientifically true, that the remain-
Ing parts pay no rent.


§ 4. Let us however suppose that there were a validity
in this objection, which can by no means be conceded to it ;
that when the demand of the community had forced up food


502 _ BOOK Il. CHAPTER Xvi. § 4.


to such a price as would remunerate the expense of pro-
ducing it from a certain quality of soil, it happened neverthe-
less that all the soil of that quality was withheld from culti-
vation, by the obstinacy of the owners in demanding a rent
for it, not nominal, nor trifling, but sufficiently onerous to
be a material item in the calculations of a farmer. What
would then happen? Merely that the increase of produce,
which the wants of society required, would for the time be
obtained wholly (as it always is partially), not by an extension
of cultivation, but by an increased application of labour and
capital to land already cultivated.

Now we have already seen that this increased application
of capital, other things being unaltered, is always attended
with a smaller proportional return. We are not to suppose
some new agricultural invention made precisely at this junc-
ture; nor a sudden extension of agricultural skill and know-
ledge, bringing into more general practice, just then, inven-
tions already in partial use. We are to suppose no change,
except a demand for more corn, and a consequent rise of its
price. The rise of price enables measures to be taken for
increasing the produce, which could not have been taken with
profit at the previous price. The farmer uses more expensive
manures; or manures land which he formerly left to nature;
or procures lime or marl froma distance, as a dressing for the
soil; or pulverizes or weeds it more thoroughly; or drains,
irrigates, or subsoils portions of it which at former prices
would not have paid the cost of the operation; and so forth.
These things, or some of them, are done, when, more food
being wanted, cultivation has no means of expanding itselt
upon new lands. And when the impulse is given to extract
an increased amount of produce from the soil, the farmer or
improver will only consider whether the outlay he makes for
the purpose will be returned to him with the ordinary profit,
and not whether any surplus will remain for rent. Even,
therefore, if it were the fact that there is never any land
taken into cultivation, for which rent, and that too of an


RENT. 503


amount worth taking imto consideration, was not paid; it
would be true nevertheless that there is always some agri-
cultural capital which pays no rent, because it returns nothing
beyond the ordinary rate of profit: this capital being the
portion of capital last applied—that to which the last addi-
tion to the produce was due; or (to express the essentials of the
case in one phrase), that which is applied in the least favourable
circumstances. But the same amount of demand, and the
same price, which enable this least productive portion of
capital barely to replace itself with the ordinary profit, enable
every other portion to yield a surplus, proportioned to the
advantage it possesses. And this surplus it is, which competi-
tion enables the landlord to appropriate. The rent of all land
is measured by the excess of the return to the whole capital
employed on it, above what is necessary to replace the capi-
tal with the ordinary rate of profit, or in other words, above
what the same capital would yield if it were all employed in
as disadvantageous circumstances as the least productive por-
tion of it: whether that least productive portion of capital
is rendered so by being employed on the worst soil, or by
being expended in extorting more produce from land which
already yielded as much as it could be made to part with
on easy terms.

It is not pretended that the facts of any concrete case
conform with absolute precision to this or any other scientific
principle. We must never forget that the truths of political
economy are truths only in the rough. It is not, for example,
strictly true that a farmer will cultivate no land, and apply
no capital, which returns less than the ordinary profits. He
will expect the ordinary profits on the bulk of his capital.
But when he has cast in his lot with his farm, and bartered
his skill and exertions, once for all, against what the farm will
yield to him, he will probably be willing to expend capital
on it (for an immediate return) in any manner which will


afford him a surplus profit however small, beyond the value


Baa ee


FBR IS J sae


ek a LER ren


i Hen aie


504 BOOK II. CHAPTER Xvi. § 4.


of the risk, and the interest which he must pay for the capi-
tal if borrowed, or can get for it elsewhere if it is his own.
But a new farmer, entering on the land, would make his cal-
culations differently, and would not commence unless he
could expect the full rate of ordinary profit on all the capital
which he intended embarking in the enterprize. Again,
prices may range higher or lower during the currency of a
lease, than was expected when the contract was made, and
the land, therefore, may be over or under-rented: and eyen
when the lease expires, the landlord may be unwilling to
grant a necessary diminution of rent, and the farmer, rather
than relinquish his occupation, or seek a farm elsewhere when
all are occupied, may consent to go on paying too high a rent.
Irregularities like these we must always expect: it is impos-
sible in political economy to obtain general theorems embra-
cing the complications of circumstances which may affect
the result in an individual case. The laws which we are
enabled to lay down respecting rents, profits, wages, prices,
are only true in so faras the persons concerned are free from
the influence of any other motives than those arising from
the general circumstances of the case, and are guided, as to
those, by the ordinary mercantile estimate of profit and loss.
Applying this twofold supposition to the case of farmers and
landlords, it will be true that the farmer requires the ordinary
rate of profit on the whole of his capital; that whatever it
returns to him beyond this he is obliged to pay to the land-
lord, but will not consent to pay more; that there is a portion
of capital applied to agriculture in such circumstances of
productiveness as to yield only the ordinary profits; and that
the difference between the produce of this, and of any other
capital of similar amount, is the measure of the tribute
which that other capital can and will pay, under the name
of rent, to the landlord. This constitutes a Jaw of rent, as
near the truth as such a law can possibly be: though of
course modified or disturbed in individual cases, by pending


RENT. 505


contracts, individual miscalculations, the influence of habit,
and even the particular feelings and dispositions of the per-
sons concerned.


§ 5. Aremark is often made, which must not here be
omitted, although, I think, more importance has been at-
tached to it than it merits. Under the name of rent, many
payments are commonly included, which are not a remunera-
tion for the original powers of the land itself, but for capital
expended on it. The additional rent which land yields in
consequence of this outlay of capital, should, in the opinion
of some writers, be regarded as profit, not rent. But before
this can be admitted, a distinction must be made. The
annual payment by a tenant almost always includes a consi-
deration for the use of the buildings on the farm; not only
barns, stables, and other outhouses, but a house to live in,
not to speak of fences and the like. The landlord will ask,
and the tenant give, for these, whatever is considered sufficient
to yield the ordinary profit, or rather (risk and trouble being
here out of the question) the ordinary interest, on the value
of the buildings ; that is, on what it has cost to erect them, or
rather, on what it would now cost to erect others as good: the
tenant being bound, in addition, to leave them in as good repair
as he found them, for otherwise a much larger payment than
simple interest would of course be required from him. These
buildings are as distinct a thing from the farm, as the stock
or the timber on it; and what is paid for them can no more
be called rent of land, than a payment for cattle would be, if
it were the custom that the landlord should stock the farm
for the tenant. The buildings, like the cattle, are not land,
but capital, regularly consumed and reproduced; and all
payments made in consideration for them are properly
interest.
But with regard to capital actually sunk in improve-
ments, and not requiring periodical renewal, but spent once
for all in giving the land a permanent increase of productive-


506 BOOK Il. CHAPTER Xvi. § 5.


ness, it appears to me that the return made to such capital
loses altogether the character of profits, and is governed by
the principles of rent. It is true that a landlord will not
expend capital in improving his estate unless he expects
from the improvement an increase of income, surpassing the
interest of his outlay. Prospectively, this increase of income
may be regarded as profit; but when the expense has been
incurred, and the improvement made, the rent of the im-
proved land is governed by the same rules as that of the
unimproved. Equally fertile land commands an equal rent,
whether its fertility is natural or acquired; and I cannot
think that the incomes of those who own the Bedford Level
or the Lincolnshire Wolds, ought to be called profit and not
rent because those lands would have been worth next to
nothing unless capital had been expended on them. The
owners are not capitalists, but landlords; they have parted
with their capital; it is consumed, destroyed; and neither 1S,
nor is to be, returned to them, like the capital of a farmer or
manufacturer, from what it produces. In lieu of it they now
have land, of a certain richness, which yields the same rent,
and by the operation of the same causes, as if it had pos-
séssed from the beginning the degree of fertility which has
been artificially given to it.

An American political economist of merit, Mr. H. C.
Carey*, takes away, still more completely than I haye
attempted to do, the distinction between these two sources
of rent, by rejecting one of them altogether: he considers
all rent as the effect of capital expended. In proof of this,
he contends that the whole pecuniary value of all the land
in any country, in England for instance, or in the United
States, does not amount to anything approaching to the sum
which has been laid out, or which it would even now be
necessary to lay out, in order to bring the country to its pre-


* Principles of Political Economy, Part the First,“ Of the Laws of the
Production and Distribution of Wealth.’


RENT. 507


sent condition, from a state of primeeval forest. This asser-
tion at first sight presents itself as a most startling paradox,
seeming to imply, that the lands of all countries, taken on
the average, are not worth what has been laid out in improy-
ing them; and that, to the proprietors, the improvement of
land, has on the whole been a miscalculation. But on
examining Mr. Carey’s data, it appears that he by no means
asserts this. In his estimate of the capital sunk in the land,
he includes all which has been laid out in making roads and
canals; that is, not in adding to the value of land already
occupied, but in rendering other and rival lands accessible.
Making up the account on this principle, the result brought
out by Mr. Carey is perhaps correct, and if it is not, easily
might be so. Roads and canals are not constructed to raise
the value of the land which already supplies the markets, but
(among other purposes,) to cheapen the supply, by letting in
the produce of other and more distant lands; and the more
effectually this purpose is attained, the lower rent will. be.
If we could imagine that the railways and canals of the
United States, instead of only cheapening communication,
did their business so effectually as to annihilate cost of car-
riage altogether, and enable the produce of Michigan to reach
the market of New York as quickly and cheaply as the pro-
duce of Long Island—the whole value of all the land of the
United States (except such as lies convenient for building)
would be annihilated ; or rather, the best would only sell for
the expense of clearing, and the government tax of a dollar
and a quarter per acre; since land in Michigan, equal to the
best in the United States, may be had in unlimited abund-
ance by that amount of outlay. But it is strange that Mr.
Carey should think this fact inconsistent with the Ricardo
theory of rent. Admitting all that he asserts, it is still true
that as long as there is land which yields no rent, the land
which does yield rent, does so in consequence of some adyan-
tage which it enjoys, in fertility or vicinity to markets, over
the other; and the measure of its advantage is also the mea.


508 BOOK Il. CHAPTER XVI. § 5.


sure of its rent. And the cause of its yielding rent, is that
it possesses a natural monopoly; the quantity of land, as
favourably circumstanced as itself, not being sufficient to
supply the market. These propositions constitute the theory
of rent, laid down by Ricardo; and if they are true, I cannot
see that it signifies much whether the rent which the-land
yields at the present time, is greater or less than the interest
of the capital which has been laid out to raise its value, toge-
le ther. with the interest of the capital which has been laid out
ey to lower its value. This seems to me an altogether unim-


Hi portant question.

A Mr. Carey’s objection, however, has at least thought and
Ae originality, and in that respect differs from the arguments
he commonly met with against the theory of rent; a theorem
i Hi which may be called the pons asinorum of political economy,
| if for there are, I am inclined to think, few persons who have
bs refused their assent to it, except from not having thoroughly


understood it. The loose and inaccurate way in which it is
often apprehended by those who affect to refute it, is very
remarkable. Many, for instance, have imputed absurdity to
Mr. Ricardo’s theory, because it is absurd to say that the
cultivation of inferior land is the cause of rent on the superior.
Mr. Ricardo does not say that it is the cultivation of inferior
land, but the necessity of cultivating it, from the insufficiency
of the superior land to feed a growing population: between
it which and the proposition imputed to him there is no less a
uh difference than that between demand and supply. Others
Au again allege as an objection against Ricardo, that if all land
were of equal fertility, it might still yield a rent. But Ri-
cardo says precisely the same. He says that if all lands were
equally fertile, those which are nearer to their market than
te others, and are therefore less burthened with cost of car-
riage, would yield a rent equivalent to this advantage; and
if that the land yielding no rent would then be, not the least
i fertile, but the least advantageously situated, which the wants
of the community required to be brought into cultivation. |


t
if


a
4
i
it
cH


FEMS
aoner gee


eRe


RENT. 509


It is also distinctly a portion of Ricardo’s doctrine, that even
apart from differences of situation, the land of a country
supposed to be of uniform fertility would, all of it, on a cer-
tain supposition, pay rent: namely, if the demand of the
community required that it should all be cultivated, and cul-
tivated beyond the point at which a further application of
capital begins to be attended with a smaller proportional
return. It would be difficult to show that the whole land of
a country can yield a rent on any other supposition.


$6. After this view of the nature and causes of rent,
let us turn back to the subject of profits, and bring up for
reconsideration one of the propositions laid down in the last
chapter. We there stated, that the advances of the capi-
talist, or in other words, the expenses of production, consist
solely in wages of labour; that whatever portion of the
outlay is not wages, is profit, and whatever is not profit, is
wages. Rent, however, being an element which it is impos-
sible to resolve into either profits or wages, we were obliged,
for the moment, to assume that the capitalist is not required
to pay rent—to give an equivalent for the use of an appro-
priated natural agent: and I undertook to show in the pro-
per place, that this is an allowable supposition, and that rent
does not really form any part of the expenses of production,
or of the advances of the capitalist. The grounds on which
this assertion was made are now apparent. It is true that
all tenant-farmers, and many other classes of producers, pay
rent. But we have now seen, that whoever cultivates land,
paying a rent for it, gets in return for his rent an instrument
of superior power to other instruments of the same kind for
which no rent is paid. The superiority of the instrument is
in exact proportion to the rent paid for it. If a few persons
had steam-engines of superior power to all others in exist-
ence, but limited by physical laws to a number short of the


demand, the rent which a manufacturer would be willing to


pay for one of these steam-engines could not be looked upon


510 BOOK II. CHAPTER XVI. § 6.


as an addition to his outlay, because, by the use of it, he
would save in his other expenses the equivalent of what it
cost him: without it he could not do the same quantity of
work, unless at an additional expense equal to the rent.
The same thing is true of land. The real expenses of pro-
duction are those incurred on the worst land, or by the capi-
tal employed in the least favorable circumstances. This land
or capital pays, as we have seen, no rent. Whoever does
pay rent, gets back its full value in extra advantages, and the
rent which he pays does not place him in a worse position
than, but only in the same position as, his fellow-producer
who pays no rent, but whose instrument is one of inferior
efficiency.

We have now completed the exposition of the laws which
regulate the distribution of the produce of land, labour, and
capital, as far as it is possible to discuss those laws independ-
ently of the instrumentality by which in a civilized society
the distribution is effected; the machinery of Exchange and
Price. The more complete elucidation and final confirmation
of the laws which we have laid down, and the deduction of
their most important consequences, must be preceded by an
explanation of the nature and working of that machinery—a
subject so extensive and complicated as to require a separate
Book.


BOOK III.


EXCHANGE,


BOOK IIt.-


EXCHANGE.


CHAPTER I.


OF VALUE.


Sileeed Turney subject on which we are now about to enter
fills so important and conspicuous a position in political
economy, that in the apprehension of some thinkers its
boundaries confound themselves with those of the science
itself. One eminent writer has proposed as a name for
Political Kconomy, “ Catallactics,” or the science of ex-
changes : by others it has been called the Science of Values.
If these denominations had appeared to me logically correct,
I must have placed the discussion of the elementary laws of
value at the commencement of our Inquiry, instead of post-
poning it to the Third Part; and the possibility of so long
deferring it is alone a sufficient proof that this view of the
nature of Political Economy is too confined. It is true that
in the preceding Books we have not escaped the necessity of
anticipating some small portion of the theory of Value, espe-
cially as to the value of labour and of land. It is never-
theless evident, that of the two great departments of Political
Economy, the production of wealth and its distribution, the


WOW Te 2


514 BOOK III. CHAPTER I. § 1.


consideration of Value has to do with the latter alone; and
with that, only so far as competition, and not usage or custom,
is the distributing agency. The conditions and laws of Pro-
duction would be the same as they are, if the arrangements
of society did not depend on Exchange, or did not admit of
it. Even in the present system of industrial life, in which
employments are minutely subdivided, and all concerned in
production depend for their remuneration on the price of
a particular commodity, exchange is not the fundamental
law of the distribution of the produce, no more than roads
and carriages are the essential laws of motion, but merely a
part of the machinery for effecting it. To confound these
ideas, seems to me not only a logical, but a practical blunder.
It is a case of the error too common in political economy, of
not distinguishing between necessities arising from laws of
nature, and those created by social arrangements: an error,
which appears to me to be at all times producing two oppo-
site mischiefs ; on the one hand, causing political economists
to class the merely temporary truths of their subject among
its permanent and universal laws; and on the other, leading
many persons to mistake the permanent laws of Production
(such as those on which the necessity is grounded of restrain-
ing population) for temporary accidents, arising from the
existing constitution of society—which those who would
frame a new system of social arrangements, are at liberty to
disregard.

In a state of society, however, in which the industrial
system is entirely foundedon purchase and sale, each individual,
for the most part, living not on things in the production of
which he himself bears a part, but on things obtained by 4
double exchange, a sale followed by a purchase—the question
of Value is fundamental. Almost every speculation respecting
the economical interests of a society thus constituted, implies
some theory of Value: the smallest error on that subject
infects with corresponding error all our other conclusions;
and anything vague or misty in our conception of it, creates


rs
ET LE SS ST ST SEAT ATS


VALUE. 515


confusion and uncertainty in everything else. Happily, there
is nothing in the laws of Value which remains for the present
or any future writer to clear up; the theory of the subject is
complete: the only difficulty to be overcome is that of so
stating it as to solve by anticipation the chief perplexities
which occur in applying it: and to do this, some minuteness
of exposition, and considerable demands on the patience of
the reader, are unavoidable. He will be amply repaid, how-
ever, (if a stranger to these inquiries) by the ease and ra-
pidity with which a thorough understanding of this subject
will enable him to fathom most of the remaining questions of
political economy.


§ 2. We must begin by settling our phraseology. Adam
Smith, in a passage often quoted, has touched upon the most
obvious ambiguity of the word’ value; which in one of its
senses, signifies usefulness, in another, power of purchasing;
in his own language, value in use and value in exchange.
But (as Mr. De Quincey has remarked) in illustrating this
double meaning, Adam Smith has himself fallen into another
ambiguity. Things (he says) which have the greatest value in
use have often little or no value in exchange; which is true,
since that which can be obtained without labour or sacrifice
will command no price, however useful or needful it may be.
But he proceeds to add, that things which have the greatest
value in exchange, as a diamond for example, may have little
or no value in use. This is employing the word use, not in
the sense in which political economy is concerned with it,
but in that other sense in which use is opposed to pleasure.
Political economy has nothing to do with the comparative
estimation of different uses in the judgment of a philo-
sopher or of a moralist. The use of a thing, in political
economy, means its capacity to satisfy a desire, or serve a
purpose. Diamonds have this capacity ina high degree, and
unless they had it, would not bear any price. ; Value in use,
or as Mr. De Quincey calls it, teleologic sales as extreme

2L 2


516 BOOK Ill. CHAPTER I. § 3.


limit of value in exchange. The exchange value of a thing
may fall short, to any amount, of its value in use; but that
it can ever exceed the value in use, implies a contradiction;
it supposes that persons will give, to possess a thing, more
than the utmost value which they themselves put upon It, as
a means of gratifying their inclinations.

The word Value, when used without adjunct, always
means, in political economy, value in exchange; or as it has
been called by Adam Smith and his successors, exchangeable
value, a phrase which no amount of authority that can be
quoted for it can make other than bad English. Mr. De
Quincey substitutes the term Exchange Value, which is un-
exceptionable.

Exchange value requires to be distinguished from Price.
The words Value and Price were used as synonymous by the
early political economists, and are not always discriminated
even by Ricardo. But the most accurate modern writers, to
avoid the wasteful expenditure of two good scientific terms
on a single idea, have employed Price to express the value of
a thing in relation to money; the quantity of money for
which it will exchange. By the price of a thing, therefore,
we shall henceforth understand its value in money; by the
value, or exchange value of a thing, its general power of
purchasing; the command which its possession gives over
purchaseable commodities in general.


§ 3. But here a fresh demand for explanation presents
itself. What is meant by command over commodities m
general? The same thing exchanges for a great quantity of
some commodities, and for a very small quantity of others.
A suit of clothes exchanges for a great quantity of bread,
and for a very small quantity of precious stones. The value
of a thing in exchange for some commodities may be rising,
for others falling. A coat may exchange for less bread this
year than last, if the harvest has been bad, but for more
glass or iron, if a tax has been taken off those commodities,


——————————


VALUE. 517


ee iene ee in their manufacture. Has the
eo - at, in these circumstances, fallen or risen i
npossi le to say: all that can be said is, that it has
fallen in relation to one thing, and risen in respect to another.
But there is another case, in which no one would have any
hesitation in saying what sort of change had taken place in
the value of the coat: namely, if the cause in which the
disturbance of exchange values originated, was something
directly affecting the coat itself, and not the bread, or the
glass. Suppose, for example, that an invention had been
made in machinery, by which broadcloth could be woven at
half the former cost. The effect of this would be to lower
the value of a coat, and if lowered by this cause, it would be
lowered not in relation to bread only or to glass only, but to all
purchaseable things, except such as happened to be affected
at the very time by a similar depressing cause. We should
therefore say, that there had been a fall in the exchange
value or general purchasing power of a coat. The idea of
general exchange value originates in the fact, that there
really are causes which tend to alter the value of a thing in
exchange for things generally, that is, for all things which
are not themselves acted upon by causes of) simile

dency.
In considering exchange value scie


dient to abstract from all causes except those which originate
in the very commodity under consideration. Those which
which we compare 1t,


originate in the commodities with eae
; : os
affect its value in relation to these commodities; bu
which originate m itself, affect its V
commodities. “In order the more com


attention to these last, it 1s conyen Gan sable in
tommoditicsabab thes one in question remain invaria


their relative values When we are considering the ers
a a . i
which raise or lower the value of corn, we suppose that
i yhi gin
woollens, silks, cutlery, sugar, timber, &c., while varying
‘> b)


j ant in the pra-
their power of purchasing corn, a Pp


ntifically, it is expe-


alue in relation to all
pletely to confine our
t to assume that all


remain const


~ epics


518 BOOK Ill. CHAPTER I. § 4.


portions in which they exchange for one another. On this
assumption, any one of them may be taken as a representa-
tive of all the rest: since in whatever manner corn varies m
value with respect to any one commodity, it varies in the
same manner and degree with respect to every other; and
the upward or downward movement of its value estimated in
some one thing, is all that needs be considered. Its money
value, therefore, or price, will represent as well as anything
else its general exchange value, or purchasing powers and
from an obvious convenience, will often be employed by us
in that representative character; with the proviso that money
itself do not vary in its general purchasing power, but that
the prices of all things, other than that which we happen to
be considering, remain unaltered.


§ 4. The distinction between Value and Price, as we
have now defined them, is so obvious, as scarcely to seem m
need of any illustration. But in political economy the
greatest errors arise from overlooking the most obvious
truths. Simple as this distinction is, it has consequences
with which a reader unacquainted with the subject would do
well to begin early by making himself thoroughly familiar.
The following is one of the principal. There is such a thing
as a general rise of prices. All commodities may rise in
their money price. But there cannot be a general rise of
values. It is a contradiction in terms. A can only rise in
value by exchanging for a greater quantity of B and C; in
which case these must exchange for a smaller quantity of A.
All things cannot rise relatively to one another. If one-half
of the commodities in the market rise in exchange value, the
very terms imply a fall of the other half; and reciprocally,
the fall implies a rise. Things which are exchanged for one
another can no more all fall, or all rise, than a dozen runners
can each outrun all the rest, or a hundred trees all overtop
one another. Simple as this truth is, we shall presently see
that it is lost sight of in some of the most accredited


VALUE. 519


ae Ger Sigs and of what are called prac-
Beat ee — st specimen, we may instance the
eee : attac < in the imagination of most people
Re escca oe prices. Because when the price of
7 ee odity rises, the circumstance usually indicates a
its value, people have an indistinct feeling when all
prices rise, as if all things simultaneously had risen in value,
and all the possessors had become enriched. That the
srloniey, prices of all things should rise or fall, provided they
all rise or fall equally, is in itself, and apart from exist-
ing contracts, of no consequence. It affects nobody’s
wages, profits, or rent. Kvery one gets more money in
the one case, and less in the other; but, of all that is to be
bought with money they get neither more nor less than
before. Itmakes no other difference than that of using more
or fewer counters to reckon by. The only thing which in this
case is really altered in value, is money; and the only persons
who either gain or lose are the holders of money, or those who
have to receive or to pay fixed sums of it. There is a differ-
ence to annuitants and to creditors the one way, and to those
who are burthened with annuities, or with debts, the contrary
way. There is a disturbance, in short, of fixed money con-
tracts; and this is an evil, whether it takes place in the
debtor’s favour or in the creditor's. But as to future trans-
actions there is no difference to any on® Let it therelon
be remembered (and occasions will often arise for calling ut
to mind) that a general rise or @ general fall of ee of
a contradiction; and that a general rise or a general fall e
prices is merely tantamount to an alteration in the value (0)
money, and is a matter of complete indifference, save in SO
far as it affects existing contracts for recelving and paying


fixed pecuniary amounts.
y into the laws of


ation to make-
es I contemplate


ommencing the inquir
one further observ
e for all, that the cas


§ 5. Before ¢
value and price, I have
must give warning, one


oh hE


—————— SS


520 BOOK III. CHAPTER I. § 5.


are those in which values and prices are determined by com-
petition alone. In so far only as they are thus determined,
can they be reduced to any assignable law. The buyers must
be supposed as studious to buy cheap, as the sellers to sell
dear. The values and prices, therefore, to which our con-
clusions apply, are mercantile values and prices; such prices
as are quoted in price-currents; prices in the wholesale mar-
kets, in which buying as well as selling is a matter of busi-
ness; in which the buyers take pains to know, and generally
do know, the lowest price at which an article of a given qua-
lity can be obtained; and in which, therefore, the axiom is
true, that there cannot be, for the same article, of the same
quality, two prices in the same market. Our propositions
will be true in a much more qualified sense, of retail prices;
the prices paid in shops, for articles of personal consumption.
For such things there often are not merely two, but many
prices, in different shops, or even in the same shop; habit
and accident having as much to do in the matter as general
causes. Purchases for private use, even by people in busi-
ness, are not always made on business principles: the feel-
ings which come into play in the operation of getting and in
that of spending their income, are often extremely different.
Either from indolence, or insouciance, or because people
think it fine to pay and ask no questions, three-fourths of
those who can afford it, give much higher prices than neces-
sary for the things they consume; while the poor often do
the same from ignorance and defect of judgment, want of
time for searching and making inquiry, and not unfrequently
from coercion, open or disguised. For these reasons, retail
prices do not follow with all the regularity which might be
expected, the action of the causes which determine wholesale
prices. The influence of those causes is ultimately felt in the
retail markets, and is the real source of such variations in
retail prices as are of a general and permanent character.
But there is no regular or exact correspondence. Shoes of
equally good quality are sold in different shops at prices which


VALUE, 521


differ considerably; and the price of leather may fall without
causing the richer class of buyers to pay less for shoes.
Nevertheless, shoes do sometimes fall in price; and when
they do, the cause is always some such general circumstance
as the cheapening of leather: and when leather is cheapened,
even if no difference shows itself in shops frequented by rich
people, the artisan and the labourer generally get their shoes
cheaper, and there is a visible diminution in the contract prices
at which shoes are delivered for the supply of a workhouse or
of a regiment. In all reasoning about prices the proviso
must be understood, “supposing all parties to take care of
their own interest.” Inattention to these distinctions has
led to improper applications of the abstract principles of
political economy, and still oftener to an undue discrediting
of those principles through their being compared with a dif-
ferent sort of facts from those which they contemplate, or
which can fairly be expected to accord with them.


PP EAT


CHAPTER II.


OF DEMAND AND SUPPLY, IN THEIR RELATION TO
VALUE.


§1. Tsar a thing may have any value in exchange,
two conditions are necessary. It must be of some use; that
is (as already explained) it must conduce to some purpose,
satisfy some desire. No one will pay a price, or part with
anything which serves some of his purposes, to obtain a
thing which serves none of them. But, secondly, the thing
must not only have some utility, there must also be some
difficulty in its attainment. “Any article whatever,” says
Mr. De Quincey*, “to obtain that artificial sort of value '
which is meant by exchange value, must begin by offering
itself as a means to some desirable purpose; and secondly,
even though possessing incontestably this preliminary advan-
tage, it will never ascend to an exchange value in cases where
it can be obtained gratuitously and without effort; of which
last terms both are necessary as limitations. For often it
will happen that some desirable object may be obtained gra-
tuitously; stoop, and you gather it at your feet; but still,
because the continued iteration of this stooping exacts a labo-
rious effort, very soon it is found, that to gather for your-
self virtually is not gratuitous. In the vast forests of the
Canadas, at intervals, wild strawberries may be gratuitously
gathered by shiploads: yet such is the exhaustion of a stoop-
ing posture, and of a labour so monotonous, that everybody
is soon glad to resign the service into mercenary hands.”
As was pointed out in the last chapter, the utility of a
thing in the estimation of the purchaser, is the extreme limit


* Logie of Political Economy, p. 13.


DEMAND AND SUPPLY. 523


of its exchange value: higher the value cannot ascend; pecu-
liar circumstances are required to raise it so high. This topic
is happily illustrated by Mr. De Quincey. “ Walk into al-
most any possible shop, buy the first article you see; what
will determine its price? In ninety-nine cases out of a hun-
dred, simply the element D—difficulty of attainment. The
other element, U, or intrinsic utility, will be perfectly ino-
perative. Let the thing (measured by its uses) be, for your
purposes, worth ten guineas, so that you would rather give
ten guineas than lose it; yet, if the difficulty of producing
it be only worth one guinea, one guinea is the price which it
will bear. But still not the less, though U is inoperative,
can U be supposed absent? By no possibility; for, if it had
been absent, assuredly you would not have bought the article
even at the lowest price. U acts upon you, though it does
not act upon the price. On the other hand, in the hun-
dredth case, we will suppose the circumstances reversed: you
are on Lake Superior in a steam-boat, making your way to
an unsettled region 800 miles a-head of civilization, and
consciously with no chance at all of purchasing any luxury
whatsoever, little luxury or big luxury, for the space of ten
years to come. One fellow-passenger, whom you will part
with before sunset, has a powerful musical snuffbox; know-
ing by experience the power of such a toy over your own
feelings, the magic with which at times it lulls your agitations
of mind, you are vehemently desirous to purchase tt. iim
the hour of leaving London you had forgot to do so; here is
a final chance. But the owner, aware of your situation not less
than yourself, is determined to operate by a strain pushed to
the very uttermost upon U, upon the intrinsic worth of the
article in your individual estimate for your individual pur-
poses. He will not hear of Das any controlling power or
mitigating agency in the case; and finally, although at six
guineas a-piece in London or Paris you might have loaded a
Waggon with such boxes, you pay sixty rather than lose it
when the last knell of the clock has sounded, which sum-


524 BOOK Ill. CHAPTER II. § 2.


mons you to buy now or to forfeit for ever. Here, as before,
only one element is operative: before it was D, now it is U.
But after all, D was not absent, though inoperative. The
inertness of D allowed U to put forth its total effect. The
practical compression of D being withdrawn, U springs up
like water in a pump, when released from the pressure of air.
Yet still that D was present to your thoughts, though the
price was otherwise regulated, is evident; both because U
and D must coexist in order to found any case of exchange
value whatever, and because undeniably you take into very
particular consideration this D, the extreme difficulty of
attaimment (which here is the greatest possible, viz., an im-
possibility) before you consent to have the price racked up
to U. The special D has vanished; but it is replaced
in your thoughts by an unlimited D. Undoubtedly you
have submitted to U in extremity as the regulating force of
the price; but it was under a sense of D’s latent presence.
Yet D is so far from exerting any positive force, that the
retirement of D from all agency whatever on the price—
this it is which creates as it were a perfect vacuum, and
through that vacuum U rushes up to its highest and ultimate
gradation.”

This case, in which the value is wholly regulated by the
necessities or desires of the purchaser, is the case of strict
and absolute monopoly; in which, the article desired being
only obtainable from one person, he can exact any equiva-
lent, short of the point at which no purchaser could be
found. But it is not a necessary consequence, even of com-
plete monopoly, that the value should be forced up to this
ultimate limit : as will be seen when we have considered the
law of value in so far as depending on the other element,
difficulty of attainment.


§ 2. The difficulty of attainment which determines
value, is not always the same kind of difficulty. It some-
times consists in an absolute limitation of the supply. There


DEMAND AND SUPPLY. 525


ate things of which it is physically impossible to increase the
quantity, beyond certain narrow limits. Such are those
ates which can be grown only in peculiar circumstances of
soil, climate, and exposure. Such also are ancient sculptures;
Pictures by the old masters; rare books or coins, or other
articles of antiquarian curiosity. Among such may also be
reckoned houses and building-ground, in a town of definite
extent (such as Venice, or any fortified town where fortifica-
ons are necessary to security) ; the most desirable sites in
any town whatever ; houses and parks peculiarly favoured by
natural beauty, in places where that advantage is uncommon.
Potentially, all land whatever is 2 commodity of this class;
and might be practically so, in countries fully occupied and
cultivated.

But there is another category, (embracing the majority of
all things that are bought and sold), in which the obstacle to
attainment consists only in the labour and expense requisite
to produce the commodity. Without a certain labour and
expense it cannot be had; but when any one is willing to
incur this, there needs be no limit to the multiplication of
the product. If there were labourers enough and machinery
enough, cottons, woollens, or linens might be produced by
thousands of yards for every single yard now manufactured.
There would be a point, no doubt, where further increase
would be stopped by the incapacity of the earth to afford
more of the material. But there is no need, for any purpose
of political economy, to contemplate a time when this ideal
limit could become a practical one.

There is a third case, intermediate between the two pre-
Ceding, and rather more complex, which I shall at present
merely indicate, but the importance of which in political
economy is extremely great. There are commodities which
can be multiplied to an indefinite extent by labour and
expenditure, but not by a fixed amount of labour and expen-
diture. Only a limited quantity can be produced at a given
cost ;‘if more is wanted, it must be produced at a greater


weds Fey
Hb tl


Per mererr nk oer
Sieh


a ——
ea


en a


526 BOOK III. CHAPTER II. § 3.


cost. To this class, as has been often repeated, agricultural
produce belongs ; and generally all the rude produce of the
earth; and this peculiarity is a source of very important
consequences; one of which is the necessity of a limit to
population ; and another, the payment of rent.


§ 3. These being the three classes, in one or other of
which all things that are bought and sold must take their
place, we shall consider them in their order. And first,
of things absolutely limited in quantity, such as ancient
sculptures or pictures.

Of such things it is commonly said, that their value
depends upon their scarcity; but the expression is not
sufficiently definite to serve our purpose. Others say, with
somewhat greater precision, that the value depends on the
demand and the supply. But even this statement requires
rauch explanation, to make it a clear exponent of the relation
between the value of a thing, and the causes of which that
value is an effect.

The supply of a commodity is an intelligible expression:
it means the quantity offered for sale; the quantity that is to
be had, at a given time and place, by those who wish to
purchase it. But what is meant by the demand? Not the
mere desire for the commodity. A beggar may desire a pine-
apple; but his desire, however great, will have no influence
on the price. Writers have therefore given a more limited
sense to demand, and haye defined it, the wish to possess,
combined with the power of purchasing. To distinguish
demand in this technical sense, from the demand which is
synonymous with desire, they call the former effectual de-
mand*. After this explanation, it is usually supposed that


* Adam Smith, who introduced the expression ‘effectual demand,”
employed it to denote the demand of those who are willing and able to give
for the commodity what he calls its natural price, that is, the price which
will enable it to be permanently produced and brought to market.—See his
chapter on Natural and Market Price (book i. ch. 7.)


DEMAND AND SUPPLY. 527


there remains no further difficulty, and that the value de-
pends upon the ratio between the effectual demand, as thus
defined, and the supply.

These phrases, however, fail to satisfy any one who
Tequires clear ideas, and a perfectly precise expression of
them. Some confusion must always attach to a phrase so
Mappropriate as that of a ratio between two things not of
the same denomination. What ratio can there be between a
quantity and a desire, or even a desire combined with a
Power? A ratio between demand and supply is only intelli-
gible if by demand we mean the quantity demanded, and if
the ratio intended is that between the quantity demanded
and the quantity supplied. But again, the quantity demanded
ob fixed quantity, even at the same time and place; it
vanes according to the value: if the thing is cheap, there is
usually a demand for more of it than when it is dear. The
demand, therefore, partly depends on the value. But it was
before laid down, that the value depends on the demand.
From this contradiction how shall we extricate ourselves ?
How solve the paradox, of two things, each depending upon
the other?

Although the solution of these difficulties is obvious
€nough, the difficulties themselves are not fanciful; and I
bring them forward thus prominently, because I am certain
that they obscurely haunt every inquirer into the subject who
has not openly faced and distinctly realized them. Un-
doubtedly the true solution must have been frequently given,
although I cannot call to mind any one who had given it
before myself, except the eminently clear thinker and skilful
Expositor, J. B.Say. I should have imagined, however, that
it must be familiar to all political economists, if the writings
of several did not give evidence of some want of clearness
on the point, and if the instance of Mr. De Quincey did not
prove that the complete non-recognition and implied denial
of it are compatible with great intellectual ingenuity, and
close intimacy with the subject-matter.


528 BOOK Ill. CHAPTER It. § 4.


§4. Meaning, by the word demand, the quantity de-
manded, and remembering that this is not a fixed quantity,
but in general varies according to the value, let us suppose
that the demand at some particular time exceeds the supply,
that is, there are persons ready to buy, at the market value,
a greater quantity than is offered for sale. Competition
takes place on the side of the buyers, and the value rises:
but how much? In the ratio (some may suppose) of the
deficiency: if the demand exceeds the supply by one-third,
the value rises one-third. By no means: for when the value
has risen one-third, the demand may still exceed the supply ;
there may, even at that higher value, be a greater quantity
wanted than is to be had; and the competition of buyers
may still continue. If the article is a necessary of life, which,
rather than resign, people are willing to pay for at any price,
a deficiency of one-third may raise the price to double, triple,
or quadruple*. Or, on the contrary, the competition may
cease before the value has risen in even the proportion of the
deficiency. A rise, short of one-third, may place the article
beyond the means, or beyond the inclinations, of purchasers
to the full amount. At what point, then, will the rise be
arrested? At the point, whatever it be, which equalizes the
demand and the supply: at the price which cuts off the extra
third from the demand, or brings forward additional sellers
sufficient to supply it. When, in either of these ways, or by
a combination of both, the demand becomes equal and no
more than equal to the supply, the rise of value will stop.

The converse case is equally simple. Instead of a demand


* «The price of corn in this country has risen from 100 to 200 per


cent and upwards, when the utmost computed deficiency of the crops has
not been more than between one-sixth and one-third below an average,
and when that deficiency has been relieved by foreign supplies. If there
should be a deficiency of the crops amounting to one-third, without any
surplus from a former year, and without any chance of relief by importa-
tion, the price might rise five, six, or even ten-fold.’—Tooke’s History of
Prices, vol. i. pp. 13—5.


DEMAND AND SUPPLY. 529


beyond the supply, let us suppose a supply exceeding the
demand. The competition will now be on the side of the
sellers: the extra quantity can only find a market, by calling
forth an additional demand equal to itself. This is accom-
plished by means of cheapness; the value falls, and brings
the article within the reach of more numerous consumers, or
Induces those who were already consumers to make increased
purchases. The fall of value required to re-establish equa-
lity, is different in different cases. The kinds of things in
which it is commonly greatest, are at the two extremities
of the scale; absolute necessaries, or those peculiar luxuries,
the taste for which is confined to a small class. In the case
of food, as those who have already enough do not require
poke on account of its cheapness, but rather expend in other
things what they save in food, the increased consumption
occasioned by cheapness carries off, as experience shows, a
very small part of the extra supply caused by a good har-
vest*; and the fall is practically arrested only when the
farmers withdraw their corn, and hold it back in hopes of a
higher price; or by the operations of speculators who buy
Corn when it is cheap, and store it up to be brought forth
when more urgently wanted. Whether the demand and
Supply are equalized by an increased demand, the result of
cheapness, or by withdrawing a part of the supply, equalized
they are in either case.

Thus we see that the idea of a ratio, as between demand
and Supply, is out of place, and has no concern in the matter:
the Proper mathematical analogy is that of an equation.
Demand and supply, the quantity demanded and the quan-
tty supplied, will be made equal. If unequal at any moment,
Competition equalizes them, and the manner in which this is
done is by an adjustment of the value. If the demand
increases, the yalue rises; if the demand diminishes, the
value falls : again, if the supply falls off, the value rises; and


* See Tooke, and the Report of the Agricultural Committee in 1821.
2M


VOL. T.


530 BOOK III. CHAPTER Il. § 5.


falls, if the supply is increased. The rise or the fall con-
tinues until the demand and supply are again equal to one
another: and the value which a commodity will bring in
any market, is no other than the value which, in that market,
gives a demand just sufficient to carry off the existing or
expected supply.

This, then, is the Law of Value, with respect to all
commodities not susceptible of being multiplied at pleasure.
Such commodities, no doubt, are exceptions. There is ano-
ther law for that much larger class of things, which admit of
indefinite multiplication. But it is not the less necessary to
conceive distinctly and grasp firmly the theory of this excep-
tional case. In the first place, it will be found to be of great
assistance in rendering the more common case intelligible.
And in the next place, the principle of the exception stretches
wider, and embraces more cases, than might at first be sup-
posed.


§ 5. There are but few commodities which are natu-
rally and necessarily limited im supply. But any commodity
whatever may be artificially so. Any commodity may be
the subject of a monopoly; like tea, in this country, up to
1834; tobacco in France, salt and opium in British India, at
present. The price of a monopolized commodity is com-
monly supposed to be arbitrary; depending on the will of
the monopolist, and limited only (as in Mr. De Quincey’s
case of the musical box in the wilds of America) by the
buyer’s extreme estimate of its worth to himself. This is in
one sense true, but forms no exception, nevertheless, to the
dependence of the value on supply and demand. The mono-
polist can fix the value as high as he pleases, short of what
the consumer either could not or would not pay; but he can
only do so by limiting the supply. The Dutch East India
Company obtained a monopoly price for the produce of the
Spice Islands, but to do so they were obliged, in good sea-
sons, to destroy a portion of the crop. Had they persisted


DEMAND AND SUPPLY. 531


in selling all that they produced, they must haye-forced a
market by reducing the price, so low, perhaps, that they
would have received for the larger quantity a less total return
than for the smaller: at least they showed that such was
their opinion by destroying the surplus. Even on Lake
Superior, Mr. De Quincey’s huckster could not have sold his
box for sixty guineas, if he had possessed two musical boxes
and desired to sell them both. Supposing the cost price of
each to be six guineas, he would have taken seventy for the
two in preference to sixty for one; that is, although his
monopoly was the closest possible, he would have sold the
boxes at thirty-five guineas each, notwithstanding that sixty
_ Was not beyond the buyer’s estimate of the article for his
purposes. Monopoly value, therefore, does not depend on
any peculiar principle, but is a mere variety of the ordinary
case of demand and supply.

Again, although there are few commodities which are at
all times and for ever unsusceptible of increase of supply,
any commodity whatever may be temporarily so, and with
Some commodities this is habitually the case. Agricultural
produce, for example, cannot be increased in quantity before
the next harvest; the quantity of corn already existing in
the world, is all that can be had for sometimes a year to
come. During that interval, corn is practically assimilated
to things of which the quantity cannot be increased. In
the case of most commodities, if requires a certain time to
increase their quantity ; and if the demand increases, then
until a corresponding supply can be brought forward, that is
until the supply can accommodate itself to the demand, the
value will so rise as to accommodate the demand to the
Supply.

There is another case, the exact converse of this. There
are some articles of which the supply may be indefinitely
increased, but cannot be rapidly diminished. There are
things so durable that the quantity in existence is at all times


very great in comparison with the annual produce. Gold,
2M 2


532 BOOK III. CHAPTER II. $5.


and the more durable metals, are things of this sort; and
also houses. The supply of such things might of course be
at once diminished by destroying them; but to do this could
only be the interest of the possessor if he had a monopoly
of the article, and could repay himself for the destruction of
a part by the increased value of the remainder. The value,
therefore, of such things may continue for a long time so
low, either from excess of supply or falling off in the demand,
as to put a complete stop to further production ; the diminu-
tion of supply by wearing out being so slow a process, that
a long time is requisite, even under a total suspension of
production, to restore the original value. During that inter-
val the value will be regulated solely by supply and demand,
and will rise very gradually as the existing stock wears out,
until there is again a remunerating value, and production
resumes its course.

Finally, there are commodities of which, though capable
of being increased or diminished to a great, and even an
unlimited extent, the value never depends upon anything
but demand and supply. This is the case, in particular, with
the commodity Labour; of the value of which we have
treated copiously in the preceding Book: and there are many
cases besides in which we shall find it necessary to call in
this principle to solve difficult questions of exchange value.
This will be particularly exemplified when we treat of Inter-
national Values; that is, of the terms of interchange between
things produced in different countries, or, to speak more
generally, in distant places. But into these questions we
cannot enter until we shall have examined the case of com-
modities which can be increased in quantity indefinitely and
at pleasure; and shall have determined by what law, other
than that of Demand and Supply, the permanent or average
values of such commodities are regulated. ‘This we shall do
in the next chapter.


CHAPTER III.


OF COST OF PRODUCTION, IN ITS RELATION TO
VALUE.


§ 1. Wuen the production of a commodity is the effect
of labour and expenditure, whether the commodity is suscep-
tible of unlimited multiplication or not, there is a minimum
value which is the essential condition of its being permanently
produced. The value at any particular time is the result of
Supply and demand; and is always that.which is necessary
to create a market for the existing supply. But unless that
value is sufficient to repay the Cost of Production, and to
afford, besides, the ordinary expectations of profit, the com-
modity will not continue to be produced. Capitalists will
not go on permanently producing at a loss. They will not
even go on producing at a profit less than they can live upon.
Persons whose capital is already embarked, and cannot easily
be extricated, will persevere for a considerable time without
profit, ahd have been known to persevere even at a loss, in
hopes of better times. But they will not do so indefinitely,
or when there is nothing to indicate that times are likely to
improve. No new capital will be invested in an employ-
ment, unless there be an expectation not only of some profit,
but of a profit as great (regard being had to the degree of
eligibility of the employment in other respects,) as can be
hoped for in any other occupation at that time and place.
When such profit is evidently not to be had, if people do
not actually withdraw their capital, they at least abstain from
replacing it when consumed. The cost of production, toge-
ther with the ordinary profit, may therefore be called the
necessary price, or value, of all things made by labour and
capital. Nobody willingly produces in the prospect of loss,


ft
t {
5


534 BOOK III. CHAPTER III. § 1.


Whoever does so, does it under a miscalculation, which he
corrects as fast as he is able.

When a commodity is not only made by labour and capi-
tal, but can be made by them in indefinite quantity, this
Necessary Value, the minimum with which the producers will
be content, is also, if competition is free, the maximum which
they can expect. If the value of a commodity is such that
it repays the cost of production not only with the customary
but with a higher rate of profit, capital rushes to share in this
extra gain, and by increasing the supply of the article, reduces
its value. This is not a mere supposition or surmise, but a
fact familiar to those conversant with commercial operations.
Whenever a new line of business presents itself, offering a
hope of unusual profits, and whenever any established trade
or manufacture is believed to be yielding a greater profit than
customary, there is sure to be in a short time so large a pro-
duction or importation of the commodity, as not only
destroys the extra profit, but generally goes beyond the mark,
and sinks the value as much too low as it had before been raised
too high ; until the oversupply is corrected by a total or partial
suspension of further production. As I have already inti-
mated*, these variations in the quantity produced do not
presuppose or require that any person should change his em-
ployment. Those whose business is thriving, increase their
produce by availing themselves more largely of their credit,
while those who are not making the ordinary profit, restrict
their operations, and (in manufacturing phrase) work short
time. In this mode is surely and speedily effected the equi-
lization, not of profits perhaps, but of the expectations of
profit, im different occupations.

As a general rule, then, things tend to exchange for one
another at such values as will enable each producer to be
repaid the cost of production with the ordinary profit; m
other words, such as will give to all producers the same rate


* Supra, p. 487.


COST OF PRODUCTION. 535


of profit on their outlay. But in order that the profit may
be equal where the outlay, that is, the cost of production, is
equal, things must on the average exchange for one another
in the ratio of their cost of production; things, of which the
cost of production is the same, must be of the same value.
For only thus will an equal outlay yield an equal return. If
a farmer with a capital equal to 1,000 quarters of corn, can
produce 1,200 quarters, yielding him a profit of 20 per cent;
whatever else can be produced in the same time by a capital
of 1,000 quarters, must be worth, that is, must exchange for,
1,200 quarters, otherwise the producer would gain either
more or less than 20 per cent.

Adam Smith and Ricardo have called that value of a
thing which is proportional to its cost of production, its
Natural Value (or its Natural Price). They meant by this,
the point about which the value oscillates, and to which it
always tends to return; the central value, towards which,
as Adam Smith expresses it, the market value of a thing is
constantly gravitating; and any deviation from which is but
a temporary irregularity, which, the moment it exists, sets
forces in motion tending to correct it. On an average of years,
sufficient to enable the oscillations on one side of the central
line to be compensated by those on the other, the market
value agrees with the natural value; but it very seldom com-
cides exactly with it at any particular time. The sea every-
where tends to a level; but if never is at an exact level; its
surface is always ruffled by waves, and often agitated by
storms. It is enough that no point, at least in the open sea,
is permanently higher than another. Each place is alternately
elevated and depressed; _but the ocean preserves its level.


§ 2. The latent influence by which the values of things
are made to conform in the long run to the cost of production,
is the variation that would otherwise take place in the supply
of the commodity. The supply would be increased if the thing
continued to sell above the ratio of its cost of production,


536 BOOK III. CHAPTER Tt. § 2.


and would be diminished if it fell below that ratio. But we
must not therefore suppose it to be necessary that the supply
should actually be either diminished or increased. Suppose
that the cost of production of a thing is cheapened by some
mechanical invention, or increased by a tax. The value of
the thing would in a little time, if not immediately, fall in
the one case and rise in the other; and it would do so, simply
because if it did not, the supply would in the one case be
increased, until the price fell, in the other diminished, until
it rose. For this reason, and from the erroneous notion
that value depends on the proportion between the demand and
the supply, many persons suppose that this proportion must
be altered whenever there is any change in the value of the
commodity; that the value cannot fall through a diminution
of the cost of production, unless the supply is permanently
increased; nor rise, unless the supply is permanently dimi-
nished. But this is not the fact: there is no need that there
should be any actual alteration of supply; and when there
is, the alteration, if permanent, is not the cause but the
consequence of the alteration in value. If, indeed, the
supply could not be increased, no diminution in the cost of
production would lower the value: but there is by no
means any necessity that it should. The mere possibility
often suffices; the dealers are aware of what would
happen, and their mutual competition makes them anti-
cipate the result by lowering the price. Whether there
will be a greater permanent supply of the commodity
after its production has been cheapened, depends on quite
another question, namely, on whether a greater quantity is
wanted, at the reduced value. Most commonly a greater
quantity is wanted, but not necessarily. “A man,” says
Mr. De Quincey*, “buys an article of instant applicability
to his own purposes the more readily and the more largely
as it happens to be cheaper. Silk handkerchiefs having


* Logic of Political Economy, pp. 230—1],


COST OF PRODUCTION. 537


fallen to half price, he will buy, perhaps, in threefold quan-
tity ; but he does not buy more steam-engines because the
price is lowered. His demand for steam-engines is almost
always predetermined by the circumstances of his situation.
So far as he considers the cost at all, 1t is much more the
cost of working this engine than the cost upon its purchase.
But there are many articles for which the market is abso-
lutely and merely limited by a pre-existing system, to which
those articles are attached as subordinate parts or members.
How could we force the dials or faces of timepieces by arti-
ficial cheapness to sell more plentifully than the inner works
or movements of such timepieces? Could the sale of wine-
vaults be increased without increasing the sale of wine? Or
the tools of shipwrights find an enlarged market whilst ship-
building was stationary? . . . Offer to a town of 3,000 inha-
bitants a stock of hearses, no cheapness will tempt that town
into buying more than one. Offer a stock of yachts, the
chief cost lies in manning, victualling, repairing; no dimi-
nution upon the mere price to a purchaser will tempt into
the market any man whose habits and propensities had not
already disposed him to such a purchase. So of professional
costume for bishops, lawyers, students at Oxford.” Nobody
doubts, however, that the price and value of all these things
would be eventually lowered by any diminution of their cost
of production ; and lowered through the apprehension enter-
tained of new competitors, and an increased supply: though
the great hazard to which a new competitor would expose
himself, in an article not susceptible of any considerable
extension of its market, would enable the established dealers
to maintain their original prices much longer than they could
do in an article offermg more encouragement to competition.
Again, reverse the case, and suppose the cost of produc-
tion increased, as for example by laying a tax on the com-
modity. The value would rise; and that, probably, imme-
diately. Would the supply be diminished? Only if the
increase of value diminished the demand. Whether this


538 BOOK Il]. CHAPTER 111. § 2.


effect followed, would soon appear, and if it did, the value
would recede somewhat, from excess of supply, until the
production was reduced, and would then rise again. There are
many articles for which it requires a very considerable rise of
price, materially to reduce the demand; in particular, articles
of necessity, such as the habitual food of the people; in
England, wheaten bread: of which there is probably as
much produced, at a high cost price, as there would be at a
price considerably lower. Yet it is especially in such _things,
that dearness or high price is popularly confounded with
scarcity. Food may be dear from scarcity, as after a bad
harvest; but the dearness (for example) which is the effect
of taxation, or of corn laws, has nothing whatever to do
with insufficient supply :.such causes do not much diminish
the quantity of food in a country: it is other ‘things rather
than food that are diminished in quantity by them, since,
those who pay more for food not having so much to expend
otherwise, the production of other things contracts itself to
the limits of a smaller demand.

It is, therefore, strictly correct to say, that the value of
things which can be increased in quantity at pleasure, does
not depend (except accidentally, and during the time neces-
sary for production to adjust itself,) wpon demand and sup-
ply; on the contrary, demand and supply depend upon it.
There is a demand for a certain quantity of the commodity
at its natural value, and to that the supply in the long run
endeavours to conform. When it fails of so conforming, it
is either from miscalculation, or from a change in some of
the elements of the problem; either in the natural value,
that is, m the cost of production ; or in the demand, from
an alteration in public taste or in the number or wealth of
the consumers. These causes of disturbance are very liable
to occur, and when any one of them does occur, the market
value of the article ceases to agree with the natural value.
The real law of demand and supply, the equation between
them, holds good in all cases: if a value different from the


COST OF PRODUCTION. 539


natural value be necessary to make the demand equal to the
supply, the market value will deviate from the natural value:
but only for a time; for the permanent tendency of supply
is to conform itself to the demand which is found by expe-
rience to exist for the commodity when selling at its natural
value. If the supply is either more or less than this, it is
so accidentally, and affords either more or less than the ordi-
nary rate of profit; which under free competition cannot
long continue to be the case.

To recapitulate; demand and supply govern the value of
all things which cannot be indefinitely increased; except
that even for them, when produced by industry, there is a
minimum value, determined by the cost of production. But
in all things which admit of indefinite multiplication, demand
and supply only determine the perturbations of value, during
a period which cannot exceed the length of time necessary
for altering the supply. While thus ruling the oscillations of
value, they themselves obey a superior force, which makes
value gravitate towards Cost of Production, and which would
settle it and keep it there, if fresh disturbing influences were
not continually arising to make it again deviate. To pursue
the same strain of metaphor, demand and supply always
rush to an equilibrium, but the condition of stable equili-
brium is when things exchange for each other according to

their cost of production, or, in the expression we have used,
when things are at their Natural Value.


|
Pi
i
i]
}
i
ii |
}
|
}
:
|
|
:


CHAPTER IV.


ULTIMATE ANALYSIS OF COST OF PRODUCTION.


§ 1. THE component elements of Cost of Production
haye been set forth in the First Part of this enquiry*. The
principal of them, and so much the principal as to be nearly
the sole, we found to be Labour. What the production of
a thing costs to its producer, or its series of producers, is the
labour expended in producing it. If we consider as the pro-
ducer the capitalist who makes the advances, the word
Labour may be replaced by the word Wages: what the pro-
duce costs to him, is the wages which he has had to pay.
At the first glance indeed this seems to be only a part of his
outlay, since he has not only paid wages to labourers, but has
likewise provided them with tools, materials, and perhaps
buildings. These tools, materials, and buildings, however,
were produced by labour and capital; and their value, like
that of the article to the production of which they are sub-
servient, depends on cost of production, which again is
resolvable into labour. The cost of production of broadcloth
does not wholly consist in the wages of weavers ; which alone
are directly paid by the cloth manufacturer. It consists also
of the wages of spinners and woolcombers, and, it may be
added, of shepherds, all of which the clothier has paid for in
the price of yarn. It consists too of the wages of builders
and brickmakers, which he has reimbursed in the contract
price of erecting his factory. It partly consists of the wages
of machine makers, iron founders, and miners. And to these
must be added the wages of the carriers who transported
any of the means and appliances of the production to the


* Supra, pp. 37-9.


ULTIMATE ANALYSIS OF COST OF PRODUCTION. 541


place where they were to be used, and the product itself to
the place where it is to be sold.

The value of commodities, therefore, depends principally
(we shall presently see whether it depends solely) on the
quantity of labour required for their production ; including
in the idea of production, that of conveyance to the market.
“Tn estimating” says Ricardo*, “the exchangeable value of
stockings, for example, we shall find that their value, com-
paratively with other things, depends on the total quan-
tity of labour necessary to manufacture them and bring them
to market. First, there is the labour necessary to cultivate
the land on which the raw cotton is grown; secondly, the
labour of conveying the cotton to the country where the
Stockings are to be manufactured, which includes a portion
of the labour bestowed in building the ship in which it is
conveyed, and which is charged in the freight of the goods;
thirdly, the labour of the spimner and weaver; fourthly, a
portion of the labour of the engineer, smith, and carpenter,
who erected the buildings and machinery by the help of
which they are made; fifthly, the labour of the retail dealer,
and of many others, whom it is unnecessary further to parti-
cularize. The aggregate sum of these various kinds of labour,
determines the quantity of other things for which these
Stockings will exchange, while the same consideration of the
Various quantities of labour which have been bestowed on
those other things, will equally govern the portion of them
which will be given for the stockings.

“To convince ourselves that this is the real foundation of
exchangeable value, let us suppose any improvement to be
made in the means of abridging labour in any one of the
various processes through which the raw cotton must pass
before the manufactured stockings come to the market to be
exchanged for other things; and observe the effects which
will follow. If fewer men were required to cultivate the


* Principles of Political Economy and Taxation, ch. i. sect. 3.


542 BOOK III. CHAPTER Iv. § 2.


raw cotton, or if fewer sailors were employed in navigating,
or shipwrights in constructing, the ship in which it was con-
veyed to us; if fewer hands were employed in raising the
buildings and machinery, or if these, when raised, were ren-
dered more efficient; the stockings would inevitably fall in
value, and command less of other things. They would fall,
because a less quantity of labour was necessary to their pro-
duction, and would therefore exchange for a smaller quantity
of those things in which no such abridgment of labour had


Sr


a
iv
a
4


been made.
“Economy in the use of labour never fails to reduce the


relative value of a commodity, whether the saving be in the
labour necessary to the manufacture of the commodity itself,
or in that necessary to the formation of the capital, by the
aid of which it is produced. In either case the price of
stockings would fall, whether there were fewer men employed
as bleachers, spinners, and weavers, persons immediately
necessary to their manufacture; or as sailors, carriers, en-
gineers, and smiths, persons more indirectly concerned. In
the one case, the whole saving of labour would fall on the
stockings, because that portion of labour was wholly confined
to the stockings ; in the other, a portion only would fall on
the stockings, the remainder being applied to all those other
commodities, to the production of which the buildings, ma-
chinery, and carriage, were subservient.”


§ 2. It will have been observed that Ricardo expresses
himself as if the quantity of labour which it costs to produce
a commodity and bring it to market, were the only thing on
which its value depended. But since the cost of production
to the capitalist is not labour but wages, and since wages
may be either greater or less, the quantity of labour being
the same; it would seem that the value of the product can-
not be determined solely by the quantity of labour, but by
the quantity together with the remuneration; and that values
must partly depend on wages.


ULTIMATE ANALYSIS OF COST OF PRODUCTION. 543


In order to decide this point, it must be considered, that
value is a relative term; that the value of a commodity is not
a name for an inherent and substantive quality of the thing
itself, but means the quantity of other things which can be Fie
obtained in exchange for it. The value of one thing, must
always be understood relatively to some other thing or to
things in general. Now the relation of one thing to another
cannot be altered by any cause which affects them both alike.
A rise or fall of general wages is a fact which affects all
commodities in the same manner, and therefore affords no
Teason why they should exchange for each other in one rather
than in another proportion. To suppose that high wages ta |
make high values, is to suppose that there can be such a Bi
thing as general high values. But this is a contradiction in ie
terms: the high value of some things is’ synonymous with fl
the low value of others. The mistake arises from not tit |
attending to values but only to prices. Though there is no t
such thing as a general rise of values, there is such a thing
as a general rise of prices. As soon as we form distinctly the if
Idea of values, we see that high or low wages can have |
nothing to do with them; but that high wages make high
prices, is a popular and widely-spread opinion. The whole i A
amount of error involved in this proposition can only be Rik:
seen thoroughly when we come to the theory of money; at Hi
present we need only say that if it be true, there can be no iF
such thing as a real rise of wages ; for if wages could not
rise without a proportional rise of the price of everything, P|
they could not, for any substantial purpose, rise at all. This i
Surely is a sufficient reductio ad absurdum, and shows the hf
amazing folly of the propositions which may and do become,
and long remain, accredited doctrines of popular political
economy. It must be remembered too, that general high
prices, even supposing them to exist, can be of no use to a
producer or dealer, considered as such; for if they increase Hifi
his money returns, they inerease in the same degree all his
expenses. There is no mode in which capitalists can com-


544 BOOK III. CHAPTER Iy. § 3.


pensate themselves for a high cost of labour, through any
action on values or prices. It cannot be prevented from
taking its effect in low profits. If the labourers really get
more, that is, get the produce of more labour, a smaller per-
centage must remain for profit. From this Law of Distri-
bution, resting as it does on a law of arithmetic, there is no
escape. The mechanism of Exchange and Price may hide
it from us, but is quite powerless to alter it.


§ 3. Although, however, general wages, whether high or
low, do not affect values, yet if wages are higher m one em-
ployment than in another, or if they rise or fall permanently
in one employment without doing so in others, these ine-
qualities do really operate upon values. The causes which
make wages vary from one employment to another, have
been considered in a former chapter. When the wages of
an employment permanently exceed the average rate, the
value of the thing produced will, in the same degree, exceed
the standard determined by mere quantity of labour. Things,
for example, which are made by skilled labour, exchange for
the produce of a much greater quantity of unskilled labour;
for no reason but because the labour is more highly paid.
If, through the extension of education, the labourers com-
petent to skilled employments were so increased in number
as to diminish the difference between their wages and those
of common labour, all things produced by labour of the
superior kind would fall in value, compared with things pro-
duced by common labour, and these might be said therefore
to rise in value. We have before remarked that the difficulty
of passing from one class of employments to a class greatly
superior, has hitherto caused the wages of all those classes
of labourers who are separated from one another by any very
marked barrier, to depend more than might be supposed
upon the increase of the population of each class, considered
separately; and that the inequalities in the remuneration of
labour which cannot be accounted for by differences of hard-


ULTIMATE ANALYSIS OF COST OF PRODUCTION. 545


ness or disagreeableness, are much greater than could exist
if the competition of the labouring people generally could
be brought practically to bear on each particular employ-
ment. It follows from this that wages in different employ-
ments do not rise or fall simultaneously, but are, for short and
sometimes even for long periods, nearly independent of one
another. All such disparities evidently alter the relative costs
of production of different commodities, and will therefore be
completely represented in their natural or average value.

It thus appears that the maxim laid down by some of the
best political economists, that wages do not enter into value,
is expressed with greater latitude than the truth warrants, or
than accords with their own meaning. Wages do enter into
value. The relative wages of the labour necessary for pro-
ducing different commodities, affect their value just as much
as the relative quantities of labour. It is true, the absolute
wages paid have no effect upon values; but-neither has the
absolute quantity of labour. If that were to vary simulta-
heously and equally in all commodities, values would not be
affected. If, for instance, the general efficiency of all labour
were increased, so that all things without exception could be
produced in the same quantity as before with a smaller
amount of labour, no trace of this general diminution of cost
of production would show itself in the values of commodi-
ties. Any change which might take place in them would only
represent the unequal degrees in which the improvement
affected different things; and would consist in cheapening
those in which the saving of labour had been the greatest,
while those in which there had been some, but a less saving
of labour, would actually rise in value. In strictness. there-
fore, wages of labour have as much to do with value as quan-
tity of labour: and neither Ricardo nor any one else has
denied the fact. In considering, however, the causes of varia-
tions in value, quantity gf labour is the thing of chief im-
portance ; for when that varies, it is generally in one or a few
commodities at a time, but the variations of wages (except

VOL. I. 2N


546 3 BOOK III. CHAPTER Iv. § 4.


passing fluctuations) are usually general, and have no consi-
derable effect on value.


§ 4. Thus far of labour, or wages, as an element in cost
of production. But in our analysis, in the First Book, of
the requisites of production, we found that there is another
necessary element in it besides labour. There is also capital;
and this being the result of abstinence, the produce, or its
value, must be sufficient to remunerate, not only all the
labour required, but the abstinence of all the persons by
whom the remuneration of the different classes of labourers
was advanced. The return for abstinence is Profit. And
profit, we have also seen, is not exclusively the surplus
remaining to the capitalist after he has been compensated for
his outlay, but forms, in most cases, no unimportant part of
the outlay itself. The flax-spinner, part of whose expenses
consists of the purchase of flax and of machinery, has had
to pay, in their price, not only the wages of the labour by
which the flax was grown and the machinery made, but the
profits of the grower, the flax-dresser, the miner, the iron-
founder, and the machine-maker. All these profits, toge-
ther with those of the spinner himself, were again advanced
by the weaver, in the price of his material, linen yarn: and
along with them the profits of a fresh set of machine-makers,
and of the miners and iron-workers who supplied them with
their metallic material. All these advances form part of the
cost of production of linen. Profits, therefore, as well as
wages, enter into the cost of production which determines
the value of the produce.

Value, however, being purely relative, cannot depend
upon absolute profits, no more than upon absolute wages,
but upon relative profits only. High general profits cannot,
any more than high general wages, be a cause of high values,
because high general values are an aksurdity and a contradic-
tion. In so far as profits enter into the cost of production
of all things, they cannot affect the value of any. It is


ULTIMATE ANALYSIS OF COST OF PRODUCTION. 547


only by entering in a greater degree into the cost of produc-
tion of some things than of others, that they can have any
influence on value.

For example, we have seen that there are causes which
necessitate a permanently higher rate of profit in certain em-
ployments than in others. There must be a compensation
for superior risk, trouble, and disagreeableness. This can
only be obtained by selling the commodity at a value above
that which is due to the quantity of labour necessary for its
production. If gunpowder exchanged for other things in no
higher ratio than that of the labour required from first to last
for producing it, no one would set up a powder-mill. Butchers
are certainly a more prosperous class than bakers, and do not
seem to be exposed to greater risks, since it is not remarked
that they are oftener bankrupts. They seem, therefore, to
obtain higher profits, which. can only arise from the more
limited competition, caused by the unpleasantness, and to a
certain degree, the unpopularity of their trade. But this
higher profit implies that they sell their commodity at a
higher value than that due to their labour and outlay. All
Inequalities of profit which are necessary and permanent, are
represented in the relative values of the commodities.


§ 5. Profits, however, may enter more largely into the
conditions of production of one commodity than of another,
even though there be no difference in the rate of profit
between the two employments. The one commodity may be
called upon to yield profit during a longer period of time
than the other. The example by which this case is usually
illustrated is that of wine. Suppose a quantity of wine, and
a quantity of cloth, made by equal amounts of labour, and
that labour paid at the same rate. The cloth does not im-
prove by keeping; the wine does. Suppose that, to attain
the desired quality, the wine requires to be kept five years.
The producer or dealer will not keep it, unless at the end of


five years he can sell it for as much more than the cloth, as
2n 2


548 BOOK III]. CHAPTER Iv. §5.


amounts to five years’ profit, accumulated at compound
interest. The wine and the cloth were made by the same
original outlay. Here then is a case in which the natural
values, relatively to one another, of two commodities, do
not conform to their cost of production alone, but to their
cost of production plus something else. Unless, indeed, for
the sake of generality in the expression, we include the profit
which the wine-merchant foregoes during the five years, in
the cost of production of the wine: looking upon it as a
kind of additional outlay, over and above his other advances,
for which outlay he must be indemnified at last.

All commodities made by machinery are assimilated, at
least approximatively, to the wine in the preceding example.
Tn comparison with things made wholly by immediate labour,
profits enter more largely into their cost of production.
Suppose two commodities, A and B, each requiring a year
for its production, by means of a capital which we will on
this occasion denote by money, and suppose to be 1,000/.
A is made wholly by immediate labour, the whole 1,000/.
being expended directly in wages. B is made by means of
labour which cost 5007. and a machine which cost 500J., and
the machine is worn out by one year’s use. The two com-
modities will be exactly of the same value; which, if com-
puted in money, and if profits are 20 per cent>per annum,
will be 1,2007. But of this 1,200/., in the case of A, only
200/., or one-sixth, is profit: while in the case of B there is
not only the 200/., but as much of 500J. (the price of the
machine,) as consisted of the profits of the machine-maker;
which, if we suppose the machine also to have taken a year
for its production, is again one-sixth. So that in the case of
A only one-sixth of the entire return is profit, whilst in B
the element of profit comprises not only a sixth of the whole,
but an additional sixth of a large part.

The greater the proportion of the whole capital which
consists of machinery, or buildings, or material, or anything
else which must be provided before the immediate labour


549


ULTIMATE ANALYSIS OF COST OF PRODUCTION.


tan commence, the more largely will profits enter into the
cost of production. It is equally true, though not so obvious
at first sight, that greater durability in the portion of capital
which consists of machinery or buildings, has precisely the
same effect as a greater amount of it. As we just supposed {
one extreme case, that of a machine entirely worn out by a
year’s use, let us now suppose the opposite and still more
extreme case, of a machine which lasts for ever, and requires t hi.
n0 repairs. In this case, which is as well suited for the pur-
Pose of illustration as if it were a possible one, it will be ay
unnecessary that the manufacturer should ever be repaid the
500/. which he gave for the machine, since he has always the |
Machine itself, worth 500J.: but he must be paid, as before, pt
a profit on it. The commodity B, therefore, which in the
Case previously supposed was sold for 1,200/. of which sum
1,000. were to replace the capital and 200/. were profit, can
now be sold for 700/., being 5007. to replace wages, and 200/. ie
profit on the entire capital. Profit, therefore, enters into the
value of B in the ratio of 200. out of 700/., being two-
Sevenths of the whole, or 28+ per cent., while in the case of
A, as before, it enters only in the ratio of one-sixth, or 163
percent. The case is‘of course purely ideal, since no machi-
nery or other fixed capital lasts for ever; but the more
durable it is, the nearer it approaches to this ideal case, and }
the more largely does profit enter into the return. If, for
mstance, a machine worth 500/. loses one-fifth of its value
by each year’s use, 1007. must be added to the return to
make up this loss, and the price of the commodity will be
8007. Profit therefore will enter into it in the ratio of 200/.
to 800/., or one-fourth, which is still a much higher propor-
tion than one-sixth, or 2007. in 1,200/., as in case A.

From the unequal proportion in which in different em-
ployments profits enter into the advances of the capitalist,
and therefore into the returns required by him, two conse-
quences follow in regard to value. One is, that commodities
do not exchange in the ratio simply of the quantities of


550 BOOK III. CHAPTER Iy. § 5.


labour required to produce them; not even if we allow
for the unequal rates at which different kinds of labour
are permanently remunerated. We have already illustrated
this by the example of wine: we shall now further exem-
plify it by the case of commodities made by machinery.
Suppose, as before, an article A made by a thousand pounds
worth of immediate labour. But instead of B, made by
500/. worth of immediate labour and a machine worth 5002,
let us suppose C, made by 500/. worth of immediate labour
with the aid of a machine which has been produced by ano-
ther 500/. worth of immediate labour: the machine requiring
a year for making, and worn out by a year’s use; profits
being as before 20 per cent. A and C are made by equal
quantities of labour, paid at the same rate: A costs 1,000/.
worth of direct labour; C, only 500/. worth, which however
is made up to 1,000/. by the labour expended in the con-
struction of the machine. If labour, or its remuneration,
were the sole ingredient of cost of production, these two
things would exchange for one another. But will they do so?
Certainly not. The machine having been made in a year by
an outlay of 500/., and profits beg 20 per cent, the natural
price of the machine is 600/.: making an additional 100/.
which must be advanced, over and above his other expenses,
by the manufacturer of C, and repaid to him with a profit of
20 per cent. While, therefore, the commodity A is sold
for 1,200/., C cannot be permanently sold for less than 1,320/.

A second consequence is, that every rise or fall of general
profits will have an effect on values. Not indeed by raising
or lowering them generally, (which, as we have so often said,
is a contradiction and an impossibility): but by altering the
proportion in which the values of things are affected by the
unequal lengths of time for which profit is due. When two
things, though made by equal labour, are of unequal value
because the one is called upon to yield profit for a greater num-
ber of years or months than the other; this difference of value
will be greater when profits are greater, and less when they


ULTIMATE ANALYSIS OF COST OF PRODUCTION. 551


are less. The wine which has to yield five years’ profit more
than the cloth, will surpass it in value much more if profits
are 40 per cent, than if they are only 20. The commodities
A and C, which, though made by equal quantities of labour,
were sold for 1,200/. and 1,320/., a difference of 10 per cent,
would if profits had been only half as much; have been sold
for 11002. and 1155/., a difference of only 5 per cent.

It follows from this that even a general rise of wages,
when it involves a real increase in the cost of labour, does in
some degree influence values. It does not affect them in the
manner vulgarly supposed, by raising them universally. But
an increase of the cost of labour, lowers profits; and there-
fore lowers in natural value the things into which profits
enter in a greater proportion than the average, and raises
those into which they enter in a less proportion than the
average. All commodities in the production of which machi-
nery bears a large part, especially if the machinery is very
durable, are lowered in their relative value when profits fall ;
or, what is equivalent, other things are raised in value rela-
tively to them. This truth is sometimes expressed in a
phraseology more plausible than sound, by saying that a rise
of wages raises the values of things made by labour, in com-
parison with those made by machinery. But things made by
machinery, just as much as any other things, are made by
labour, namely the labour which made the machinery itself:
the only difference being that profits enter somewhat more
largely into the production of things for which machinery is
used, though the principal item of the outlay is still labour.
It is better, therefore, to associate the effect with fall of
profits than with rise of wages; especially as this last expres-
sion is extremely ambiguous, suggesting the idea of an increase
of the labourer’s real remuneration, rather than of what is
alone to the purpose here, namely, the cost of labour to its


employer.


§ 6. Besides the natural and necessary elements in cost


552 BOOK III. CHAPTER Iv. § 6.


of production—labour and profits—there are others which
are artificial and casual, as for instance, a tax. ‘The taxes on
bricks and malt are as much a part of the cost of production
of those articles, as the wages of the labourers. The ex-
penses which the law imposes, as well as those which the
nature of things imposes, must be reimbursed with the ordi-
nary profit from the value of the produce, or the things will
not continue to be produced. But the influence of taxation
on value is subject to the same conditions as the influence
of wages and of profits. It is not general taxation, but dif
ferential taxation, that produces the effect. If all produc-
tions were taxed by a fixed percentage on their value,
relative values would be in no way disturbed. If only a few
commodities were taxed, their value would rise: and if only
a few were left untaxed, their value would fall. If half were
taxed and the remainder untaxed, the first half would rise and
the last would fall relatively to each other. This would be
necessary in order to equalize the expectation of profit in all
employments, without which the taxed employments would
ultimately, if not immediately, be abandoned. But general
taxation, when equally imposed, and not disturbing the rela-
tion of different productions to one another, cannot produce
any effect on values.

We have thus far supposed that all the means and appli-
ances which enter into the cost of production of commodities,
are things whose own value depends on their cost of produc-
tion. Some of them, however, may belong to the class of
things which cannot be increased ad libitum in quantity, and
which therefore, if the demand goes beyond a certain amount,
command a scarcity value. The materials of many of the
ornamental articles manufactured in Italy are the substances
called rosso, giallo, and verde antico, which, whether truly or
falsely I know not, are asserted to be solely derived from
the destruction of ancient columns and other ornamental
structures; the quarries from which the stone was originally
cut being exhausted, or their locality forgotten. A material


ULTIMATE ANALYSIS OF COST OF PRODUCTION. 553


of such a nature, if in much demand, must be at a scarcity
value; and this value enters into the cost of production, and,
consequently, into the value of the finished article. The
time seems to be approaching when the more valuable furs
will come under the influence of a scarcity value of the mate-
rial. Hitherto the diminishing number of the animals which
produce them, in the wildernesses of Siberia and on the
coasts of the Esquimaux Sea, has operated on the value
only through the greater labour which has become necessary
for securing any given quantity of the article, since, without
doubt, by employing labour enough, it might still be obtained
in much greater abundance for some time longer.

But the case in which scarcity value chiefly operates in
adding to cost of production, is the case of natural agents.
These, when unappropriated, and to be had for the taking,
do not enter into cost of production, save to the extent of
the labour which may be necessary to fit them for use.
Eyen when appropriated, they do not (as we have already
seen) bear a value from the mere fact of the appropriation,
but only from scarcity, that is, from limitation of supply.
But it is equally certain that they often do bear a scarcity
value. Suppose a fall of water, in a place where there are
more mills wanted than there is water-power to supply:
the use of the fall of water will have a scarcity value,
sufficient either to bring the demand down to the supply, or
to pay for the creation of an artificial power, by steam or
otherwise, equal in efficiency to the water-power.

A natural agent beimg a possession in perpetuity, and
being only serviceable by the products resulting from its
continued employment, the ordinary mode of deriving benefit
from its ownership is by an annual equivalent, paid by the
person who uses it, from the proceeds of its use. This
equivalent always might be, and generally is, termed a rent.
The question, therefore, respecting the influence which the


appropriation of natural agents produces on values, is often
stated in this form: Does Rent enter into Cost of Produc-


i |
i
i
z ¥
Hy
f.
It
if


ca


554 BOOK III. CHAPTER Iv. § 6.


tion? and the answer of the best political economists is in
the negative. The temptation is strong to the adoption of
these sweeping expressions, even by those who are aware of
the restrictions with which they must be taken; for there is
no denying that they stamp a general principle more firmly in
the mind, than if it were hedged round in theory with all its
practical limitations. But they also puzzle and mislead, and
create an impression unfavourable to political economy, as if
it disregarded the evidence of facts. Who can deny that
rent sometimes enters into cost of production? If I buy or
rent a piece of ground, and build a cloth manufactory on it,
does not the ground-rent form legitimately a part of my
expenses of production, which must be repaid by the pro-
duct? And since all factories are built on ground, and most
of them in places where ground is peculiarly valuable, the
rent paid for it must, on the average, be compensated in the
values of all things made in factories. In what sense it is
true that rent does not enter into the cost of production or
affect the value of agricultural produce, will be shown in the
succeeding chapter.


CHAPTER V.


OF RENT, IN ITS RELATION TO VALUE.


$1. We have investigated the laws which determine the
value of two classes of commodities: the small class which,
being limited to a definite quantity, have their value entirely
determined by demand and supply, save that their cost of
production (if they have any) constitutes a minimum below
which they cannot permanently fall; and the large class
which can be multiplied ad libitum by labour and capital,
and of which the cost of production fixes the maximum as
well as the minimum at which they can permanently ex-
change. But there is still a third kind of commodities
to be considered; those which haye, not one, but several
costs of production; which can always be increased in
quantity by labour and capital, but not by the same amount
of labour and capital; of which so much may be produced
at a given cost, but a further quantity not without a
greater cost. These commodities form an intermediate
class, partaking of the character of both the others. The
principal of them is agricultural produce. We have already
made abundant reference to the fundamental truth, that in
agriculture, the state of the art being given, doubling the
labour does not double the produce; that if an increased
quantity of produce is required, the additional supply is
obtained at a greater cost than the first. Where a hun-
dred quarters of corn are all that is at present required
from the lands of a given village, if the growth of popula-
tion made it necessary to raise a hundred more, either by
breaking up worse land now uncultivated, or by a more
elaborate cultivation of the land already under the plough,
the additional hundred, or some part of them at least,


556 BOOK III. CHAPTER v. §1.


might cost double or treble as much per quarter as the former
supply.

If the first hundred quarters were all raised at the same
expense (only the best land being cultivated); and if that
expense would be remunerated with the ordinary profit by a
price of 20s. the quarter; the natural price of wheat, so long
as no more than that quantity was required, would be 20s.;
and it could only rise above, or fall. below that price, from
vicissitudes of seasons, or other casual variations in supply.
But if the population of the district advanced, a time would
arrive when more than a hundred quarters would be necessary
to feed it. We must suppose that there is no access to any
foreign supply. By the hypothesis, no more than a hundred
quarters can be produced in the district, unless by either
bringing worse land into cultivation, or altering the system
of culture to a more expensive one. Neither of these things
will be done without a rise of price. This rise of price will
gradually be brought about by the increasing demand. So
long as the price has risen, but not risen enough to repay
with the ordinary profit the cost of producing an additional
quantity, the increased value of the limited supply partakes of
the nature of a scarcity value. Suppose that it will not
answer to cultivate the second best land, or land of the
second degree of remoteness, for a less return than 25s. the
quarter; and that this price is also necessary to remunerate
the expensive operations by which an increased produce
might be raised from land of the first quality. If so, the
price will rise, through the increased demand, until it reaches
25s. That will now be the natural price; being the price
without which the quantity, for which society has a demand
at that price, will not be produced. At that price, however,
society can go on for some time longer; could go on per-
haps for ever, if population did not increase. The price,
having attained that point, will not again permanently recede,
(though it may fall temporarily from accidental abundance) ;
nor will it advance further, so long as society can obtain the


SS ee en ec EE EI Le NNN aes INTUTE Eg gat Pena OR ERO Ta


RENT, IN ITS RELATION TO VALUE. Doi


production.


I have made use of Price, in this reasoning, as a con-
venient symbol of Value, from the greater familiarity of the
idea: and I shall continue to do’so as far as may appear to be
necessary.

In the case supposed, different portions of the supply of
corn have different costs of production. Though the 20,
or 50, or 150 quarters additional have been produced at a
cost proportional to 25s., the original hundred quarters per
annum are still produced at a cost only proportional to 20s.
This is self-evident, if the original and the additional supply
are produced on different qualities of land. It is equally
true if they are produced on the same land. Suppose that
land of the best quality, which produced 100 quarters at 20s.,
has been made to produce 150 by an expensive process,
which it would not answer to undertake without a price
of 25s. The cost which requires 25s. is incurred for the
sake of 50 quarters alone: the first hundred might have
continued for ever to be produced at the original cost, and
with the benefit, on that quantity, of the whole rise of price
caused by the increase of demand: no one, therefore, will
incur the additional expense for the sake of the additional
fifty, unless they alone will pay for the whole of it. The
fifty, therefore, will be produced at their natural price, pro-
portioned to the cost of their production; while the other
hundred will now bring in 5s. a quarter more than their
natural price—than the price corresponding to, and sufficing
to remunerate, their lower cost of production.

If the production of any, even the smallest, portion of
the supply, requires as a necessary condition a certain price,
that price will be obtained for all the rest. We are not able
to buy one loaf cheaper than another because the corn from
which it was made, being grown on a richer soil, has cost
less to the grower. The value, therefore, of an article


supply it requires without a second increase of the cost of


(meaning its natural, which is the same with its average, -


558 BOOK III. CHAPTER v. § 2.


value) is determined by the cost of that portion of the supply
which is produced and brought to market at the greatest
expense. This is the Law of Value of the third of the
three classes into which all commodities are divided.


§ 2. If the portion of produce raised in the most un-
favourable circumstances, obtains a value proportioned to its
cost of production ; all the portions raised in more favourable
circumstances, selling as they must do at the same value,
obtain a value more than proportioned to their cost of pro-
duction. Their value is not, correctly speaking, a scarcity
value, for it is determined by the circumstances of the pro-
duction of the commodity, and not by the degree of dearness
necessary for keeping down the demand to the level of a
limited supply. The owners, however, of those portions of
the produce enjoy a privilege; they obtain a value which
yields them more than the ordinary profit. If this advantage
depends upon any special exemption, such as being free from
a tax, or upon any personal advantages, physical or mental,
or any peculiar process only known to themselves, or upon
the possession of a greater capital than other people, or upon
various other things which might be enumerated, they retain
it to themselves as an extra gain, over and above the general
profits of capital, of the nature, in some sort, of a monopoly
profit. But when, as in the case which we are more par-
ticularly considering, the advantage depends on the pos-
session of a natural agent of peculiar quality, as for instance
of more fertile land than that which determines the general
value of the commodity ; and when this natural agent is not
owned by themselves ; the person who does own it, is able to
exact from them, in the form of rent, the whole extra gain
derived from its use. We are thus brought by another road
to the Law of Rent, investigated in the concluding chapter
of the Second Book. Rent, we again see, is the difference
between the unequal returns to different parts of the capital
employed on the soil. Whatever surplus any portion of


RENT, IN ITS RELATION TO VALUE. 559


agricultural capital produces, beyond what is produced by the
same amount of capital on the worst soil, or under the most
expensive mode of cultivation, which the existing demands
of society compel a recourse to; that surplus will naturally
be paid as rent from that capital, to the owner of the land on
which it is employed.

It was long thought by political economists, among the
rest even by Adam Smith, that the produce of land is always
at a monopoly value, because (they said) in addition to the
ordinary rate of profit, it always yields something further
for rent. This we now see to be erroneous. A thing cannot
be at a monopoly value, when its supply can be increased
to an indefinite extent if we are only willing to incur the
cost. If no more corn than the existing quantity is grown,
it is because the value has not risen high enough to remune-
rate any one for growing it. Any land which at the existing
price, and by the existing processes, will yield the ordinary
profit, is tolerably certain, unless some artificial hindrance
intervenes, to be cultivated, although nothing may be left for
rent. As long as there is any land, fit for cultivation, which
at the existing price cannot be profitably cultivated at all,
there must be some land a little better, which will yield the
ordinary profit, but allow nothing for rent: and that land,
if within the boundary of a farm, will be cultivated by the
farmer; if not so, probably by the proprietor, or by some
other person on sufferance. Some such land at least, under
cultivation, there can scarcely fail to be.

Rent, therefore, forms no part of the cost of production
which determines the value of agricultural produce. Cir-
cumstances no doubt may be conceived in which it might
do so, and very largely too. We can imagine a country so
fully peopled, and with all its cultivable soil so completely
occupied, that to produce any additional quantity would re-
quire more labour than the produce would feed: and if we
suppose this to be the condition of the whole world, or of a
country debarred from foreign supply, then, if population


560 BOOK III. CHAPTER v. § 2.


continued increasing, both the land and its produce would
really rise to a monopoly or scarcity price. But this state
of things never can have really existed anywhere, unless pos-
sibly in some small island cut off from the rest of the world;
nor is there any danger whatever that it should exist. It
certainly exists in no known region at present. Monopoly,
we haye seen, can take effect on yalue, only through lmita-
tion of supply. In all countries of any extent there is more
cultivable land than is yet cultivated; and while there is
any such surplus, it is the same thing, so far as that quality
of land is concerned, as if there were an infinite quantity.
What is practically limited in supply is only the better
qualities; and even for those, so much rent cannot be de-
manded as would bring in the competition of the lands not
yet in cultivation ; the rent of a piece of land must be some-
what less than the whole excess of its productiveness over
that of the best land which it is not yet profitable to cultivate ;
that is, it must be about equal to the excess above the worst
land which it és profitable to cultivate. The land or the
capital most unfavourably circumstanced among those ac-
tually employed, pays no rent; and that land or capital
determines the cost of production which regulates the value
of the whole produce. Thus rent is, as we have already seen,
no cause of value, but the price of the privilege which the
inequality of the returns to different portions of agricultural
produce confers on all except the least favoured portion.
Rent, in short, merely equalizes the profits of different
farming capitals, by enabling the landlord to appropriate all
extra gains occasioned by superiority of natural advantages.
If all landlords were unanimously to forego their rent, they
would but transfer it to the farmers, without benefiting the
consumer; for the existing price of corn would still be an
indispensable condition of the production of part of the exist-
ing supply, and a part could not obtain that price unless the
whole obtained it. Rent, therefore, unless artificially m-
creased by restrictive laws, is no burthen on the consumer:


SPE CELTS HE NS eh PO


RENT, IN ITS RELATION TO VALUE. 561


it does not raise the price of corn, and is no otherwise a
detriment to the public, than inasmuch as if the state had
retained it, or imposed an equivalent in the shape of a land-
tax, it would then have been a fund applicable to general
instead of private advantage.


§ 3. Agricultural productions are not the only com-
modities which have several different costs of production at
once, and which, in consequence of that difference, and in
proportion to it, afford a rent. Mines are also an instance.
Almost all kinds of raw material extracted from the interior
of the earth—metals, coals, precious stones, &c., are obtained
from mines differing considerably in fertility, that is, yielding
very different quantities of the product to the same quantity
of labour and capital. This being the case, it is an obvious


“question, why are not the most fertile mines so worked as to


supply the whole market? No such question can arise as to
land; it being self-evident, that the most fertile lands could
not possibly be made to supply the whole demand of a fully
peopled country; and even of what they do yield, a part is
extorted from them by a labour and outlay as great as that
required to grow the same amount on worse land. But it is
not so with mines; at least, not universally. There are,
perhaps, cases in which it is impossible to extract from a
particular vein, in a given time, more than a certain quantity
of ore, because there is only a limited surface of the vein
exposed, on which more than a certain number of labourers
cannot be simultaneously employed. But this is not true
of all mines. In collieries, for example, some other cause
of limitation must be sought for. In some instances the
owners limit the quantity raised, in order not too rapidly to
exhaust the mine: in others there are said to be combina-
tions of owners, to keep up a monopoly price by limiting
the production. Whatever be the causes, it is a fact that
mines of different degrees of richness are in operation, and
since the value of the produce must be proportional to the


WO tie 20


562 BOOK Ill. CHAPTER Vv. § 3.


cost of production at the worst mine (fertility and situation
taken together), it is more than proportional to that of the
best. All mines superior in produce to the worst actually
worked, will yield, therefore, a rent, equal to the excess.
They may yield more; and the worst mine may itself yield a
rent. Mines being comparatively few, their qualities do not
graduate gently into one another, as the qualities of land do;
and the demand may be such as to keep the value of the
produce considerably above the cost of production at the
worst mine now worked, without being sufficient to bring
into operation a still worse. During the interval the produce
is really at a scarcity value.

Fisheries are another example. Fisheries in the open sea
are not appropriated, but fisheries in lakes or rivers almost
always are so, and likewise oyster-beds or other particular
fishing grounds on coasts. We may take salmon fisheries as
an example of the whole class. Some rivers are far more
productive in salmon than others. None, however, without
being exhausted, can supply more than a very limited demand.
The demand of a country like England can only be supplied
by taking salmon from many different rivers, of unequal pro-
ductiveness, and the value must be sufficient to repay the
cost of obtaining the fish from the least productive of these.
All others, therefore, will, if appropriated, afford a rent equal
to the value of their superiority. Much higher than this it
cannot be, if there are salmon rivers accessible which from
distance or inferior productiveness have not yet contributed
to supply the market. If there are not, the value, doubtless,
may rise to a scarcity rate, and the worst fisheries in use may
then yield a considerable rent.

Both in the case of mines and of fisheries, the natural
order of events is liable to be interrupted by the opening of
a new mine, or a new fishery, of superior quality to some of
those already in use. The first effect of such an incident is
an increase of the supply; which of course lowers the value,
to call forth an increased demand. This reduced value may


RENT, IN ITS RELATION TO VALUE. 563


beno longer sufficient to remunerate the worst of the existing
mines or fisheries, and these may consequently be abandoned.
If the superior mines or fisheries, with the addition of the
one newly opened, produce as much of the commodity as is
Tequired at the lower value corresponding to their lower
cost of production, the fall of value will be permanent, and
there will be a corresponding fall in the rents of those mines
or fisheries which are not abandoned. In this case, when
things have permanently adjusted themselves, the result will
be, that the scale of qualities which supply the market will
have been cut short at the lower end, while a new insertion
will have been made in the .scale at some point higher up;
and the worst mine or fishery in use—the one which regulates
the rents of the superior qualities and the value of the com-
modity—will be a mine or fishery of better quality than that
by which they were previously regulated.

Land is used for other purposes than agriculture, espe-
cially for residence ; and when so used yields a rent, deter-
mined by principles similar to those already laid down. The
ground rent of a building, and the rent of a garden or park
attached to it, will not be less than the rent which the same
land would afford in agriculture: but it may be greater than
this, to an indefinite amount; the surplus being either in con-
sideration of beauty or of convenience, the convenience often
Consisting in superior facilities for pecuniary gain. Sites of
remarkable beauty are generally limited in supply, and there-
fore, if in great demand, are at ascarcity value. Sites superior
only in convenience are governed as to their value by the ordi-
nary principles of rent. The ground rent of a house in a small
Village is but little higher than the rent of a similar patch of
ground in the open fields: but that of a shop in Cheapside
will exceed these, by the whole amount at which people
estimate the superior facilities of money-making in the more
crowded place. The rents of wharfage, dock and harbour
room, water-power, and many other privileges, may be ana-


lysed on similar principles.
202


564 BOOK III. CHAPTER v. § 4.


§ 4. Cases of extra profit analogous to rent, are more
frequent in the transactions of industry than is sometimes
supposed. Take the case, for example, of a patent, or exclu-
sive privilege for the use of a process by which cost of pro-
duction is lessened. If the value of the product continues
to be regulated by what it costs to those who are obliged to
persist in the old process, the patentee will make an extra
profit equal to the advantage which his process possesses over
theirs. This extra profit is essentially similar to rent, and
sometimes even assumes the form of it ; the patentee allowing
to other producers the use of his privilege, in consideration
of an annual payment. So long as he, and those whom he
associates in the privilege, do not produce enough to supply
the whole market, so long the original cost of production,
being the necessary condition of producing a part, will regulate
the value of the whole; and the patentee will be enabled to
keep up his rent to a full equivalent for the advantage which
his process gives him. In the commencement indeed he will
probably forego a part of this advantage for the sake of under-
selling others: the increased supply which he brings forward
will lower the value, and make the trade a bad one for those
who do not share in the privilege; many of whom there-
fore will gradually retire, or restrict their operations, or enter
into arrangements with the patentee: as his supply increases
theirs will diminish, the value meanwhile continuing slightly
depressed. But if he stops short in his operations before
the market is wholly supplied by the new process, things will
again adjust themselves to what was the natural value before
the invention was made, and the benefit of the improvement
will accrue solely to the patentee.

The extra gains which any producer or dealer obtains
through superior talents for business, or superior business
arrangements, are very much of a similar kind. If all his
competitors had the same advantages, and used them, the
benefit would be transferred to their customers, through the
diminished value of the article: he only retains it for himself


SNE EEA ompR


EDEN LIE OT EES POMS


RENT, IN ITS RELATION TO VALUE. 565


because he is able to bring his commodity to market at a
lower cost, while its value is determined by a higher. All
advantages, in fact, which one competitor has over another,
whether natural or acquired, whether personal or the result
of social arrangements, bring the -commodity, so far, into
our Third Class, and assimilate the possessor of the advantage
to a receiver of rent. Wages and profits represent the
universal elements in production, while rent may be taken to
represent the differential and peculiar: any difference in
favour of certain producers, or in favour of production in cer-
tain circumstances, being the source of a gain, which, although
not called rent unless paid periodically by one person to
another, is governed by laws entirely the same with it. The
price paid for a differential advantage in producing a com-
modity, cannot enter into the general cost of production of
the commodity.

A commodity may, no doubt, in some contingencies,
yield a rent even under the most disadvantageous circum-
stances of its production; but only when it is, for the time,
in the condition of those commodities which are absolutely
limited in supply, and is therefore selling at a scarcity value;
which never is, nor has been, nor can be, a permanent con-
dition of any of the great rent-yielding commodities: unless
through their approaching exhaustion, if they are mineral
products, (coal, for example), or through an increase of popu-
lation, continuing after a further increase of production
becomes impossible; a contingency, which the almost inevit-
able progress of human culture and improvement in the long
interval which has first to elapse, forbids us to consider as
probable.


Apes


met at ELS,


CHAPTER VI,


SUMMARY OF THE THEORY OF VALUE.


§ 1. We have now attained a favourable point for look-
ing back, and taking a simultaneous view of the space which
we have’ traversed since the commencement of the present
Book. The following are the principles of the theory of
Value, so far as we have yet ascertained them.

I. Value is a relative term. The value of a thing means
the quantity of some other thing, or of things in general,
which it exchanges for. The values of all things can never,
therefore, rise or fall simultaneously. There is no such
thing as a general rise or a general fall of values. Every
rise of value supposes a fall, and every fall a rise.

II. The temporary, or market value of a thing, depends
on the demand and supply; rising as the demand rises, and
fallmg as the supply rises. The demand, however, varies
with the value, being generally greater when the thing is
cheap than when it is dear; and the value always adjusts
itself in such a mannér, that the demand is equal to the
supply.

All. Besides their temporary value, things have also a
permanent, or as it may be called, a Natural Value, to
which the market value, after every variation, always tends to
return: and the oscillations compensate for one another, so
that, on the average, commodities exchange at about their
natural value.

IV. The natural value of some things is a scarcity value:
but most things naturally exchange for one another in the
ratio of their cost of production, or at what may be termed
their Cost Value.

V. The things which are naturally and permanently at a


1
:
|
|


SUMMARY OF THE THEORY OF VALUE. 567


scarcity value, are those of which the supply cannot be
increased at all, or not sufficiently to satisfy the whole of the
demand which would exist for them at their cost value.

VI. A monopoly value means a scarcity value. Mono-
poly cannot give a value to anything, except through a limi-
tation of the supply.

VII. Every commodity of which the supply can be
indefinitely increased by labour and capital, exchanges for
other things proportionally to the cost necessary for pro-
ducing and bringing to market the most costly portion of
the supply required. The natural value is synonymous with
the Cost Value, and the cost value of a thing, means the cost
value of the most costly portion of it.

VIII. Cost of Production consists of several elements,
some of which are constant and universal, others occasional.
The universal elements of cost of production are, the wages
of the labour, and the profits of the capital. The occasional
elements are, taxes, and any extra cost occasioned by a scarcity
value of some of the requisites.

IX. Rent is not an element in the cost of production of
the commodity which yields it; except in the cases, (rather
conceivable than actually existing) in which it results from,
and represents, a scarcity value. But when land capable of
yielding rent in agriculture, is applied to some other purpose,
the rent which it would have yielded is an element in the
cost of production of the commodity which it is employed to
produce.

X. Omitting the occasional elements; things which admit
of indefinite increase, naturally and permanently exchange
for each other according to the comparative amount of wages
which must be paid for producing them, and the comparative
amount of profits which must be obtained by the capitalists
who pay those wages.

XI. The comparative amount of wages does not depend
on what wages are in themselves. High wages do not make
high values, nor low wages low values. The comparative


568 BOOK III. CHAPTER VI. § 1.


amount of wages depends partly on the comparative quan-
tities of labour required, and partly on the comparative rates
of its remuneration.

XII. So, the comparative rate of profits does not depend
on what profits are in themselves ; nor do high or low profits
make high or low values. It depends partly on the compa-
rative lengths of time during which the capital is employed,
and partly on the comparative rate of profits in different
employments.

XIII. If two things are made by the same quantity of
labour, and that labour paid at the same rate, and if the
wages of the labourer have to be advanced for the same
space of time, and the nature of the employment does not
require that there be a permanent difference in their rate of
profit; then, whether wages and profits be high or low, and
whether the quantity of labour expended be much or little,
these two things will, on the average, exchange for one
another.

XIV. If one of two things commands, on the average,
a greater value than the other, the cause must be that it
requires for its production either a greater quantity of labour,
or a kind of labour permanently paid at a higher rate; or
that the capital, or part of the capital, which supports that
labour, must be advanced for a longer period ; or, lastly, that
the production is attended with some circumstance which
requires to be compensated by a permanently higher rate of
profit.

XV. Of these elements, the quantity of labour required
for the production is the most important: the effect of the
others is smaller, though none of them are insignificant.

XVI. The lower profits are, the less important become
the minor elements of cost of production, and the less do
commodities deviate from a value proportioned to the quan-
tity and quality of the labour required for their production.

XVII. But every fall of profits lowers, in some degree,
the cost value of things made with much or durable ma-


SUMMARY OF THE THEORY OF VALUE. 569


chinery, and raises that of things made by hand; and every
rise of profits does the reverse.


§ 2. Such is the general theory of Exchange Value. It
is necessary, however, to remark that this theory contem-
plates a system of production carried on by capitalists for
profit, and not by labourers for subsistence, In proportion
as we admit this last supposition—and in most countries we
must admit it, at least in respect of agricultural produce, to
a very great extent—such of the preceeding theorems as
relate to the dependence of value on cost of production will
require modification. Those theorems are all grounded on
the supposition, that the producer’s object and aim is to
derive a profit from his capital. This granted, it follows that
he must sell his commodity at the price which will afford the
ordinary rate of profit, that is to say, it must exchange for
other commodities at its cost value. But the peasant-pro-
prietor, the metayer, and even the peasant-farmer, or allot-
ment-holder—the labourer, under whatever name, producing
on his own account—is seeking, not an investment for his
little capital, but an advantageous employment for his time
and labour, His disbursements, beyond his own main-
tenance and that of his family, are so small, that nearly the
whole proceeds of the sale of his produce are the wages of
labour. When he and his family have been fed from the
produce of his farm (and perhaps clothed with materials
grown thereon, and manufactured in the family) he may, i
respect of the supplementary remuneration derived from the
sale of his surplus produce, be compared to those labourers
who, deriving their subsistence from an independent source,
can afford to sell their labour at any price which is to their
minds worth the exertion. A peasant, who supports himself
and his family with one portion of his produce, will often
sell the remainder very much below what would be its cost


value to a capitalist. ea ;
There is, however, even in this case, a minimum, or infe-


570 BOOK III. CHAPTER vi. § 2.


rior limit, of value. The part of his produce which he carries
to market, must bring in to, him the value of all necessaries
which he is compelled to purchase; and it must enable him to
pay his rent. Rent, under peasant cultivation, is not governed
by the principles set forth in the chapters immediately pre-
ceding, but is either determined by custom, as in the case of
metayers, or, if fixed by competition, depends on the ratio of
population to land. Rent, therefore, in this case, is an ele-
ment of cost of production. The peasant must work until
he has cleared his rent and the price of all purchased neces-
saries. After this, he will go on working only if he can sell
the produce for such a price as will overcome his aversion to
labour.

The minimum just mentioned is what the peasant must
obtain in exchange for the whole of his surplus produce.
But inasmuch as this surplus is not a fixed quantity, but may
be either greater or less according to the degree of his indus-
try, a minimum value for the whole of it does not give any
minimum value for a definite quantity of the commodity. In
this state of things, therefore, it can hardly be said, that the
value depends at all on cost of production. It depends en-
tirely on demand and supply, that is, on the proportion


between the quantity of surplus food which the peasants ©


choose to produce, and the numbers of the non-agricultural,
or rather of the non-peasant population. If the buying class
is numerous and the growing class lazy, food may be perma-
nently at a scarcity price. I am not aware that this case has
anywhere a real existence. If the growing class is energetic
and industrious, and the buyers few, food will be extremely
cheap. This also is a rare case, though some parts of
France perhaps approximate to it. The common cases are,
either that, as in Ireland, the peasant class is indolent and the
buyers few, or the peasants industrious and the town popula-
tion numerous and opulent, as in Belgium, the north of Italy,
and parts of Germany. The price of the produce will adjust
itself to these varieties ot circumstances, unless modified, as


SUMMARY OF THE THEORY OF VALUE. 571 |


in many cases it is, by the competition of producers who
are not peasants, or by the prices of foreign markets.


§ 3. Another anomalous case is that of slave-grown pro-
duce: which presents, however, by no means the same degree
of complication. The slave-owner is a capitalist, and his
inducement to production consists in a profit on his capital. {
This profit must amount to the ordinary rate. In respect to

his expenses, he is in the same position as if his slaves were ie
free labourers working with their present efficiency, and were ]
hired with wages equal to their present cost. If the cost is less, re
| im proportion to the work done, than the wages of free labour

would be,so much the greater are his profits: but if all other


producers in the country possess the same advantage, the

values of commodities will not be at all affected by it. The

only case in which they ean be affected, is when the privilege

| of cheap labour is confined to particular branches of produc- j

| tion, free labourers at proportionably higher wages being

employed in the remainder. In this case, as in all cases of

permanent inequality between the wages of different employ-

ments, prices and values receive the impress of the inequality.

Slave-grown will exchange for non-slave-grown commodities

in a less ratio than that of the quantity of labour required

for their production ; the value of the former will be less, and
: of the latter greater, than if slavery did not exist.

The further adaptation of the theory of value to the

- varieties of existing or possible industrial systems may be

left with great advantage to the intelligent reader. It is well

said by Montesquieu, “Il ne faut pas toujours tellement

épuiser un sujet, qu’on ne laisse rien a faire au lecteur. Il
ne s’agit pas de faire lire, mais de faire penser *,”


+ TOMS


* Esprit des Lois, liv. xi. ad finem.


rs
a
Z
ica
C4
=
<j


a


APP RAEN (DAG:


Iy 1846 there appeared an elaborate treatise*, by two
authors, MM. Mounier and Rubichon, the latter of whom
was by his own statement a public functionary for ten years
preceding the French Revolution, and both appear to take
their ideas of a wholesome state of society from the institu-
tions and practices of the middle ages. In this book it is
maintained, that while French writers and administrators are
ma conspiracy to represent their country as making rapid
strides in prosperity, the progress of the morcellement is in
fact reducing it to beggary. An imposing array of official
details, adduced in apparent support of this assertion, gaye a
degree of weight to it which it could not claim from any cor-
rectness of information or capacity of judgment shown by its
authors. Their work was cried up as a book of authority by
the Quarterly Review}, in an article which excited some
notice by proclaiming, on the evidence produced by these
writers, that “in a few years the Code Napoleon will be
employed in dividing fractions of square inches of land, and
deciding by logarithms infinitesimal inheritances.” As such
representations ought not to be without a permanent answer,
I think it worth while to subjoin the substance of three
articles in the Morning Chronicle, containing as complete a
refutation of these writers and of their reviewer, partly from
their own materials, as appears to be either merited or
required.


* De l’Agriculture en France, d’aprés les Documents officiels. Par
M. L. Mounier, avec des Remarques par M. Rubichon. Paris, 1846.
+ For December, 1846.


Substance (with omissions and corrections) of three articles
in the Morning Chronicle of 11th, 13th, and 16th J anuary
1847, in reply to MM. Mounier and Rubichon and to the
Quarterly Review, on the Subdivision of Landed Property
in France.


i


Tur reyiewer makes an extraordinary slip at the threshold of his
subject, in estimating the extent to which the morcellement has
actually proceeded. He finds it stated, that among nearly five
millions and a half of landed proprietors, there are 2,600,000 the
revenue of whose land, as rated to the land-tax, does not exceed
forty shillings, which sum, he very candidly says, should rather be
sixty, as the rated value is very much lower than the real yalue.
On this he exclaims, “There already exist in France millions of
examples that a propriétaire may be poorer than a peasant.
2,600,000 families, comprising 18,000,000 persons, of each of oie
families the rated income does not exceed forty shillings, but say
sixty shillings sterling, for the maintenance of five persons—and
these are proprietors! The poorest day labourer would earn four
times as much.” He seems actually to suppose that these small
proprietors, like great landlords, live only upon the rené of their
land, forgetting that they haye its whole produce. He might have
known from the very documents he has quoted, and might have
guessed if he had not known, that the forty shillings at heh the
land is rated in the collector’s books are not the gross produce of
the little estate, but its net produce ; the surplus beyond the expenses
of cultivation ; which expenses include the subsistence of the culti-
yators, together with interest on the capital. The reviewer himself
shows that the rated revenue of all the landed property of France is
about 4 per cent of its rated value, and does not therefore much
exceed a reasonable rent.. A writer who can mistake this for the
whole income of a peasant cultivating his own land, gives the
measure of his competency for the subject, and of the degree of
attention he has paid to it.

We will now attempt to discover, from the reviewer's data and
those of his authors, what may really be the condition of these
2,600,000 proprietors. As the French Government estimates the


lod
APPENDIX. 577


Jand-tax at one tenth of the revenue of the land, families rated at
£2 (or 50 franes) pay, it is to be presumed, five francs. The average
of the contribution fonciere for all France is 23 franes per hectare,
and in the southern half of the kingdom, which is the most divided,
two francs. A hectare being about 22 English acres, this gives
from five to between six and seven acres as the portion of land
which falls to the lot of each of the reviewer's forty-shilling or
sixty-shilling freeholders. But, it may be said, this is not the ave-
rage but the maximum of their possessions. We will therefore take
another estimate, grounded on official documents, from the reviewer's
authorities, MM, Mounier and Rubichon. “It is hardly credible,”
they say, “that there are in France more than four millions of pro-
prietors so poor, that they pay no more than 5f. 95c.” (say 6f.) “to
the contribution fonciére.” In this case the 5f. 95c. are certainly
the average. Six francs of land-tax corresponds to six acres per
family on the average of all France, and to seven and a-half on that
of the southern division, which contains the greatest proportion of
small proprietors. A still more favourable result is given by the
calculations of M. Lullin de Chateauvieux, a much better autho-
nity than these authors, who estimates the average holdings of the
3,900,000 poorest proprietors at eight acres and a half. Now, take
any one of these computations in a fertile country like France, sup-
Pose as bad an agriculture as exists anywhere in Western Europe;
and then judge whether a single family, industrious and economical
as the French of the poorer classes are, and enjoying the entire pro-
duce of from five to eight and a half acres, subject to a payment @:
only tenpence an acre to the Government, can be otherwise than in
® very desirable condition? We do not forget that the land is
sometimes mortgaged for part of the purchase money, and the
reviewer makes a great cry about the tremendous incumbrances by
which the land of France is weighed down ; not amounting, however,
on his own showing, to forty per cent on the rental, which we
should think is as favourable a return as could be made by any
landed aristocracy in Europe. The interest on the mortgages of all
France is estimated at twenty-four millions sterling for one hundred
and fourteen millions of acres—less than five shillings per acre.
The owner of from five to eight acres could afford to pay double this
amount, and be very well off. ae
We are aware that this is an average, and that four millions
VOL. I. 2P


ae


578 APPENDIX.


of properties averaging, according to M. de Chateauvieux, eight
acres and a-half, imply a great number of proprietors who have less.
But there must be a proportional (though not an equal) number
who haye more; and it must not be supposed that this statement
includes the large properties, one of which would be enough to keep
up the ayerage against a hundred extremely small ones. No pro-
perties are included which pay so much as twenty francs land-tax,
corresponding on the average of France to twenty acres—on that of
the south to twenty-five. When it is considered that of the whole soil
of France much less than half is in the hands of peasant proprietors,
and that this half is not more subdivided than we now see, it will
probably be thought that hitherto at least the mischiefs of subdivi-
sion have not reached a very formidable height.

But it is not what France now is, so much as what she is becom-
ing, that is the material point. Is the morcellement increasing, or
likely to increase? The apologists of the French system have never
denied that the land in many parts of France is too minutely
divided. What they deny is, that it is a growing evil. They assert
that the subdivision has reached its height, and that the reunions,
by purchase, marriage, and inheritance, now balance the subdiyi-
sions. How stands the fact in this respect? Are the small pro-
perties tending to become still smaller, or not? The reader will be
surprised when he finds that, with all their straimmg, M. Rubichon
and his reviewer haye failed of proving that the morcellement, in
this sense of the term, is making any progress at all.

The reviewer has a curious theory on the subject. He thinks
that “on the calculated average of three children to each inheri-
tance,” the piece of land now held by one proprietor must mecessa-
rily be divided among three in the next generation, and among nine
in that which follows. Under what system of landed property
could a population increase at this rate, and not be reduced to star-
vation? But is it a fact that population is anywhere trebled in the
space of a generation? We have here blunder within blunder of a
very complicated description. In the first place, he should not have
said three children to one inheritance, but to two inheritances ; for
as the French law in questions of property observes that impartial
justice between the two sexes in which other laws are so often defi-
cient, the mother’s patrimony is on an average equal to that of the
father. In the next place, could not the reviewer haye taken the


er or a ee eT a Yl a ae


APPENDIX, 579


trouble to ascertain at what rate the French population is actually
increasing? If he had, he would have found that in the 27 years
from 1815 to 1842 it only increased 18 per cent, and during that
period with progressively increasing slowness, namely—in the first
eleyen years 9 per cent, in the next nine years less than 6 per cent,
and in the seven years from 1835 to 1842, 3 1-10th per cent only*.
This retardation we must take the liberty of attributing mainly to
the prudence and forethought generated in the poorest class by this
yery subdivision of property.

Instead, therefore, of trebling in a generation, the population
increases in that period about 20 per centt; and if the growth of
towns, and of employments not agricultural, in the same space of
time, is sufficient to absorb this increase, there needs not be, and
will not be, even if the law does its worst, any increase of subdivi-
sion. Now, the towns of France haye increased, and are increas-
ing, at a rate far exceeding the general increase of the population.
We read only the other day in the Svécle, as the result of the census
just concluded, that Paris, which in 1832 had only 930,000 inhabit-
ants, has now more than 1,350,000, an increase of nearly fifty per
cent in fourteen years. There is every reason then to infer, from


_ these general data, that the morcellement is making no progress.


What facts have M. Rubichon and the Quarterly reviewer to
oppose to these? One fact; which at first sight appears a very
strong one. Between 1826 and 1835, the number of properties
rated to the land-tax exhibited an increase of more than 600,000;
being about six per cent in ten years. Let us first remark, that
600,000 separate assessments are equivalent only to about. 300,000
proprietors; it being the common estimate of French writers, that
on the average about two cétes fonciéres, or separate accounts with
the land-tax, correspond only to a single proprietor. But if the
reviewer had consulted his author just ten pages further on}, he


* These facts are taken from M. Passy. In page 340 of the present work,
from a more complete comparison, which includes the results of the last census,


the increase of population has been shown to be even slower than is here repre-


sented.
+ Even this is a considerable overstatement. The census of 1806 showed a


i i f that year, it
opulation of 29,107,425. In 1846, according to the census o .

hat only increased! to 35,409,486, being an increase of little more than 213 per
cent in forty years. ‘The longest term ever assigned to a generation is thirty


years. :
+ Mounier and Rubichon, vol. i. p. 110.


580 APPENDIX.


would have found a cause sufficient to account for a considerable
portion of this increase. There were sold between 1826 and 1835
domains of the State, to the value of nearly 134 millions of franes,
or five and a-half millions sterling. The very nature of such a sale
implies division. And we are the more inclined to ascribe much of
the apparent increase of division to this circumstance, because in
the ten years preceding those in question, the cdtes fonciéres
increased in number by little more than 200,000; an alarming
proof, according to the reviewer, of the progressive advance of the
evil; but, as we suspect, arising partly from the fact, that during
the earlier decennial period a smaller, though still a considerable,
amount of public domains were alienated.
In addition to the State lands, a great extent of Communal lands
were likewise alienated during the same period: and it is further
necessary to subtract all the additions made to the number of céées
fonciéres by the extension of building, and by the natural subdivision
of town property, during ten years. All these items must be accu-
rately estimated and deducted, before it can be affirmed with cer-
tainty that in the rural districts there was during those years any
increased division of landed property at all. And eyen if there was,
increased division does not necessarily imply increased subdivisron.
Large estates may have been, and we believe were, in many
instances, divided, but the division may have stopped there. We |
know of no reason for supposing that small properties were divided
into others still smaller, or that the average size of the possessions of


It so happens that facts exist, more specific and more expressly
to the point than any of M. Rubichon’s. A new cadastre, or
survey and valuation of lands, has been in progress for some years
past. In thirty-seven cantons, taken indiscriminately through
France, the operation has been completed; in twenty-one it is
nearly complete. In the thirty-seven, the cdtes fonciéres, which
were 154,266 at the last cadastre (in 1809 and 1810), have only
increased by 9,011, being less than 18 per cent in considerably
more than thirty years, while in many of the cantons they have
considerably diminished. From this increase is to be subtracted
all which is due to the progress of building during the period, as
well as to the sale of public and communal lands. In the other
twenty-one cantons the number of cétes fonciéres is not yet pub-


peasant families was at all diminished.
:
b


At ESI


APPENDIX. 581


lished, but the numher of parcelles, or separate bits of land, has
diminished in the same period ; and among these districts is included
the greater part of the banliewe of Paris, one of the most minutely
divided districts in France, in which the morcellement has actually
diminished by no less than 16 per cent. The details may be found
in M, Passy’s little work, “Des Systémes de Culture.” So much
for the terrible progress of subdivision.

We cannot leave this part of the subject without noticing one of
the most signal instances which the reviewer has exhibited of his
incompetency for the subject he treats of. He laments over the
extraordinary number of sales of landed property which he says the
law of inheritance constantly occasions ; and indeed the sales of land
are shown to have amounted in ten years to no less than one-fourth
part of the whole territorial property of France. Now, whatever
else this extraordinary amount of sale and purchase may prove, the
whole of it is one gigantic argument against the reviewer's case ;
for every sale of land which is caused by the law of inheritance
must be a sale for the express purpose of preventing subdivision.
Tf land, sold in consequence of an inheritance, is nevertheless sub-
divided, this cannot be an effect of the law of inheritance; it would
only prove that land sells for a higher price when sold in small
Portions : that is, in other words, that the poor, and eyen, as the
neviewer would have us believe, the very poor, are able to outbid
the rich in the land market. This certainly does not prove that the
very poor of France are so very poor as these writers try to make
out, while it does prove that, if so, they must be by far the most
mdustrious and economical people on the face of the earth, for
Which some credit ought surely to be given to the system of peasant
Properties,

Il.


We haye shown that the four millions of landowners in France
who can be reckoned among peasant-proprietors, those whose hold-
ings fall short of twenty acres, are computed by one of the best
living authorities to possess on the ayerage eight and a-half English
acres each, and that from no authentic documents can the average
be brought much below that amount; a fact wholly incompatible
with their being in the state approaching to starvation in which
M. Rubichon and his reviewer would represent them. It is equally


floiinee


582 APPENDIX.


certain that if there is bad agriculture on these small estates, it is
from some other cause than their smallness. Farms of this size are
consistent with agriculture equal to any on the face of the earth.

We shall now, however, touch upon another kind of moreelle-
ment, which does amount to a serious inconvenience, and wherever
it exists must have a strong tendency to keep agriculture in a low
state. This is, the subdivision, not of the land of the country
among many proprietors, but of the land of each proprietor into
many detached pieces, or parcelles, as they are technically desig-
nated. This inconvenience has been experienced in other countries
besides France, as in the canton of Zurich, in the Palatinate, and
(as respects holdings, though not properties) in Treland. In France
it is carried to so great an excess, that the number of parcelles is
ten times the number of cétes fonciéres; and as there are supposed
to be twice as many cétes foncieres as proprietors, the curious fact is
disclosed, that on the average of France the estate of every land-
owner consists of twenty fragments in twenty different places. The
consequences are a subject of general and increasing complaint.
Great loss of time and labour ; waste of cultivable soil in boundaries
and paths; the inaccessibility of many parcelles without trespas-
sing on other properties; endless disputes and frequent litigation—
are enumerated among the evils; and it is evident what obstacles
the small size and dispersed position of the parcelles, and their
intermixture with those of other proprietors, must oppose to many
kinds of agricultural improvement.

For a considerable portion of this evil the French law of inhe-
ritance may fairly be held responsible. A certain amount of it is
inevitable wherever landed properties are undergoing a double
process of division and recomposition : marriages, for example,
must in general bring together portions of land not adjacent. But
if parents had the power of bequest, the owner of twenty parcelles,
even if he adhered to the spirit of the law of equal division, would
give some of the portions entire to one child, and others to another.
The law, on the contrary, must divide with exact equality ; and as
it is generally impossible to adjust the value of patches of unequal
fertility, vineyards, meadows, arable, &c., so as to satisfy every-
body, it continually happens, especially in the more backward parts
of France, that when the settlement is made by division instead
of sale, each co-heir insists on taking a share of every parcelle,


PSI


0 ie eee ITC a


APPENDIX. 583


instead of the whole of some parcelles; from whence, no doubt, the
amazing multiplication of these little patches in many parts of France.

This evil, while it would not exist to any very material extent
except under the peculiar French law of inheritance, is not inevit-
able even under that law. The enormous extent of sales of land,
amounting in ten years to a fourth part of the landed property of
France, are a clear proof that in general the adjustment of inhe-
ritances is not effected by a subdivision of the land, but by sale:
which, it needs scarcely be remarked, does not necessarily imply
parting with the land, there being nothing to hinder the heirs them-
selves from becoming the purchasers. We have no doubt it would
be found that this rational mode of executing the law is tending
more and more to become universal. To hasten the undoing of the
mischief which has been already done, the Government has been
often ur ged (in some instances by Councils-General of Departments)
to propose a law authorising the consolidation of landed properties
by a general valuation and exchange of allotments, in every com-
mune in which the majority of the proprietors may apply for it;
and unless the evil is seen to be correcting itself by a spontaneous
process, nothing, we should think, can long prevent the adoption of
So salutary an expedient.

That French agriculture, and the condition of the peasant popu-
lation, are injuriously affected by this sort of morcellement, is so far
true, that it must considerably retard the improvement which might
otherwise be expected, and which, in spite of all hindrances, does
eyen now, to a great extent, take place. More than this we cannot
admit. There are conclusive proofs of great and rapid improvement
in some parts of France, and M. Rubichon and his reviewer have
no evidence whatever of retrogression in any.

They produce tables of the average amount of different kinds of
food consumed by the population ; also tables of the number of
cattle, the amount of produce per hectare of the different kinds of
cultivation, &c., caleulated from the official documents. These
estimates, assuming their correctness (which, so far as that quality
is attainable, we generally see no reason to discredit), are indica-
tive, doubtless, of a low and backward state. But statistics are
only evidence of the present. Where are the statistics of the past
That the agriculture of a great part of France is rude and imperfect


is known to all Europe ; but that it ever was better, is an assertion
a


Sti acee cles epN es


584 APPENDIX.


opposed to all evidence, and we shall not take M. Rubichon’s word
for it, no more than for the notion that the food and general con-
dition of the mass of the people has been deteriorating from the
time of Louis XIV.*, if not earlier. At this last proposition we
cannot repress our wonder. In the reign of Louis XIV., Marshal
Vauban, a great authority with all who are themselves authorities,
and eyen with M. Rubichon, estimated that one-tenth of the popu-
lation of France were beggars, and five of the remaining nine-tenths
little above beggary. In the same reign, Labruyére claimed
credit for apprising the salons of Paris that a strange nondescript
sort of animals, who might be seen in the fields, and were much
addicted to grubbing in the earth, were, though nobody would sup-
pose it, a kind of men. Some readers may remember the picture
drawn by the old Marquis Mirabeau of the rural population in the
middle of the eighteenth century; nor was Arthur Young's, at
the opening of the Revolution, much more favourable. Compare
this with any authentic account, or with the testimony of any
observant resident or traveller, respecting their condition now.
M. Rubichon’s statistics comprise no returns of the rate of wages.
We are quite willing that our case should rest upon the result of an
inquiry into that one point.

As for agriculture, when it is recollected that, at the beginning
of this century, in the greater part of France the culture of artificial
grasses might be said to be unknown, and that the course of culti-
vation consisted solely of grain crops and fallows, it will be difficult
to make us believe that, even in the most backward parts of the
country, there has not been a considerable improvement from so
miserable a level.


* Tt did deteriorate in the early part of the reign of Louis XIV, not because
the peasants Vought land, but because they were compelled to sed/ it. ‘‘Au
moment’’ says Michelet (Le Peuple, ch. 1), ‘‘ou nos ministres Italiens, un
Mazarin, un Emeri, doublaient les taxes, les nobles qui remplissaient la cour
obtinrent aisément d’étre exemptés, de sorte que le fardeau double tomba
d’aplomb sur les épaules des faibles et des pauyres, qui furent bien obligés de
vendre ou donner cette terre 4 peine acquise, et de redeyenir des mercenaires,
fermiers, métayers, journaliers.... Je prie et je supplie ceux qui nous font des
lois ou les appliquent, de lire le détail de la funeste réaction de Mazarin et de
Louis XIV dans les pages pleines d’indignation et de douleur ot I’a consignée un
grand citoyen, Pesant de Boisguillebert, réimprimé recemment dans la Collection
des Economistes. Puisse cette histoire les avertir dans un moment ou diverses
influences trayaillent 4 l’envi pour arréter l’ceuvre capitale de la France, l’acqui-
sition de la terre par le trayailleur.”’


APPENDIX. 585


The blind zeal with which M. Rubichon presses everything
into the service of his theory, in which he is faithfully echoed by
his reviewer, makes them lay great stress upon the increase of roots,
and other inferior kinds of culture, as a proof that the population is
sinking to-an inferior kind of nutriment; as if the same thing was
not happening in England; as if it was not a necessary condition of
an improved rotation of crops, that other cultures should increase in
a greater proportion than grain culture, and even at the expense, in
some degree, of the inferior kinds of grain.

We have admitted, and again admit, the unsatisfactory state of
cultivation on a very great portion of the soil of France; but would
it be any better if the estates were large? Is it any better now on
the large estates? When M. Rubichon and his reviewer talk of
the small properties as “creating a new Ireland in France,” his
own pages make it known that the large properties, in the back-
ward parts of France, are already an Ireland, in the very worst
feature of Irish landed mismanagement, the system of middlemen.
It is a general practice, according to M. de Chateauvieux, with
the great proprietors of the central departments, to let their land en
bloc to a middleman, usually an attorney or a notary, who sublets it
in small portions on the métayer system, and is not only, as in
Treland, the hardest and most grasping of landlords, but having
only a temporary tenure, and being no agriculturist, of course
expends nothing in improvements. Of fifty-seven millions of acres
cultivated by tenants, twenty-one millions only are held by farmers
at fixed rents, and thirty-six millions on the métayer tenure;
which in France implies all the defects with very few of the advan-
tages of proprietary cultivation; the only exceptions being La
Vendée and a few of the adjoining departments, where the large
proprietors are resident, a primitive relationship subsists between
them and their tenants, and the métayers have in general, as in
Tuscany, a virtual fixity of tenure. We do not believe it will
be found in any part of France that the small properties are
under a bad agriculture, and the large properties under a good
one. They are both bad, or both good. Where large farms exist
and are well cultivated, the small properties also are well managed

and prosperous,

And this brings us to the principal cause, both now and

formerly, of the unimproved agriculture and scanty application of


586 APPENDIX.


capital to the soil of France. This is, the exclusive taste of the
wealthy and middle classes for town life and town pursuits,
combined with the general want of enterprise of the French
nation with respect to industrial improvements. It is truly,
though epigrammatically, said by M. Rubichon, that the French-
man, generally, knows but one way of getting rich; namely,
thrift. He does not understand sowing money freely to reap it
largely. This is the true cause why, when large properties are
sold, they bring the greatest price by being much subdivided.
The peasants, thanks to the Revolution, to the small properties,
and to their own unparalleled prudence, are able to purchase
land, and their savings are the only part of the wealth of the
country which takes that direction. We are often told, that it
does not answer to capitalists to buy land at the extravagant price
which the passion of the peasantry for land induces them to give,
amounting often to forty years’ purchase. It does not answer to
pay that price in order to liye idly on the rent in Paris, or the
large provincial towns. But if there was one particle of the spirit
of agricultural improvement in the owners of the monied wealth
which is so largely increasing in the manufacturing and com-
mercial districts, few speculations would be more profitable than to
buy land in many fertile and ill-cultivated parts of France, at even
more than forty years’ purchase of its wretchedly low rental, which
would soon be doubled or trebled by the application of capital,
with ordinary agricultural knowledge and enterprise. If the
petite cultwre is half as wasteful and unprofitable as is pretended,
the profit would be proportional of substituting la grande culture
for it. The thing would soon be done if the love of industrial
progress should ever supplant in the French mind the love of
national glory, or if the desire of national glorification should take
that direction. But with a people who dislike rural pursuits, and
in the pursuit of money-getting prefer the beaten ways, there can
be no other farming than peasant farming.


Ill.


Tux cheval de bataille of. M. Rubichon and his English followers
against the petite propriété, is the cattle question; not without:
cause, since on this subject they haye an indisputable basis of fact,
however inadequate to sustain the superstructure they have raised


OF as ew esaamnineane


——


APPENDIX. 587


upon it. The supply of butcher’s-meat to some of the principal
towns, especially Paris, is less copious than formerly. It has
increased greatly, but in a less ratio than the population. Of the
fact there is no doubt, since on this point there are trustworthy
statistics of the past as well as of the present. In 1789 the
consumption of meat in Paris averaged 68 kilogrammes (150 lbs.)
for each person; in 1841 it was but 55 (121 lbs.), and there are
also complaints of a falling off in the quality.

The Quarterly reviewer treats very cavalierly the explanation
given of this fact by M. Cunin-Gridaine, Minister of Commerce
and Agriculture. ‘This is to be accounted for by the revolution
which has taken place in the working classes; Paris having become
the most manufacturing town in Europe.” Industrielle is not
exactly synonymous with manufacturing, but let that pass. On
this the reviewer :—“ This seems a strange explanation. The new
population of Paris is to starve on an ounce” (five ounces) “of
meat per diem. How is that? Pooh! says the Liberal Minister,
they are only manufacturers. This solution will not be very
agreeable to those theorists amongst us who confound the extension
of manufactures with the welfare and comfort of the working
people. The more candid Minister of Louis-Philippe asswmes that
a manufacturing population must of necessity be worse fed than
other classes.” The reviewer is evidently no Gidipus. But he
might have found in another page of M. Rubichon’s treatise, what
the Minister meant. In a town such as Paris before the Revolu-
tion, in which there was, comparatively speaking, no production at
all, but only distribution—the population consisting of the great
landlords, the Court and higher functionaries paid by the State,
the bankers, financiers, government contractors, and other monied
classes, with the great and small dealers and tradesmen needful for
supplying these opulent consumers, and few labourers beyond those
who cannot be wanting in so large a town—all will see that the
richer must bear an unusually high numerical proportion to the
poorer consumers in such a city. Suppose now that a Manchester
or a Glasgow grows up in the place. It is pretty evident that
while this would add a little to the richer class, it would add
twenty times as much to the poorer. Considering now that the
upper and middle classes in France are great consumers of animal
food, while the poor consume very little, the ration of each poor


saa


588 APPENDIX.


petson might in these circumstances increase very much, while yet
the average consumption per head of the whole city, owing to the
diminished proportional numbers of the richer class, might be
considerably diminished. We have little doubt that this is the
fact, and that the great increase in the inferior kinds of animal
food introduced into Paris would prove to be for the use, not of
those who formerly used the superior kinds, but in a great measure
for those who seldom obtained animal food at all.

This, however, does not explain the whole of the change which
has taken place; for the price of butcher’s meat has also risen in
the Paris markets so materially as to be a source of great priyation
and complaint. The rise may be ascribed to various causes.
In the first place, “France has till lately always been a large
importer of cattle; and down to 1814 they were exempted from
all duty. In that year, however, a duty of three frances was laid
on each head of cattle imported;” and in 1822 the duty “was
suddenly raised to 55 francs, an increase which has well nigh put
a stop to the imporlation*.” Secondly, the octroi, or town custom
duty, now so burthensome, did not exist at all in 1789, and has
been largely increased at various periods, both in Paris and most
other towns, since its first establishment. These causes are enough
of themselves to account for a considerable part of the enhance-
ment complained of.

But if there were not these causes, there is cause almost
sufficient in the very fact of an increased and rapidly increasing
population. Paris has added, in fourteen years, between four and
five hundred thousand to its inhabitants, an increase of nearly one-
half. The agriculture of a country must be rapidly improving
indeed, if an increase like this can take place in a single market
without compelling it to draw its supplies from a larger surface
and a greater distance, and therefore at an increased expense.
Where would London have been by this time, for the supply of its
markets, were it not for our great coasting trade, and the inyention of
steam navigation, which conyeys not only cattle but carcasses from
the extremity of Scotland as cheaply as they can be brought from
Buckinghamshire? The cattle for the supply of Paris must travel


* Macculloch’s Geographical Dictionary, art. France.


=—eer eee


APPENDIX. 589


by land, from distances varying from 50 to 150 leagues (this rests
on the authority of a Committee of the Municipal Council of Paris,
in 1841), and after so long a journey have either to be brought


to market out of condition, or to be fattened in the immediate


neighbourhood. Can any one, then, be surprised that a doubled
population cannot be so well or so cheaply supplied as one of half
the number?

To these three causes of the diminished supply of butcher’s
meat in the towns, we are not afraid to add a fourth, which,
though resting mainly on general considerations, we should not be
wholly unable to support by positive evidence. This is, the
increased consumption by the country people. They have less
animal food in proportion, to spare for the towns, because they
retain more of it for their own use.

On what evidence is it asserted that small properties imply
deficiency of cattle, and consequent deficiency of manure? That
they are not fayourable to sheep farming seems to be admitted;
but the breeding and fattening of horned cattle seems to be so
perfectly compatible with small capital, that in the opinion of many
Continental authorities, small farms haye the advantage in this
respect, and so great an advantage as to be more than a compensa-
tion for their inferiority in sheep*. It is argued that the petite
propriété must diminish the number of cattle, because it leads to the
breaking up of natural pasture. But when natural pasture is fit for
the plough, a greater number of cattle than were supported on the
whole, may be supported on a part, by laying it out in roots and
artificial grasses; and it is well known that on the stall-feeding
system there is much greater preservation of manure. The question
of petite culture, in relation to cattle, is, in fact, one and the same with
the question of stall-feeding. The two things must stand or fall
together. Stall-feeding produces, ceteris paribus, a greater quan-
tity of provisions, but in the opinion of most judges a lower quality.
Experience must decide.

This brings us back to the causes assigned by the committee of
the Paris town-council, for the falling off in the quality of the beef
consumed at Paris. One is, the extraordinary increase in the


* See this question discussed in Book I. chap. 9 of the present work,
pp. 176-8,


590. APPENDIX.


consumption of dairy produce. Milk is now brought from dis-
tances of thirty leagues, and within six or eight leagues of Paris no
calyes are now bred up, all being sold at the earliest moment
possible. In consequence, a great part of the beef sold at Paris is
the flesh of cows too old to be fit for producing milk. A second
cause assigned is, the increase of stall-feeding. But the committee
make an instructive distinction. In Normandy, which affords
the greatest portion of the supply, the quality, they say, has
deteriorated; but in La Vendée, and the central provinces, the
Limousin, Nivernais, Bourbonnais, and La Marche, “there is im-
provement in weight, in fatness, and from some districts in
number,” although these countries have also adopted stall-feeding ;
and in this, say the committee, there is no contradiction, since
“what is a deterioration in the rich pasturages of Calvados, is
improvement in the petites herbes of the Allier and the Niévre.”

It may now be left to the reader to judge if the case of our
adversaries has not broken down as completely on this, their
strongest point, as it has done on every other point of any import-
ance.

We cannot close this long controversy without producing
evidence of the extraordinary improvement, extraordinary both in
amount and in rapidity, which is taking place in the productive-
ness of the agriculture of some parts of France. We quote from
another work by an authority already cited, M. Hippolite Passy,
several times a minister of Louis-Philippe, and well-known as one
of the first politicians and publicists of France. This tract, pub-
lished in 1841, is an examination of “the changes in the agricul-
tural condition of the Department of the Eure since 1800.” The
Eure is one of the five departments of Normandy, and belongs to
the region of which M. Rubichon admits the agriculture to be the -
best in France; but only (as he contends) because the morcellement
has not had time to produce its effects, having commenced in that
region only from the Revolution, and he assigns to it accordingly
no privilege but that of Outis in the Odyssey, to be devoured the
last. Let us now see the facts. This department fortunately
possesses an accurate agricultural statistique for the year 1800,
drawn up by a préfet who took great pains to be correct in his
information. M. Passy’s pamphlet is a comparison of these returns
with those collected by the present French Government in 1837.


APPENDIX. 591


In this interval of thirty-seven years, scarcely any new land was
taken into cultivation, nearly all fit for culture having been already
occupied. But fallows have diminished from 172,000 hectares to a
little more than 80,000. The cultures which supply cattle have
increased in a much greater proportion than any others : instead of
17 per cent of the cultivated area, they now occupy 387 per cent.
Horses have multiplied from 29,500 to 51,000, horned cattle from
51,000 to 106,000, sheep from 205,000 to 511,000, and as their
food has increased in a still greater ratio, and there is importation
besides, all kinds of live stock are better fed, and have gained in
size, weight, and value. The produce per hectare of all kinds of
grain, and of most other kinds of produce, has considerably increased,
of some kinds nearly doubled. These changes have chiefly been
effected during the second half of the period, so that the improve-
ment is as progressive as on M. Rubichon’s theory should haye
been the deterioration. There has been no perceptible variation in
the proportion between the grande and the petite culture; nor has
the division of properties at all promoted the division of farms.
On the soils where small farms are most profitable, large properties
are rented to small tenants ; where the reverse is the case, a single
farmer often rents the lands of several proprietors, and this arrange-
ment extends itself more as the subdivision of property advances.
The consumption of food per head of the population has largely
increased—in the ratio, according to M. Passy, of about 37 per
cent; and while the agricultural wealth of the department has
increased, according to his estimate, by 54 per cent, the population
has only increased 5 per cent*.

Though the Eure belongs to the most productive and thriving
region of France, it is not the most productive or the most thriving
department. The Nord, which comprises the greater part of
French Flanders, and is a country of small farms, maintains, accord-
ing to M, Passy, proportionally to its extent, a third more cattle
than the Eure; and the average produce of wheat per hectare,
instead of seyenteen, is twenty hectolitres, about twenty-two
English bushels per acre.


* During the last quinquennial period, the population of this department,
on the shewing both of the census and of the register of births and deaths, has
actually diminished.


592 APPENDIX.


Results almost as satisfactory may be deduced from a statistical
aczount of a much less improved district than the Hure, the most
eastern district of Brittany, the arrondissement of Fougéres, pub-
lished in 1846, by the Sous-préfe, M. Bertin. “It is only since
the peace,” says this intelligent functionary, “that the agriculture
of the arrondissement has made much progress ; but from 1815 it
has improved with increasing rapidity. If from 1815 to 1825 the
improvement was as one, it was as three between 1825 and 1835,
and as six since that period.” At the beginning of the century
little wheat was cultivated, and that little so ill, that in 1809 the
produce per hectare was estimated only at 9 hectolitres. At pre-
sent M. Bertin estimates it at 16. The cattle, being better fed,
and crossed with more vigorous breeds, haye increased in size and
strength; while in number, horned cattle, between 1813 and 1844,
multiplied from 33,000 to 52,000, sieep from 6,300 to 11,000, swine
from 9,300 to 26,100, and horses from 7,400 to 11,600. New and
valuable manures have been introduced, and have come largely into
use. The extent of meadow land has increased and is increasing,
and great attention has of late been paid to its improvement. ‘This
testimony comes from an enemy of the morcellement, who, however,
states that it is advancing very slowly, and is not likely to advance
much further, the coheirs not dividing each parcelle, but either
distributing the parcelles among them, or disposing of them by pri-
vate or public sale. Some farmers, he says, who are also proprie-
tors, haye the good sense to sell the ‘ew fields which belong to them,
in order to increase their farming capital. M. Bertin is an enemy
to stall-feeding, which, he says, is not practised in his arrondisse-
ment. The increase of live stock is therefore the more remarkable.
It may not be useless to mention an assertion of this writer, that the
official publication from which M. Rubichon’s data are taken
greatly understates the number of horned cattle in France, by the
accidental omission of a column in summing up, by which the
number is brought below ten millions, when it ought, according to
M. Bertin, to be thirteen.

Of the food of the inhabitants he says, that not long ago it was
composed almost exclusively of milk, buckwheat cakes, and rye
bread, but has greatly improved in quantity, quality, and variety,
especially in the Jast ten years, and now consists of wheaten bread,
or bread of two-thirds wheat and one-third rye, with butter, vege-


APPENDIX. 593


tables, and “in good farms” about a kilogramme (or 2+ lbs.) of
pork per week for each person. ‘There is also some consumption of
other flesh-meats among the labouring people, and the arrondisse-
ment contains 63 butchers’ shops, where fifteen years ago there
were not 30; the increase not being in the towns (or rather town),
but in the villages. The clothing of the rural population is sub-
stantial, “and different for every season, which is always a sign of
general comfort,” and “ persons in rags are yery rare in the arron-
dissement.”

We cannot further extend this long discussion; but enough has
been said, to enable our readers adequately to appreciate the ter-
rible predictions of alarmist writers respecting the consequences of
the Division of Landed Property in France.


ine)
©


VOL, I.


mn


LONDON;


HARRISON AND CO., PRINTERS,


ST. MART


By the same Author,


A System of Logic, Ratiocinative and Inductive. The
Second Edition. Two Volumes, Octayo. 30s.


Kssays on some Unsettled Questions of Political Economy.
Octavo. 6s. 6d.


Sod ee UREA a


f
|
|
i
j
}
S
2: ?
.


