The Old Red Sandstone (Hugh Miller, 1841)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: Internet Archive scan (1860 edition of the 1841 classic) (https://archive.org/details/oldredsandstone03millgoog). Hugh Miller (1802-1856) - the classic of popular geology: the fossil fishes of the Old Red Sandstone.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 



at |http : //books . google . com/ 



GREENE 



^ 



GREENE 



aV^alT-D 



Tim 



OLD RED SANDSTONE; 



on. 



NEW WALKS IN AN OLD FIELD. 



TO WHICH IS APPBITDBD 



A SERIES OF GEOLOCJICAL PAPERS, 



READ BEFORE THE 



ROYAL PHYSICAL SOCIETY OF EDINBURGH. 



B Y 



IIUGH MILLER, LL.D., 

AUTHOR OF "THE FOOTPRINTS OF THE CBBATOB,'* 
**TUE TESTIMONY OF TUB ROCKS," ETC. ETC 



ILLUSTRATED WITH NUMEROUS ENORAVINGS. 
A NEW, IMPROVED, AND ENLARGED EDITION. 

O O '^ 
BOSTON: 

aOULD AND LINCOLN. 

59 WA8IJ I.N UTON STRKKT. 

NEW YORKi SHELDON AND COMPANY. 
CINCINNATI : GEO. 8. BLANCUARD. 

1860. 



ssi.-jslo 



ijsuf^i 



IB 



Ent«>red aocordinp: to Act of Congress, In the year 185S, by 

OOULO * LINCOLN, 

\m the Clerk's office of the District Court of the District of Massachusetts. 



STIKF.OTTPED AT THE BOSTON 8TERB0TYPB POl'XDRT. 



rriiiT *'l hy O. k\ Rand & Co. Ntk 3 OorurnlL 



AMERICAN PUBLISHERS^ NOTICE 



NEW AND ENLARGED EDITION. 



" IIuGH Miller's * Old Red Sandstone,' to a be^nner, is worth 
a thonsand didactic treatases," said Sir Roderick Impey Murchison 
in bis Address before the British Geological Society. "No geolo- 
gist can pemse it without instruction and delight," said Professor 
Benjamin Silliman in his American Journal of Science. Of the 
work thus commended hy the highest authorities on both sides of 
the Atlantic, the American pubUshers now hare the pleasure of 
presenting to the public a new and greatly improved edition. 

Geology is emphatically a growing science, and in the hands of no 
master did it ever grow more rapidly, or to better purpose, than in 
Hugh Miller's. It thus happened that as edition after edition of his 
work was caUed for, he had new facts, new arguments, and new 
conclusions, wherewith to enrich its pages. Some of these were pre- 
sented in the prefaces to the successive editions, others were incor- 
porated with the text, and others took the form of notes. Since 
Mr. Miller's death, a new edition has been given to the public by 
Mrs. ^filler, with a preface from her own pen, notes by other hands, 
additional plates, and a largo amount of new matter selected from 
Mr. Miller's unpublished writings. The present American edition 
ts rcvprinted Atxn that ; but, to avoid encumbering the volume, the 



IV AMERICAN PUBLISHERS NOTICE. 

substance of what is important in the several prefaces alluded to, 
is incorporated with this. 

"The Old Red Sandstone" was Hugh Miller's first geological 
work, and was first published in 1841. In 1842, a second edition 
was called for. This contained about fiflc<en pages of new matter, 
referring chiefly to the least known portion of the Old Red system — 
that middle formation to which the organisms oC Balruddery and 
Carmyle belong. A print (Plate xi.) illustrative of this portion 
of the work was also added, and one or two conjectures were made 
to give place to the facts at which they pointed. 

A third edition was issued in 1846. In the preface to that edition, 
Mr. Miller announced that the bold prediction made by him in the 
first, — that the ichthyolites of the Old Red Sandstone would be 
found at least equal to those of all the geological formations united, 
at the death of Cuvier, — was already more than fulfilled. For, 
while Cuvier had enumerated but ninety-two species of fossil fishes 
in all, Agassiz had already, in 1846, enumerated one hundred and 
five in the Old Red Sandstone alone, — a formation which had been 
regarded as poorer in organisms than any other. The catalogue of 
species in that formation, as determined and arranged by Agassiz, 
was given in this edition. Many additions to the volume in the 
form of notes were also made, and in several instances the text was 
modified. It had been stated in the first two editions that a gradual 
increase of size was observable in the progress of ichthyolitic life, 
and that the Old Red System exhibited, in its successive formations, 
this gradation of bulk, beginning with an age of dwarfs, and ending 
with an age of giants. When the third edition was issued, it had 
been ascertained that there were giants among the dwarfs ; the re- 
mains of one of the largest fishes found anywhere iti the system had 



▲XEKICXN PUBLISHSKS NOTICE. V 

been discorered in its lowest formation. By the positive proof thus 
furnished, Mr. Miller was convinced that the theory of a gradual 
progression in size, from the earlier to the later Palaeozoic fomui- 
tions, though based originally on no inconsiderable amount of 
negative evidence, must be permitted to drop. 

The fourth, fifth, and sixth editions were mainly if not wholly re- 
prints of the third. The seventh, which has just been issued under 
the supervision of Mrs. Miller, and is re-printed in the present vol- 
ume, contains large and interesting additions. AVhile the text and 
notes of Mr. Miller arc preserved without the slightest change or 
revision, some notes have been appended by a friend of Mrs. Miller, 
with the view of drawing attention to whatever modifications of 
opinion he may himself have recorded in his later works, or may 
have been known to express verbally in conversation with his 
friends. In addition to these, three or four notes have been fur- 
nished by the Eev. W. S. Symonds, who is described as a well- 
known geologist intimately acqumnted with the Silurian and Old 
Red of his own neighborhood in the south-west of England. Several 
new figures have also been added, taken either' from specimens in 
Mr. Mller's own unique collection, or from those in the possession 
of others, which it is known he had asked permission to copy. These 
present the fossils to which they relate in new and striking aspects. 
They arc those on Plates ix., x., xii., and xiv., and on pages 54 
and 2G7. 

But tlic most important adJiilons to the volume are from the pen" 
of Hugh Miller himself. They consist of the Geological Papers 
read by him before the Royal Physical Society of Edinburgh. 
These papers have been selected by Mrs. Miller from the mass of 
her husband's unpublished writings ; and, while they add greatly to 



VI AMERICAH FUBLISHE&S NOTICE. 

the size of the volume, they add to its value no less. In each and 
all, the characteristics of their author's genius are abundantly dis- 
played. The first paper presents a succinct summary of those 
evidences drawn from gcolog)' in favor of revealed religion, whicli it 
formed the chief portion of his peculiar mission to originate and 
establish. In the second is given a sketch of the early progress of 
general geologic knowledge in Scotland, together with a delightful 
account of his exploration of the valley of the Girvan. It is ger- 
mane to the subject of the twelfth chapter of " The Old iled 
Sandstone." The paper on the Marbles of Assynt furnishes fine 
illustrations of Mr. Miller's sagacity as a geologist, and of his unri- 
valled powers of description. The concluding paper presents a 
comprehensive survey of the Fossiliferous Deposits of Scotland. 

In preparing this volume for the press, the publishers have varied 
in some few instances from the arrangement of the Edinburgh edi- 
tion. The four new plates which in that edition were appended to 
the Notes, have, with a \new to convenience in this, been distributed 
through the body of the work at the points where, they seemed most 
properly to belong. This arrangement made it necessary to re- 
number the old plates. One of the new cuts has been connected 
with a note in which it b specifically mentioned ; and several foot- 
notes, most of them by Mr. S^'monds, have been transferred from 
the body of the work to the " Notes" at the end. These changes, it 
is believed, constitute a decided improvement With the exception 
of these, and the abridgment of the multiplied prefaces, the present 
edition is a reprint of the new Edinburgh edition. 

B06TOK, April, is^a 



TO 

RODERIJK IMPEY MURCHISON, Esq., F.ILS., Etc., 

PRB8IDBNT OF THB O90LOOICAL 80CIBTT. 

Ik the autumn of last year, I sat down to write a few geo- 
logical sketches for a newspaper ; the accumulated facts of 
twenty years crowded upon me as I wrote, and the few 
sketches have expanded into a volume. Permit me, honored 
Sir, to dedicate this volume to you. Its imperfections are 
doubtless many, for it has been produced under many disadvan- 
tages ; but it is not the men best qualified to decide regarding it 
whose criticisms I fear most ; and I am especially desirous to 
bring it under your notice, as of all geologists the most thor- 
oughly acquainted with those ancient formations which it pro-* 
fesses partially to describe. I am, besides, desirous it should 
be known, and this, I trust, from other motives than those of 
vanity, that, when prosecuting my humble researches in ob- 
scurity and solitude, the present President of the Geological 
Society did not deem it beneath him to evince an interest in 
the results to which they led, and to encourage and assist the 
inquirer with his advice. Accept, honored Sir, my sincere 
thanks for your kindness. 

Smith, the father of English Geology, loved to remarK that 
he had been born upon the Oolite — the formation wnose 
various deposits he was the first to distinguish and describe, 
and from which, as from the meridian line of the geographer, 
the geological scale has been graduated on both sides. I 

(yii) 



Vlll DEDICATION. 

have ihouglu of the circumstance when, on visiting in my 
native district the birthplace of the author of the Silurian 
System^ I found it situated among the more ancient fossilifcr- 
ous rocks of the north of Scotland — the Lower Formation 
of tlie Old Red Sandstone spreading out beneath and around 
it, and the first- formed deposit of the system, the Great Con- 
glomerate, rising high on the neighboring hills. It is un(|ucs- 
tionnbly no slight advantage to be placed, at that early stage 
of life, when the mind collects its facts with greatest avidity, 
and the curiosity is most active, in localities where there is 
much to attract observation that has escaped the notice of 
others. Like the gentleman whom I have now the honor of 
addressing, I too was born on the Old Red Sandstone, and 
first broke ground as an inquirer into geological fact in a for- 
mation scarce at all known to the geologist, and in which 
there still remains much for future discoverers to examine 
and describe. Hence an acquaintance, I am afraid all too 
slight, with phenomena which, if intrinsically of interest, may 
be found to have also the interest of novelty to recommend 
them, and with organisms which, though among the most an- 
cient of things in their relation to the world's history, will be 
pronounced new by the geological reader in their relation to 
human knowledge. Hence, too, my present opportunity of 
subscribing myself, as the writer of a volume on the Old 
Red Sandstone, 

Honored Sir, 

With sincere gratitude and respect, 

Your obedient humble Servant, 

HUGH MILLER. 
Bdxnb'^K'^h Maj, \, 1841. 



AUTHOR'S PRFACE. 



Neablt one third of the present volunne appeared a few 
months ago in the form of a series of sketches in the WU» 
ness newspaper. A portion of the first chapter was submitted 
to the public a year or two earlier, in ChamhersU Edinburgh 
JoumdL The rest, amounti^ig to about two thirds of the 
whole, appears for the first time. 

Every such work has its defects. The faults of the pres- 
ent volume — faults all too obvious, I am afraid — would have 
been probably fewer had the writer enjoyed greater leisure. 
Some of them, however, seem scarce separable from the na- 
ture of the subject : there are others for which> from their 
opposite character, I shall have to apologize in turn to oppo- 
site classes of readers. My facts would, in most instances, 
have lain closer had I written for geologists exclusively, and 
there would have been less reference to familiar phenomena. 
And had I written for only general readers, my descriptions 
of hitherto undescribed organisms, and the deposits of little- 



X PBEFACE. 

known localities, would have occupied fewer pages, and 
would have been thrown off with, perhaps, less regard to 
minute detail than to pictorial effect. May I crave, while ad- 
dressing myself, now to the one class, and now to the other, 
the alternate forbearance of each ? 

Such is the state of progression in geological science, that 
the geologist who stands still for but a very little, must be 
content to find himself lefl behind. Nay, so rapid is the prog- 
ress, that scarce a geological work passes through the press 
in which some of the statements of the earlier pages have 
not to be modified, restricted, or extended in the concluding 
ones. The present volume shares, in this respect, in what 
seems the common lot In describing the Coecosteus, the 
reader will find it stated that the creature, unlike its contem- 
porary the PterichthySy was unfurnished with arms. Ere 
arriving at such a conclusion, I had carefully examined at 
least a hundred different Coeeostei ; but the positive evidence 
of one specimen outweighs the negative evidence of a hun- 
dred ; and I have just learned from a friend in the north, 
(Mr. Patrick Duff, of Elgin,) that a CoccosUus lately found a' 
Lethen-bar,.and now in the possession of Lady Gordon 
Gumming, of Altyre, is furnished with what seem uncouth, 
paddle-shapeA arms, that project from the head.* All that I 



* As these paddle-shaped arms have not been introduced by Agas- 
^ into his restoration of the Cbeanteut, their existence, at least om 
imu, ntist still be regard kL as problematieal. There can be no doubt. 



PB£FAC£« XI 

have given of the creature, however, will be fouad tr je to the 
actual type ; and that parts should have been omitted will 
surprise no one who xtmembeni that many hundred belem* 
nit^ had been figured and described ere a specimen turned 
up in which the homy prolongation, with its enclosed ink-bag, 
was found attached to the calcareous spindle ; and that even 
yet, aAer many thousand trilobites have been carefully exam- 
ined, it remains a question with the oryctologist, whether this 
crustacean of the earliest periods was furnished with legs, or 
creeped on an abdominal foot, like the snail. 

I owe to the kindness of Mr. Robertson, Inverugie, the 
specimen figured in Plate V., fig. 7, containing shells of the 
only species yet discovered m the Old Red Sandstone of 
Scotland. They occur in the Lower Formation of the system, 
in a quarry near Kirkwald, in which the specimen figured, 
with several others of the same kind, was found by Mr. 
Robertson, in the year 1834. In referring to this shell, page 
90, I have spoken of it as a delicate bivalve, much resem* 
bling a Venus; drawing my illustration, naturally enough, 
when describing the shell of an ocean deposit, rather from 
among marine, than fluviatile testacea. I have since submit* 
ted it to Mr. Murchison, who has obligingly written me that 
he " can find no one to say more regarding it than that it is 



however, that they existed aa plate* of very peculiar form, and gp-catly 
resembling paddles, and that they served in the economy of the ammol 
tome still unaccounted for purpose. 



xn 



PREFACE. 



very like a Cyciasy He adds, however, that it must be an 
oceau production notwithstanding, seeing that all its contem- 
poraries in England, Scotland, and Russia, whether shells or 
fish, are unequivocally marine. 

With the exception of two of the figures in Plate X., the 
figures of the Cephalaspis and the HoJoptyckiuSy and one of 
the sections in the Frontispiece, section 2, all the prints of 
the volume are originals. To Mr. Daniel Alexander, of Ed- 
mburgh, — a gentleman, who to the skill and taste of the 
superior artist, adds no small portion of the knowledge of the 
practical geologist, — I am indebted for several of the draw- 
ings ; that of fig. 2 in Plate V., fig. 1 in Plate VI., fig, 2 in 
Plate VIII., and figs. 3 and 4 in plate X. I am indebted to 
another friend for fig. 1, in Plate VII. Whatever defects may 
be discovered in any of the others, must be attributed to the 
untaught efforts of the writer, all unfamiliar, hitherto, with the 
pencil, and with by much too little leisure to acquaint himself 
with it now. 



CONTENTS. 



CHAPTER I. 

The Worlung-man's true Policy. — His only Mode of acquiring 
Power. — The Ex.Tcise of the Faculties essential to Enjoy- 
ment. — No necessary Connection between Labor and Unhap- 
pineas. — Narrative. — Scenes in a Quarry. — The two dead 
Birds. — Landscape. — Hippie Markings on a Sandstone Slab. 

— Boulder Stones. — Inferences derived from their water- worn 
Appearance. — Sea-coast Section. — My first discovered Fossil. 

— Lias Deposit on the Shores of the Moray Frith. — Belcm- 
nite. — Result of the Experience of half a Lifetime of ToiL — 
Advantages of a Wandering Profession in Connection with 
the Geology of a Country. — Oeological Opportunities of the 
Stone -Mason. — Design of the present Work. . . l-U 



CHAPTER II. 



Tlie Old Red Sandstone. — Till very lately its Existence as a dis- 
tinct Formation disputed. — Still little known. — Its great 
Importance in the Geological Scale. — lUunration. — ITie 
ff (xiii) 



XIV CONTENTS. 

North of Scotland girdled by an immense Belt cf Old Red 
Sandstone. — Line of the Girdle along the Coast ^- Marks of 
yast Denudation. — Its Extent partially indicated by Hills on 
the western Coast of Ross-shire. — The System of great 
Depth in the North of .Scotland. — Difficulties in the Way of 
estimating the Thickness of Deposits. — Peculiar Formation 
of HilL — Illustrated by Ben Nevis. — Caution to the Geologi- 
cal Critic. — Lower Old Red Sandstone immensely developed 
in Caithness. — Sketch of the Geology of that County. — Its 
strange Group of Fossils. — their present Place of Sepulture. 
— Their ancient Habitat — Agassiz. — Amazing Progress of 
Fossil Ichthyology during the last few Years. — Its Nomen- 
clature. — Learned Names repel unlearned Readers. — Not a 
great deal in them, 16-34 



CHAPTER III 

Lamarck's Theory of Progression illustrated. — Class of Facta 
which give Color to it. — The Credulity of Unbelief. — M. 
MaiUet and his Fish-birds. — Gradation not Progress. — Geo- 
logical Argument. — The Present incomplete without the 
Past — Intermediate links of Creation. — Organisms of the 
Lower Old Red Sandstone. — - The Pterichthye. — Its first Dis- 
co"T«ry. — Mr. Murchison's Decision regarding it. — Confirmed 
by that of Agassiz. — Description. — The several Varieties 
of the Fossil yet discovered. — Evidence of violent Death 
in the Attitudes in which they are found. — The CoeeotUue 
of the Lower Old Red. — Description. — Gradations £rom 
Crustacea to Fishes. — Habits of the CocoM^tfut. — Scarcely 
fipy Conception too extravagant for Nature to realize, • 3A-54 



CONTENTS. : 

CHAPTER IV. 

The Elfin-fish of Gawln Douglas. — The Fish of the Old Bed 
Sandstone scarcely less curious. — Place which they occu- 
pied indicated in the present Creation by a mere Gap. — Fish 
divided into two great Scries, the Osseous and Cartilagi- 
nous. — Their distinctive Peculiarities. — Geological Illustra- 
tion of Dr. Johnson's shrewd Objection to the Theory of 
Soame Jenyns. — Proo£i of the intermediate Character of the 
Ichthyolites of the Old Red Sandstone. — Appearances which 
first led the Writer to deem it intermediate. — Confirmation 
by Agassiz. — The OsteolepU. — Order to which this Ichthy- 
olite belonged. — Description. — Dipienu. — Diploptenu, — 
CheiroUpia, — Qlyptolepu^ 6<}- 



CHAPTER V. 

The Classifying Principle and its Uses. — Three Groups of Ich- 
thyolites among the Organisms of the Lower Old Red Sand- 
stone. — Peculiarities of the Third Group. — Its Varieties. - • 
Description of the Cheiracanthua, — Of two unnamed Fossils 
of the same Order. — Microscopic Beauty of these ancient 
Fish. — Various Styles of Ornament which obtain among 
them. — The Molluscs of the Formation. — Remarkable chief- 
ly for the Union of modem with ancient Forms which they 
exhibit. — Its Vegetables. — Importance and Interest of the 
Record which it furnishes, 79 91 



CHAPTER VI. 
ITie lines of the Geographer rarely right Lines. — These last, 



XV CONTENTS. 

rAOB 

however, always \i'orth looking at when they occur. — Strik- 
ing Instance in the Line of the Great Caledonian Val- 
ley. — Indicative of the Direction in which the Volcanic 
Agencies have operated. — Sections of the Old Red Sand- 
stone furnished oy the granitic Eminences of the Line. — 
Illustration. — Lias of the Moray Frith. — Surmisings regard- 
ing its original Extent. — These lead to an exploratory Ram- 
ble. — Narrative. — Phenomena exhibited in the Course of 
half an Hour's Walk. — The little Bay. -~ Its Strata and their 
Organisms, 95-106 



CHAPTER VII. 

Further Discoveries of the Ichthyolitc Beds. — Found in one 
Locality under a Bed of Peat. — Discovered in another be- 
neath an ancient Burying-ground. — In a third underlying 
the Lias Formation. — In a fourth overtopped by a still 
older Sandstone Deposit — Difficulties in ascertaining the 
true Place of a ncwly-discovercd Formation. — Caution 
against drawing too hasty inferences from the mere Circum- 
stance of Neighborhood. — The Writer receives his first 
Assistance from without. — Geological Appendix of the Messrs. 
Anderson, of Inverness. — Further Assistance from the Re- 
searches of Agassiz. — Suggestion. — Dr. John Malcolmson. 
— llis extensive Discoveries in Moray. — He submits to 
Agassiz a Drawing of the PtericfUhye, — Place of the Ich- 
thyolites in the Scale at length determined. — Two distinct 
Platforms of Being in the Formation to which they be- 
long, 109-124 



COHTSMTS. xvii- 



CHAPTER VIII. 



PA«I 



Upper FormatioxiB of the Old Red Sandstone. — Room eno.igh 
far each and to spare. — Middle, or Comstone Formation. — 
The Cephalatpis its most characteristic Organism. — Descrip- 
tion. — The Den of Balruddery richer in the Fossils of this 
middle Formation than anj other Locality yet discovered. — 
Yarious Contemporaries of the Cephalatpis, — Vegetable Im- 
pressions. — Oigantio Crustacean. — Seraphim* — Ichthyodo- 
rulites. — Sketch of the Geology of Forfarshire. — Its older 
Deposits of the Comstone Formation. — The Quarries of 
Carmylie. — Their Vegetable and Animal Remains. — The Up- 
per Formation. — Wide Extent of the Fauna and Flora of the 
earlier Formations. — Probable Cause, • . • 125-150 



CHAPTER IX. 

Fossils of the Upper Old Red Sandstone much more imperfect- 
ly preserved than those of the Lower. — The Causes obvious. 
— Difference between the two Groups, which first strikes the 
Observer, a difference in size. — The Holoptychius a character- 
istic Ichthyolite of the Formation. — Dcscrijition of its huge 
Scales. — Of its Occipital Bones, Fins, Teeth, and general Ap- 
pearance. — Contemporaries of the HoloplycMus. — Sponge-like 
Bodies. — Plates resembling those of the Sturgeon. — Teeth of 
various forms, but all evidently the teeth of fishes. — lime- 
stone Band and its probable Origin. — Fossils of the Yellow 
Sandfftone. ^ the Pterichthy of Dura Den. — Member of a Fam- 



XVUl CONTENTS. 

FA Oft 

ily peculiarly characteristic of the SyBtcm. — No intervening 
Formation between the Old Red Sandstone and the Coal Meas- 
ures. — The Hohptychius contemporary for a time with the 
lf(^a/k:AMy«. — The Columns of Tubal-Cain, . . 151-172 



CHAPTER X. 

Speculations in the Old Red Sandstone, and their Character. — 
George, first Earl of Cromarty. — His Sagacity as a Naturalist 
at fault in one instance. — Sets himself to dig for Coal in the 
Lower Old Red Sandstone. — Discovers a fine Artesian WelL 

— Value of Geological Knowledge in an economic view. — 
Scarce a Secondary Formation in the Kingdom in which Coal 
has not been aought for. — Mineral Springs of the Old Red 
Sandstone. — Strathpeffer. — Its Pecidiarities whence derived. 

— Chalybeate Springs of Easter Ross and the Black Isle. — 
Petrifying Springs. — Building-Stone and lame of the Old 
Red Sandstone. - Its various Soils, .... 173-189 



CHAPTER XI. 

Geological Physiognomy. — Scenery of the Primary Formations ; 
GneiM, Mica Schist, Quartz Rock. — Of the Secondary ; the 
Chalk Formations, the Oolite, the New Red Sandstone, the 
Coal Measures. — Scenery in the Neighborhood of Edinburgh. 
— Aspect of the Trap Rocks. — The Disturbing and Denuding 
Agencies. — Distinctive Features of the Old Red Sandstone. — 
Of the Great Conglomerate. — Of the Iphthyolite Beds. — l*he 



CONTEKTS. 



Barn of Etthie. — Hie Upper OldRed Sendstones. — Scene in 
Moray, 190-210 



CHAPTER XII. 

The two Aspects in which Matter can be viewed; Space and 
Time. — Geological History of the Earlier Periods. — The Cam- 
brian System. — Its Annelids. — The Silurian System. — Its 
Corals, Encrinites, MoUnscs, and Trilobites. — Its Fish. — These 
of a high Order, and called into Existence apparently by Myri- 
ads.— Opening Scene in the History of the Old Red Sand- 
stone a Scene of Tempest. — Represented by the Great Con- 
glomerate. — Red a prevailing Color among the Ancient Rocks 
contained in this Deposit. — Amaring Abundance of Animal 
life. — Exemplified by a Scene in the Herring Fishery. — Plat- 
form of Death. — Probable Cause of the Catastrophe which ren- 
dered it such, 211-224 



CHAPTER XIII. 

Successors of the exterminated Tribes. — The Gap slowly filled. — 
Proof that the Vegetation of a Formation may long survive 
its Animal Tribes. — Probable Cause. — Immensely extended 
Period during which Fishes were the Master-existences of our 
Planet. — Extreme Folly of an Infidel Objection illustrated by 
' the Fact, — Singular Analogy between the History of Fishes 
as Individuals and as a Class. — Chemistry of the Lower For- 
mation. — Principles on which the Fish-enclosing Nodules 



XX 



CONTENTS. 



were probably formed. — Chemical Effect of Animal Matter 
in dischargfing the Color from Red Sandstone. — Origin oi 
the I revailing tint to which the System owes its Name. — Suc- 
oessiye Modes in which a Metal may exist. — The Restorations 
of the Geologist void of Color. — Very different Appearance of 
the Ichthyolites of Cromarty and Moray, . . • 226-242 



CHAPTER XIV. 

The Comstone Formation and its Organisms. — Dwarf Vegeta- 
tion. — CephaUupides. — Huge Lobster. — Habitats of the ex- 
isting Crustacea. — No unapt representation of the Deposit of 
Balruddery, famished by a land-locked Bay in the neighbor- 
hood of Cromarty. — Vast Space occupied by the Geological 
Formations. — Contrasted with the half-formed Deposits which 
r e p resent the existing Creation. — Inference. — The formation of 
the Holoptychitts, — Probable origin of its Siliceous Limestone. 
— Marked increase in the Bulk of the Existences of the Sys- 
tem. — Conjectural Cause. — The Coal Measures. — The Lime- 
stone of Burdie House. — Conclusion, • • • • 243-259 



IcHTHTOUTBS OY THB Old Rbd SA2a)ST02rB — from Agasslz's 
MFoissonsFossiles," 261-264 

Notes 266 

Appendix 803 



EXPLANAnONS OF THE SECTIONS AND PUTE8. 



SECTION I. 



KrFXBSBNTs the Old Red System of Scotland firom its upper bedi 
of Yellow Quartzose Sandstone to its- Great Conglomerate base, 
a. Quartzose Yellow Sandstone. 6. Impure concretionary limestone 
enclosing masses of chert, c. Red and variegated sandstones and 
conglomerate. These three deposits constitute an upper formation 
of the system, characterized by its peculiar group of fossils. (See 
Chapter IX.) d. Deposit of gray fissile sandstone which constitutes 
the middle formation of the system, characterized also by its peculiar 
organic group. (See Chapter Vlil.) 0. Red and yaricgated sand- 
stones, undiBtinguishable often in their mineral character from the 
upper sandstones, c, but in general less gritty, and containuig fewer 
pebbles. /. Bituminous schists, g. Coarse gritty sandstone, h. Great 
Conglomerate. These four beds compose a lower formation of the 
system, more strikingly marked by its peculiar orgamsms than even 
the other two. (See Chapters H. HI. IV. and V.) In the section this 
lower formation is represented as we find it developed in Caithnesi 
and Oikney In fig. 6 it is represented as developed in Cromaity, 
where, though the fossils are identical with those of the more north- 
«m localities, at least one of the deposits, /, is mineralogically differ- 

(xxi) 



XXil 



EXPLANATI0I4S OF THE PLATES. 



ent — altoniating beds of sandstone and clay, these last encloedng 
limestone nodules, taking the place of the bituminous itchists. 



SECTION II. 

The Old Red System of England and Wales, as given in the general 
Section of Mr. Murchison, with the Silurian Hocks beneath and the 
carbonifDrous limestone above, t. The point in the geological scale 
at which vertebrated existences first appear. The throe Old Kcd 
Sandstone formations of this section correspond in their characteristio 
fossils with those of Scotland, but the proportions in which they are 
developed are widely dififercnt. The tilestones seem a comparatively 
narrow stripe in the system in England ; the answering formation in 
Scotland, e, /, ^, A, is of such enormous thickness, that it has been 
held by very superior geologists to contain three distinct formations 
— e, the New Ked Sandstone, /, a representative of the Coal Meas- 
ures, and ff, h, the Old Red Sandstone. 



SECTION III. 

Interesting case of extensive denudation from existing causes on 
the northern shore of the Moray Frith. (See pages 198 and 199.) 
The figures and letters which mark the various beds correspond with 
those of fig. 5, and of the following section. The *' fish-bed," No. 1, 
represents what the reader will find described in pp. 221-225 as the 
•* platform of sudden death." 



SECTION IV. 

Illustration of a fault in tae Bum of Eathie, Cromartyshire. (^See 
pages 204 and 205.) 



EXPLANATIONS OF THE FLATES. XXUt 

PxjkTB L — Fig. 1, Restoration of upper side of the elongated spe- 
•des of Pleriehthys, (P. oblonyus,) referred to in page 47. lig. 2^ 
PterichthyM MUierL Fig. 3, Part of tail of elongated species, showing 
portions of the original covering of rhomboidal scales. Fig. 4, Tu* 
hcrcles of Pteriehthyt magnified. 

Platb n. — Tig. 2, Bestoration of under side of Pteriehihy oh 
ionffuM. ]Flg. 1, A second specimen of Pteriehihy MUleru Fig. 3, 
Portion of wing, natural size. 

Platb m. — Fig. 1, Coocotteiu cutpidtUiu* Fig. 2, Impression of 
inner surface of large dorsal plate. Fig. 3, Abdominal lozenge-shaped 
plate. Fig. 4, Portion of jaw, with teeth. 

Plate IV. — Fig. 1, Restoration of OtUolepU mqfor. Fig. 2, Scales 
from the upper part of the bodj magnified. Fig. 3, Large defensive 
scale which runs laterally along .all the single fins. Fig. 4, Under 
side of scale, showing the attaching bar. Fig. 5, Enamelled and 
punctulated jaw of the creature, ^g. 6, Magnified portion of fin, 
showing the enamelled and punctulated rays. 

Plate Y. — Fig. 1, Dipterus macrolepidohu. This figure serves 
merely to show the place of the fins and the general outline of the 
ichthyolite. All the specimens the writer has hitherto examined fail 
to show the minuter details. Fig. 2, Glyptolepia leptopterua. Fig. 3, 
Single scale of the creature, showing its rustic style of ornament. 
Fig. 4, Scale with a nail-like attachment. Fig. 5, Under side of 
scale. Fig. 6, Magnified portion of fin. Fig. 7» Shells of the Old 
Red Sandstone. 

Plate YL — Fig. 1, Cheirolepia Cummingim, Fig. 2, Magnified 
Monies Fig. 3, Magnified portion of fin. 



XXIY EXPLANATIONS OF THE FLATES. 

Plate YU. — Fig. 1, CheiracanthuM microlepidottu. Fig. 2, Magnj 
fied scales. Figs. 3, 4, 6, 6, 7» 8, Vegetable impressibnB of the Old 
Bed Sandstone. 

Plate VlXl. — Fig. 1, Diplacanihtu longiapima. Fig. 2, i>»^/acon- 
^Aztf ttriaiiLs. Fig. 3, Magnified scales of fig 1. Fig. 4, Spine of fig. 
2, slightly magnified. 

Plate IX. — Restoration of Cocooitetts, incomplete, found in Mr. 
Miller's Museum after his death. (Seventh Edinburgh edition, 1858.) 

Plate X. — Restoration of Cephakapia, from several specimens lately 
foimd in Forfarshire. (Seventh Edinburgh edition, 1858.) 

Plate XI. — Fig. 1, One of the tail flaps of the gigantic Crusta^ 
cean of Forfarshire. Fig. 2, Reticulated markings of Carmylie. 

Plate XII. — Parka deeipiena, from a specimen in the private col 
lection of Lord Kinnaird, at Rossie Priory. (Seventh Edinburgh edi 
tion, 1858.) 

Plate XIII. — Fig. I, Cephakupis LyelUi, copied from Lyell's £^ 
emerU* of Geology, Fig. 2, Holoptychiui Nobiliasimua, copied on a 
greatly reduced scale from Murchison's Sihtrian Syttem, Fig. 3, Scale 
of Holoptychius, natural size. Fig. 4, Tooth of ditto, also natural sixe. 
These last drawn from specimens in the collection of Mr. Patrick Dufi; 
of Elgin. 

Plate XIV. — Figure of a Hohptychiut, found some time ago in 
Dura Den, Fifeshire, and now in the possession of a private collector 
In Dundee. (Seventh Edinburgh edition, 1858.) 



NEW WALKS IN AN OLD FIELD; 

OB, 

THE OLD RED SANDSTONE. 



CHAPTER L 

The Working-man's True Policy. — His only Mode of acquiring 
Power. — The Exercise of the Faculties essential to Enjoyment. — 
No necessary Connection between Labor and Unhappiness. — Narra- 
tive. — Scenes in a Quarry. — The two dead Birds. — Landscape. — 
Hippie Markings on a Sandstone Slab. — Boulder Stones. — Lifer- 
cnce derived from their water- worn Appearance. — Sea-coast Sec- 
tion. — My first discovered Fossil. — Lias Deposit on the Shores of 
the Moray Frith. — Belemnite. — Result of the Experience of half 
a Lifetime of Toil. — Advantages of a Wandering Profession in 
Connection with the Geology of a Country. — Geological Opportu- 
nities of the Stone-Mason. — Design of the present Work. 

My advice to young working-men, desirous of bettering 
their circumstances, and adding to the amount of their en- 
joyment, is a very simple one. Do not seek happiness in 
what is misnamed pleasure ; seek it rather in what is termed 
study. Keep your consciences clear, your curiosity fresh, 
and embrace every opportunity of cultivating your minds. 
You will gain nothing by attending Chartist meetings. The 
fellows who speak nonsense with fluency at these assemblies, 
and deem their nonsense eloquence, are totally unable to help 
either you or themselves ; or, if they do succeed in helping 
1 



*Z THE OLD RED SANDSTONE. 

themselves, it will be all at your expense. Leave them to 
harangue unheeded, and set yourselves to occupy your lei- 
sure hours in making yourselves wiser men. Learn to make 
a right use of your eyes : the commonest things are worth 
looking at — even stones and weeds, and the most familiar 
ai jmals. Read good books, not forgetting the best of all : 
(here is more true philosophy in the Bible than in every work 
of every sceptic that ever wrote ; and we would be all mis- 
erable creatures without it, and none more miserable than 
you. You are jealous of the upper classes ; and perhaps it 
is too true that, with some good, you have received much 
evil at their hands. It must be confessed they have hitherto 
been doing comparatively little for you, and a great deal for 
themselves. But upper and lower classes there must be, so 
long as the world lasts ; and there is only one way in which 
your jealousy of them can be well directed. Do not let them 
get ahead of you in intelligence. It would be alike unwise 
and unjust to attempt casting them down to your own level, 
and no class would suffer more in the attempt than your- 
selves ; for you would only be clearing the way, at an im- 
mense expense of blood, and under a tremendous pressure 
of misery, for another and perhaps worse aristocracy, with 
some second Cromwell or Napoleon at their head. Society, 
however, is in a state of continual flux : some in the upper 
classes are fro*n time to lime going down, and some of you 
from time to time mounting up to take their places — always 
the more steady and intelligent among you, remember; and 
if all your minds were cultivated, not merely intellectually i 
but morally also, you would find yourselves, as a body, in 
the possession of a power which every charter in the world 
could not confer upon you, and which all the tyranny or in- 
justice of the world could not withstand. 



THE OLD RED SANDSTONE. 3 

I iDtended, however, to speak rather of the pleasui^ to be 
derived, by even the humblest, in the pursuit of knowledge, 
than of the power with which knowledge in the masses is 
invariably accompanied. For it is surely of greater impor- 
tance that men should receive accessions to their own happi- 
ness, than to the influence which they exert over other men. 
There is none of the intellectual, and none of the moral fac- 
ulties, the exercise of which does not lead to enjoyment • 
nay, it is chiefly in the active employment of these that all 
enjoyment consists ; and hence it is that happiness bears so 
little reference to station. It is a truth which has been often 
told, but very little heeded or little calculated upon, that 
though one nobleman may be happier than another, and 
one laborer happier than another, yet it cannot be at all pre- 
mised of their respective orders, that the one is in any de- 
gree happier than the other. Simple as the fact may seem, 
if universally recognized, it would save a great deal of use- 
less discontent, and a great deal of envy. Will my humbler 
readers permit me at once to illustrate this subject, and to 
introduce the chapters which follow, by a piece of simple 
narrative ? I wish to show them how possible it is to enjoy 
much happiness in very mean employments. Cowper tells 
us that labor, though the primal curse, ^^ has been softened 
into mercy ; '*'* and I think that, even had he not done so, 1 
would have found out the fact for myself. 

It was twenty years, last February, since I set out a little 
before sunrise to make my first acquaintance with a life of 
labor and restraint, and I have rarely had a heavier heart 
tlian on that morning. I was but a slim, loose-jointed hoy at 
the time — fiind of the pretty intangibilities of romance, and 
of dreaming vhen broad awake ; and, woful change ! I was 
now going to work at what Burns has instanced in his " Twa 



4 THE OLD RED SANDSTONE. 

Dogs" as one of the most disagreeable of all emplo3rinent8-> 
to work in a quarry. Bating the • passing uneasiness occa< 
sioned by a few gloomy anticipations, the portion of my life 
which had already gone by had been happy beyond the ccm- 
mon lot. I had been a wanderer among rocks and woods — 
a reader of curious books when I could get them — a gleaner 
of old traditionary stories ; and now I was going to exchange 
all my day-dreams, and all my amusements, for the kind of 
life in which men toil every day that they may be enabled to 
eat, and eat every day that they may be enabled to toil I 

Tne quarry in which I wrought lay on the southern shore 
of a noble inland bay, or frith, rather, with a little clear stream 
on the one side, and a thick fir wood on the other. It had 
been opened in the Old Red Sandstone of the district, and 
was overtopped by a huge bank of diluvial clay, which rose 
over it in some places to the height of nearly thirty feet, and 
which at this time was rent and shivered, wherever it pre- 
sented an open front to the weather, by a recent frost. A 
heap of loose fragments, which had fallen from above, 
blocked up the face of the quarry, and my first employment 
was to clear them away. The friction of the shovel soon 
blistered my hands ; but the pain was by no means very 
severe, and I wrought hard and willingly, that I might see 
how the huge strata below, which presented so firm and un- 
broken a frontage, were to be torn up and removed. Picks, 
and wedges, and levers were applied by my brother-work- 
men ; and simple and rude as I had been accustomed to re- 
gard these implements, I found I had much to learn in the 
way of using them. They all proved inefficient, however ; 
and the workmen had to bore into one of the inferior strata, 
and employ gunpowder. The process was new to me, and I 
deemed it a highly amusing one : it had the merit, too, of 



THE OLD a£D SANDSTONE. 5 

being attended with some such degree of danger as a boating 
or rock excursion, and had thus an interest independent of its 
novelty. We had a few capital shots : the fragments flew 
in every direction ; and an immense mass of the diluvium 
came toppling down^ bearing with it two dead birds, that in a 
recent storm had crept into one of the deeper fissures, to dio 
in the shelter. I felt a new interest in examining them. The 
one was a pretty cock goldfinch, with its hood of vermilion, 
and its wings inlaid with the gold to which it owes its name, 
as unsoiled and smooth as if it had been preserved for a mu« 
seum. The other, a somewhat rarer bird, of the woodpecker 
tribe, was variegated with light blue and a grayish yellow. 1 
was engaged in admiring the poor little things, more disposed 
to be sentimental, perhaps, than if I had been ten years older, 
and thinking of the contrast between the warmth and jollity 
of their green summer haunts, and the cold and darkness of 
their last retreat, when I heard our employer bidding the 
workmen lay by their tools. I looked up, and saw the sun 
sinking behind the thick fir wood beside us, and the long, 
dark shadows of the trees stretching downwards towards the 
shore. 

This was no very formidable beginning of the course of 
life I had so much dreaded. To be sure, my hands were a 
little sore, and I felt nearly as much fatigued as if I had been 
climbing among the rocks ; but I had wrought and been use- 
ful, and had yet enjoyed the day fully as much as usual. It 
was no small matter, too, that the evening, converted, by a 
rare transmutation, into the delicious " blink of rest" which 
Bums so truthfully describes, was all my own. I was as 
light of heart next morning as any of my brother- workmen. 
There had been a smart frost during the night, and the rime 
lay white on the grass as we passed onwards through the 



U THE OLD RED SANDSTONE. 

fields ; but the sun rose in a clear atmosphere, and the day 
mellowed, as it advanced, into one pf those delightful day^ of 
earfy spring, which give so pleasing an earnest of whatever 
is mild and genial in the better half of the year. All the 
workmen rested at midday, and I went to enjoy my half- 
hour alone on a mossy knoll in the neighboring wood, which 
commands through the trees a wide prospect of the bay and 
the opposite shore. There was not a wrinkle on the water, 
not a cloud in the sky, and the branches were as moveless 
in the calm as if they had been traced on canvas. From a 
wooded promontory that stretched half way across the frith, 
there ascended a thin column of smoke. It rose straight as 
the line of a plummet for more than a- thousand yards, and 
then, on reaching a thinner stratum of air, spread out equally 
on every side, like the foliage of a stately tree. Ben Wevis 
rose to the west, white with the yet unwasted snows of win- 
ter, and as sharply defined in the clear atmosphere, as if all 
its sunny slopes and blue retiring hollows had been chiselled 
in marble. A line of sno^ran along the opposite hills; all 
above was white, and all below was purple. They reminded 
me of the pretty French story, in which an old artist is de- 
scribed as tasking the ingenuity of his future son-in-law, by 
giving him, as a subject for his pencil, a flower-piece com- 
posed of only white flowers, of which the one half were to 
bear their proper color, the other half a deep purple hue, and 
yet all be perfectly natural ; and how, the young man resolved 
tlie riddle, and gained his mistress, by introducing a transpar- 
ent purple vase into the picture, and making the light pass 
through it on the flowers that were drooping over the edge. 
I returned to the quarry, convinced that a very exquisite 
pleasure may be a very cheap one, and that the busiest em 
ploymenTs may afiord leisure enough to eiyoy it. 



THE OLD RBD SANDSTONE. 7 

Tlie gunpowder had loosened a large mass in one of the 
inferior strata, and our first employment, on resuming our la* 
bors, was to raise jt from its bed. I assisted the other work- 
men in placing it on edge, and was much struck by the ap- 
pearance of the platform on which it had rested. The en- 
tire surface was ridged and furrowed like a bank of sand that 
had been left by the tide an hour before. I could trace every 
bend and curvature, every cross hollow and counter ridge of 
the corresponding phenomena ; for the resemblance was no 
half resemblance — it was the thing itself ; and I had observed 
it a hundred and a hundred times, when sailing my little schoon- 
er in the shallows left by the ebb. But what had become of the 
waves that had thus fretted the solid rock, or of what element 
had they been composed ? I felt as completely at fault as Rob- 
inson Crusoe did on his discovering the print of the man's foot 
on the sand. The evening furnished me with still further 
cause of wonder. We raised another blo9k in a different 
part of the quarry, and found that the area of a circular 
depression in the stratum below was broken and flawed in 
every direction, as if it had been the bottom of a nool recently 
dried up, which had shrunk and split in the hardening. Sev- 
eral large stones came rolling down from the diluvium in the 
course of the aflernoon. They were of different qualities 
from the Sandstone below, and from one another ; and, what 
was more wonderful still, they were all rounded and water- 
worn, as if they had been tossed about in the sea, or the bed 
of a river, for hundreds of years. There could not, surely, be 
a more conclusive proof that the bank which had enclosed them 
to long could not have been created on the rock on which it 
rested. No workman ever manufactures a half-worn article, 
and the stones were all half-worn ! And if not the bank, 
vhy then the sandstone underneath ? I was lost in conjecture, 



8 THE OLD BED SANDSTONE. 

and found I had food enough for thought that evening, with- 
out once thinking of the unhappiness of a life of labor. 

l*he immense masses of diluvium which we had to clear 
away rendered the working of the quarry lahorious and ex- 
pensive, and all the party quitted it in a few days, to make 
trial of another that seemed to promise better. The one we 
lef% 's situated, as I have said, on the southern shore of an in- 
land bay — the Bay of Cromarty ; the one to which we re- 
moved has been opened in a lofty wall of cliffs that overhangs 
the northern shore of the Moray Frith. I soon found I was 
to be no loser by the change. Not the united labors of a 
thousand men for more than a thousand years could have fur- 
nished a better section of the geology of the district than this 
range of cliffs. It may be regarded as a sort of chance dis- 
section on the earth's crust. We see in one place' the pri- 
mary rock, with its veins of granite and quartz, its dizzy preci- 
pices of gneiss, and its huge masses of hornblende ; we find 
the secondary rock in another, with its beds of sandstone and 
shale, its spars, its clays, and its nodular limestones. We dis- 
cover the still little known but highly interesting fossils of the 
Old Red Sandstone in one deposition ; we find the beautifully 
preserved shells and lignites of the Lias in another. There 
arc the remains of two several creations at once before us. 
The shore, too, is heaped with rolled fragments of almost 
every variety of rock, — basalts, ironstones, hypersthenes, por- 
phyries, bituminous shales, and micaceous schists. In short, 
the young geologist, had he all Europe before him, could 
hardly choose for himself a better field. I had, however, no 
one to tell me so at the time, for geology had not yet travelled 
so fur north ; and so, without guide or vocabulary, I had to 
grope my way as I best might, and find out all its wonders 
for myself. Bui 90 slow was the process, and so much was I 



TBB OLD BED SANDSTONE. 9 

a seeker in the dark, that the facts contained in these few sen- 
tences were the patient gatherings of years. 

In the course of the first day^s employment, I picked up a 
nodular mass of blue limestone, and laid it open by a stroke 
of the hammer. Wonderful to relate, it contained iasiile a 
beautifully finished piece of sculpture — one of the volutes 
apparently of an Ionic capital ; and not the far-famed walnut 
of the fairy tale, had I broken the shell and found the little 
dog lying within, could have surprised me more. Was there 
another such curiosity in the whole world ? I broke open a 
few other nodules of similar appearance, — for they lay pretty 
thickly on the shore, — and found that there might In one 
of these there were what seemed to be the scales of fishes, 
and the impressions of a few minute bivalves, prettily striated ; 
in the centre of another there .was actually a piece of decayed 
wood. Of all Nature's riddles these seemed to me to be at 
once the most interesting, and the most difficult to expound. 
I treasured them carefully up, and was told by one of the 
workmen to whom I showed them, that there was a part of 
the shore about two miles farther to the west, where curiously 
shaped stones, somewhat like the heads of boarding-pikes, 
were occasionally picked up; and that in his father's days 
the country people culled them thunderbolts, and deemed 
them of sovereign efficacy in curing bewitched cattle. Our 
employer, on quilting the quarry for the building on which we 
were to be engaged, gave all the workmen a half-holiday. I 
employed it in visiting the place where the thunderbolts had 
fallen so thickly, and found it a richer scene of wonder than I 
could have fancied in even my dreams. 

What first attracted my notice was a detached group of low 
lying skerries, wholly different in form and color from the 
sandstone clifis above, or the primary rocks a little farther lo 



10 THE OLD RED SANDSTONE. 

the west. I found them composed of thin strata of limestone, 
alternating with thicker beds of a black slaty substance, which, 
as I ascertained in the course of the evening, bums with a 
powerful flame, and emits a strong bituminous odor. The 
layers into which the beds readily separate are hardly an 
eighth part of an inch in thickness, and yet on every layei 
there are the impressions of thousands and tens of thousands 
of the various fossils peculiar to the Lias. We may turn over 
these wonderful leaves one after one, like the leaves of a her- 
barium, and find the pictorial records of a former creation in 
every page. Scallops, and gryphites, and ammonites, of almost 
every variety peculiar to the formation, and at least some eight 
or ten varieties of belemnite ; twigs of wood, leaves of plants, 
cones of an extinct species of pine, bits of charcoal, and the 
scales of fishes ; and, as if to render their pictorial appear- 
ance more striking, though the leaves of this interesting 
volume are of a deep black, most of the impressions are of a 
chalky whiteness. I was lost in admiration and astonishment, 
and found my very imagination paralyzed by an assemblage 
of wonders, that seemed to outrival, in the fantastic and the 
extravagant, even its wildest conceptions. I passed on from 
ledge to ledge, like the traveller of the tale through the city 
of statues, and at length found one of the supposed aerolites I 
had come in quest of, firmly imbedded in a mass of shale. 
But I had skill enough to determine that it was other than 
what it had been deemed. A very near relative, who had 
been a sailor in his time on almost every ocean, and had visit- 
ed almost every quarter of the globe, had brought home one 
of these meteoric stones with him from the coast of Java. It 
was of a cylindrical shape and vitreous texture, and it seemed 
to have parted in the middle when in a half-molten state, and 
to have united again, somewhat awry, ere it had cooled enough 



THE OLD RED SAlfDSTONE. 11 

to have lost the adhesive quality. But there was nothing 
organic in its structure, whereas the stone I had now found 
was organized very curiously indeed. It was of a conical 
form and filamentary texture, the filaments radiating in straight 
lines from the centre to the circumference. Finely-marked 
veins like white threads ran transversely through these in its 
upper half to the point, while the space below was occupied 
by an internal cone, formed of plates that lay parallel to the 
base, and which, like watch-glasses, were concave on the un« 
der side, and convex on the upper. I learned in time to call 
this stone a belemnite, and became acquainted with enough of 
its history to know that it once formed part of a variety of cut- 
tle-fish, long since extinct. 

My first year of labor came to a close, and I found that the 
amount of ray happiness had not been less than in the last of 
my boyhood. My knowledge, too, had increased in more 
than the ratio of former seasons ; and as I had acquired the 
skill of at least the common mechanic, I had fitted myself for 
independence. The additional experience of twenty years 
has not shown me that there is any necessary connection be- 
tween a life of toil and a life of wretchedness ; and when I 
have found good men anticipating a better and a happier time 
than either the present or the past, the conviction that in every 
period of the world's history the great bulk of mankind must 
pass their days in labor, has not in the least inclined me to 
scepticism. 

My curiosity,, once fully awakened, remained awake, and 
my opportunities of gratifying it have been tolerably ample. 
I have been an explorer of caves and ravines — a loiterer 
along sea-shores — a climber among rocks — a laborer in 
quarries. My profession was a wandering ono. I remember 
paasing direct, on one occasion, from the wild western coast 



12 THE OLD BED SANDSTONE. 

of Ross-shire, where the Old Red Sandstone leans at a high 
angle against the prevailing Quartz Rock of the district, to 
where, on the southern skirts of Mid-Lothian, the Mountain 
Limestone rises amid the coal. I have resided one season oo 
a raised beach of the Moray Frith. I have spent the season 
immediately following amid the ancient granites and contort- 
ed schists of the central Highlands. In the north I have laid 
open by thousands the shells and lignites of the Oolite; in the 
south I have disinterred from their matrices of stone or of 
shale the huge reeds and tree ferns of the Carboniferous pe- 
riod. I have been taught by experience, too, how neces* 
sary an acquaintance with geology of both extremes of the 
kingdom is to the right understanding of the formations of 
either. In the north, there occurs a vast gap in the scale. 
The Lias leans unconformably against the Old Red Sand* 
stone ; there is no Mountain Limestone, no Coal Measures, 
none of the New Red Marls or Sandstones, Under or Upper. 
There are at least three entire systems omitted. But the upper 
portion of the scale is well nigh complete. In one locality 
we may pass from the Lower to the Upper Lias, in another 
from the Inferior to the Great Oolite, and onward to the Ox- 
ford Clay and the Coral Rag. We may explore, in a lliird 
locality, beds identical in their organisms with the Wealden 
of Sussex. In a fourth we find the flints and fossils of the 
Chalk. The lower part of the scale is also well nigh com- 
plete. The Old Red Sandstone is amply developed in Moray, 
Caithness, and Ross ; and the Grauwacke, in its more ancient 
unfossilifcrous type, rather extensively in Banffshire. But ta 
acquaint one's self with the three missing formations, — to 
complete one's knowledge of the entire scale by filling up 
the hiatus, — it is necessary to remove to the south. The 
geology of the Lothians is the geology of at least two thirds 



THE OLD RED SANDSTONE. J 3 

of the gap, and perliaps a little more ; — the geok gy of At- 
ran wants, it is supposed^ only the Upper New fied Sandstone 
to fill it entirely. 

One important truth I would fain press on the attention of 
my lowlier readers. There are few professions, however 
humble, that do not present their peculiar advantages of ob- 
servation ; there are none, I repeat, in which the exercise of 
the faculties does not lead to enjoyment I advise the stone- 
mason, for instance, to acquaint himself with Geology. Much 
of his time must be spent amid the rocks and quarries of 
widely separated localities. The bridge or harbor is no soon- 
er completed in one district, than he has to remove to where 
the gentlcman^s seat, or farm-steading is to be erected in an- 
other ; and so, in the course of a few years, he may pass 
over the whole geological scale, even when restricted to Scot* 
land, from the Grauwacko of the Lammermuirs, to the 
Wealden of Moray, or the Chalk-flints of Banflshire and 
Aberdeen ; and this, too, with opportunities of observation, at 
every stage, which can be shared with him by only the gen- 
tleman of fortune, who devotes his whole time to the study. 
Nay, in some respects, his advantages arc superior to those 
of the amateur himself. The latter must often pronounce a 
formation unfossiliferous when, after the examination of at 
most a few days, he discovers in it nothing organic ; and ii 
will be found that half the mistakes of geologists have arisen 
from conclusions thus hastily formed. But the working-man, 
whose employments have to be carried on in the same forma- 
tion for months, perhaps years, together, enjoys better oppor- 
tunities for arriving at just decisions. There are, besides, a 
thousand varieties of accident which lead to discovery — 
floods, storms, landslips, tides of unusual height, ebbs of ex- 
traordinary fall : and the man who plies his labor at all sea- 
2 



14 TUE OLD RED SANDSTONE. 

sons in ihc open air has by much the best chance of profiting 
by these. There are formations which yield their organismn 
slowly to the discoverer, and the proofs which establish ihcir 
place in the geological scale more tardily still. I was ac- 
quainted with the Old Red Sandstone of Ross and Cromarty 
for nearly ten years ere I had ascertained that it is richl) 
fossiliferous — a discovery which, in exploring this formation 
in those localities, some of our first geologists had failed to 
anticipate. I was acquainted with it for nearly ten years more 
ere I could assign to its fossils their exact place in the scale. 
In the following chapters I shall confine my observations 
chiefly to this system and its organisms. To none of the 
others, perhaps, excepting the Lias of the north of Scotland, 
have I devoted an equal degree of attention ; nor is there a 
formation among them which, up to the present time, has re- 
mained so much a terra incognita to the geologist. The 
space on both sides has been carefully explored to its upper 
and lower boundary ; the space between has been suffered to 
remain well nigh a chasm. Should my facts regarding it*^ 
facts constituting the slow gatherings of years — serve as 
stepping-stones laid across, until such time as geologists of 
greater skill, and more extended research, shall have bridged 
over the gap, I shall have completed half my design. Should 
the working-man be encouraged by my modicum of success 
to improve his opportunities of observation, I shall have ac- 
3omplished the whole of it. It cannot be too extensively 
known, that nature is vast imd knowledge limited ; and thai 
ao individual, however humble in place or acquirement, neeii 
despair of adding to the general fund. 



CHAPTER n. 

The Old Red Sandstone. — Till very lately its Existence as a distinct 

Formation disputed Still little known. — Its great Importance in 

the Geological Scale. — Illustration. — The North of Scotland gir- 
dled by an immense Belt of Old Red Sandstone. — Line of the Gir- 
dle along the Coast. — Marks of vast Denudation. — Its Extent par- 
tially indicated by Hills on the Western Coast of Ross-shire. — The 
System of Great Depth in the North of Scotland. — Difficulties in 
the way of estimating the Thickness of Deposits. — Peculiar Forma- 
tion of Ilill. — Illustrated by Ben Nevis. — Caution to the Geological 
Critic. — Lower Old Red Sandstone immensely developed in Caith* 
ness. — Sketch of the Geology of that County — Its strange Grouf 
of Fossils. — Their present place of Sepulture. — Their anciem 
Habitat — Agassiz. — Amazing Progress of Fossil Ichthyology dur- 
ing the last few Years. — Its Nomenclature. — Learned Names repel 
unlearned Readers. — Not a great deal in them. 

" The Old Red Sandstone,^^ says a Scottish geologist, in a 
digest of some recent geological discoveries, which appeared 
a short time ago in an Edinburgh newspaper, " has heen hith- 
erto considered as remarkably barren of fossils.^' The re- 
mark is expressive of a pretty general opinion among geolo- 
gists of even the present time, and I quote it on this account. 
Only a few years have gone by since men of no low standing 
in the science disputed the very existence of this formation — 
system rather, for it contains at least three distinct formations ; 
Olid but for the influence of one accomplished geologist, the 
cclc^brated author of the Silurian System^ it would have been 
probably degraded from its place in the scale altogether. 
" You must inevitably give up the Old Red Sandstone," said 
an mgcnious foreigner to Mr. Murchison, when on a visit to 
England abo'it four years ago, and whose celebrity among his 

(16) 



J 6 THE OLD RED SANDSTONE. 

own countrymen rested chiefly on his researches in tlio more 
anciei t formations, — " you must inevitably give up the Old 
Red Sandstone : it is a mere local deposit, a doubtful accu- 
mulation huddled up in a comer, and has no type or represen- 
tative abroad." " I would willingly give it up if nature would,*' 
was the reply ; '^ but it assuredly exists, and I cannot.'* In a 
recently published tabular exhibition of the geological scale 
by a continental geologist, I could not distinguish this system 
at all. There are some of our British geologists, too, who 
still regard it as a sort of debatable tract, entitled to no inde- 
pendent status. They find, in what they deem its upper beds, 
the fossils of the Coal Measures, and the lower graduating 
apparently into the Silurian System ; and regard the whole 
as a sort of common, which should be divided as proprietors 
used to divide commons in Scotland half a century ago, by 
giving a portion to each of the bordering territories. Even 
the better informed geologists, who assign to it its proper 
place as an independent formation, furnished with its own 
organisms, contrive to say all they know regarding it in a 
very few paragraphs. Lyell, in the first edition of his admi- 
rable elementary work, published only two years ago, devotes 
more than thirty pages to his description of the Coal Measures, 
and but two and a half to his notice of the Old Red Sandstone. • 

* As the succinct notice of this distinguished geologist may servo 
as a sort of pocket map to the reader in indicating the position of the 
system, its three great deposits, and its extent, I take the liberty of 
transferring it entire. 

<*0LD RED SANDSTONE. 

*< It was stated that the Carboniferous formation was surmounted 
by one called the • New Red Sandstone,' and underlaid by another 
called the Old Red, which last was formerly merged in the Carbonifcr- 
C71S System but is now found to be distinguisliable by its fossils. Tbn 



THE OLD BED SANDSTONE. 17 

It will be found, however, that this hitherto neglected sys- 
tem yields in importance to none of the others, whether we 
take into account its amazing depth, the great extent to 
which it is developed both at home and abroad, the interest- 
ing links which it furnishes in the zoological scale, or the 
vast period of time which it represents. There are localities 
in which the depth of the Old Red Sandstone fully equals 
the elevation of Mount iEtna over the level of the sea, and 
in which it contains three distinct groups of organic remains, 



Old Bed Sandstone is of enormous thickness in Herefordshire, 
Worcesteishirc, Shropshire, and South Wales, where it is seen to 
crop out beneath the Coal Measures, and to repose on the Silurian 
Rocks. In that region, its thickness has been estimated by Mr. 
Murchison at no less than ten thousand feet. It consists there of — 

** 1st. A quartzose conglomerate, passing downwards into chocolate- 
red and green sandstone and marL 

•* 2d. Comstonc and marl, (red and green argillaceous spotted marls, 
with irregular courses of impure concretionary limestone, proyin- 
cially called Comstone, mottled red and green ; remains of fishes.) 

** 3d. lUcstone, (finely laminated hard reddish or green micaceous 
or quartzose sandstones, which split into tiles ; remains of moUusca 
and fishes.) 

** I hare already observed that fossils are rare in marls and sand- 
stones in which the red oxide of iron prevails. In the Corftstone, 
however, of the counties above mentioned, fishes of the genera Ceph- 
alaspis and Onchus have been discovered. In the Tilestone, also. 
Ichthyodorulites of the genus Onchus have been obtained, and a 
species of Diptcrus, with mollusca of the genera Avicula, Area, Cucul- 
IjBa, Terebratula, lingula. Turbo, Trochus, Turritella, Bellcrophon, 
Orthoceras, and others. 

** By consulting geological maps, the reader will perceive that, from 

Wales to the north of Scotland, the Old lied Sandstone appears in 

patches, and often in large tracts. Many fishes have been found in it 

at Caithness, and various organic remains in the northern part oi 

2* 



18 THE OLD RED SANDSTONE. 

the one rising in beautiful progression over the other. Let 
the reader imagine a digest of English history, complete 
from the times of the invasion of Julius Cffisar to the reign 
of that Harold who was slain at Hastings, and from the times 
of Edward III. down to the present day, but bearing no 
record of the Williams, the Henrys, the Edwards, the John, 
Stephen, and Richard, that reigned during the omitted period, 
or of the striking and important events by which their sev- 
eral reigns were distinguished. A chronicle thus mutilated 
and incomplete would be no unapt representation of a geo- 
logical history of the earth in which the period of the Uppei 
Silurian would be connected with that of the Mountain Lime- 
stone, or of the limestone of Burdie House, and the period 
of the Old Red Sandstone omitted. 

The eastern and western coasts of Scotland, which lie to 



Fifcshire, where it crops out firom beneath the Coal formation, and 
spreads into the adjoining northern half of Forfarshire ; forming, to- 
gether with trap, the Sidlaw Hills and valley of Strathmore. A 
large bolt of this formation skirts the northern borders of the Gram- 
pians, firom the seacoast at Stonehaven and the Frith of Tay to the 
opposite western coast of the Frith of Clyde. In Forfarshire, where, 
as in Herefordshire, it is many thousand feet thick, it may be divided 
into three principal masses — 1st. Red and mottled marls, comstone, 
and sandstone ; 2d. Conglomerate, often of vast thickness ; 3d. Tile- 
stones, and paving-stone, highly micaceous, and containing a slight 
admixture of carbonate of lime. In the uppermost of these divisions, 
but chiefly in the lowest, the remains of fish have been foimd, of the 
genus named by M. Agassiz Cephalaspis, or buckler-headed, from 
the extraordinary shield which covers the head, and which has often 
been mistaken for that of a trilobite of the division Asaphus. A 
gigantic species of fish, of the genus Holoptychius, has also been 
found by Dr. Flaming in the Old Red Sandstone of Fifeahire." — > 
Lyell's Elementt, j p. 462-4. (See Note A.) 



THE OLD RED SANDSTONE. l^ 

the north of the Friths of Forth and Clyde, together with the 
southern flank of the Grampians and the northern coast of 
Sutherland and Caithness, appear to have heen girdled at 
some early period by immense continuous beds of Old Red 
Sandstone. At a still earlier time, the girdle seems to have 
formed an entire mantle, which covered the enclosed tract from 
side to side. The interior is composed of what, after the 
elder geologists, I shall term primary rocks — porphyries, 
granites, gneisses, and micaceous schists; and this central 
nucleus, as it now exists, seems set in a sandstone frame. 
The southern bar of the frame is still entire: it stretches 
along the Grampians from Stonehaven to the Frith of Clyde. 
The northern bar is also well nigh entire : it runs unbroken 
along the whole northern coast of Caithness, and studs, in 
three several localities, the northern coast of Sutherland, 
leaving breaches of no very considerable extent between. 
On the east, there are considerable gaps, as along the shores 
of Aberdeenshire.* The sandstone, however, appears at 
Gamrie, in the county of Banfl*, in a line parallel to the coast, 
and, after another interruption, follows the coast of the Moray 
Frith far into the interior of the great Caledonian valley, and 
then running northward along the shores of Cromarty, Ross, 
and Sutherland, joins, after another brief interruption, the 
northern bar at Caithness. The western bar has also its 

• The progress of discovery has shown, since this passage was 
written, that these gaps are not quite so considerable as I had sup- 
posed. The following paragraph, which appeared in July, 1843, in an 
Aberdeen paper, bears directly on the point, and is worthy of being 
preserved: — 

"ARTESIAN WELL. 

"The greatest of these interesting works yet existing in Aberdeen 
has just been successfully completed at the tape- works of Messrs. 



20 THE OLD RED SANDSTONE. 

oruachcs towards the south ; but it stretches, almost without 
interruption, for about a hundred miles, from the near neigh- 
borliood of Cape Wrath to the southern extremity of Apple- 
cross ; and though greatly disturbed and overflown by the 
traps of the inner Hebrides, it can be traced by occasional 
patches on towards the southern bar. It appears on the 
northern shore of Loch Alsh, on the eastern shore of Loch 
Eichart, on the southern shore of Loch Eil, on the coast 
and islands near Oban, and on the east coast of*Arran. De- 
tached hills and island-like patches of the same formation 
occur in several parts of the interior, far within the frame or 



Milne, Low, and Co., Woolmanhill. The bore is 8 inches in diame- 
ter, and 2d0 feet 9 inches deep. It required nearly eleven months' 
working to complete the excavation. 

*< h\ its progpress, the following strata were cut through in succes- 
sioi : — 

G root vcfcetable mould. 
18 ** grny or bluixh clay. 

9 ) ** sand and shingle, cncloiing rolled itunea of varloua alzea. 
n " light blue clay. 
3 ** rough Hand and ihlngle. 
115 ** Old Red tiandittone conglomerate, eompoeed of red clay, quarts, mka 

and rolled stones. 
74 " alternating strata of compact, fine-grained Red Sandstone, varying la 
thickness ftom 1 to 7 feet, and clay, varying from 6 inches to 19 feet 
thick. 
6 ** 9 inches, mica-slate formation, the first two feet of which wore chiefly a 
hard, brown quartzose substance, containing iron, manganese, and 
carbonate of lime. 



3150 feet, 9 inches. 

"The temperature of the water at the bottom of the well, when 
completed, was found to be within a fraction of 60° Fahrenheit, and 
the average temperature of the locality, deduced frt)m twenty-three 
years' observation, by the late George Jnnes, F. B. S., is 47° 1 : 
henco nearly 3 degrees of increase appear as the effects of central 
^eat The supply of water obtained is excellent in quality, and suf- 



THE OLD RED SANDSTON>:. 21 

girdle. It caps some of the higher summits in Sutherland- 
shire ; it forms an oasis of sandstone among the primary 
districts of Strathspey ; it rises on the northern shores of 
Loch Ness in an immense mass of conglomerate, based on 
a small-grained, red granite, to a height of about three thou- 
sand feet over the level ; and on the north-western coast of 
Ross-shire it forms three immense insulated hills, of at 
least DO lower altitude, that rest unconformably on a base of 
gneiss. 

There appear every where in connection with these patches 
and eminences, and with the surrounding girdle, marks of 
¥ast denudation. I have often stood fronting the three Ross- 

ficient in quantity for all the purposes of the works. Such an oppor- 
tunity of investigating the geology of the locality can but rarely 
occur; and, in the present instance, the proprietor and managers 
afforded every &cility to scientific inquirers for conducting examina- 
tions. To make the bearings of the case clear and simple, the fol- 
lowing is quoted from Mr. Miller's work on the Old Bed Sandstone. 
[The writer here quotes the above passage, and then proceeds.] Mr. 
^filler win be glad to Icam, that though the convulsions of nature 
have shattered the * frame ' along the shores of Aberdeenshire, yet 
the fragments are not lost, as will be seen from the section above 
described; they are here reposing in situ imdcr the accumulated 
debris of uncounted ages — chiefly the ♦ boulder clay,* and sediment- 
ary deposits of the Dee and Don, during a period when they kninglcd 
their waters in the basin in which Aberdeen now stands. The pri- 
mary rocks — the settings — our granites, of matchless beauty — 
stand out in bold relief a mile or two westward from the seaooast 
Within this year or two, the * Old Red ' has been discovered at Do- 
vanha, Union Grove, Iluntly Street, Glenbumie, Balgo^iiic, and 
various other localities to the northward. Hence it may reasonably 
be inferred, that our fragment of the • frame * envelops the primary 
rocks imder our city, and along the coast for a considerable distance 
between the Dee and the Buchaness." — Aberdeen ConstitutionaL 



22 THE OLD RED SANDSTONE. 

shire hills * at sunset in the finer summer^evenings, when the 
clear light threw the shadows of their gigantic, cone-like 
forms far over the lower tract, and lighted up the lines of 
their horizontal strata, till they showed like courses of ma- 
sonry In a pyramid. They seem at such times as if colored 
by the geologist, to distinguish them from the surrouadbig 
tract, and from the base on which they rest as on a common 
pedestal. The prevailing gneiss of the district reflects a 
cold, bluish hue, here and there speckled with white, where 
the weathered and lichened crags of intermingled quartz 
rock jut out on the hill-sides from among the heath. The 
three huge pyramids, on the contrary, from the deep red of 
the stone, seem flaming in purple. There spreads all around 
a wild and desolate landscape of broken and shattered hills, 
separated by deep and gloomy ravines, that seem the rents 
dnd fissures of a planet in ruins, and that speak distinctly of 
a period of convulsion, when upheaving fires from the abyss, 
and ocean currents above, had contended in sublime antag- 
onism, the one slowly elevating the entire tract, the other 
grinding it down and sweeping it away. I entertain little 
doubt that, when this loftier portion of Scotland, including 
the entire Highlands, first presented its broad back over the 
waves, the upper surface consisted exclusively, from the one 
extremity to the other — from Benlomond to the Maidenpaps 
of Caithness — of a continuous tract of Old Red Sandstone; 
though, ere the land finally emerged, the ocean currents of 
ages had swept it away, all except in the Ir wer and last* 
mised borders, and in the detached localities, where it still 
remains, as in the pyramidal hills of western Ross-shire, to 
5hDW the amazing depth to which it had once overlaid the 

* SuU Veinn, Coul Beg, and Coul More. 



THE OLD BED SANDSTONE. 23 

inferior rocks. Th^ Old Red Sandstone of Morvhcim, io 
Caithness, overlooks all the primary hills of the district, from 
an elevation of three thousand five hundred feet. 

The depth of the system, on both the eastern and i^estero 
coasts of Scotland, is amazingly great — how great, I shall not 
▼enture to say. There are no calculations more doubtful than 
those of the geologist. The hill just instanced (Morvhcim) is 
apparently composed from top to bottom of what in Scotland 
forms the lowest member of the system — a coarse conglom* 
erate; and yet I have nowhere observed this inferior mem* 
ber, when I succeeded in finding a section of it directly ver- 
tical, more than a hundred yards in thickness — less than 
one tenth the height of the hill. It would be well nigh as 
unsafe to infer that the three thousand five hundred feet of 
altitude formed the real thickness of the conglomerate, as to 
infer that the thickness of the lead which covers the dome 
of St. PauPs is equal to the height of the dome. It is always 
perilous to estimate the depth of a deposit by the height of a 
hill that seems externally composed of it, unless, indeed, like 
the pyramidal hills of Ross-shire, it be unequivocally a hill 
dug out by denudation, as the sculptor digs his eminences 
out of the mass. In most of our hills, the upheaving agency 
has been actively at work, and the space within is occupied 
by an immense nucleus of inferior rock, around which the 
upper formation is wrapped like a caul, just as the vegetable 
mould or the diluvium wraps up this superior covering in 
turn. One of our best known Scottish mountains — the gi- 
gantic Ben Nevis — furnishes an admirable illustration of 
this latter construction of hill. It is composed of three zones 
or rings of rock, the one rising over and out of the other, 
like the cases of an opera-glass drawn out. The lower zone 
w composed of gneiss and mica-slate, the middle zone of 



24 THE OLD RED SANDSTONE. 

granite, the terminating zone of porphyry. The elevating 
power appears to have acted in the centre, as in the well- 
known case of Jorullo, in the neighborhood of the city of 
Mexico, where a level tract four square miles in extent rose, 
about the middle of the last century, into a high dome of 
more than double the height of Arthur's Seat.* In the forma- 
tion of our Scottish mountain, the gneiss and mica-slate of the 
district seem to have been upheaved, during the first period 

* It is rarely that the geologist catches a hill in the act of forming, 
and hence the interest of this well-attested instance. From the period 
of the discovery of America to the middle of the last century, tho 
plains of Jorullo had undergone no change of surface, and the seat of 
the present hill was covered by plantations of indigo and sugar-cane, 
when, in June, 1759, hollow sounds were heard, and a succession 
of earthquakes continued for sixty days, to the great consternation 
of the inhabitants. After the cessation of these, and in a period 
of tranquillity, on the 28th and 29th of September, a horrible subter- 
ranean noise was again heard, and a tract four square miles in extent 
rose up in the shape of a dome or bladder, to the height of sixteen 
hundred and seventy feet above tho original level of the plain. Tho 
affrighted Indians fled to the mountains ; and from thence looking 
down on the phenomenon, saw flames issuing from the earth for miles 
around the newly- elevated hill, and the softened surface rising and 
falling like that of an agitated sea, and opening into numerous rents 
and fissures. Two brooks which had watered the plantations precip- 
itated themselves into the burning chasms. The scene of this singular 
event was visited by Humboldt about the beginning of the present 
century. At that period, the volcanic agencies had become compara- 
tively quiescent ; the hill, however, retained its original altitude ; a 
number of smaller hills had sprung up around it ; and tho traveller 
found the waters of the engulfed rivulets escaping at a high tempera- 
ture from caverns charged with sulphureous vapors and carbonic acid 
gas. There were inliabitants of tho country living at the time who 
were more than twenty years older than the hill of Jorullo, and who 
had witnessed its rise. 



THE OLD RED SANDSTONE. 25 

of Plutonic action in the locality, into a rounced hill of mod- 
erate altitude, but of huge base. The upheaving power con- 
tinued to operate — the gneiss and mica-slate gave way a- top 
— and out of this lower dome there arose a higher dome of 
granite, which, in an after and terminating period of the inter 
nal activity, gave way in turn to yet a third and last dome of 
porphyry. Now, had the elevating forces ceased to operate 
just ere the gneiss and mica-slate had given way, we would 
have known nothing of the interior nucleus of granite — had 
they ceased just ere the granite had given way, we wDUid 
have known nothing of the yet deeper nucleus of por* 
phyry ; and yet the granite and the porphyry would as* 
suredly have been there. Nor could any application of 
the measuring rule to the side of the hill have ascertained 
the thickness of its outer covering — the gneiss and the mica 
schist. The geologists of the school of Werner used to illus- 
trate what we may term the anatomy of the earth, as seen 
through the spectacles of their system, by an onion and its 
coats : they represented the globe as a central nucleus, encir- 
cled by concentric coverings, each covering constituting a geo 
logical formation. The onion, through the introduction of a bet- 
ter school, has become obsolettj as an illustration ; but to restore 
it again, though for another purpose, we have merely to cut it 
through the middle, and turn downwards the planes formed 
by the knife. It then represents, with its coats, hills such aa we 
describe — hills such as Ben Nevis, ere the granite had per- 
forated the gneiss, or the porphyry broken through the granite. 
If it be thus unsafe, however, to calculate on the depth of 
deposits by the altitude of hills, it is quite as unsafe for the 
geologist, who has studied a formation in one district, to set 
himself to criticise the calculations of a brother geologist by 
whom it has been studied in a different and widely-separated 
3 



26 THB OLD BED SANDSTONE. 

district. A deposit in ooe locality may be found to 
many times the thickness of the same deposit in another. 
There are exposed, beside the Northern and Southern Sutors 
of Cromarty, two nearly vertical sections of the coarse con- 
glomerate bed, which forms, as I have said, in the north olT 
Scotland, the base of the Old Red System, and which rises 
to 90 great an elevation in the mountain of Morvheim. Tho 
sections are little moro than a mile apart ; and yet, while 
the thickness of this bed in the one does not exceed one hun» 
dred feet, that of the same bed in the other somewhat exceeds 
two hundred feet More striking still — under the Northern 
Sutor, the entire Geology of Caithness, with all its vast beds, 
and all its numerous fossils, from the granitic rock of the Ord 
hill, the southern boundary of the county, to the uppermost 
sandstones of Dunnet-head, its extreme northern corner, is 
exhibited in a vertical section not more than three hundred 
yards in extent. And yet so enormous is the depth of the 
deposit in Caithness, that it has been deemed by a very supe- 
rior geologist to represent three entire formations — the Old 
Red S3rstcm, by its unfossiliferous, arenaceous, and conglom- 
erate beds ; the Carboniferous System, by its dark-colored 
middle schists, abounding in bitumen and ichthyolites ; and 
the New Red Sandstone, by the mottled marls and moulder- 
ing sandstones that overlie the whole.* A slight sketch of 
the Geology of Caithness may not be deemed uninteresting 
This county includes, in the state of greatest development 

• Dr. Hibbert, whose researches among the limestones of Burdie 
House have been of such importance to Geology, was of Ihis opinion. 
I find it also expressed in the admirable geological appendix affixed 
by the Messrs. Anderson to their Guule to i?te ITighlandi and Island* of 
Scotlatui. " No beds of real coal/* say these gentlemen, " have been 
discovered in Caithness ; and it would thus appear that tho middle 



THE OLD RED SANDSTONE. 27 

any where yet known, that fossiliferous portion of the Old 
Red Sandstone which I purpose first to describe, and which 
will yet come to be generally regarded as an independent 
formation, as unequivocally characterized by its organic 
remains as the formations. either above or below it. 

The county of Sutherland stretches across the island from 
the German to the Atlantic Ocean, and presents, throughout 
its entire extent, — except where a narrow strip of the Oolitic 
formation runs along its eastern coast, and a broken belt of 
CMd Rei Sandstone tips its capes and promontories on the 
west, — a broken and tumultuous sea of primary hills. 
Scarce any of our other Scottish counties are so exclusively 
Highland, nor are there any of them in which the precipices 
are more abrupt, the valleys more deep, the rivers more 
rapid, or the mountains piled into more fantastic groups and 
masses. The traveller passes into Caithness, and finds him* 
self surrounded by scenery of an aspect so entirely dissimilar, 
that no examination of the rocks is necessary to convince him 
of a geological difference of structure. An elevated and un- 
even plain spreads around and before him, league beyond 
league, in tame and unvaried uniformity, — its many hollows 
darkened by morasses, over which the interveniug eminences 
rise in the form rather of low moory swellings, than of hills, 
— its coasts walled round by clifis of gigantic altitude, that 
elevate the district at one huge stride from the level of the 
sea, and skirted by vast stacks and columns of rock, that 

■chUtote tyftem of the county, containing the fossil fish, is in geologi' 
cal character and position intermediate between the Old and New 
Red Sandstone formations, but not identical with the Carboniferous 
limestone, or the true Coal Measures, although probably occupying 
the place of one or other of them." — p. 198 



28 THE OLD RED SANDSTONE. 

Stand out like the advanced pickets of the land amid the 
ceaseless turmoil of the breakers. The district, as shown on 
the map, presents nearly a triangular form — the Pentland 
Frith and the German Ocean describing two of its sides, 
while the base is formed by the line of boundary which sepa- 
rates it from the county of Sutherland. 

Now, in a geological point of view, this angle may be re- 
garded as a vast pyramid, rising perpendicularly from the 
basis furnished by the primary rocks of the latter county, and 
presenting newer beds and strata as we ascend, until we 
reach the apex. The line from south to north in the angle — 
from Morvheim to Dunnet-head — corresponds to the line of 
ascent from the top to the bottom of the pyramid. The first 
bed, reckoning from the base upwards, — the ground tier of 
the masonry, if I may so speak, — is the great conglomerate. 
It runs along the line of boundary from sea to sea, — from 
the Ord of Caithness on the east, to Portskerry on the north ; 
and rises, as it approaches the primary hills of Sutherland, 
into a lofty mountain chain of bold and serrated outline, which 
attains its greatest elevation in the hill of Morvheim. This 
great conglomerate bed, the base of the system, is represented 
in the Cromarty section, under the Northern Sutor, by a bed 
two hundred and fifteen feet in thickness. The second tier 
of masonry in the pyramid, and which also runs in a nearly 
parallel line from sea to sea, is composed mostly of a coarse 
red and yellowish sandstone, with here and there beds of peb- 
bles enclosed, and here and there deposits of green earth and 
red marl. It has its representative in the Cromarty section, 
in a bed of rod and yellow arenaceous stone, one hundred 
and fourteen feet six inches in thickness. These two inferior 
beds possess but one character, — they are composed of the 
same niitnrials, with merely this difference, that the rocki 



THE OLD ££D SANDSTONE. 29 

which have been broken into pebbles for the construction of 
the one, have been ground into sand for the composition of 
the other. Directly over them, the middle portion of the pyr- 
amid is occupied by an enormous deposit of dark-colonid 
bituminous schist, slightly micaceous, calcareous, orscmi-cal« 
carcous, — here and there interlaced with veins of carbonate 
of time. — here and there compact and highly siliceous, — 
and bearing in many places a mineralogical character diffi- 
cult to be distinguished from that at one time deemed peculiar 
to the harder grauwacke schists. The Caithness flagstones, 
so extensively employed in paving the footways of our larger 
towns, are furnished by this immense middle tier or belt, and 
represent its general appearance. From its lowest to its 
highest beds it is charged with fossil fish and obscure vegeta- 
ble impressions ; and we find it represented in the Cromarty 
section by alternating bands of sandstones, stratified clays, 
and bituminous and nodular limestones, which form altogether 
a bed three hundred and fifly-five feet in thickness ; nor does 
this bed lack its organisms, animal and vegetable, generically 
identical with those of Caithness. The apex of the pyramid 
is formed of red mouldering sandstones and mottled marls, 
which exhibit their uppermost strata high over the eddies of 
the Pentland Frith, in the huge precipices of Dunnet-head, 
and which are partially represented in the Cromarty section 
by an unfossilifcrous sandstone bed of unascertained thick- 
ness ; but which can be traced for about eighty feet from the 
upper limestones and stratified clays of the middle member, 
until lost in overlying beds of sand and shingle. 

I am particular, at the risk, I am afraid, of being tedious, 
in thus describing the Geology of this northern county, and 
of the Cromarty section, which represents and elucidates it 
They i^^ustmte more than the formations of two insulated 



30 THE OLD RED SANDSTONE. 

districts : tliey represent also a vast period of time in ih« 
history of the globe. The pyramid, with its three huge bars, 
its foundations of granitic rock, its base of red conglomerate, 
its central band of dark-colored schist, and its lighter tinted 
apex of sandstone, is inscribed from bottom to top, like an 
Egyptian obelisk, with a historical record. The upper and 
lower sections treat of tempests and currents — the middle is 
*^ written within and without '* with wonderful narratives of 
animal life ; and yet the whole, taken together, comprises but 
an earlier portion of that chronicle of existences and events 
furnished by the Old Red Sandstone. It is, however, with 
this earlier portion that my acquaintance is most minute. 

My first statement regarding it must be much the reverse 
of the borrowed one with which this chapter begins. The 
fossils are remarkably numerous^ and in a state ofhighpres' 
ervation. I have a hundred solid proofs by which to estab- 
lish the truth of the assertion, within less than a yard of me« 
Half my closet walls are covered with the peculiar fossils of 
the Lower Old Red Sandstone; and certainly a stranger 
assemblage of forms have rarely been grouped together ; — 
creatures whose very type is lost, fantastic and uncouth, and 
which puzzle the naturalist to assign them even their class ; 
— boat-like animals, furnished with oars and a rudder ; — fish 
plated over, like the tortoise, above and below, with a strong 
armor of bone, and furnished with but one solitary rudder- 
like fin ; other fish less equivocal in their form, but with the 
membranes of their fins thickly covered with scales ; — crea- 
tures bristling over with thorns ; others glistening in an enam- 
elled coat, as if beautifully japanned — the tail, in every in- 
stance among the less equivocal shapes, formed not equally, 
as in eicisting fish, on each side the central vertebral column, 
fiut chiefly oc the lower side — the column sending cvit its 



THB OLD R£D SANDSTONS. 31 

QJiLinisbed vertebrae to the extreme terminaliuii of the fin. 
All the forms testify of a remote antiquity — of a period 
whose ^^ fashions have passed away/^ The figures on a 
Chinese vase or an Egyptian obelisk are scarce more unlike 
what now exists in nature, than the fossib of the Lower Old 
Red Sandstone. 

Geology, of all the sciences, addresses itself most power* 
fully to the imagination, and hence one main cause of the 
interest which it excites. Ere setting ourselves minutely to 
examine the peculiarities of these creatures, it would be per* 
haps well that the reader should attempt realizing the place of 
their existence, and relatively the time — not of course with 
regard to dates and eras, for the geologist has none to reckon 
by, but with respect to formations. They were the denizens 
of the same portion of the globe which we ourselves inhabit, 
regarded not as a tract of country, but as a piece of ocean 
crossed by the same geographical lines of latitude and longi- 
tude. Their present place of sepulture in some localities, 
had there been no denudation, would have been raised high 
over the tops of our loftiest hills — at least a hundred feet 
over the conglomerates which form the summit of Morvheim, 
and more than a thousand feet over the snow-capped Ben 
Wyvis. Geology has still greater wonders. I have seen 
belemnites of the Oolite — comparatively a modem forma- 
tion — which had been dug out of the sides of the Himalaya 
mountains, seventeen thousand feet over the level of the sea. 
But let us strive to carry our minds back, not to the place 
of sepulture of these creatures, high in the rocks, — though 
that I shall afterwards attempt minutely to describe, — but to 
the place in which they lived, long ere the sauroid fishes of 
Burdie House liad begun to exist, or the corallines of thfl 
mountain limestone had spread out their multitudinous arms 



t32 THE OLD RED SANDSTONE. 

in a sea gradually shallowing, and out of which the land had 
already partially emerged. 

A continuous ocean spreads over the space now occupied 
hy the British islands : in the tract covered by the green 
fields and brown moors of our own country, the bottom, for 
a hundred yards downwards, is composed of the debris of 
rolled pebbles and coarse sand intermingled, long since con- 
solidated into the lower member of the Old Red Sandstone ; 
the upper surface is composed of banks of sand, mud, and 
clay ; and the sea, swarming with animal life, flows over all. 
My present object is to describe the inhabitants of that sea. 

Of these, the greater part yet discovered have been named 
by Agassiz, the highest authority as an ichthyologist in 
Europe or the world, and in whom the scarcely more cele- 
brated Cuvier recognized a naturalist in every respect worthy 
to succeed him. The comparative amount of the labors of 
these two great men in fossil ichthyology, and the amazing 
acceleration which has taken place within the last few 
years in the progress of geological science, are illustrated 
together, and that very strikingly, by the following interesting 
fact — a fact derived directly from Agassiz himself, and which 
must be new to the great bulk of my readers. When Cuvier 
closed his researches in this department, he had named and 
described, for the guidance of the geologist, ninety-two distinct 
species of fossil fish ; nor was it then known that the entire 
geological scale, from the Upper Tertiary to the Grauwacko 
inclusive, contained more. Agassiz commenced his labors ; 
and, in a period of time little exceeding fourteen years, he 
has raised the number of species from ninety-two to sixteen 
hundred. And this number, great as it is, is receiving acces- 
sions almost every day. In his late visit to Scotland, he found 
Pleven new species, and one new genus, in the collection oi 



TU£ OLD BED SANDSTONE. 33 

Lady Cumming of Altyre, all from the upper beds of that 
lower member of the Old Red Sandstone represented by the 
dark-colored schists and inferior sandstones of Caithness. 
lie found forty-two new species more in a single collec- 
tion in Ireland, furnished by the Mountain Limestone of 
Armagh. 

Some of my humbler readers may possibly be repelled by 
his names ; they are, like all names in science, unfamiliar in 
their respect to mere English readers, just because they are 
names not for England alone, but for England and the world. 
I am assured, however, that they are all composed of very 
good Greek, and picturesquely descriptive of some pecu- 
liarity in the fossils they designate. One of his Ichthyolites, 
with a thorn or spine in each fin, bears the name of Acan^ 
tkodes^ or thorn-like ; another with a similar mechanism of 
spines attached to the upper part of the body, and in which 
the pectoral or hand-fins are involved, has been designated 
the Cheir acanthus^ or thorn-hand ; a third covered with curi- 
ously-fretted scales, has been named the Glyptolepis^ or 
carved-scale ; and a fourth, roughened over with berry-like 
tubercles, that rise from strong osseous plates, is known as the 
CaccasteuSy or berry-on-bone. And such has been his principle 
of nomenclature. The name is a condensed description. 
But though all his names mean something, they cannot mean 
a great deal ; and as learned words repel unlearned readers, 
I shall just take the liberty of reminding mine of the humbler 
class, that there is no legitimate connection between Geology 
and the dead languages. The existences of the Old Red 
Sap'lstone hud lived for ages, and had been dead for myriads 
of ages, ere there was Greek enough in the world to furnish 
them with names. There is no working-man, if he be a per- 



>( 



•on t jSBi'AijBJscs -pn ami 

Xcuwi^. nnL-arcnninr .iiiiiwirf 
f 



CHAPTER m. 

Lmuot^'s Theory of Progresnon illastrated. — Class of Facts which 
glire Color ^o it.— The Credolitj of UmbOie/. — yi. Maillet and hii 
Fish-birds. — Gradation not Progress. — Geological Argument. — 
The Present incomplete without the Past. — Intermediate Jinks 
of Creation. — Organisms of the Lower Old Red Sandstone.— 
The Pteriehthya. — Its first Disoovery . — Mr. Murcluson's Decision 
regarding it. — Confirmed by that of Agassiz. — Description. — 
The sereral Varieties of the Fossil yet discorered. — Evidence of 
Violent Death in the Attitudes in which they are found. — The 
Cfxotteut of the Lower Old Red. — Description. — Gradations 
from Crustacea to fishes. — Habits of the Coceotteus. — Scarcely 
any Conception too eztrayagant lor Nature to realize. 

Mr. Ltell^s brilliant and popular work, The Principles of 
Geology^ must have introduced to the knowledge of most of 
my readers the strange theories of Lamarck. The ingenious 
foreigner, on the strength of a few striking facts, which 
prove that, to a certain extent, the instincts of species may 
be improved and heightened, and their forms changed from a 
lower to a higher degree of adaptation to their circumstances, 
has concluded that there is a natural progress from the in* 
ferior orders of being towards the superior ; and that the off- 
spring of creatures low in the scale in the present time, may 
hold a much higher place in it, and belong to different and 
nobler species, a few thousand years hence. The descend- 
ants of the ottrang'oulang^ for instance, may be employed in 
some future age in writing trei^tiscs on Geology, in which 
they shall have to describe the remains of the quadrumava 
as belonging to an extinct order. Lamarck himself, when 
bcnring home in triumph with him the skeleton of some hug" 

(35) 



Hii THE OLD RED SANDSTONE. 

salamander or crocodile of the Lias, might indulge, consist- 
ently with his theory, in the pleasing belief that he had pos* 
scssed himself of the bones of his grandfather — a grand- 
father removed, of course, to a remote degree of (Consan- 
guinity, by the intervention of a few hundred thousand 
great-greats. Never yet was there a fancy so wild and ex- 
travagant but there have been men bold enough to dignify it 
with the name of philosophy, and ingenious enough to find 
reasons for the propriety of the name. 

The setling-dog is taught to set ; he squats down and points 
at the game ; but the habit is an acquired one — a mere trick 
of education. What, however, is merely acquired habit in 
the progenitor, is found to pass into instinct in the descend- 
ant: the puppy of the setting-dog squats down and sets 
untaught — the educational trick of the parent is mysterious- 
ly transmuted into an original principle in the offspring. The 
adaptation which takes place in the forms and constitution of 
plants and animals, when placed in circumstances different 
from their ordinary ones, is equally striking. The woody 
plant of a warmer climate, when transplanted into a colder, 
frequently exchanges its ligneous stem for a herbaceous one, 
as if in anticipation of the killing frosts of winter; and, 
dying to the ground at the close of autumn, shoots up again 
in spring. The dog, transported from a temperate into a 
frigid region, exchanges his covering of hair for a covering 
of wool ; when brought back again to his former habitat, the 
wool is displaced by the original hair. And hence, and from 
similar instances, the derivation of an argument, gcM>d so far 
as it goes, for changes in adaptation to altered circum- 
ftances of the organization of plants and animals, and for 
the improvability of instinct. But it is easy driving a prin- 
ciple too far. The elasticity of a common bow, and the 



THE OLD RED SANDSTONE. 37 

Strength of an ordinary arm, are fully adequate to the trans* 
mission of an arrow from one point of space to another point 
a hundred yards removed ; but he would be a philosopher 
wortli looking at, who would assert that they were equally 
adequate for the transmission of the same arrow from points 
removed, not by a hundred yards, but by a hundred miles. 
And such, but still more glaring, has been the error of La- 
marck. He has argued on this principle of improvement 
and adaptation — which, carry it as far as we rationally may, 
still leaves the vegetable a vegetable, and the dog a dog — 
that, in the vast course of ages, inferior have risen int6 supe- 
rior natures, and lower into higher races ; that molluscs and 
zoophytes have passed into fish and reptiles, and, fish and 
reptiles into birds and quadrupeds ; that unformed, gelatinous 
bodies, with an organization scarcely traceable, have been 
metamorphosed into oaks and cedars ; and that monkeys and 
apes have been transformed into human creatures, capable of 
understanding and admiring the theories of Lamarck. As- 
suredly there is no lack of faith among infidels; their 
** vaulting" credulity o'erlcaps revelation, and " falls on the 
other side.'^ One of the first geological works I ever read 
was a philosophical romance, entitled Telliamed^ by a M. 
Maillet, an ingenious Frenchman of the days of Louis XV. 
This Maillet was by much too great a philosopher to credit 
the scriptural account of Noah's flood ; and yet he could be- 
lieve, like Lamarck, that the whole family of birds had existed 
at one time as fishes, which, on being thrown ashore by the 
waves, had got feathers by accident ; and that men themselves 
arc but the descendants of a tribe of sea-monsters, who, tiring 
of their proper element, crawled up the beach one sunny 
•norning, and, taking a fancy to the land, forgot to return.* 

• Few men could describe better than Maillet. Hi» extravaganora 
4 • 



88 THB OLD RED SATTDSTOHS. 

*« How easy," says this fanciful writer, «' is it to conceive 
the change of a winged fish, flying at times through the itrater, 
at times through the air, into a bird flying always through 
the air ! " It is a law of nature, that the chain of being, 

are aa amusing aa those of a Uary tale, and quite aa extreme. Taks 
the following extract aa an instance : — 

** Winged or flying fish, stimulated by the desire of prey, or the fear 
of death, or pushed near the shore by the billows, have fallen among 
reeds or herbage, whence it was not possible for them to resume their 
flight to the sea, by means of which they had contracted their fint 
facility of flying. Then their fins, being no longer bathed in the sea* 
water, were split, and became warped by their dryness. While they 
found; among the reeds and herbage among which they fell, any ali- 
ments to support them, the vessels of their fins, being separated, were 
lengthened and clothed with beards, or, to speak more justly, the mem- 
branes, which before kept them adherent to each other, were meta- 
morphosed. The beard formed of these warped membranes was 
lengthened. The skin of these animals was insensibly covered with 
a down of the same color with the skin, and this down gradually in- 
creased. The little wings they had under their belly, and which« 
Uke their wings, helped them to walk in the sea, became feet, and 
served them to walk on land. There were also other small changes 
in their figure. The beak and neck of some were lengthened, and 
those of others shortened. The conformity, however, of the first 
figure subsists in the whole, and it wUl be always easy to know it. 
Examine all the species of fowls, large and small, even those of the 
Indies, those which are tufted or not, those whose feathers are 
reversed, such as we see at Damietta — that is to say, whose plu- 
mage runs from the toil to the head — and you will find species 
of fish quite similar, scaly or without scales. All species of parrots, 
whose plumages are so difiercnt, the rarest and the most aingn- 
lar-marked birds, arc, conformable to fact, painted like tl.em with 
block, brown, gray, yellow, green, red, violet color, and those of gold 
and azure ; and aU this precisely in the same ports where tl.e plu- 
mages of those birds are diversified in so curious a manner." — 
TeUiatned, p. 224, ed. 1750. 



THE OLD RED SANDSTONE. 39 

from the lowest to the highest form of life, should he, in 
some degree, a continuous chain ; that the various classes of 
existence should shade into one another, so that it often proves 
a matter of no little difficulty to point out the exact line of 
demarcation where one class or family ends, and another 
class or family begins. The naturalist passes from the vege- 
table to the animal tribes, scarcely aware, amid the perplex- 
ing forms of intermediate existence, at what point he quits 
the precincts of the one to enter on those of the other. All 
the animal families have, in like manner, their connecting 
links ; and it is chiefly out of these that writers such as La- 
marck and Maillet construct their system. They confound 
gradation with progress. Geoffrey Hudson was a very short 
man, and Groliath of Gath a very tall one, and the gradations 
of the human stature lie between. But gradation is not prog- 
ress ; and though we find full-grown men of five feet, five 
feet six inches, six feet, and six feet and a half, the fact gives 
us no earnest whatever that the race is rising in stature, and 
that at some future period the average height of the human 
family will be somewhat between ten and eleven feet. And 
equally unsolid is the argument, that from a principle of gra- 
dation in races would deduce a principle of progress in races. 
The tall man of six feet need entertain quite as little hope of 
rising into eleven feet as the short man of five ; nor has the 
fish that occasionally flies any better chance of passing into 
a bird than the fish that only swims. 

' Geology abounds with creatures of the intermediate class : 
there are none of its links more numerous than its connect- 
ing links ; and hence its interest, as a field of speculation, to 
the assertors of the transmutation of races. But there is a 
fats, incompleteness in the evidence, that destroys its char- 
acter as such. It supplies in abundance those hnks of 



40 THE OLD RED SAirnSTOlfS. 

generic comiection, which, as it were, many together disatmOar 
races ; but it furnishes no genealogical link to show that the 
existences of one race derive their lineage frcxn the exist- 
ences of another. The scene shifts, as we pass from forma- 
tioD to formation ; we are introduced in each to a new dra» 
matis persona; and there exist no such proofs of their being 
at once different and yet the same, as those produced in the 
Winier j Tale, to show that the grown shepherdess of the one 
scene is identical with the exposed infismt of the scene that 
went before. Nay, the reverse is well nigh as strikingly the 
case, as if the grown shepherdess had been introduced into 
the earlier scenes of the drama, and the child into its con- 
cluding scenes. 

The argument is a very simple one. Of all the vertebra- 
ta, fishes rank lowest, and in geological history appear first. 
We find their remains in the Upper and Lower Silurians, in 
the Lower, Middle, and Upper Old Red Sandstone, in the 
Mountain Limestone, and in the Coal Measures ; and in the 
latter formation the first reptiles appear.* Fishes seem to 
have been the master existences of two great systems, may- 
hap of three, ere the age of reptiles began. Now fishes dif- 
fer very much among themselves : some rank nearly as low 
as worms, some nearly as high as reptiles ; and if fish could 
have risen into reptiles, and reptiles into mammalia, we would 
necessarily expect to find lower orders of fish passing into 
higher, and taking precedence of the higher in their appear- 
ance in point of time, just as in the Winter^ s Tale we see 
iho infant preceding the adult. If such bo not the case — if 
fish niaJe their first appearance, not in their least perfect, but 
in their most perfect state — not in their nearest approxima- 
tion to the worm, but in their nearest approximation to the rep- 
tile — there is no room for progression, and the argument 
♦ See Note B. 



THE OLD RED SANDSTONE. 41 

falls. Now it is a geological fact, that it is fish of the higher 
orders that appear first on the stage, and that they are found 
to occupy exactly the same level during the vast periol rep* 
resented by five succeeding formations. There is no pro- 
gression. If fish rose into reptiles, it must have been by 
sudden transformation — it must have been as if a man who 
liad stood still for half a lifetime should bestir himself all ot 
once, and take seven leagues at a stride. There is no get- 
ting rid of miracle in the case — tliere is no alternative be- 
tween creation and metamorphosis. The infidel substitutes 
progression for Deity ; Greology robs him of his god. 

But no roan who enters the geological field in quest of the 
wonderful, need pass in pursuit of his object from the true to 
the fictitious. Does the reader remember how in Milton's 
sublime figure, the body of Truth is represented as hewn in 
pieces, and her limbs scattered over distant regions, and how 
her friends and disciples have to go wandering all over the 
world in quest of them .' There is surely something very 
wonderful in the fact, that, in uniting the links of the chain 
of creation into an unbroken whole, we have in like manner 
to seek for them all along the scale of the geologist ; — some 
we discover among the tribes first annihilated — some among 
the tribes that perished at a later period — some among the 
existences of the passing time. We find the present incom- 
plete without the past — the recent without the extinct. There 
are marvellous analogies which pervade the scheme of Provi- 
dence, and unite, as it were, its lower with its higher parts. 
The perfection of the works of Deity is a perfection entire 
in its components ; and yet these are not contemporaneous, 
but successive : it is a perfection which includes the dead as 
well as the living, and bears relation, in its completeness, not 
to time, but to eternity. 
4' 



42 THE OLD REJ> SAXSSTOSE. 

We find the organisms of the Old Red Sandstone supplj- 
ing on important link, or, rather, series of links, in the ichthy- 
ologic al scale, which are wanting in the present creation, and 
the absence of which evidently occasions a wide gap between 
the two grand divisions or series of fishes — the bony and 
the cartilaginoas. Of this, however, more anon. Of all the 
organisms of the system, one of the most extraordinary, and 
the one in which Lamarck would have most delighted, i^, the 
PteriehtktfSj or winged fish, an ichthyolite which the writer 
bad the pleasure of introducing to the acquaintance of geol- 
ogists neariy three years ago, but which he first laid open to 
the light about seven years eariier. Had Lamarck been the 
discoverer, he would unquestionably have held that he had 
caught a fish almost in the act of wishing itself into a bird. 
There are wings which want only feathers, a body which 
seems to have been as well adapted for passing through the 
air as the water, and a tail by which to steer. And yet there 
are none of the fossils of the Old Sed Sandstone which less 
resemble any thing that now exists than its Pterichthys. I 
fain wish I could communicate to the reader the feeling with 
which I contemplated my first-found specimen. It opened 
with a single blow of the hammer ; and there, on a ground 
of Iight«colored limestone, lay the efiigy of a creature fash- 
ioned apparently out of jet, with a body covered with plates, 
two powerful looking arms, articulated at the shoulders, a 
head as entirely lost in the trunk as that of the ray or the 
■un-(ish, and a long, angular tail. My first-formed idea re- 
garding it was, that I had discovered a connecting link 
between the tortoise and the fish — the body much resembles 
that of a small turtle ; and why, I asked, if one formation 
gives us sauroid fishes, may not another give us chelonian 
ones? or if m the Lias we find the body of the lizard 



THB OLD RED SANDSTONE. 43 

mounted on the paddles of the whale, why not find in the 
Old Red Sandstone the body of the tortoise mounted in a 
somewhat similar manner? The idea originated in error; 
but as it was an error which not many naturalists could have 
corrected at the time, it may be deemed an excusable one, 
more especially by such of my readers as may have seen 
well-preserved specimens of the creature, or who examine 
the subjoined prints. (Nos. I. and II.) I submitted some of 
my specimens to Mr. Murchison, at a time when that gentle- 
man was engaged among the fossils of the Silurian System, 
and employed on his great work, which has so largely serves 
to extend geological knowledge regarding those earlier peri- 
ods in which animal life first began. He was much inter- 
ested in the discovery : it furnished the geologist with addi- 
tional data by which to regulate and construct his calculations, 
and added a new and very singular link to the chain of 
existence in its relation to human knowledge. Deferring to 
Agassiz, as the highest authority, he yet anticipated the de- 
cision of that naturalist regarding it, in almost every particu- 
lar. I had inquired, under the influence of my firat impres- 
sion, whether it might not be considered as a sort of interme- 
diate existence between the fish and the chelonian. He 
stated, in reply, that he could not deem it referriblc to any 
family of reptiles ; that, if not a fish, it approached more 
closely to the Crustacea than to any other class ; and that ho 
had little doubt Agassiz would pronounce it to be an 
ichthyolite of that ancient order to which the CephnlaspU 
belongs, and which seems to have formed a connecting link 
between Crustacea and fishes.* The specimens submitted to 

• The aborigines of South America deemed it wonderful that the 
Europeans who first visited them should, without previous concert, 



44 THE OLD RED SANDSTONE. 

Mr. Marchison were forwarded to Agassiz. They were much 
more impofect than some which I have since disinterred ; 
and to restore the entire animal from them would require 
powers such as those possessed by Cuvier in the past age, and 
by the naturalist of Neufchatel in the present. Broken as 
they were, however, Agassiz at once decided from them that 
the creature must have been a fish. 

1 have placed one of the specimens before me. Imagine 
the figure of a man rudely drawn in black on a gray ground, 
the head cut off at the shoulders, the arms spread at full, as 
in the attitude of swimming, the body rather long than oth- 
erwise, and narrowing from the chest downwards, one of the 
legs cut away at the hip-joint, and the other, as if to preserve 
the balance, placed directly under the centre of the figure, 



agree in reading after the same manner the same scrap of manuscript, 
and in deriving the same piece of information from it. The writer 
experienced on this occasion a somewhat similar feeling. His speci* 
mens seemed written in a character cramp enough to suggest 
those doubts regarding original meaning which lead to various read- 
ings ; but the geologist and the naturalist agreed in perusing them 
after exactly the same fashion — the one in London, the other in 
Neufchatel. Such instances give confidence in the findings of sci- 
ence. The decision of Mr. Murchison I subjoin in Ms own words — 
his numbers refer to various specimens of Pt«richthy» : «« As to your 
fossils 1, 2, 3, we know nothing of them here, (London,) except that 
tlicy remind me of the occipital fragments of some of the Caithness 
fishes. I do not conceive they can be referrible to any reptile; 
for, if not fishes, they more closely approach to crustaceans than to 
any other class. I conceive, ho\i'evcr, that Agassiz will pronounce 
Uicm to be fishes, which, together with the curious genus CephaiaspU 
of the Old Hod Sandstone, form the connecting links between cru&ta- 
ceans and fishes. Your specimens remind one in several respects of 
th) Cephalatjit:' 



44* 



PLATE t. 



rMiUeri 



^.9. 



THB OLD BSD SANDSTOICB. 45 

which it seems to support Such, at a first glance, is the 
appearance of the fossil. The body was of very considera- 
ble depth, perhaps little less deep proportionally from back to 
breast than the body of the tortoise ; the under part was flat ; 
the upper rose towards the centre into a roof-like ridge ; and 
both under and upper were covered with a strong armor of 
bony plates, which, resembling more the plates of the tortoise 
than those of the crustacean, received their accessions of 
growth at the edges or sutures. The plates on the under 
side are divided by two lines of suture, which run, the one 
longitudinally through the centre of the body, the other trans- 
versely, also through the centre; and they would cut one 
another at right angles, were there not a lozehge-shaped 
plate inserted at the point where they would otherwise meet. 
There are thus dvo plates on the lower or belly part of the 
animal. They are all thickly tubercled outside with wart-like 
prominences, (see Plate I., fig. 4 ; ) the inner present appear- 
ances indicative of a bony structure. The plates on the 
upper side are more numerous and more difficult to describe, 
just as it would be difficult to describe the forms of the vari- 
ous stones which compose the ribbed and pointed roof of a 
Grothic cathedral, the arched ridge or hump of the back re- 
quiring, in a somewhat similar i^'ay, a peculiar form and 
arrangement of plates. The apex of the ridge is covered 
by a strong hexagoml plate, fitted upon it like a cap or hel- 
met, and which nearly corresponds in place to the fiat central 
plate of the under side. There runs around it a border of 
variously formed plates, that diminish in size and increase in 
number towards the head, and which are separated, like the 
pieces of a dissected map, by deep sutures. They all pre- 
sent the tubercled surface. The eyes are placed in front, on 
a prominence considerably lower than the roof-like ridge of 



46 THE OLD RED SANDSTONE. 

the back; the mouth seems to have opened, as m many 
fishes, in the edge of the creature's snout, where a line running 
along the back would bisect a line running along the belly ; 
but this part is less perfectly shown by my specimens than 
any other. The two arms, or paddles, are placed so far for- 
ward as to give the body a disproportionate and decapitated 
oppearance. From the shoulder to the elbow, if I may em- 
ploy the terms, there is a swelling, muscular appearance, as 
in the human arm ; the part below is flattened, so as to re- 
semble the blade of an oar, and terminates in a strong, sharp 
point. The tail — the one leg on which, as exhibited in one 
of my specimens, the creature seems to stand — is of con- 
siderable length, more than equal to a third of the entire fig- 
ure, and of an angular form, the base representing the part 
attached to the body, and the apex its termination. It was 
covered with small tubercled, rhomboidal plates, like scales, 
(see Plate I., fig. 3;) and where the internal structure is 
shown, there are appearances of a vertebral column, with rib- 
like processes standing out at a sharp angle. The ichthyo- 
lite, in my larger specimens, does not much exceed seven 
inches in length ; and I despatched one to Agassiz, rather more 
lljan two years ago, whose extreme length did not exceed an 
inch. Such is a brief, and, I am afraid, imperfect sketch of 
a creature whose very type seems no longer to exist. But 
for the purposes of the geologist, the descriptions of the 
graver far exceed those of the pen, and the accompanying 
prints will serve to supply all that may be found wanting in 
the text Fig. 1, in Plate L, and fig. 2, in Plate II., are both 
restorations — the first of the upper, and the second of the 
under, part of the creature. It may, however, encourage 
the confidence of the naturalist, who for the first time looks 
upon forn^ so strange, to be informed that Plate I., with its 



46« 



PLATE IL 



THB OLD BED BANDSTOIIB. 47 

two figures, waa submitted to Agaasiz during his recent brief 
stay in Edinburgh, and that he as readily recognized in it the 
species of the two kinds which it exhibits, as he had previ* 
ously recognized the species of the originals in the limestone. 
Agassiz, in the course of his late visit to Scotland, found 
six species of the Plerichthys * — three of these, and the 
wings of a fourth, in the collection of the writer. The dif-* 
fcrcnces by which they are distinguished may be marked by 
even an unpractised eye, especially in the form of the bodies 
and wings. Some are of a fuller, some of a more elongated, 
form ; in some the body resembles a heraldic shield, of near- 
ly the ordinary shape and proportions ; in others the sliield 
stretches into a form not very unlike that of a Norway skiflT, 
from tne midships forward. In some of the varieties, too, the 
wings are long and comparatively slender ; in others shorter, 
and of greater breadth : in some there is an inflection resem- 
bling the bend of an elbow ; in others there is a continuous 
swelling from the termination to the shoulder, where a sudden 
narrowing takes place immediately over the articulation. I 
had inferred somewhat too hurriedly, though perhaps naturally 
enough, that these wings, or arms, with their strong sharp 
points and oar-like blades, had been at once paddles and 
spears -» instruments of motion and weapons of defence ; 
and hence the mistake of connecting the creature with the 
Chelonia. I am informed by Agassiz, however, that they 
were weapons of defence only, which, like the occipital spines 
of the river bull-head, were erected in moments of danger or 

* Agassiz now reckons ten distinct species of Pteriehthyt — P. are- 
naius, P. cancriformU, P. comutiu, P, mq/or, P. Milleri, P. ItUia, P. 
oblonffUM, P. productiUy P. teitudinaritu, and P. hydrophilua; of these, 
nine species belong to the Lower, and one — the Pteriehthya hydropht' 
iia- to the Upper Old Red Sandstone. 



48 THE OLD BED SANDSTONE. 

alarm, and at other times lay close by the creature's side ; 
and that the sole instrument of motion was the tail, which, 
when covered by its coat of scales, was proportionally of a 
somewhat larger size than the tail shown in the print, which, 
as in the specimens from whence it was taken, exhibits but tlie 
obscure and uncertain lineaments of the skeleton. The river 
bull-head, when attacked by an enemy, or immediately as it 
feels the hook in its jaws, erects its two spines at nearly right 
angles with the plates of the head, as if to render itself as 
difficult of being swallowed as possible. The attitude is one 
of danger and alarm ; and it is a curious fact, to which I shall 
afterwards have occasion to advert, that in thb attitude nine 
tenths of the PierUhthyes of the Lower Old Red Sandstone 
are to be found. We read in the stone a singularly preserved 
story of the strong instinctive love of life, and of the mingled 
fear and anger implanted for its preservation — ** The champi- 
ons in distorted postures threat.*' It presents us, too, with a 
wonderful record of violent death falling at once, not on a few 
individuals, but on whole tribes. 

Next to the Pterichthys of the Lower Old Red I shall place 
its contemporary the Coccosteus of Agassiz, a fish which, in 
some respects, must have somewhat resembled it. Both were 
covered with an armor of thickly tubercled bony plates, and 
both furnished with a vertebrated tail. The plates of the one, 
when found lying detached in the rock, can scarcely be dis- 
tinguished from those of the other : there are the same marks, 
as in the plates of the tortoise, of accessions of growth at the 
edges — the same cancellated bony structure within, tne same 
kind of tubercles without. The forms of the creatures them- 
selves, however, were essentially different. I have compared 
the figure of the Pterichthys, as shown in some of my b*-Ucr 
specimen^, to that of a man with the head cut off a: the 



48* 
C0ceaJeus Ca.tpidatus Ag, 



flATK III. 



THK OLD RED SANDSTONE. 49 

Hhoulders, one of the legs also wanting, and the arms spread 
to the full. The figure of the Coccosteus I would compare 
to a boy^s kite. (See Plate III., fig. 1.) There is a rounded 
head, a triangular body, a long tail attached to the apex of 
the triangle, and arms thin and rounded where they attach to ^ 
the body, and spreading out towards their termination like 
the ancient one-sided shovel which we see sculptured on old 
tombstones, or the rudder of an ancient galley.* The 
manner in which the plates are arranged on the head is 
peculiarly beautiful ; but I am afraid I cannot adequately 
describe them. A ring of plates, like the ring-stones of an 
arch, runs along what may be called the hoop of the kite ; 
the form of the keystone-plate is perfect ; the shapes of the 
others are elegantly varied, as if for ornament ; and what 
would be otherwise the opening of the arch, is filled up with 
one large plate, of an outline singularly elegant A single 
plate, still larger than any of the others, covers the greater 
part of the creature's triangular body, to the shape of which 
it nearly conforms. It rises saddle- wise towards the centre : 
on the ridge there is a longitudinal groove ending in a perfo- 
ration, a little over the apex, (Plate III., fig. 2 ;) two small lat- 
eral plates on either side fill up the base of the angle ; and 
the long tail, with its numerous vertebral joints, terminates the 
figure. 

Does the reader possess a copy of Lyell's lately published 
elementary work, edition 1838 ? If so, let him first turn up 
the description of the Upper Silurian rocks, from Murchison, 
which occurs in page 459, and mark the form of the trilobite 
Asaphus caiidatus^ a fossil of the Wenlock formation. (See 

• I hare since ascertained that these seeming arms or paddles were 
simply plates of a peculiar form. (See Plate IX.) 



50 THE OLD RKD SANDSTONE. 

Sil, SysL, Plate VII.} The upper part, or head, forms a cres- 
cent ; the body rises out of the concave with a sweep some* 
what resembling that of a Gothic arch ; the outline of the 
whole approximates to that of an egg, the smaller end termi- 
nating in a sharp point. Let him remark, further, that this 
creature was a crustaceotts animal, of the crab or Icbster 
class, and then turn up the brief description of the Old Red 
Sandstone in the same volume, page 454, and mark the form 
of the Cephalaspis, or buckler-head — a fish of a formation 
immediately over that in which the remains of the trilobito 
most abound. He will find that the fish and the crustacean 
are wonderfully alike. The fish b more elongated, but both 
possess the crescent-shaped head, and both the angular and 
apparently jointed body.* They illustrate admirably how 
two distinct orders may meet They exhibit the points, if 1 
may so speak, at which the plated fish is linked to the shelled 
crustacean. Now, the Coccosteus is a stage further on ; it is 
more unequivocally a fish. It is a Cephalaspis with an artic- 
ulated tail attached to the angular body, and the horns of the 
crescent-shaped head cut off*. 

Some of the specimens which exhibit this creature are 



* Really jointed in the case of the trilobite ; only apparently so in 
that of the Cephalaspis. The body of the trilobite, like thf.t of the 
lobster, was barred by transverse, oblong, overlapping plates, and be- 
ttvecn every two plates there was a joint ; the body of the Cephalaspis, 
in like manner, was barred by transverse, oblong, overlapping scales, 
between which there existed no such joints. It is interesting to ob- 
serve how nature, in thus bringing two such different classes as fishes 
and Crustacea together, gives to the higher animal a sort of pictorial 
resemblance to the lower, in parts where the construction could not 
be identic^ without interfering with the grand distinctioni of the 
classes. 



THB OLD RED saudstohs. 51 

exceedingly curious. In one, a coprolite still rests in the ab- 
domen ; and a common botanist^s microscope shows it thickly 
speckled over with minute scales, the indigestible exuviae of 
fish on which the animal had preyed. In the abdomen of 
another we find a few minute pebbles — just as pebbles are 
occasionally found in the stomach of the cod — which had 
been swallowed by the creature attached to its food. Is there 
nothing wonderful in the fact, that men should be learning at 
this time of day how the fishes of the Old Red Sandstone 
lived, and that there were some of them rapacious enough 
not to be over nice in their eating ? 

The under part of the creature is still very imperfectly 
known : it had its central lozenge-shaped plate, like that on 
the under side of the Pterichihys^ but of greater elegance, 
(see Plate III., fig. 3,) round which the other plates were 
ranged. ^* What an appropriate ornament, if set in gold ! ^^ 
said Dr. Buckland, on seeing a very beautiful specimen of 
this central lozenge in the interesting collection of Professor 
Traill of Edinbui^h, — " What an appropriate ornament for a 
lady geologist ! ^^ There are two marked peculiarities in the 
jaws of the CoccosieuSj as shown in most of the specimens, 
illustrative of the lower part of the creature, which I have 
yet seen. The teeth, instead of being fixed in sockets, 
like those of quadrupeds and reptiles, or merely placed 
on the bone, like those of fish of the common varieties, seem 
to have been cut out of the solid, like the teeth of a saw 
or the teeth in the mandibles of the beetle, or in the nippers 
of the lobster, (Plate III., fig. 4 ;) and there appears to have 
been something strangely anomalous in the position of the 
jaws — something too anomalous, perhaps, to be regarded as 
proven by the evidence of the specimens yet found, but which 
may be mentioned with the view of directing attention to it 



m TB£ OLD BED SANMTOirS. 

** Do not be deterred,^ said Agassiz, in the course of one of 
the interviews in which he obligingly indulged the writer of 
these chapters, who had mentioned to him that one of his 
opinions, just confirmed by the naturalist, had seemed so 
extraordinary that he had been almost afraid to communicate 
it, — ** Do not be deterred, if you have examined minutely, 
by any dread of being deemed extravagant The possibili* 
ties of existence run so deeply into the extravagant, that there 
is scarcely any conception too extraordinary for nature to real- 
ize.^ In all the more complete specimens which I have yet 
seen, the position of the jaws is vertical^ not horizontal ; and 
yet the creature, as shown by the tail, belonged unquestion- 
ably to the vertebrata. Now, though the mouths of the crusita- 
ceous animals, such as the crab and lobster, open vertically, 
and a similar arrangement obtains among the insect tribes, it 
has been remarked by naturalists, as an invariable condition 
of that higher order of animals distinguished by vertebral 
columns, that their mouths open horizontally. What I would 
remark as very extraordinary in the Coccosteus — not, how- 
ever, in the way of directly asserting the fact, but merely by 
way of soliciting inquiry regarding it — is, that it seems to 
unite to a vertebral column a vertical mouth, thus forming a 
connecting link between two orders of existences, by con- 
joining what is at once their most characteristic and most dis- 
similar traits.* 



• These statements regarding the character of the teeth and the 
jiosition of the jaws of the Coccosteua have been challenged by very high 
authorities. I retain them, however, in this edition in their original 
form, as first made nearly six years ago. In at least two of my speci- 
mens of Cocco9teut the teeth and jaw form unequivooally but one bone — 
a result, it is not improbable, of some after anchylosing process, but 



TH£ OLD RED SAlfDSTOM£. S3 

I am acquainted with four species of Coceosteus — C. ded" 
piens, C. cuspidatuty C. ohlangus^ and a variet j not yet named ; 
and many more species may yet be discovered.* Of all the 
existences of the formation, this curious fish seems to have 
been one of the most abundant. In a few square yards of 
rock I have laid open portions of the remains of a dozen dif- 
ferent individuals belonging to two of the four species, the C. 
decipiens and C. cuspidaius^ m the course of a single evening 
None of the other kinds have yet been found at Cromarty 
lliese two difiered from each other in the proportions which 
their general bulk bore to their length — slightly, too, in the 
arrangement of their occipital plates. The Coceosteus latus^ 
as the name implies, must have been by much a massier fish 
than the other ; and we find the arch-like form of the plates 
which covered its head moro complete : the plate representing 
the keystone rests on the saddle-shaped plate in the centre, 
and the plates representing the spring stones of the arch exhibit 
a broader base. The accompanying print (Plate III.) repre- 
ents the Coceosteus cuspidatus. The average length of the 
creature, including the tail, as shown in most of the Cromarty 
specimens, somewhat exceeded a foot. A few detached 
plates from Orkney, in the collection of Dr. Traill, mu^ 
have belonged to an individual of fully twice that length.t 

* A fifth species has been named C maximus. f See Note C. 



which still solicits inquiry as not yet definitely accounted for. The 
matter of hct in the case is certainly one which should be determined, 
not analogically, but on its own pro;;cr evidence, as furnished by good 
specimens. As for the remark regarding the probable position of the 
creature's jaws, it was ventured on at first, as the reader may perceive, 
with much hesitation, and must now be regarded as more doubtful 



54 



THE OLD RED SANDSTONE. 



than ever. Its repetition here, howeyer, will, I trust, be regarded wt 
simply indicative of a wish on the part of the writer, that the ques- 
tion be kept open just a little longer, and that further examination be 
made. There is certainly something yery pecidiar about the mouth 
of the Coccotteta not yet understood, and singularly formed plates, 
connected with it, which haye not been introduced into any restora- 

tion, and the use of whiph in the 
economy of the animal seem wholly 
unknown. [1S60. — I haye at length 
found a yery perfect specimen of the 
nether Jaw of Coeeotteus, and am pre- 
pared to show that it was of a char- 
acter altogether unique. It had its 
two groups of from six to eight teeth, 
(exactly where, in the human sub- 
ject, the molars are placed,) that 
seem to haye acted on correspond- 
ing groups in the intermaxillaries, 
and two other groups of from three 
to five teeth placed at right angles 
with these, direct in the symphysis, 
and that seem to haye acted on each 
other. But though these unique teeth of the symphysis formed a ycr- 
tical b'nc of mouth, it joined on at right angles to a transyerse line of 
the ordinary type, as the upright stroke of the letter T joins on to the 
horizontal line a-top.] Fourth edition. 



CHAPIER IV. 

Hie Elfin-flsh of Gawin Douglas. — The Fish of the Old Red Sand- 
stone scaroelj less curious. — Place which they occupied indicated 
in the present Creation by a mere Gap. — Fish divided into two 
great Series, the Osseous and Cartilaginous — Their distinctiTe 
Peculiarities. — Geological Illustration of Dr. Johnson's shrewd 
Objection to the Theory of Soame Jenyns. — Proofs of the inter- 
mediate Character of the Ichthyolites of the Old Red Sandstone. 

— Appearances which first led the Writer to deem it intermediate. 

— Confirmation by Agassis. — The Oiteolepit. — Order to which this 
Ichthyolite belonged. — Description. — Dipterut* — Diphptenu, — 
CheiroUpit, — GlyptolepU. 

Has the reader ever heard of the " griesly fisch ^^ and the 
*• laithlie flood," described by that minstrel Bishop of Dunkeld 
** who gave rude Scotland Virgil's page ? " Both fish and 
flood are the extravagances of a poet's dream. The flood 
came rolling through a wilderness of bogs and quagmires, 
under banks *^ dark as rocks the whilk the sey upcast" A 
skeleton forest stretched around, doddered and leafless ; and 
through the " unblomit " and ** barrant " trees 

*< The quhissUng wind blew mony bitter blast ; " 

the whitened branches " clashed and clattered ; " the " vile 
water rinnando'erheid," and " routing as thonder," made " hid. 
cous trubil ; " and to augment the uproar, the " griesly fisch," 
like the fish of eastern story, raised their heads amid the foam, 
and shrieked and yelled as they passed. " The grim monsters 
f ^rdeafit the heiring with their schouts ; " — they were both 
fish and elves, and strangely noisy m the latter capacity ; and 
the longer the poet listened, the more frightened he became. 
6 (56) 



56 THE OLD RED SANDSTONE. 

The description concludes, like a terrific dream, with ^Aa wui> 
derings through the labyrinths of the dead forest, where all 
was dry and sapless ^bove, and mud and marsh below, and 
with his exclamations of grief and terror at finding himself 
hopelessly lost in a scene of prodigies and evil spirits. And 
such was one of the wilder fancies in which a youthful Scot- 
tish poet of the days of Flodden indulged, ere taste had arisen 
to restrain and regulate invention. 

Shall I venture to say, that the ichthyolitcs of the Old Red 
Sandstone have sometimes reminded me of the ^^ fisch of the 
laithlie flood ? " They were hardly less curious. We find 
them surrounded, like these, by a wilderness of dead vegeta- 
tion, and of rocks upcast from the sea ; and there are the 
footprints of storm and tempest around and under tliem. 
True, they must have been less noisy. Like the " griesly 
fisch," however, they exhibit a strange union of opposite 
natures. One of their families — that of the Cephalaspis — 
seems almost to constitute a connecting link, says Agassiz, 
between fishes and crustaceans. They had, also, their fami- 
lies of sauroid, or reptile fishes — and their still more numer- 
ous families that unite the cartilaginous fishes to the osseous. 
And to these last the explorer of the Lower Old Red Sand- 
stone finds himself mainly restricted. The links of the 
system are all connecting links, separated by untold ages 
from that which they connect ; so that, in searching for theii 
representatives amid the existences of the present time, ne 
find but the gaps which they should have occupied. And it 
IS essentially necessary from this circumstance, in acquaint- 
ing one's self with their peculiarities, to examine, if I may so 
express myself, the sides of these gaps, — the existing links 
at both ends to which the broken links should have pieced, 
— in short, all tboso more striking peculiarities of the exist- 



THE OLD RED SANDSTONE. 57 

ing disparted families which we find united in the inter- 
mediate families that no longer exist. Without some such 
preparation, the inquirer would inevitably share the fate of 
the poetical dreamer of Dunkeld, by losing his way in a laby- 
rinth. In passing, therefore, with this object from the ex- 
tinct to the recent, I venture to solicit, for a few paragraphs, 
the attention of the reader. 

Fishes, the fourth great class in point of rank in the ani- 
mal kingdom, and, in extent of territory, decidedly the first, 
are divided, as they exist in the present creation, into two dis- 
tinct series — the osseous and the cartilaginous. The osseous 
embraces that vast assemblage which naturalists describe as 
^* fishes properly so called,'^ and whose skeletons, like those 
of mammalia, birds, and reptiles, are composed chiefly of a 
calcareous earth pervading an organic base. Hence the du- 
rability of their remains. In the cartilaginous series, on the 
contrary, the skeleton contains scarce any of this earth : it is 
a framework of indurated animal matter, elastic, semi-trans- 
parent, yielding easily to the knife, and, like all mere animal 
substances, inevitably subject to decay. I have seen the 
huge cartilaginous skeleton of a shark lost in a mass of pu- 
trefaction in less than a fortnight I have found the minutest 
bones of the osseous ichthyolites of the Lias entire after the 
lapse of unnumbered centuries. 

The two series do not seem to precede or follow one 
another in any such natural sequence as that in which the 
great classes of the animal kingdom are arranged. The 
mammifer takes precedence of the bird, the bird of the rep- 
tile, the reptile of the fish ; there is progression in the scale 
— the arrangement of the classes is consecutive, not paral- 
lel. But in this great division there is no such progression ; 
the osseous nsh take^ no precedence of the cartilaginous fish« 



58 THE OLD RED SANDSTONE. 

or the cartilaginous, as a series, of the osseous* The ar« 
rangement is parallel, not consecutive ; hut the parallelism, 
if I may so express myself, seems to he that of a longer with 
a shorter line ; — the cartilaginous fishes, though much less 
numerous in their orders and families than the other, stretch far- 
ther along the scale in opposite directions, at once rising higher 
and sinking lower than the osseous fishes. The cartilaginons 
order of the sturgeons, — a roe-depositing tribe, devoid alike of 
affection for their young, or of those attachments which give 
the wild heasts of the forest partners in their dens, — may be 
regarded as fully abreast of by much the greater part of the 
osseous fishes, in both their instincts and their organization. 
The family of the sharks, on the other hand, and some of 
the ra3rs, rise higher, as if to connect the class of fish with 
the class immediately above it — that of reptiles. Many of 
them are viviparous, like the mammalia — attached, it is 
said, to their young, and fully equal even to birds in the 
strength of their connubial attachments. The male, in some 
Instances, has been known to pine away and die when de- 
prived of his female companion.* But then, on the other 
hand, the cartilaginous fishes, in some of their tribes, sink as 
low beneath the osseous as they rise above them in others. 
The suckers, for instance, a cartilaginous family, are the most 
imperfect of all vertebral animals ; some of them want even 

* Some of the osseous fishes are also vivlparoas — the '* viviparous 
blenny," for instance. The evidence from which the supposed affec- 
tion of the higher fishes for their o£bpring has been inferred, is, I 
am afraid, of a somewhat equivocal character. The love of the sow 
for her litter hovers, at times, between that of the parent and that of 
the epicure ; nor have we proof enough, in the present state of ich- 
theological knowledge, to eonclude to which side the parental love 
o'' the fish inclines. The :3nnabial affections of some of the higher 



THE OLD RED SANDSTONE. 59 

ihe sense of sight ; they seem mere worms, furnished with 
fins and gills, and were so classed hy Linnaeus ; hut though 
now ascertained to be in reality fishes, they must be regarded 
as the lowest link in the scale — as connecting the class with 
the class Vermes^ just as the superior cartilaginous fishes may 
he regarded as connecting it with the class Rcptilia, 

Between the osseous and the cartilaginous fishes there ex- 
ist some very striking dissimilarities. The skull of the osse- 
ous fish is divided into a greater number of distinct bones, 
and possesses more movable parts, than the skulls of mam- 
miferous animals : the skull of the cartilaginous fish, on the 
contrary, consists of but a single piece, without joint or sut- 
ure. There is another marked distinction. The bony fish, 
if it approaches in form to that general type which we recog- 
nize amid all the varieties of the class as proper to fishes, 
and to which, in all their families, nature is continually in- 
clining, will be found to have a tail branching out, as in the 
perch and herring, from the bone in which the vertebral col- 
umn terminates; whereas the cartilaginous fish, if it also 
approach the general type, will be found to have a tail 
formed, as in the sturgeon and dog-fish, on both sides of the 
hinder portion of the spine, but developed much more largely 
on the under than on the upper side. In some instances, it 
is wanting on the upper side altogether. It may be as im- 
possible to assign reasons for such relations els for those 



families seem better established. Of a pair of gigantic rays (Cepha* 
Itrpiera gioma) taken in the Mediterranean, and described by Kisao, 
the female was captured by some fishermen ; and the male continued 
constantly about the boat, as if bewailing the fate of his companion, 
and was then found floating dead. — See Wilson's article Icututolo 
OY, Eneye. f^rit.t seventh edition. * 

6* 



60 THE OLD RED SANDSTONE. 

which exist hetween the digestive organs and the hoofs of th« 
ruminant animals ; but it is of importance that they should 
be noted.* It may be remarked, further, that the great bulk 
of fishes whose skeletons consist of cartilage have yet an 
ability of secreting the calcareous earth which composes bone, 
and that they are furnished with bony coverings, either par- 
tial or entire. Their bones lie outside. The thorn-back de- 
rives its name from the multitudinous hooks and spikes of 
bone that bristle over its body ; the head, back, and opercu- 
lum of the sturgeon are covered with bony plates ; the thoma 
and prickles of the shark are composed of the same mate- 
rial. The framework within is a framework of mere anima. 
matter ; but it was no lack of the osseous ingredient that led 
to the arrangement — an arrangement which we can alone 
refer to the will of that all-potent Creator, who can transpose 
his materials at pleasure, without interfering with the perfec- 
tion of his work. It is a curious enough circumstance, that 
some of the osseous fishes, as if entirely to reverse the con- 
dition of the cartilaginous ones, are partially covered with 

* Dr. Buckland, in his BridgewaUr Treatise^ assigns satisfactory 
reasons for this construction of tail in sharks and sturgeons. Of the 
fishes of these two orders, he states, ** the former perform the office 
of scavengers, to clear the water of impurities, and have no teeth, 
but feed, by means of a soft, leather-like mouth, capable of protru- 
sion and contraction, on putrid vegetables and animal substances at 
the bottom ; and hence they have constantly to keep their bodies is 
an inclined position. The sharks employ their tail in another i>ecu- 
liar manner — to turn their body, in order to bring their mouth, 
which is placed downwards beneath the head, into contact with their 
prey. We find an important provision in every animal, to give a po- 
sition of ease and activity to the head during the operation of feed- 
/If." • BridgtwaUr TWo^tf, p. 279, voL L, first ed. 



THE OLD BED SANDSTONE. 61 

plates of cartilage. They are bone within, anJ cartilage 
without, just as others are bone without and cartilage 
within. 

But how apply all this to the Geology of the Old Red 
Sandstone ? Very directly. The ichthyolites of this ancient 
formation hold, as has been said, an intermediate place, un« 
occupied among present existences, between the two series, 
and in some respects resemble the osseous, and in some the 
cartilaginous tribes. The fact reminds one of Dr. Johnson^s 
shrewd objection to the theory embraced by Soame Jenyns 
in his Free Inquiry^ and which was the theory also of Pope 
and Bolingbroke. The metaphysician held, with the poet 
and his friend, that there exists a vast and finely graduated 
chain of being from Infinity to nonentity — from God to 
nothing ; and that to strike out a single link would be to mar 
the perfection of the whole.* The moralist demonstrated, 
oa the contrary, that this chain, in the very nature of things 
must be incomplete at both ends — that between that which 

* ** See, through this air, this ocean, and this earth, 
All matter quick, and hursting into birth ; 
Above, how high progressive life may go I 
Around, how wide ! how deep extend below ! 
Vast chain of being ! which firom God began — 
Nature's ethereal, human angel, man, 
Beast, bird, fish, insect — what no eye can see, 
No glass can reach ; from Infinite to thee — 
From thee to nothing. On superior powers 
Were we to press, inferior might on ours ; 
Or in the full creation leave a void, 
Where, one step broken, the great scalers destroyed : 
From Nature's chain, whatever link you strike. 
Tenth, or ten thousandth, breaks the chain alike." 

Etiay tn Man, 



G2 THE OLD RED SANDSTONE. 

does, and that which does not exist, there must he an infinite 
difference — that the chain, therefore, cannot lay hold on 
nothing. He showed, further, that between the greatest of 
finite existences and the adorahle Infinite there must exist 
anotlier illimitahle void — that the boundless and the bcunded 
are as widely separated in their natures and qualities as the 
existent and the non-existent — that the chcun, in short, can- 
not lay hold on Deity. He asserted, however, that not only 
is it thus incomplete at both ends, but that we must regard it 
as well nigh as incomplete in many of its intermediate links 
as at its terminal ones ; that it is already a broken chain, 
seeing that between its various classes of existence myriads 
of intermediate existences might be introduced, by graduat- 
ing more minutely what must necessarily be capable of in- 
finite gradation ; and that, to base an infidel theory on the 
supposed completeness of what is demonstrably incomplete, 
and on the impossibility of a gap existing in what is already 
filled with gaps, is just to base one absurdity on another.* 

* The following are the well-stated reasonmgs of Dr. Johnaon, a 
writer who never did injustice to an argument for want of words to 
express it in : — 

"The scale of existence from Infinity to nothing cannot possibly 
have being. The higbiest being not infinite must be at an infinite dis- 
tance from Infinity. Cheyne, who, with the desire inherent in math- 
ematicians to reduce every thing to mathematical images, considers 
aU existence as a cone, allows that the basis is at an infinite distance 
from the body, and in this distance between finite and infinite there 
will be room forever for an infinite series of indefinable existence. 

** Between the lowest positive existence and nothing, whenever 
we suppose positive existence to cease, is another chasm infinitely 
deep, where there is room again for endless orders of subordinate na- 
ture, continued forever and ever, and yet infinitely superior to non- 
•Tistenco. 



THB OLD RED SANDSTONE. 63 

Now, we find the Geology of what may he termed tho 
second ag3 of vertehrated existence (for the Lower Old Red 
Sandstone was such) coming curiously in to confirm the rea- 
sonings of Johnson. It shows us the greater part of the fish 
of an entire creation thus msinuated between two of the 
links of our own. 

It is now several years since I was first led to suspect that 
the condition of the ichthyolites of the Old Red Sandstone 
was intermediate. I have alluded to the comparative inde- 
smictibility of the osseous skeleton, and the extreme liability 
to decay characteristic of the cartilaginous one. Of a skel- 
eton in part osseous and in part cartilaginous, we must, of 
course, expect, when it occurs in a fossil state, to find the in- 
destructible portions only. And when, in every instance, we 
find the fossil skeletons of a formation complete in some of 
their parts, and incomplete in others — the entire portions in- 

** To these meditationB humanity is unequaL But yet we may ask, 
not of our Maker, but of each other, since on the one side creation, 
whenever it stops, must stop infinitely below infinity, and on the oth- 
er infinitely above nothing, what necessity there is that it should 
proceed so fat either way — that being so high or so low should ever 
have existed. We may ask, but I believe no created wisdom can 
give an adequate answer. 

** Nor is this all. In the scale, wherever it begins or ends, are in- 
finite vacuities. At whatever distance we suppose the next order of 
beings to be above man, there is room for an intermediate order of 
beings between them ; and if for one order, then for infinite orders, 
sinco every thing that admits of more or less, and consequently all 
the parts of that which admits them, may be infinitely divided ; so 
that, as far as we can judge, there may be room in t}ie vacuity be- 
tween any two steps of the scale, or between any two points of the 
cone of being, for infinite exertion of infinite power.'* — Bwiew of 
^ J Free Inquiry " 



64 THE OLD BED SANDSIONE. 

variably agreeing, aad the wanting portions invariably agree* 
ing also — it seems but natural to conclude that an original 
difTcrencc must have obtained, and that the existing parts, 
which we can at once recognize as bone, must have been 
united to parts now wanting, which were composed of car- 
tilage. The naturalist never doubts that the shark^s teeth, 
which he finds detached on the shore, or buried in some an- 
cient formation, were united originally to cartilaginous jaws. 
Now, in breaking open all the ichthyolites of the Lower Old 
Red Sandstone, with the exception of those of the two fami- 
lies already described, we find that some of the parts are in- 
variably wanting, however excellent the state of preservation 
maintained by the rest. I have seen every scale preserved 
and in its place — one set of both the larger and smaller 
oones occupying their original position — jaws thickly set 
with teeth still undetached from the head — the massy bones 
of the skull still unseparated — the larger shoulder-bone, on 
which the operculum rests, lying in its proper bed — the oper- 
culum itself entire — and all the external rays which sup- 
port the fins, though frequently fine as hairs, spreading out 
distinct as the fibres in the wing of the dragon-fly, or the 
woody nerves in an oak-leaf. In no case, however, have I 
succeeded in finding a single joint of the vertebral column, 
or the trace of a single internal ray. No part of the internal 
skeleton survives, nor does its disappearance seem to have had 
any connection with the greater mass of putrescent matter 
which must have surrounded it, seeing that the external rays 
of the fins show quite as entire when turned over upon the 
body, OS sometimes occurs, as when spread out from it in 
profile. Besides, in the ichthyolites of the chalk, no parts 
of the skeleton are better preserved than the internal parts — 
the vertebral jomts, a id the internal rays. The reader must 



TH£ OLD RED SANDSTONE. 65 

hare observed, in the cases of a museum of Natural Histury 
preparatioos of fish of two several kinds — preparations of 
the skeleton, in which only the osseous parts are exhibited, 
and preparations of the external form, in which the whole 
body is shown in profile, with the fins spread to the full, 
and at least half the bones of the head covered by the skin 
but in which the vertebral column and internal rays are want- 
. iDg. Now, in the fossils of the chalk, with those of the other 
later formations, down to the New Red Sandstone, we find that 
the skeleton style of preparation obtains ; whereas, in at least 
three fourths of the ichthyolites of the Lower Old Red, we find 
only what we may term the external style. I had marked, 
besides, another circumstance in the ichthyolites, which 
seemed, like a nice point of circumstantial evidence, to give 
testimony in the same line. The tails of all the ichthyolites, 
whose vertebral columns and internal rays are wanting, are 
unequally lobed, like those of the dog-fish and sturgeon, (both 
cartilaginous fishes,) and the body runs on to nearly the ter- 
mination of the surrounding rays. The one-sided condition 
of tail exists, says Cuvier, in no recent osseous fish known to 
naturalists, except in the bony pike — a sauroid fish of the 
warmer rivers of America. With deference, however, to so 
high an authority, it is questionable whether the tail of the 
bony pike should not rather be described as a tail set on 
Aomewhat awry, than as a one-sided tail. 

All these peculiarities I could but note as they turned up be* 
fore me, and express, in pointing them out to a few friends, a 
sort of vague, because hopeless, desire, that good fortune 
might throw me in the way of the one man of all the world 
liest qualified to explain the principle on which they occurred, 
find to decide whether fishes may be at once bony and 
r^inilaginous. But that meeting was a contingency rather to 



66 THE OLD RED SANDSTONE. 

be wished than hoped for — a circumstance within the bounds 
of the possible, but beyond those of the probable. Could 
the working-man of the north of Scotland have so much as 
dreamed that he was yet to enjoy an opportunity o." compar- 
ing his observations with those of the naturalist of Neufchatel, 
and of having his inferences tested and confirmed ? 

The opportunity did occur. The working-man did meet 
with Agassiz ; and many a query had he to put to him ; and 
never, surely, was inquirer more courteously entreated, or his 
doubts more satisfactorily resolved. The reply to almost my 
first question solved the enigma of nearly ten years^ standing. 
And finely characteristic was that reply of the frankness and 
candor of a great mind, that oan afibrd to make it no secret, 
that, in its onward advances on knowledge, it may know 
to-day what it did not know yesterday, and that it is content 
to " gain by degrees upon the darkness." " Had you asked 
me the question a fortnight ago," said Agassiz, " I could not 
have replied to it. Since then, however, I have examined 
an ichthyolite of the Old Red Sandstone in which the verte- 
bral joints are fortunately impressed on the stone, though 
the joints themselves have disappeared, and which, exactly 
resembling the vertebra; of the shark, must have been carti- 
laginous." In a subsequent conversation, the writer was grati- 
fied by finding most of his other facts and inferences authen- 
ticated and confirmed by those of the naturalist I shall 
attempt introducing to the reader the peculiarities, general 
and specific, of the ichthyolites to which these facts and ob- 
servations mainly referred, by describing such of the families 
as are most abundant in the formation, and the points in 
which they either resemble or differ from the existing fish of 
our seas. 

Of these ancient families, the Osieohpis^ or bony-scale. 



i 



fLMTEir 



THE OLD RED SANDSTONE. 67 

(see Plate IV., ^g. 1,) may be regarded as illustrative of tlio 
general type. It was one of the first discovered of the Caith- 
ness fishes, and received its name in the days of Cuvier, from 
the osseous character of its scales, ere it was ascertained that 
it had numerous contemporaries, and that to all and each of 
these the same description applied. The scales of the fishes 
of the Lower Old Red Sandstone, like the plates and detached 
prickles of the purely cartilaginous fishes, were composed of 
a bony, not of a homy, substance, and were all coated exter- 
nally with enamel. The circumstance is one of interest. 

Agassiz, in his system of classification, has divided fishes 
into four orders, according to the form of their scales ; and 
his principle of division, though apparently arbitrary and 
trivial, is yet found to separate the class into great natural 
•families, distinguished from one another by other and very 
striking peculiarities. One kind of scale, for instance, the 
placoid or broad-plated scale, is found to characterize all the 
cartilaginous fishes of Cuvier except the sturgeon ; — it is 
the characteristic of an otherwise well-marked series, whose 
families are furnished with skeletons composed of mere ani- 
mal matter, and whose gills open to the water by spiracles. 
The fish of another order are covered by ctenoid or comb- 
shaped scales, the posterior margin of each scale being toothed 
somewhat like the edge of a saw or comb ; and the order, 
ihus distinguished, is found wonderfully to agree with an order 
formed previously on another princit)le of classification, the 
Acanthopterygii, or thorny-finned order of Cuvier, excluding 
only the smooth-scaled families of this previously formed 
division, and including, in addition to it, the flat fish. A 
third order, the Cycloidean, is marked by simple marginated 
scales, like those of the cod, haddock, whiting, herring, 
salmon, 6cc. ; and this order is found to embrace chiefly the 



68 THE OLD EED SANDSTONE. 

Malacopterygii, or sofl-finned order of Cuvier— an order tc 
which all these well-known fish, with an immense multitude 
of others, belong. Thus the results of the principle of classi- 
fication adopted by Agassiz wonderfully agree with the re- 
sults of the less simple principles adopted by Cuvier and the 
other masters in this department of Natural History. Now, 
it is peculiar to yet a fourth order, the Ganoidean, or shiniog- 
scaled order, that by much the greater number of the genera 
which it comprises exist only in the fossil state. At least 
five sixths of the whole were ascertained to be extinct several 
years ago, at a time when the knowledge of fossil Ichthyology 
was much more limited than at present : the proportions are 
now found to be immensely greater on the side of the dead. 
And this order seems to have included all the semi-osseous, 
semi-cartilaginous ichthyolites of the Lower Old Red Sand- 
stone : the enamelled scale is the characteristic, according to 
Agassiz's principle of classification, of the existences that 
filled the gap so of\en alluded to as existing in the present 
creation. All their scales glitter with enamel : they bore to 
this order the relation that the cartilaginous fish bear to the 
Placoidean order, the thorny-finned fish to the Ctenoidean 
order, and the soft-finned fish to the Cycloidean order. It 
also included, with the semi-cartilaginous, the sauroid fish — 
those master existences and tyrants of the earlier vertebmta ; 
and both classes find their representatives among the com- 
paratively few ganoid fishes of the present creation ; the one 
in the sturgeon family, which of all existing families ap- 
proaches nearest in other respects to the extinct semi-carti- 
laginous fishes ; the other in the sauroid genus Lepidosteus^ to 
which the bony pike belongs. The head, back, and sides of 
the sturgeon are defended, as has been already remarked, by 
longitud'nal rows of hard osseous bosses — the bony pike i& 



THB OLD RED SANDSTONE. 69 

armed with enamelled osseous scales, of a stony hardness. It 
aeems a somewhat curious circumstance, that fishes so unlike 
each other in their internal framework should thus resemble 
one another in their bony coverings, and in some slight degree 
in their structure of tail. One of the characteristics of sau- 
roid fishes is the extreme compactness and hardness of their 
skeleton.* 

It requires skill such as that possessed by Agassiz, to de- 
termine tliat the uncouth CoccosUus^ or the equally uncouth 
Plerichtkys^ of the Old Red Sandstone, with their long articu- 
lated tails and tortoise-like plates, were bona fide fishes; 
but there is no possibility of mistaking the Osteolepis : it is 
obvious to the least practised eye that it must have been 
a fish, and a handsome one. Even a cursory examina- 
tion, however, shows very striking peculiarities, which are 
found, on further examination, to characterize not this fam- 
ily alone, but at least one half the contemporary families 
besides. We are accustomed to see vertebrated animals 
with the bone uncovered in one part only, — that part the 
teeth, — and with the rest of the skeleton wrapped up in flesh 
and skin. Among the reptiles, we find a few exceptions ; 

• •«The sauroid or lizard-liko fishes," sajs Dr. Buckland, <* combine 
in the structure, both of the bones and some of the soft parts, charac- 
ters which are common to the class of reptiles. The bones of the 
skull are united by closer sutures than those of common fishes. The 
Tcrtebrae articulate with the spinous processes of sutures, like the 
rertcbras of saurians ; the ribs also articulate with the extremities of 
the spinous process. The caudal yertebro have distinct chevron 
bones, and the general condition of the skeleton is stronger and more 
solid than in other fishes : the air bladder also is bifid and cellular, 
approaching to the character of lungs ; and in the throat there is a 
glottis, as in sirens and salamanders, and many saurians." — Note to 
Bridgmnatm Tnat%$e^ p. 274, first edit. 



70 TH£ OLD R2U> SANDSTOICS. 

but a crea^rc with a skull as naked as its teeth,-— the bone 
being merely covered, as in these, by a hard, shining enamel, 
•—and with toes also of bare enamelled bone, would be 
deemed an anomaly in creation. And yet such was the con- 
dition of the Osteolepis^ and many of its contemporaries. The 
enamelled teeth were placed in jaws which presented outnde 
a surface as naked and as finely enamelled as their own. 
(See Plate IV., fig. 5.) The entire head was covered with 
enamelled osseous plates, furnished inside like other bones, as 
shown by their cellular construction, with their nourishing 
bloodvessels, and perhaps their oil, and which rested apparent- 
ly on the cartilaginous box, which must have enclosed the 
brain, and connected it with the vertebral column. I cannot 
better illustrate the peculiar condition of the fins of this 
jchthyolite than by the webbed foot of a water-fowl. Tho 
web or membrane in all the aquatic birds with which we are 
acquainted not only connects, but also covers the toes. The 
web or membrane in the fins of existing fishes accomplishes 
a similar purpose ; it both connects and covers the supporting 
bones or rays. Imagine, however, a webbed foot in which 
the toes — connected, but not^overed — present, as in skele- 
tons, an upper and under surface of naked bone ; and a 
very correct idea may be formed, from such a foot, of the 
condition of fin which obtained among at least one half the 
ichthyolites of the Lower Old Red Sandstone. The support- 
ing ^nes or rays seem to have been connected laterally 
by the membrane ; but on both sides they presented bony 
and finely enamelled surfaces. (See Plate IV., fig. 6.) In 
thif singular class of fish, all was bone without, and all was 
cartilage within ; and the bone in every instance, whether in 
the form of jaws or of plates, of scales or of rays, presented 
an external surface of enamel. 



THB OLD RED SANDS, f 0MB 71 

The fins are quite a study. I have alluiled to the connect- 
tng membrane. In existing fish this membrane is the princi* 
yd agent in propelling the creature; it strikes against the 
water, as the membrane of the bat^s wing strikes against the 
air ; and the internal skeleton serves but to support and stiffen 
it for this purpose. But in the fin of the Osteolepis, as in 
those of many of its contemporaries, we find the condition 
reversed. The rays were so numerous, and lay so thickly, 
side by side, like feathera in the wing of a bird, that they pre- 
sented to the water a surface of bone, and the continuous mem- 
brane only served to support and bind them together. In the 
fins of existing fish we find a sort of bat-wing construction ; in 
those of the Osteolepis a sort of bird-wing construction. The 
rays, to give flexibility to the organ which they compose, 
were all jointed, as in the sof\-finned fish — as in the her- 
ring, salmon, and cod, for example ; and we find in all the 
fins the anterior ray rising from the body in the form of an 
angular scale : it is a strong, bony scale in one of its joints, 
and a bony ray in the rest. The characteristic is a curious 
one. 

It is again necessary, in pursuing our description, to refer 
for illustration to the purely cartilaginous fishes. In at least 
all the higher ordere of these, furnished with movable jaws, 
such as the sturgeon, the ray, and the shark, the mouth is 
placed far below the snout. The dog-fish and thorn-back are 
familiar instances. Further, the mouth in bony fishes is 
movable on both the upper and under side, like the beak of 
the parrot; in the higher cartilaginous fishes it is movable, as 
in quadrupeds, on the under side only. In all their orders, 
too, exceot in that of the sturgeon, the gills open to the water 
by detached spiracles, or breathing-holes ; but in the stur- 
geon, as in the osseous fishes, there is a continuous linear 



72 THE OLD RED SANa.STON£« 

opening, shielded by an operculum, or gill-cover. In tfie 
Osteolepis the mouth opened below the snout, but not so far 
below it as in the purely cartilaginous fishes — not farther 
below it than in many of the osseous ones — than in the 
genus Aspro, for instance, or than in the genus Polynemus, 
or in even the haddock or cod. It was thickly furnished with 
slender and sharply-pointed teeth. I have hitherto been una-r 
ble fully to determine whether, like the mouths of the osseous 
fishes, it was movable on both sides ; though, from the perfect 
form of what seems to be the intermaxillary bone, I cannot 
avoid thinking it was. The gills opened, as in the osseous 
fishes, in continuous lines, and were covered by large bony 
opercules — that on the enamelled side somewhat resemble 
round japanned shields. (See Note D.) 

But while the head of the Osteolepis^ with its appendages, 
thus resembled, in some points, the heads of the bony fishes, 
the tail, like those of most of its contemporaries, differed in 
no respect from the tails of cartilaginous ones, such as the 
sturgeon. The vertebral column seems to have run on to 
well nigh the extremity of the caudal fin, which we find de- 
veloped chiefly on the under side. The tail was a one-sided 
tail. Take into account with these peculiarities — peculiari- 
ties such as the naked skull, jaws, and operculum, the naked 
and thickly-set rays, and the unequally lobed condition of tail 
— a body covered with scales, that glitter like sheets of mica, 
and assume, according to their position, the parallelogram- 
ical, rhomboidal, angular, or polygonal form — a lateral line 
raised, not depressed — a raised bar on the inner or bony 
side of the scales, which, like the doubled-up end of a tile, 
seems to have served the purpose of fastening them in their 
places — a general clustering of alternate fins towards the 
ta'\ — and the tout ensemble must surely impart to the readei 



THB OLD RED SANDSTONE. 73 

the idea of a very singular little fish. The ventral fins front 
the space which occurs between the two dorsals, and the anal 
fin the space which intervenes between the posterior dorsal 
fin and the tail. The length of the Osteolepis^ in my larger 
specimens, somewhat exceeds a foot ; in the smaller, it falls 
short of six inches. There exist at least three species of this 
ichthyolite, distinguished chiefly, in two of the instances, by 
the smaller and larger size of their scales, compared with the 
bulk of their bodies, and by punctulated markings on the en- 
amel in the case of the third. This last, however, is no spe- 
cific difierence, but common to the entire genus, and to 
several other genera besides. The names are, Osleolepis 
macrolepidohu^ O. microlepidoiits, and O. arenatus,^ 

Next to the Osleolepis we may place the Dipterus^ or 
double-wing, of the Lower Old Red Sandstone, an ichthyolite 
first introduced to the knowledge of geologists by Mr. Murch- 
ison, who, with his friend, Mr. Sedgwick, figured and de- 
scribed it in a masterly paper on the older sedimentary for- 
mations of the north of Scotland, which appeared in the 
Transactions of the Geological Society of London for 1828. 
The name, derived from its two dorsals, would suit equally 
well, like that of the Osleolepis^ many of its more recently 
discovered contemporaries. From the latter ichthyolite it dif- 
fered chiefly in the position of its fins, which were opposite, 
not alternate ; the double dorsals exactly fronting the anal 
and ventral fins. (See Plate V., fig. 1.) The Diploplerus 
a nearly resembling ichthyolite of the same formation, also 
owes its name to the order and arrangement of its fins, 



* To these there have since been added Osleolepis mqfor, O. inter* 
meditOf and O. nanus ; the two latter, however; Agassiz regards as 
diabtfuL 



74 THE OLD RBO tANDSTOlCX. 

which, like those of the Dipterus^ were placed fronting each 
other, and in pairs. But the head, in proportion to the body, 
was in greater size than in either the Dipterus or OsteoUpU ; 
and the mouth, as indicated by the creature^s length of jaw, 
must have been of much greater width. In their more strik- 
ing characteristics, however, the three genera seem to have 
nearly agreed. In all alike, scales of bone glisten with en- 
amel ; their jaws, enamel without and bone within, bristle 
thick with sharp-pointed teeth; closely-jointed plates, bur- 
nished like ancient helmets, cover their heads, and seem to 
have formed a kind of outer table to skulls externally of bone 
and internally of cartilage ; their gill-covers consist each of 
a single piece, like the gill-cover of the sturgeon ; their tails 
were formed chiefly on the lower side of their bodies ; and 
the rays of their fins, enamelled like their plates and their 
scales, stand up over the connecting membrane, like the steel 
or brass in that peculiar armor of the middle ages, whose 
multitudinous pieces of metal were fastened togetlier on a 
groundwork of cloth or of leather. All their scales, plates, 
and rays present a similar style of ornament. The shining 
and polished enamel is mottled with thickly-set punctures, or, 
rather, punctulated markings ; so that a scale or plate, when 
viewed through a microscope, reminds one of the cover of a 
saddle. Some of the ganoid scales of Burdie House present 
surfaces similarly punctulated.* 



* There exists, according to Agassiz, only a single species of Dip" 
term — D. macrelepidoius ; whereas four species of Diplopterut have been 
enumerated — D. affinUt D. borealis, D. macroeephalus, and D. Jigofiizii, 
The existence of the last named, however, as a distinct species, is re- 
gardrd as problematical by the distinguished naturalist whose name 
has been ailixed to it. 



THE OLD RED SANI>8TON£. 75 

The GlyptoUpis^ or carved scale, may be iiegarded as the 
representative of a family of the Lower Old Red Sandstone, 
which, difiering very materially from the genera described, 
had yet many traits in common with them, such as the bare, 
booy skull, the bony scales, the naked rays, and the unequally 
sided condition of tail. The fins, which were of considera- 
ble length in proportion to their breadth of base, and present 
in some of the specimens a pendulous-like appearance, clus- 
ter thick together towards the creature's lower extremities, 
leaving the upper portion bare. There are two dorsals 
placed as in the Dtptems and IHplopterus — the anterior di- 
rectly opposite the ventral fin, the posterior directly opposite 
the anal. The tail is long and spreading ; — the rays, long 
and numerously articulated, are comparatively stout at their 
base, and slender as hairs where they terminate. The 
shoulder-bones are of huge dimensions, the teeth extremely 
minute. But the most characteristic parts of the creature 
are the scales. They are of great size, compared widi the 
size of the animal. An individual not more than half a foot 
in length, the specimen figured, (see Plate V., fig. 2,) exhib 
its scales fully three eighth parts of an inch in diameter. In an- 
other more broken specimen there are scales a full inch across, 
and yet the length of the ichthyolite to which they belonged 
seems not to have much exceeded a foot and a half. Each scale 
consists of a double plate, an inner and an outer. The struc- 
ture of the inner is not peculiar to the family or the forma- 
tion : it is formed of a number of minute concentric circles, 
crossed by still minuter radiating lines — the one described, 
and the other proceeding from a common centre. (See Plate 
v., fig. 5.) All scales that receive their accessions of 
growth equally at their edges exhibit, internally, a correspond- 
ing character. The outer plate presents an appearance less 
8 



76 THE OLD S£0 SANDSTONE. 

common. It seems relieved into ridges that drop adown it 
like sculptured threads, some of them entire, some broken, 
some straight, some slightly waved, (see Plate Y., fig. 3 ;) and 
hence the name of the ichthyolite. The plates of the head 
were ornamented in a similar style, but their threads are so 
broken as to present the appearance of dotted lines, the dots 
all standing out in bold leliuf. My collection contains three 
varieties of this family ; one of them disinterred from out the 
Cromarty beds about seven years ago, and the others only a 
little later, though partly from the inadequacy of a written 
description, through which I was led to confound the Osteole- 
pis with the Diplapterus^ and to regard the GlyptolepU as 
the Osteolepis^ I was not aware until lately that the discovery 
was really such ; and under the latter name I described the 
creature in the Witness newspaper several weeks ere it had 
received the name which it now bears. It was first intro- 
duced to the notice of Agassiz, in Autumn last, by Lady Gum- 
ming of Altyre. The species, however, was a different one 
from any yet found at Cromarty.* 

The Cheirolepis^ or scaly pectoral, forms the representative 
of yet another family of the Lower Old Red Sandstone, and 
one which any eye, however unpractised, could at once dis- 
tinguish from the families just described. Professor Traill 
of the University of Edinburgh, a gentleman whose research- 
es in Natural History have materially extended the bounda- 
ries of knowledge, and whose frankness in communicating 
information is only equalled by his facility in acquiring it, 
was the first discoverer of this family, one variety of which, 
the Cheirolepis Traillii^ bears his name. The figured spcci- 

* There are three species of Olyptolepis — G, elegam, O. UptcjitenUt 
and (7. mierottpidotui. 



TH£ OLD RED SAHDSTOlfB. 77 

meo (Plate VI., 6g. 1) Agassiz has proDounced a new species, 
the discovery of the writer. la all the remains of this curi* 
ous fish which I have hitherto seen, the union of the osseous 
with the cartilaginous, in the general framework of the crea- 
ture, is strikingly apparent The external skull, the great 
shoulder-bone, and the rays of the fins, are all unequivocally 
osseous ; the occipital and shoulder-bones, in particular, seem 
of great strength and massiveness, and are invariably pre- 
served, however imperfect the specimen in other respects ; 
whereas, even in specimens the most complete, and which 
exhibit eveiy scale and every ray, however minute, and show 
unchanged the entire outline of the animal, not a fragment of 
the internal skeleton appears. The Cheirolepis seems to have 
varied from fourteen to four inches in length. When seen 
in profile, the under line, as in the figured variety, seems 
tliickly covered with fins, and the upper line well nigh 
naked. The large pectorals almost encroach on the ven- 
tral fins, and the ventrals on the anal fin ; whereas the 
back, for two thirds the entire length of the creature, pre- 
sents a bare rectilinear ridge, and the single dorsal, which 
rises but a little way over the tail, immediately opposite the 
posterior portion of the anal fin, is comparatively of small 
size. The tail, which, in the general condition of being 
developed chiefly on the lower side, resembles the tails of all 
the creature's contemporaries, is elegantly lobed. The scales, 
in proportion to the bulk of the body which they cover, are 
not more than one twentieth the size of those of the Osteole- 
pis. They are richly enamelled, and range diagonally from 
tlic shoulder to the belly in waving lines ; and so fretted is 
each individual scale by longitudinal grooves and ridges, that, 
on first bringing it under the glass, it seems a little bunch of 
glittering thorns, though, when more minutely examined, it is 



78 THB OLD KED 8AICD8TOHX. 

found to present somewhat the appearance of the outer side 
of the deep-sea cockle, with its strongly marked ribs and chan- 
nels, the point in which the posterior point terminates repre- 
senting the hinge. (See Plate VI., fig. 2.) The bones of 
the head, enamelled like the scales, are carved into jagged 
inequalities, somewhat resembling those on the skin of tho 
■haric, but more irregular. The sculpturings seem intended 
evidently for effect To produce harmony of appearance 
between the scaly coat and the enamelled occipital plates of 
bone, the surfaces of the latter are relieved, where they border 
on the shoulders, into what seem scales, just as the dead 
walls of a building are sometimes, for the sake of uniformity, 
wrought into blind windows. The enamelled rays of the fins 
are finished, if I may so speak, after the same style. They 
lie thick upon one another as the fibres of a quill, and like 
these, too, they are imbricated on the sides, so that the edge 
of each seems jagged into a row of prickles. (See Plate VI., 
fig. 3.) The jaws of the CheiroUpis were armed with thickly- 
set sharp teeth, like those of its contemporaries, the Osteolepis 
and Diploptems,* 



* There have been five species of Cheirolepis enumerated — C, 
(hunminffUB, C, iplendem, C. TraUUi^ C, unUaUralU^ and C, Urttgus. 
The CheiroUpit aplenden* and C. unilaUralia Agassjg regards as 
doubtfiiL 



CHAPTER V. 

Die Classifyuig Principle* and its Uses.— Three groups of Ichtliyo* 
litcs among the Organisms of the Lower Old Red Sandstone. -• 
Peculiarities of the Third Group. — Its Varieties. — Descriptic& 
of the Ckeiraeantkui, — Of two unnamed Fossils of the same Or^ 
der. — Microscopic Beauty of these Ancient Fish. — Various Styles 
of Ornament which obtain among them. — The Molluscs of the 
Formation. — Remarkable chiefly for the Union of Modem with 
Ancient Forms which they exhibit. — Its Vegetables, — Importance 
toad Interest of the Record which it furnishes. 

Thbke rests in the neighborhood of Cromarty, on the up- 
per stratum of one of the richest ichtbyolite beds I have yet 
seen, a huge water-rolled boulder of granitic gneiss, which 
must have been a traveller, in some of the later periods of 
geological change, from a mountain range in the interior 
highlands of Ross-shire, more than sixty miles away. It is 
an uncouth looking mass, several tons in weight, with a flat 
upper surface, like that of a table ; and as a table, when en- 
gaged in collecting my specimens, I have often found occa- 
sion to employ it. I have covered it over, times without 
number, with fragments of fossil fish — with plates, and scales, 
and jaws, and fins, and, when the search proved successful. 
With entire ichthyolites. Why did I always arrange them, 
almost without thinking of the matter, into three groups ? 
Why, even when the mind was otherwise employed, did the 
fragments of the Coccosteus and Pterichthys come to occupy 
one corner of the stone, and those of the various fish just 
described another corner, and the equally well-marked re- 
mains of a yet different division a third comer? The 

(79) 



80 THE OLD RED SANDSTONE. 

process seemed almost mechaDical, so little did it employ the 
attention, and so invariable were the results. The fossils of 
the surrounding bed always found their places on the huge 
stone in three groups, and at times there was yet a fourth 
group added — a group whose organisms belonged not to tlie 
animal, but the vegetable kingdom. What led to the arrange- 
ment, or in what did it originate ? In a principle inherent in 
the human mind — that principle of classification which wo 
find pervading all science — which gives to each of the many 
cells of recollection its appropriate facts — and without which 
all knowledge would exist as a disorderly and shapeless mass, 
too huge for the memory to grasp, and too heterogeneous for 
the understanding to employ. I have described but two of 
the groups, and must now say a very little about the principle 
on which, justly or otherwise, I used to separate the third, 
and on the distinctive difierences which rendered the separa- 
tion so easy. 

The recent bony fishes are divided, according to the 
Cuvierian system of classification, into two great orders, the 
soft-finned and the thorny-finned order — the MtUacoplerygii 
and the Acanthopierygii. In the former the rays of the fins 
are thin, flexible, articulated, branched : each ray somewhat 
resembles a jointed bamboo ; with this diiSerence, however, 
that what seems a single ray at bottom, branches out into 
three or four rays a-top. In the latter, (the thorny-finned 
order,) — especially in their anterior dorsal, and perhaps anal 
fins, — the rays are stifif continuous spikes of bone, and each 
stands detached as a spear, without joint or branch. The 
])erch may be instanced as a familiar illustration of this order 
— the gold-fish of the other. Now, between the fins of two 
sets — shall I venture to say orders ? — of the ichthy elites of 
the Lower Old Bed Sandstone, an equally striking difference 



THB OLD BED SAKDSTONB. 81 

obtains. The fin of the Osteolepis^ with its surface of enam- 
elled and minutely johited bones, I have already described as 
a sort of bird-wing fin. The naked rays, with their flat- 
tened surfaces, lay thick together as feathers in the wing of 
a bird — so thick as to conceal the connecting membrane; 
and fins of similar construction characterized the families 
of the Dipterus^ DiplopleruSj Glyptolepis^ Cheirolepis, Holop* 
tyekius^ and, I doubt not, many other families of the same 
period, which await the researches of future discoverers. But 
.the fins of another set of ichthyolites, their contemporaries, 
may be described as bat-wing fins : they presented to the 
water a broad expanse of membrane ; and the solitary ray 
which survives in each was not a jointed, but a continuous 
spear-like ray. The fins of this set, or order, are thorny-fins, 
like those of the Acanthopterygii ; the anterior edge of each, 
with the exception of, perhaps, the caudal fin, which differs in 
construction from the others, is composed of a strong, bony 
spike. Such, with some tacit reference, perhaps, to the sim- 
ilar Cuvierian principle of classification, were the distinctive 
difiTcrences, on the strength of which I used to arrange two 
of my groups of fossils on the granitic boulder ; and the 
influence of the same principle, almost instinctively exerted, 
— for, in writing the previous pages, I scarce thought of its 
existence, — ^has, I find, given to each group its own chapter. 
Of the membranous-finned and thorny-rayed order of ich- 
thyolites, the Cheir acanthus^ or thorny-hand, (i, e. pectoral,) 
may be regarded as an adequate representative. (See Plate 
ViL, fig. 1.) The Cheiraeanthus must have been an eminently 
handsome little fish — nlim, tapering, and described in all its 
outlines, whether of the body or the fins, by gracefully waved 
linps. It is, however, a rare matter to find it presenting iis 
onginai profile in the stone ; — none of the other ichthyolitet 



62 THE OLD RED SANDSTONE. 

arc so frequently distorted as the Cheiracanthus. It seems to 
have been more a cartilaginous and less an osseous fish than 
most of its contemporaries. However perfect the specimen, 
no part of the internal skeleton is ever found, not even when 
scales as minute as the point of a pin are preserved, and 
every spine stands up in its original place. And hence, per« 
haps, a greater degree of flexibility, and consequent distor- 
tion. The body was covered wi^h small angular scales, 
brightly enamelled, and delicately fretted into parallel ridges, 
that run longitudinally along the upper half of the scale, and 
leave the posterior portion of it a smooth, glittering sur- 
face. (See Plate VIL, fig. 2.) They diminish io size to- 
wards the head, which, from the faint stain left on the stone, 
seems to have been composed of cartilage exclusively, and 
either covered with skin, or with scales of extreme minute- 
ness. The lower edge of the operculum bears a tagged 
fringe, like that of a curtain. The tail, a fin of considerable 
power, had the unequal sided character common to the for- 
mation; and the slender and numerous rays on both sides 
are separated by so many articulations as to present the ap- 
pearance of parallelogramical scales. The other fins are 
comparatively of small size. There is a single dorsal placeo 
about two thirds the entire length of the creature adown the 
back ; and exactly opposite its posterior edge is the anterior 
edge of the anal fin. The ventral fins are placed high upon 
the belly, somewhat like those of the perch ; the pectorals 
only a little higher. But it is rather in the construction of 
the fins, than their position, that the peculiarities of the 
Cheiracanthus are most marked. The anterior edge of each, 
as in the pectorals of the existing genera Cestracion and 
Chimara^ is formed of a strong, large spine. In the Chimara 
horea^is^ a cartilaginous fish of the Northern Ocean, the 



THB OLD RED SAKDSTONS. o3 

spine seems placed in front of the weaker rays, just, if I may 
be allowed the comparison, as, in a line of mountaineers en- 
gaged in crossing a swollen torrent, the strongest man in the 
party is placed on the upper side of the line, to break off the 
force of the current from the rest In the CheiracanthuSj 
bowever, each fin seems to consist of but a single spine, with 
an angular membrane fixed to it by one of its sides, and at- 
tached to the creaturc^s body on the other. Its fins are masts 
and sails — the spine representing the mast, and the mem- 
brane the sail ; and it is a curious characteristic of the order, 
that the membrane, like the body, of the ichthyblite, is thickly 
covered with minute scales. The mouth seems to have 
opened a very little under the snout, as in the haddock ; and 
there are no indications of its having been furnished with 
teeth.* 

An ichthyolite first discovered by the writer about three 
years ago, and introduced by him to the notice of Agassiz 
during his recent visit to Edinburgh, but still unfurnished with 
a name,t is a still more striking representative of this order 
than even the Cheir acanthus. It must have been proportion- 
ally thick and short, like some of the tropical fishes, though 
rather handsome than otherwise. (See Plate VIII., fig. 1.) 
The scales, minute, but considerably larger tiian those of the 
CheiracanthuSj are of a rhomboidal form, and so regularly 
striated — the striae converging to a point at the posterior ter- 
mination of each scale — that, when examined with a glass, 
the body appears as if covered with scallops. (See Plate 



• There have been three species of Cheiraccmthua determined — C, 
mierolepidoiiu, C. minoTj and C. Murchisani. 
t Now determined to be a species of Diplaeanihut — D. hnpU 

9 



84 THE OLD R£D SANDSTONE. 

VIII., fig. 3.) It seems a piece of exquisite shell-work, such 
as we sometimes see on the walls of a grotto. There are 
two dorsals — the posterior,' immediately over the tail, and 
directly opposite the anal fin ; the anterior, somewhat higher 
up than the ventrals ; and all the fins are of great size. The 
anterior edge of each is formed of a strong spine, round as 
the handle of a halbert, and diminishing gradually and sym- 
metrically to a sharp point. Though formed externally of 
solid bone, it seems to have been composed internally of car 
Llage, like the bones of some of the osseous fishes — those 
of the halibut, for instance ; and the place of the cartilage is 
generally occupied in the stone by carbonate of lime. The 
membrane which formed the body of the fin was covered, 
like that of the Clieir acanthus^ with minute scales, of the 
same scallop-like pattern with the rest, but of not more than 
one sixth the size of those which cover the creature's sides 
and back. Imagine two lug-sails stifily extended between 
the deck of a brigantine and her two masts, the lattei 
raking as far aft as to form an angle of sixty degrees with 
the horizon, and some idea may be formed of the dorsals 
of this singular fish. They were lug-sails, formed not to be 
acted upon by the air, but to act upon the water. None of 
my specimens show the head ; but, judging from analogies 
furnished by the other families of the group, I entertain little 
doubt that it will be found to be covered, not by bony plates, 
but by minute scales, diminishing, as they approach the snout, 
into mere points. In none of the specimens does any pari 
of the internal skeleton survive. 

My collection contains the remains of yet another fish of 
this group, which was unfurnished with a name only a few 
months ago, but which I first discovered about Use years 
since. (See Plate Vlll., fig. 2.) It is now designated t'^f 



w* 



PLATE rUL 



THE OLD RED SANDSTONE. 85 

Diplacanihus ; and, though the smallest ichthyoUte of the for- 
mation yet known, it is by no means the least curious. The 
?ength from head to tail, in some of my specimens, does not 
exceed three inches ; the largest fall a little short of five. 
The scales, which are of such extreme minuteness that their 
peculiarities can be detected by only a powerful glass, re« 
semble those of the Cheiracanthus ; but the ridges are more 
waved, and seem, instead of running in nearly panillcl lines, 
lo converge towards the apex. There are two dorsals, the 
one rising immediately from the shoulder, a little below the 
nape, the other directly opposite the anal fin. The vcntrals 
are placed near the middle of the belly. There is a curious 
mechanism of shoulder-bone involved with a lateral spine and 
with the pectorals. The creature, unlike the Cheiracanthus. 
■eems to have been furnished with jaws of bone : there are 
fragments of bone upon the head, tubercled apparently on 
the outer surface ; and minute cylinders of carbonate of lime 
running along all the larger bones, where we find them acci- 
dentally laid open, show that they were formed on internal 
bases of cartilage. But the best marked characteristic of 
the creature is furnished by the spines of its fins, which are 
of singular beauty. Each spine resembles a bundle of rods, 
or, rather*, like a Gothic column, the sculptured semblance of 
a bundle of rods, which finely diminish towards a point, sharp 
and tapering as .that of a rush. (See Plate VIII., fi^ 4.) • 
The rest of the fin presents the appearance of a mere scaly 
membrane, and no part of the internal skeleton appears. 
Perhaps this last circumstance, common to all the ichthyolites 
of the formation, if we except the families of the Coccostcus 



* Agassiz reckons four species of Diplacai.thut — D, craaaiapinWi 
Ih longiMpimUy D. ttricUulua, and D. atriatua, 

9* 



86 THB OLD BSD SAKDSTOlfS. 

and Pterichthys^ may throw some light on the apparently 
membranous condition of fin peculiar to the families of this 
order. What appears in the fossil a mere scaly membrane at- 
tached to a single spine of bone, may have had in the living 
animal a cartilaginous framework, like the fins of the dog- 
fish and thorn-back, that are amply furnished with rays of carti* 
lage — though, of course, all such ra3rs must have disappeared! 
in the stone, like the rest of the internal skeleton. Unques- 
tionably, the caudal fin of the two last described fossils must 
have been strengthened by some such internal framework ; 
for, as they differ from the other fins, in being unprovided 
with osseous spines, they would have formed, without an in- 
ternal skeleton, mere pendulous attachments, altogether unfit- 
ted to serve the purposes of instruments of motion. There 
may be found in the bony spines of all this order direct proof 
that, had there been an internal skeleton of bone, it would 
have survived. The spines run deep into the body, as a 
ship^s masts run deep into her hulk ; and we can see them 
standing up among the scales to their termination, in such 
bold relief, that, from a sort of pictorial illusion, they seem 
as if fixed to the creature's sides, and foreshortened, instead 
of rising in profile from its back or belly. (See Plate VIIL 
fig. 1.) The observer will of course remember, that, in the 
living animal, the view of the spine must have terminated 
with the line of the profile, just as the view of a vessePs mast 
terminates with the deck, though the mast itself penetrates to 
the interior keel. Now, it must be deemed equally obviousi 
that, had the vertebral column been of bone, not of cartilage, 
instead of exhibiting no trace, even the faintest, of having 
ever existed, it would have stood out in as high relief as the 
internal huts or stocks of the spines. And such are the 
general characteristics of a few of the ichth volitea of this 



THS OLD BBD SANDSTONB. 67 

lower fonnation of the Old Red Sandstone — a few of vhe 
more striking forms, sculptured, if I may so speak, on the 
middle compartment of the Caithness pyramid. It would be 
easy rendering the list more complete at even the present 
stage, when the field is still so new that almost every laborer 
in it can exhibit genera and species unknown to his brother 
laborers. The remains of a species of Hohptychius have 
been discovered low in the formation, at Orkney, by Df. 
Traill ; similar remains have been found in it at Gamrie. In 
its upper beds the specimens seem so different from those in 
the lower, that, in extensive collections made from the inferior 
strata of one locality, Agassiz has been unable to identify a 
single specimen with the specimens of collections made from 
the superior strata of another, though the genera are the 
same. Meanwhile there are heads and hands at work on the 
subject ; Geology has become a Briareus ; and I have little 
doubt that, in five years hence, this third portion of the Old 
Red Sandstone will be found to contain as many distinct vari- 
eties of fossil fish as the whole geological scale was known 
to contain fifteen years ago.* 

There is something very admirable iti the consistency of 
style which obtains among the ichthyolites of this formation. 
In no single fish of cither group do we find two styles of or- 
nament — in scarce any two fishes do we find exactly the 
same style. I pass fine buildings almost every day. In some 

• This prediction has been already more than accomplished. At 
the death of Cuvier, in 1832, thero were but ninety-two species of 
fossil fish known to the geologist ; Agassiz now enumerates one hun- 
dred and five species that belong to the Old Red Sandstone alone ; 
and if we include doubtful species, on which he has not authorita- 
tively decided — some of which, however, were included in the list 
of Cuvier — one h'tndred and fiifty-one. 



68 THE OLD RED SANDSTONE. 

there is a discordant jumbling — an Egyptian Sphinx, for in- 
stance, placed over a Doric portico ; in all there prevails a 
vast amount of timid imitation. The one repeats the other, 
either in general outline or in the subordinate parts. But the 
case is otherwise among the ichthyolites of the Old Red 
Sandstone; nor does it lessen the wonder, that their nicer 
ornaments should yield their beauty only to the microscope. 
There is unity of character in every scale, plate, and fin — 
unity such as all men of taste have learned to admire in 
those three Grecian orders from which the ingenuity of Rome 
was content to borrow, when it professed to invent — in the 
masculine Doric, the chaste and graceful Ionic, the exquisite- 
ly elegant Corinthian; and yet the unassisted eye fails to dis- 
cover the finer evidences of this unity : it would seem as if 
the adorable Architect had wrought it out in secret with ref- 
erence to the Divine idea alone. The artist who sculptured 
the cherry-stone consigned it to a cabinet, and placed a mi- 
croscope beside it ; the microscopic beauty of these ancient 
fish was consigned to the twilight depths of a primeval ocean. 
There is a feeling which at times grows upon the painter and 
the statuary, as if the perception and love of the beautiful 
had been sublimed into a kind of moral sense. Art comes 
to be pursued for its own sake ; the exquisite conception in 
the mind, or the elegant and elaborate model, becomes all in 
all to the worker, and the dread of criticism or the appetite 
of praise almost nothing. And thus, through the influence 
of a power somewhat akin to conscience, but whose province 
is not the just and the good, but the fair, the refined, the ex- 
quisite, have works prosecuted in solitude, and never intended 
for the world, been found fraught with loveliness. Sir 
Thomas Lawrence, when finishing, with the most consum- 
mate care, a picture intended for a semi-barbarous^ foreign 



THB OLD RED SANDSTONE. 89 

court, was asked why he took so much pains with a piece des- 
tined, perhaps, never to come under the eye of a connoisseur. 
** I cannot help it,^' he replied ; '^ I do the best I can, unable, 
through a tyrant feeling, that will not brook offence, to do 
any thing less.^' It would be perhaps over bold to attribute 
any such overmastering feeling to the Creator ; yet certain it 
is, that among his creatures well nigh all approximations 
towards perfection, in the province in which it expatiates, 
owe their origin to it, and that Deity in all his works is his 
own rule. 

The Osteolepis was cased, I have said, from head to tail, in 
complete armor. The head had its plaited mail, the body its 
scaly mail, the fins their mail of parallel and jointed bars ; 
the entire suit glittered with enamel ; and every plate, bar, 
and scale was dotted with microscopic points. Every ray 
had its double or treble punctulated row, every scale or plate 
its punctulated group ; the markings lie as thickly in propor- 
tion to the fields they cover, as the circular perforations in a 
lace veil ; and the effect, viewed through the glass, is one of 
lightness and beauty. In the Cheirolepis an entirely diff*erent 
style obtains. The enamelled scales and plates glitter with 
minute ridges, that show like thorns in a December morning 
varnished with ice. Every ray of the fins presents its serrated 
edge, every occipital plate and bone its sculptured promi- 
nences, every scale its bunch of prickle-like ridges. A more 
rustic style characterized the Glypiolepis. The enamel of 
the scales and plates is less bright ; the sculpturings are exe- 
cuted on a larger scale, and more rudely finished. The 
relieved ridges, waved enough to give them a pendulous 
appearance, drop adown the head and body. The rays of 
the fins, of great length, present also a pendulous oppear 
anre. The bones and scales seem disproportionately large. 



90 THE OLD RED SANDSTONE. 

There is a general rudeness in the finish of the creature, 
if I may so speak, that reminds one of the tattooings of 
a savage or the corresponding style of art in which he orna- 
ments the handle of his stone-hatchet or his war-club. In the 
Cheir acanthus^ on the contrary, there is much of a minute 
and cabinet-like elegance. The silvery smoothness of the 
fins, dotted with scarcely visible scales, harmonized with a 
similar appearance of head ; a style of sculpture resembling 
the parallel etchings of the line-engraver fretted the scales ; 
the fins were small, and the contour elegant. I have already 
described the appearance of the unnamed fossils — the seem- 
ing shell-work that covered the sides of the one — its mast- 
like spines and sail-like fins ; and the Gothic-like peculiarities 
that characterized the other — its rodded, obelisk-like spines, 
and the external framework of bone that stretched along its 
pectorals. 

Till very lately, it was held that the Old Red Sandstone of 
Scotland contained no mollusca. It seemed difficult, however, 
to imagine a sea abounding in fish, and yet devoid of shells. 
In all my explorations, therefore, I had an eye to the discov- 
ery of the latter, and on two several occasions I disinterred 
what I supposed might have formed portions of a cardium or 
terebratula. On applying the glass, however, the punctulated 
character of the surface showed that the supposed shells were 
but parts of the concave helmet-like plate that covered the 
snout of the Osteolcpis, In the ichthyolite beds of Cromarty 
and Ross, of Moray, Banff, Perth, Forfar, Fife, and Berwick- 
shire, not a single shell has yet been found ; but there have 
been discovered of late, in the upper beds of the Lower Old 
Red Sandstone in Orkney, the remains of a small, delicate 
bivalve, not yet described or figured but which very much 
resembles a Venus, (See Plate V., fig 7.) In the Tilestom^a 



THE OLD BED SANDSTONE. 9 J 

of England, so carefully described by Mr. Murcbison in his 
Silurian System^ shells are very abundant ; and the fact may 
now be regarded as established, that the Tilestones of Eng 
land belong to a deposit contemporaneous with the ichthyolite 
beds of Caithness and Cromarty. They occupy the same 
place low in the base of the Old Red ; and there is at least 
one ichthyolite common to both,* and which does not occur 
in the superior strata of the system in either country — the 
Dipterus macrolepidotus. The evidence that the fish and 
shells lived in the same period, and represent, therefore, the 
same formation, may be summed up in a single sentence. 
We learn from the Geology of Caithness that this species of 
Dipterus was unquestionably contemporary with all the other 
ichthyolites described ; — we learn from the Geology of Here- 
fordshire that the shells were as unquestionably contemporary 
with it f These — the shells — are of a singularly mixed 
character, regarded as a group, uniting, says Mr. Murchison, 
forms at one time deemed characteristic of the more modern 
formations, — of the latter secondary, and even tertiary periods, 
— with forms the most ancient, and which characterize the 
molluscous remains of the transition rocks. Turbinated shells 
and bivalves of well nigh the recent type may be found 
lying side by side with chambered Orthoceratites and Tere- 
bratula. | 

The vegetable remains of the formation are numerous, 
but obscure, consisting mostly of carbonaceous markings, 



* Silurian Sj/siemt part ii. p. 699. 

t In Russia, too, as shown by the recent discovenes of Murchison, 
the Old Red fishes of Caithness, and the Old Red shells of Devon- 
shire, may be found lying embedded in the same strata. 

X SiUtri^m Ryttem, part i. p. 183. 



92 THE OLD RED SANDSTONE. 

such as might be formed by comminuted sea-weed. (See 
Plate VII.) Some of the impressions fork into branches at 
acute angles, (see figs. 4, 5, and 6 ;) some affect a waved 
outline, (see figs. 7 and 8 ;) most of them, however, are 
straight and undivided. They lie in some places so tbickl} 
in layers as to give the stone in which they occur a slaty 
character. One of my specimens shows minute markings, 
somewhat resembling the bird-like eyes of the Stigmaria 
Ficoides of the Coal Measures ; — the branches of another 
terminate in minute hooks, that remind one of the hooks of 
the young tendrils of the pea when they first begin to turn. 
(See fig. 3.) In yet another there are marks of the ligneous 
fibre ; when examined by the glass, it resembles a bundle of 
horse-hairs lying stretched in parallel lines ; and in this speci- 
men alone have I found aught approaching to proof of a ter- 
restrial origin. The deposition seems to have taken place far 
from land ; and this lignite, if in reality such, had probably 
drifted far ere it at length became weightier than the support- 
ing fluid, and sank.* It is by no means rare to find fragments 



* The organism here referred to has been since slit by the lapidary, 
and the sections careftilly examined. It proves to be unequiTocallya 
true wood of the coniferons class. The folloving is the dedsion re- 
garding it of Mr. William Kicol, of Edinburgh, confessedly one of our 
highest living authorities in that division of fossil botany which takes 
cognizance of the internal structure of lignites, and decides from their 
anatomy their race and family : — 

Edinhmr/^k, I9tk Julf, 18 fS. 
Dkar Biii: — I have exnmined the ttnicture of the fossil wood which you found 
in the Old Rrd SAndstone nt CruniRrty, and have no hesitation In stating, that the 
reticulated texture of the transverse sections, though somewhat coropreased, clearly 
Indicates a coniferous origin ; but as there is not the slightest trace of a dirk to be 
seen 10 the longitudinal sections parallel to the medullary rays, it is impossible lo 
«ay whether it brionp to the Pine or Arauearian division. I an, Scc^ 

WlIXIAM NiCOL. 



TRB OLD RED SANDSTONE. 93 

of wood tnat have been borne out to sea by the gulf stream 
from the shores of Mexico or the West Indian Islands, strand- 
ed on the rocky coasts of Orkney and Shetland.* 

The dissnnilarity which obtains between the fossils of the 
contemporary formations of this system in England and Scot- 
land, is instructive. The group in the one consists mainly of 
molluscous animals ; in the other, almost entirely of ichthy- 
olites, and what seems to have been algee. Other localities 
may present us with yet different groups of the same period 
— with the productions of its coasts, its lakes, and its rivers. 
At present, we are but beginning to know just a little of its 
littoral shells, and of the fish of its profoundcr depths. These 
last are surely curious subjects of inquiry. We cannot catechise 
our stony ichthyolites, as the necromantic lady of the Arabian 
Nights did the colored 6sh of the lake, which had once been 
a city, when she touched their dead bodies with her wand, and 
they straightway raised their heads and replied to her queries. 
We would have many a question to ask them if we could — 
questions never to be solved. But even the contemplation of 
their remains is a powerful stimulant to thought. The won- 
ders of Geology exercise every faculty of the mind — reason; 
memory, imagination ; and though we cannot put our fos- 
sils to the question, it is something to be so aroused as to 
be made to put questions to one^s self. I have referred to 
the consistency of style which obtained among these ancient 
fishes — the unity of character which marked every scale, 
plate, and fin of every various family, and which distin- 
guished it from the rest ; and who can doubt that the same 
shades of variety existed in their habits and their instincts ? 
We speak of the infinity of Deity — of his inexhaustible va- 
riety of mind but we speak of it until the idea becomes a 
piece of mere commonplace in our mouths. It is well to be 
10 •Sec Note E. 



94 THE OLD BED SANDSTONE. 

brought to feel, if not to conceive of it — to be made to knon 
that we ourselves are barren-minded, and that in Him "all 
fulness dwelleth.'^ Succeeding creations, each with its 
myriads of existences, do not exhaust Him. He never re- 
peats Himself. The curtain drops, at his command, over 
one scene of existence full of wisdom and beauty ; it rises 
again, and all is glorious, wise, and beautiful as before, and 
all is new. Who can sum up the amount of wisdom whose 
record He has written in the rocks — wisdom exhibited in 
the succeeding creations of earth, ere man was, but which 
was exhibited surely not in vain ? May we not say with 
Milton, — 

Think not, though men were none, 
That heaven could want spectators, God want praise ; 
Millions of spiritual creatures walked the earth, 
And these with ceaseless praise his works beheld ? 

It is well to return on the record, and to read in its une 
quivocal characters the lessons which it was intended to 
teach. Infidelity has often misinterpreted its meaning, but 
not the less on that account has it been inscribed for purposes 
alike wise and benevolent Is it nothing to be taught, with a 
demonstrative evidence which the metaphysician cannot sup- 
ply, that nces are not eternal — that every family had iti 
beginning and that whole creations have come to an end ? 



CHAPTER VI. 

Tlie lines of the Geographer rarely right Lines. — These last, hoir- 
erer, always worth looking at when they occur. — Strikir jg Instance 
in the Line of the Oreat Caledonian Valley. — Indicative of the 
Direction in which the Volcanic Agencies have operated. — Sec- 
tions of the Old Red Sandstone furnished by the Granitic Emi- 
nences of the Line. — Illustration. — Lias of the Moray Frith. — 
Sonniaings regarding its Original Extent. — These lead to an Ex- 
ploratory Ramble. — Narrative. — Phenomena exhibited in the 
coarse of half an hoar's Walk. — The little Bay. — Its Strata and 
their Organisms. 

The natural boundaries of the geographer are rarely de- 
scribed by right lines. Whenever these occur, however, the 
geologist may look for something remarkable. There is one 
very striking example furnished by the north of Scotland. 
The reader, in consulting a map of the kingdom, will find that 
the edge of a ruler, laid athwart the country m a direction 
from south-west to north-east, touches the whole northern 
side of the great Caledonian Valley, with its long, straight 
line of lakes , and onwards, beyond the valley's termination 
at both ends, the whole northern side of Loch Eil and Loch 
Linnhe, and the whole of the abrupt and precipitous northern 
shores of the Moray Frith, to the extreme point of Turbat 
Ness — a right line of cdhsiderably more than a hundred 
miles. Nor does the geography of the globe furnish a lino 
better defined by natural marks. There is both rampait and 
fosse. On the one hand we have the rectilinear lochs and 
lakes, with an average profundity of depth more than c<qua1 
1o that of the German Ocean, and, added to these, the rec- 
tilinear lines of frith ; on the other hand, with but few inter' 

(96) 



96 THE OLD RED SANDSTONE. 

ruptions, there is an inclined wall of rock, which rises at a 
steep angle in the interior to nearly two thousand feet over 
the level of the Great Canal, and overhangs the sea towards 
its northern termination, in precipices of more than a hun- 
dred yards.* 

The direction of this rampart and fosse — this Roman 
wall of Scottish geological history — seems to have been 
that in which the volcanic agencies chiefly operated in up- 
heaving the entire island from the abyss. The line survives 
as a sort of foot-track, hollowed by the frequent tread of 
earthquakes, to mark the coiurse in which they journeyed. 
Like one of the great lines in a trigonometrical survey, it 
enables us, too, to describe the lesser lines, and to determine 
their average bearing. TAe volcanic agencies must have ex- 
tended athwart the country from soulh-west to north-east, 
Mark in a map of the island — all the better if it be a geo- 
logical one — the line in which most of our mountain ranges 
stretch across from the German Ocean to the Atlantic, — the 
Hue, too, in which our friths, lochs, and bays, on both the 
eastern and western coasts, and especially those of the latter, 
run into the interior. Mark, also, the line of the geological 
formations, where least broken by insulated groups of hills — 
the line, for instance, of the Old Red Sandstone belt, which 
flanks the southern base of the Grampians — the nearly parallel 
line of our Scottish Coal-field, in its course from sea to sea — 
the line of the Grauwacke, which forms so large a portion 
of the south of Scotland — the line of the English Coal- 
field, of the Lias, of the Oolite, of the Chalk — and how in 



• The valley of the Jordan, from the village of Laish to the south- 
nm extremity of the Dead Sea, furnishes another very remarkable 
'nstance of a geographical right line. 



THE OLD H£D SANDSTONE. 97 

this process of diagonal lining, if I may so speak, the south- 
eastern portion of England comes to be cut off from the 
secondary formations altogether, and, but for the denudation 
of the valley of the Weald, would have exhibited only ter- 
tiary depositions. In all these lines, whether of mountains, 
lakes, friths, or formations, there is an approximation to par- 
allelism with the line of the great Caledonian valley — proofs 
that the upheaving agency from beneath must have acted in 
this direction from some unknown cause, during all the im- 
mensely extended term of its operations, and along the entire 
length of the island. It is a fact not unworthy of remark, 
that the profound depths of Loch Ness undulated in strange 
sympathy with the reeling towers and crashing walls of Lis- 
bon, during the great earthquake of 1755 ; and that the im* 
pulse, true to its ancient direction, sent the waves in huge 
furrows to the north-east and the south-west. 

The north-eastern portion of this rectilinear wall or chain 
runs, for about thirty miles, through an Old Red Sandstone 
district. The materials which compose it are as unlike those 
of the plain out of which it arises, as the materials of a 
stone dike, running half-way into a field, are unlike the vege- 
table mould which forms the field^s surface. The ridge 
itself is of a granitic texture — a true gneiss. At its base 
we find only conglomerates, sandstones, shales, and stratified 
clays, and these lying against it in very high angles. Hence 
the geological interest of this lower portion of the wall. As 
has been shrewdly remarked by Mr. Murchison,* in one of 
his earlier papers, the gneiss seems to have been forced 
through the sandstone from beneath, in a solid, not a fluid 
forna ; and as the ridge a-top is a narrow one, and the sides 

* See Tramactiont of the London Qtohgical BocUty for 1828 p. 364 
10 ♦ 



98 THE OLD RED SANDSTONE. 

remarkably abrupt — an excellent wedge, both in consistency 
and form — instead of having acted on the surrounding oep- 
ositions, as most of the south country traps have done tha« 
have merely issued from a vent, and overlaid the upper 
strata, it has torn up the entire formation from the very bot- 
tom. Imagine a large wedge forced from below through a 
sheet of thick ice on a river or pond. First the ice rises in 
an angle, that becomes sharper and higher as the wedge 
lises ; then it cracks and opens, presenting its upturned edges 
on both sides, and through comes the wedge. And this is a 
very different process, be it observed, from what takes place 
when the ice merely cracks, and the water issues through 
the crack. In the one case there is a rent, and water dif- 
fused over the surface ; in the other, there is the projecting 
wedge, flanked by the upturned edges of the ice ; and these 
edges, of course, serve as indices to decide regarding the 
ice's thickness, and the various layers of which it is com- 
DO^d. Now, such are the phenomena exhibited by the 
wedge-like granitic ridge. The Lower Old Red Sandstone, 
tilted up against it on both sides, at an angle of about 
eighty, exhibits in some parts a section of well nigh two 
thousand feet, stretching from the lower conglomerate to 
the soft, unfossiliferous sandstone, which forms in Ross and 
Cromarty the upper beds of the formation. There is a 
mighty advantage to the geologist in this arrangement 
When books are packed up in a deep box or chest, we have 
to raise the upper tier ere we can see the tier below, and this 
second tier ere we can arrive at a third, and so on to the bot- 
tom. But when well arranged on the shelves of a library, 
we have merely to run the eye along their lettered backs, 
and we can thus form an acquaintance with them at a glance, 
which in the other case would have cost us a good deal of 



THE OLD RED SANDSTOl^'E. 99 

trouble. Now, in the neighborhood of this granitic wedge^ 
or wall, the strata are arranged, not like books in a box, — 
such was their original position, — but like books on the 
shelves of a library. They have been unpacked and arranged 
by the uptilting agent ; and the knowledge of them, which 
could only have been attained in their first circumstances by 
perforating them with a shaft of immense depth, may now 
be acquired simply by passing over their edges. A morn- 
ing's saunter gives us what would have cost, but for tho 
upheaving granite, the labor of a hundred miners for five 
years. 

By far the greater portion of the life of the writer was 
spent within less' than half an hour's walk of one of these 
upturned edges. I have described the granitic rock, with 
reference to the disturbance it has occasioned as a wedge 
forced from below, and with reference to its rectilinear posi- 
tion in the sandstone district which it traverses, as a stone 
wall running half-way into a field. It may communicate a 
still correcter and livelier idea to think of it as a row of 
wedges, such as one sometimes sees in a quarry when the work- 
men are engaged in cutting out from the mass some immense 
block, intended to form a stately column or huge architrave. 
The eminences, like the wedges, are separated ; in some 
places the sandstone lies between — in others there occur 
huge chasms filled by the sea. The Friths of Cromarty and 
Beauly, for instance, and the Bay of Munlochy, open into 
the interior between these wedge-like eminences ; — the well- 
known Sutors of Cromarty represent two of the wedges ; 
and it was the section furnished by the Southern Sutor that 
lay so immediately in the writer's neighborhood. The line 
of the Cromarty Frith forms an angle of about thirty-five 
degrees with that of the granitic line of wedge-like hills which 



100 THE OLD HED SAMD8T0NS. 

it bisects ; and hence the peculiar shape of that tongue of 
land which forms the lower portion of the Black Isle, and 
which, washed by the Moray Frith on the one side, and by the 
Frith of Cromarty on the other, has its apex occupied by the 
Southern Sutor. Imagine a lofty promontory somewhat re- 
.sembling a huge spear thrust horizontally into the sea — a 
ponderous mass of granitic gneiss, of about a mile in length, 
forming the head, and a rectilinear line of the Old Red Sand- 
stone, more than ten miles in length, forming the shafl ; and 
such is the appearance which this tongue of land presents, 
when viewed from its north-western boundary, the Cromarty 
Frith. When viewed from the Moray Frith, — its south-west- 
ern boundary, — we see the same granitic spear-head, but 
find the line of the shaft knobbed by the other granitic 
eminences of the chain. 

Now on this tongue of land I 6rst broke ground as a geolo- 
gist. The quarry described in my introductory chapter, as 
that in which my notice was first attracted by the ripple mark- 
ings, opens on the Cromarty Frith side of this huge spear- 
shaft ; the quarry to which I removed immediately after, and 
beside which I found the fossils of the Lias, opens on its 
Moray Frith side. The uplilted section of sandstone occurs 
on both sides, where the shaft joins to the granitic spear-head, 
but the Lias I found on the Moray Frith side alone. It studs 
the coast in detached patches, sorely worn by the incessant 
lashings of the Frith ; and each patch bears an evident rela- 
tion, in the place it occupies, to a corresponding knob or 
wedge in the granitic line. The Northern Sutor, as has been 
just said, is one of these knobs or wedges. It has its accom- 
panying patch of Lias upheaved at its base, and lying uncon- 
formably, not only to its granitic strata, but also to its subordi- 
Dale sandstones. The Southern Sutor, ahother of these knobs. 



THE OLD RED SANDSTONE. 101 

has also its accompanying patch of Lias, which, though lying 
beyond the fall of the tide, strews the beach, af\er every storm 
from the east, with its shales and its fossils. The hill of Eathie 
is yet another knob of the series, and it, too, has its Lias 
patch The granitic wedges have not only uptilted the sand- 
stone) but they have also upheaved the superincumbent Lias, 
which, but for -their agency, would have remained buricJ 
under the waters of the Frith, and its ever accumulating 
banks of sand and gravel. I had remarked at an early period 
the correspondence of the granitic knobs with the Lias patches, 
and striven to realize the original place and position of the 
latter ere the disturbing agent had upcast them to the light. 
What, I have asked, was the extent of this comparatively 
modem formation in this part cf the world, ere the line of 
wedges were forced through from below ? A wedge struck 
through the ice of a pond towards the centre breaks its con- 
tinuity, and we find the ice on both sides the wedge ; where- 
as, when struck through at the pond edge, it merely raises the 
ice from the bank, and we find it, in consequence, on but one 
side the wedge. Whether, have I often inquired, were the 
granitic wedges of this line forced through the Lias at one of 
its edges, or at a comparatively central point ? and about ten 
years ago I set myself to ascertain whether I could not solve 
the question. The Southern Sutor m a wedge open to exam* 
ination on both its sides ; — the Moray Frith washes it upon 
one side, the Cromarty Frith on the other. Was the Lias 
to be found on both its sides ? If so, the wedge must have 
been forced through the formation, not merely beside it. It 
occurs, as I have said, on the Moray Frith side of the wedge ; 
and I resolved, on carefully exploring the Frith of Cromarty 
to try whether it did not occur on that side too. 

With this object I set out on an exploratory excursion, on a 



102 THE OLD RBD SANDSTONE. 

delightful morning of August, 1830. The tide was &IIiDg , 
it had already reached the line of half ehb ; and from the 
Southern Sutor to the low, long promontory on which the 
town of Cromarty is built, there extended a broad belt of 
mingled sand-banks and pools, accumulations of boulders, and 
shingle, and large tracts darkened with algse. I passed direct 
by* a grassy pathway to the Sutor, the granitic spear-head of 
a late illustration, — and turned, when I reached the curved 
and contorted gneiss, to trace through the broad belt left by 
the retiring waters, and in a line parallel to what I have 
described as the shaA of the huge spear, the beds and strata 
of the Old Red Sandstone in their ascending succession. I 
first crossed the conglomerate base of the system, here 
little more than a hundred feet in thickness. The cease* 
less dash of the waves, which smooth most other rocks, 
has a contrary effect on this bed, except in a few localities, 
where its arenaceous cement of base is much indurated. 
Under both the Northern and Southern Sutors the sofler 
cement yields to the incessant action, while the harder peb- 
bles stand out in bold relief ; so that, wherever it presents a 
mural front to the breakers, we are reminded, by its appear- 
ance, of the artificial rockwork of the architect. It roughens 
as the rocks aroimd it polish. Quitting the conglomerate, I 
next passed over a thick bed of coarse red and yellow sand- 
stone, with here and there a few pebbles sticking from its 
surface, and here and there a stratum of finer-grained fissile 
sandstone inserted between the rougher strata : I then crossed 
over a strata of an impure grayish limestone, and a slaty 
clay, abounding, as I long afterwards ascertained, in ichthyo- 
lyf^B and vegetable remains. There are minute veins in the 
limestone (apparently cracks filled up) of a jet black bitu- 
minous substance, resembling anthracite ; the stratified clay 



' THE OLD EBD SANDSTONE i03 

is mottled by layers of semi-alumiDous, semi-calcareous noo u.cS| 
arranged like layers of flint in the- upper Chalk. These nodules, 
when cut up and polished, present very agreeable combinations 
of color ; there is generally an outer ring of reddish brown, an 
inner ring of pale yellow, and a central patch of red, and the 
whole is prettily veined with dark-colored carbonate of lime.* 
Passbg onwards and upwards in the line of the strata, I next 
crossed over a series of alternate beds of coarse sandstone 
and stratified clay, and then lost sight of the rock altogether, 
in a wide waste of shingle and boulder-stones, resting on a 
dark blue argillaceous diluvium, sometimes employed in that 
part of the country, from its tenacious and impermeable char- 
acter, for lining ponds and dams, and as mortar for the 
foundations of low-lying houses, exposed in wet weather to 
the sudden rise of water. The numerous boulders of this 
tract have their «Jtory to tell, and it is a curious one. The 
Southern Sutor, with its multitudinous fragments of gneiss, 
torn from its sides by the sea, or loosened by the action of 
frosts and storms, and rolled down its precipices, is only a 
few hundred yards away; — its base, where these lie thick- 
est, has been swept by tempests, chiefly from the east, for 
thousands and thousands of years ; and the direct eflect of 
these tempests, regarded as transporting agents, would have 
been to strew this stony tract with those detached fragments 
The same billow that sends its long roll from the German 
Ocean to sweep the base of the Sutor, and to leap up against 
its precipices to the height of eighty and a hundred feet, 
breaks in foam, only a minute af\er, over this stony tract ; 

* A concretionary limestone of the Old Red system in England, 
nriegated with purple and green, was at one time wrought as a mar- 
lie. ^ StfMrMfi S^Hsm, Part L p. 176. 



104 THE OLD RES SANDSTONBi 

which has, in consequeDce, its sprinkling of fragments ol 
gneiss, transported by an agencj so obvious. But foi every 
one such fragment which it bears, we find at least ten boul 
ders that have been borne for forty and fifty miles in the op- 
posite direction from the interior of the country — a direction 
in which no transporting agency now exists. The tempests 
of thousands of years have conveyed for but a few hundred 
yards not more than a tithe of the materials of this tract ; 
nine tenths of the whole have been conveyed by an older 
agency over spaces of forty and 6Ay miles. How immense- 
ly more powerful, then, or how immensely protracted in its 
operation, must that older agency have been !* 

I passed onwards, and reached a little bay, or, rather, an- 
gular indentation of the coast, in the neighborhood of the 
town. It was laid bare by the tide, this morning, far beyond 
its outer opening; and the huge, table-like boulder, which 
occupies nearly its centre, and to which, in a former chapter, 
I have had occasion to refer, held but a^ middle place between 
the still darkened flood-line that ran high along the beach, 
and the brown line of ebb that bristled far below with forests 
of the rough-stemmed tangle. This little, bay, or inflection 
of the coast, serves as a sort of natural wear in detaining 
floating drift-weed, and is often found piled, after violent 
storms from the east, with accumulations, many yards in ex- 
tent, and several feet in depth, of kelp and tangle, mixed 
with zoophytes and mollusca, and the remains of fish killed 
among the shallows by the tempest. Early in the last ccn- 
tur)', a large body of herrings, pursued by whales and por- 
poises, were stranded in it, to the amount of several hundred 
barrels ; and it is said that salt and cask failed the packers 
when but comparative y a small portion of the shoal were 
cured, and that by much the greatest part of them were car- 



THB OLD RED SANDSTONE. 105 

ried away by the neighboring farmers for manure. Ever 
since the formation of the present coast-line, this natural wear 
has been arresting, tide afler tide, its heaps of organic matter, 
but the circumstances favorable to their preservation have 
been wanting : they ferment and decay when driven high on 
the beach ; and the next spring-tide, accompanied by a gale 
from the west, sweeps every vestige of them away ; and so, 
after the lapse of many centuries, we find no other organisms 
among the rounded pebbles that form the beach of this little 
bay, than merely a few broken shells, and occasionally a 
mouldering fish-bone. Thus very barren formations may 
belong to periods singularly rich in organic existences. When 
what is now the little bay was the bottom of a profound 
ocean, and far from any shore, the circumstances for the 
preservation of its organisms must have been much more 
favorable. In no locality in the Old Red Sandstone with 
which I am acquainted have such beautifully preserved fos- 
nls been found. But I anticipate. 

Id the middle of the little bay, and throughout the greater 
part of its area, I found the rock exposed — a circumstance 
which I had marked many years before, when a mere boy, 
without afterwards recurring to it as one of interest. But I 
had now learned to look at rocks with another eye ; and the 
thought whksh first suggested itself to me regarding the rock 
of the little bay was, that I had found the especial object of 
my search — the Lias. The appearances are in some re- 
spects not dissimilar. The Lias of the north of Scotland is 
represented in some localities by dark-colored, unctuous 
clays, in others by grayish black sandstones, that look like 
mdurated mud, and in others by beds of black fissile shale, 
alternating with bands of coarse, impure limestone, and 
studded between the bands with limestone nodules of richer 
11 



106 THE OLD RED SANDSTONE. 

quality and finer grain. The rock laid bare in the little bay 
is a stratified clay, of a gray color tinged with olive, and oc- 
curring in beds separated by indurated bands of gray, mica- 
ceous sandstone. They also abound in calcareous nodules. 
The dip of the strata, too, is very different from that of the 
beds which lean against the gneiss of the Sutor. Instead of 
an angle of eight}', it presents an angle of less than eight. 
The rocks of the little bay must have lain beyond the dis- 
turbing, uptilting influence of the granitic wedge. So 
thickly are the nodules spread over the surface of some of 
the beds, that they reminded me of floats of broken ice on 
the windward side of a lake after a few days' thaw, when 
the edges of the fragments are smoothed and rounded, and 
they press upon one another, so as to cover, except in the 
angular interstices, the entire surface. 

I set myself carefully to examine. The first nodule I laid 
open contained a bituminous looking mass, in which I could 
trace a few pointed bones and a few minute scales. The 
next abounded in rhomboidal and finely enamelled scales, of 
much larger size and more distinct character. I wrought on 
with the eagerness of a discoverer entering for the first lime 
in a terra incognita of wonders. Almost every fragment of 
clay, every splinter of sandstone, every limestone nodule, 
contained its organism — scales, spines, plates, bones, entire 
fish ; but not one organism of the Lias could I find — no am- 
monites, no belemnites, no gr}'phites, no shells of any kind : 
the vegetable impressions were entirely different ; and not a 
single scale, plate, or ichthyodorulite could I identify with 
those of the newer formation. I had got into a diflierenl 
world, and among the remains of a different creation ; but 
where was its proper place in the scale ? The beds of the 
little bay are encircled by thick accumulations of diluvium 



THB OLD RED SANDSTOIiE. 107 

and debris, nor could I trace their relation to a single known 
lock. I was struck, as I well might, by the utter strangeness 
of the forms — the oar-like arms of the Plerichthys and its 
tortoise-like plates — the strange, buckler-looking head of 
the Coccosteus^ which, I suppose, might possibly be the back 
uf a small tortoise, though the tubercles reminded me rather 
of the skin of the shark — the polished scales and plates of 
the Osleolepis — the spined and scaled fins of the Cheiracan* 
Ihus — above all, the one-sided tail of at least eight out of 
the ten or twelve varieties of fossil which the deposit con- 
tained. All together excited and astonished me. But some 
time elapsed ere I learned to distinguish the nicer generic dif- 
ferences of the various organisms of the formation. I found 
fragments of the Plerichthys on this morning ; but I date its 
discovery, in relation to the mind of the discoverer, more than 
a twelvemonth later.* I confounded the Cheir acanthus^ too, 
with its single-spined, membranous dorsal, with Diplacanthus 
ichthyoliie^ furnished with two such dorsals ; and the Diplop- 
terus with the Osleolepis, Still, however, I saw enough to 

• I find, by some notes, which had escaped my notice when draw* 
ing up for the WUnes* newspaper the sketches now expanded into a 
volume, that in the year 1834 I furnished the collection of a geologi- 
cal friend, the Rev. John Swanson, minister of the parish of SmaU 
Isles, in the Outer Hebrides, with a well-marked specimen of the 
PtericfUkys Milleri, The circumstance pleasingly reminds me of the 
first of aU my early acquaintance, who learned to deem the time not 
dly squandered that was spent in exploring the wonders of bygone 
creations. Docs the minister of SmaU Isles still remember the boy 
who led him in quest of petrifactions — himself a little boy at the 
time — to a deep, solitary cave on the Moray Frith, whore they 
lingered amidst stalactites and mosses till the wild sea had surroimd- 
ed them unmarked, barring all chance of retreat, and the dark night 
came on^ 



108 



TBS OLD RED SANDSTONE. 



exhilarate and interest : I wrought on till the advancing tide 
came splashing over the nodules, and a powerful August sun 
bad risen towards the middle sky ; and were I to sum up all 
my happier hours, the hour would not be forgotten in which 
I sat down on a rounded boulder of granite, by the edge of 
the sea, when the last bed was covered, and spread out on tho 
boacb before me the spoils of the morning. 



CHAPTER VIL 

Portber DiscoTeries of the Ichthyolite Beds. — Found in one Local« 
itj under a Bed of Peat. — Discovered in another beneath an an- 
cient Burying-ground. — In a third underlying the lias Formation. 
— In a fourth overtopped by a still older Sandstone Deposit. — 
Difficulties in ascertaining the true Place of a newly-discoverod 
Formation. — Caution against drawing too hasty Inferences from 
the mere circumstance of Neighborhood. — The Writer receives his 
first Assistance firom without. — Oeological Appendix of the Messrs. 
Anderson, of Inverness. — Further Assistance from the Researches 
of Agassiz. — Suggestions. — Dr. John Malcolmson. — His Exten- 
sive Discoveries in Moray. — He submits to Agassiz a Drawing of 
the Pterichthys, — Place of the Ichthyolites in the Scale at length 
determined. — Two distinct Platforms of Being in the Formation 
to which they belong. 

I COMMENCED forming a small collection, and set myself 
carefully to examine the neighboring rocks for organisms of 
a similar character. The eye becomes practised in such re- 
searches, and my labors were soon repaid. Directly above 
the little bay there is a cornfield, and beyond the field a wood 
of forest trees ; and in this wood, in the bottom of a water- 
course, scooped out of the rock through a bed of peat, I 
found the stratified clay charged with scales. A few hun- 
dred yards farther to the west there is a deep, wooded ravine 
cut through a thick bed of red diluvial clay. The top of the 
bank directly above is occupied by the ruins of an ancient 
chapel, and a group of moss-grown tombstones ; and in the 
gorge of this ravine, underlying the little field of graves by 
about sixty feet, I discovered a still more ancient place of 
sepulture — that of the ichthyolites. I explored every bank, 
11* (109) 



110 THE OLD RED SARDSTONV, 

rock, and ravine on the northern or Cromarty. Piith side ol 
the tongue of land, with its terminal point of granitic gneiss 
to which I have had such frequent occasion to refer, and then 
turned to explore the southern, or Moray Frith side, in tho 
rectilinear line of the great valley. And here I was success- 
ful on a larger scale. A range of lofty sandstone cliffs, hol- 
lowed by the sea, extends for a distance of about two miles 
between two of the granitic knobs or wedges of the line — 
the Southern Sutor and the hill of Eathie. And along well 
nigh the entire length of this range of clifis, I succeeded in 
tracing a continuous ichthyolite bed, abounding in remains, 
and lymg far below the Lias, and unconformable to it I pur- 
sued my researches, and in the sides of a romantic precipi- 
tous dell, through which the Bum of Eathie — a small, mossy 
stream — finds its way to the Moray Frith,! again discovered 
the fish-beds running deep into the interior of the country, with 
immense strata of a pale yellow sandstone resting over them, 
and strata of a chocolate red lying below. But tlieir place in 
the geological scale was still to fix. 

I had seen enough to convince me that they form a contin- 
uous convex stratum in the sandstone spear-shafl, covering 
it saddle- wise from side to side, dipping towards the Moray 
Frith on the south, and to the Cromarty Frith on the north — 
that, as in a bona fide spear-shafl, the annual ring or layer of 
growth of one season is overlaid by the annual rings of suc- 
ceeding seasons, and underlaid by those of preceding ones ; 
80 this huge semi-ring of fossiliferous clays and limestones 
had its underlying semi-ring of Red Sandstone, and its over- 
lying semi-rings of yellow, of red, and of gray sandstone. 1 
knew, besides, that beneath there was a semi-ring of conglom- 
erate, tlie base of the system ; and that, for more than two 
hundred yards upwards, ring followed ring in unbroken 



THE OLD BED SAT9DST0NE. Ill 

succession — now sandstone, now limestone, now stratified 
clay. But though intimately acquainted with these lower 
rocks for more than a hundred fathoms from their hase up- 
wards, and with the upper rocks on both sides the ichthyo* 
litic bed for more than a hundred feet, there was an inter- 
vening hiatus, whose extent at this period I found it impos- 
sible to ascertain. And hence my uncertainty regarding 
the place of the ichthyolites, seeing that whole formations 
might be represented by the occurring gap. On the Moray 
Frith side, where the sections are of huge extent, a doubtful 
repeat in the strata at one point of junction, and an abrupt 
fault at another, cuts ofiTthe upper series of beds to which the 
organisms belong, from the lower to which the great conglom- 
erate belongs. On the Cromarty Frith side the sections are 
mere detached patches, obscured at every point by diluvium 
and soil ; and, in conceiving of the whole as a continuous 
line, with the Lias a-top and the granite group at the bottom, 
I was ever reminded of those coast-lines of the ancient geog- 
raphers, where a few uncertain dots, a few deeper markings, 
and here and there a blank space or two, showed the blended 
results of conjecture and discovery — whether they give a 
Terra Incognita Australia to the one hemisphere, or a 
North- Western passage to the other. The ichthyolites in a 
section so doubtful might be regarded as belonging to either 
the Old or the New Red Sandstone — to the Coal Measures, 
or to the Mountain Limestone. All was uncertainty. 

One remark in the passing : it may teach the young geolo- 
gist to be cautious in his inferences, and illustrate, besides, 
those gaps which occur in the geological scale. I had now 
discovered the ichthyolite beds in ^\e different localities ; in 
one of these — the first discovered — there is no overlying 
^ratum ; it seems as if the bed formed the top of the forma- 



J 12 TBS OLD BED SANDSTOITB. 

don : in all the others the overlying stratum is different, and 
belongs to distant and widely separated ages. We cut in one 
locality' through a peat moss — part of the ruins, perhaps, of 
one of those forests which covered, about the commencement 
of the Christian era, well nigh the entire surface of the island, 
and sheltered the naked inhabitants from the legions of Agric* 
ola. We find, as we dig, huge trunks of oak and elm, cones 
of the Scotch fir, handfuls of hazel-nuts, and bones and horns 
of the roe and the red deer. The writer, when a boy, found 
among the peat the horn of a gigantic elk. And, forming 
the bottom of this recent deposit, and lying conformably to i<, 
we find the ichthyolite beds, with their antique organisms. 
The remains of oak and elm leaves, and of the spikes and 
cones of the pine, lie within half a foot of the remains of 
the Coccosteus and Diplopterus. We dig in another locality 
through an ancient burying-ground ; we pass through a supe- 
rior stratum of skulls and coffins, and an inferior stratum, 
barren in organic . remains, and then arrive at the stratified 
clays, with their ichthyolites. In a third locality we find 
these in junction with the Lias, and underlying its lignites, 
ammonites, and belemnites,just as we see them underlying, in 
the other two, the human bones and the peat moss. And in 
jet a fourth locality we see them overlaid by immense arena 
ceous beds, that belong evidently, as their mineralogical 
character testifies, to either the Old or the New Red Sand- 
stone. The convulsions and revolutions of the geological world, 
like those of the political, are sad confounders of place and 
station, and bring into close fellowship the high and the low , 
nor is it safe in either world, — such have been the effects of 
the disturbing agencies, — to judge of ancient relations by 
existing neighborhoods, or of original situations by present 
places of occupancy. '^ Misery ,** says Shakspeare, '^ makes 



THE OLD RED SANDSTONE. 113 

Strange bedfellows/' The changes and convulsions of the 
geological world have made strange bedfellows too. I have 
seen fossils of the Upper Lias and of the Lower Old Red Sand- 
stone washed together by the same wave, out of what might 
be taken, on a cursory survey, for the same bed, and then 
mingled with recent shells, algse, branches of trees, and frag- 
ments of wrecks on the same sea-beach. 

Years passed, and in 1834 I received my first assistance 
from without, through the kindness of the Messrs. Anderson, 
of Inverness, who this year published their Guide to the 
Highlands and Islands of Scotland — a work which has 
never received half its due measure of praise. It contains, 
in a condensed and very pleasing form, the accumulated 
gleanings, for half a lifetime, of two very superior men, 
skilled in science, and of highly cultivated taste and literary 
ability; whose remarks, from their intimate acquaintance 
with every foot-breadth of country which they describe, inva- 
riably exhibit that freshness of actual observation, recorded 
on the spot, which Gray regarded as " worth whole cart-loads 
of recollection." But what chiefly interested me in their 
work was its dissertative appendices — admirable digests of 
the Natural History, Antiquities, and Geology of the country. 
The appendix devoted to Geology, consisting of fifty closely 
printed pages, — abridged in part from the highest geological 
authorities, and in much greater part the result of original 
observation, — contains, beyond comparison, the completest 
description of the rocks, fossils, and formations of the North- 
em and Western Highlands, which has yet been given to the 
public in a popular form. I perused it with intense interest, 
and learned from it, for the first time, of the fossil fishes of 
Caithness and Oarorie. 

There was almost nothing known, at the period, of the 



114 TB£ OLD RED SANDSTONE. 

oryctology of the older rocks — little, indeed, of that of the 
Old Red Sandstone, in its proper character as such ; and with 
no such guiding clew as has since been furnished by Agassiz, 
and the later researches of Mr. Murchison, the writer of the 
appendix had recorded as his ultimate conclusion, that ^^ the 
middle schistoze system of Caithness, contaming the fossil 
fish, was intermediate in geological character and position 
between the Old and New Bed Sandstone formations.^' The 
ichthy elites of Gamrie he described as resembling those of 
Caithness ; and I at once recognized, in his minute descrip- 
tions of both, the fossil fish of Cromarty. The mineralogical 
accompaniments, too, seemed nearly the same. In Caithness, 
the animal remains are mixed up in some places with a black 
bituminous matter like tar. I had but lately found among the 
beds of the little bay a mass of soft adhesive bitumen, her- 
metically sealed up in the limestone, which, when broken 
open, reminded me, from the powerful odor it cast, and which 
filled for several days the room in which I kept it, of the old 
Graulish mummy of which we find so minute account in the 
Natural History of Goldsmith. The nodules which enclosed 
the organisms at Gamrie were described as of a sub-crystalline, 
radiating, fibrous structure. So much was this the case with 
some of the nodules at Cromarty, that they had often reminded 
me, when freshly broken, though composed of pure carbonate 
of lime, of masses of asbestos. The scales and bones of 
the Caithness ichthyolites were blended, it was stated, with 
the fragments of a " supposed tortoise nearly allied to trionyx ;'* 
one of the ichthyolites, a Dipierus^ was characterized by large 
scales, a double dorsal, and a one-sided tail ; the entire lack 
of shells and zoophytes was remarked, and the abundance of 
obscure vegetable impressions. In short, had the accom- 
plished writer of the appendix been briefly describing the beds 



THE OLD RED SANDOTOITE. 115 

at Cromarty, instead of those of Caithness and Gamrie, he 
might have employed the same terms, and remarked the same 
circumstances — the striated nodules, the mineral tar, the 
vegetable impressions, the absence of shells and zoophytes, 
the large-scaled, and double-finned ichthyolites — the pecu- 
liarities of which applied equally to the Dipterus and Diplop* 
terus — and the supposed tortoise, in which I once recognized 
the Coccosteus, It was much to know, that this doubtful 
formation — for as doubtful I still regarded it — was of such 
considerable extent, and occurred in localities so widely sepa- 
rated. I corresponded with the courteous author of the 
appendix, at that time General Secretary to the Northern In- 
stitution for the Promotion of Science and Literature, and 
Conservator of its Museum ; and, forwarding to him dupli- 
cates of some of my better specimens, had, as I had antici- 
pated, the generic identity of the Cromarty ichthyolites with 
those of Caithness and Gamrie fully confirmed. ' 

My narrative is, I am afraid, becoming tedious ; but it em- 
bodies somewhat more than the mere history of a 3ort of 
Robinson Crusoe in Geology, cut off for years from all inter- 
course with his kind. It contains, also, the history of a forma- 
tion in its connection with science ; and the reader will, I 
trust, bear with me for a few pages more. Seasons passed ; 
and I received new light from the researches of Agassiz, 
which, if it did not show me my way more clearly, ren- 
dered it at least more interesting, by associating with it 
one of those wonderful truths, stranger that fictions, which 
rise evar and anon from the profounder depths of science, 
and whose use, in their connection with the human intel 
Icct, seems to be to stimulate the faculties. I have often had 
occasion to refer to the one-sided condition of tail charac- 
teristic of the ichthyolites of the Old Red Sandstone. It 



116 TBB OLD RED SANDSTONB. 

characterizes, says Agassiz, the fish of all the more ancient 
formations. At one certain point in the descending scale 
Nature entirely alters her plan in the formation of the tail. 
All the ichthyolites ahove are fashioned after one particular 
type — all helow after another and different type. The bibli- 
ographer can tell at what periods in the history of letters one 
character ceased to be employed and another came into use. 
Black letter, for instance, in bur own country, was scarce 
ever resorted to for purposes of general literature after the 
reign of James VI. ; and in manuscript writing the Italian 
hand superseded the Saxon about the close of the seventeenth 
century. Now, is it not truly wonderful to find an analogous 
change of character in that pictorial history of the past 
which Geology furnishes ? From the first appearance of ver- 
tebrated existences to the middle beds of the New Red Sand- 
stone, — a space including the Upper Ludlow rocks, the 
Old Red Sandstone in all its members, the Mountain Lime- 
stone, with the Limestone of Burdie House, the Coal Meas- 
ures, the Lower New Red, and the Magnesian Limestone, — 
we find only the ancient or unequally lobed type of tail. In 
all the formations above, including the Lias, the Oolite, Mid- 
dle, Upper, and Lower, the Wealden, the Green-Sand, the 
Chalk, and the Tertiary, we find only the equal ly-lobed con- 
dition of tail. And it is more than probable, that, with the 
tail, the character of the skeleton also changed ; that the more 
ancient type characterized, throughout, the semi -cartilaginous 
order of fishes, just as the more modern type characterizes 
the osseous fishes ; and that the upper line of the Magnesian 
Limestone marks the period at which the order became ex- 
tinct. Conjecture lacks footing in grappling with a revolu ion 
so extensive and so wonderful. Shall I venture to throw out 
a suggestion on the subject, in connection with anothei 



THE OLD RED SANDSTONE. 117 

suggestion which has emanated from one of the first of living 
geologists ? Fish, of all existing creatures, seem the most 
capable of sustaining high degrees of heat, and are to be 
found in some of the hot springs of Continental Europe, 
where it is supposed scarce any other animal could live. 
Now, all the fish of the ancient type are thickly covered by 
n defensive armor of bone, arranged in plates, bars, or scales^ 
or all the three modes together, as in the Osteolepis and one 
half its contemporaries. The one-sided tail is united invari- 
ably to a strong cuirass. And it has been suggested by Dr. 
Buckland, that this strong cuirass may have formed a sort of 
defence against the injurious effects of a highly heated sur- 
rounding medium. The suggestion is, of course, based 
purely on hypothesis. It may be stated, in direct connection 
with it, however, that in the Lias — the first richly fossilifer- 
ous formation overlying that in which the change occurred — 
we find, for the first time in the geological system, decided 
indications of a change of seasons. The foot-prints of winter 
are leA impressed amid the lignites of the Cromarty Lias. 
In a specimen now before me, the alternations of summer 
heat and winter cold are as distinctly marked in the annual 
rings as in the pines or larches of our present forests ; where- 
as in the earlier lignites, contemporary with ichthyolites of 
the ancient type, either no annual rings appear, or the mark- 
ings, if present, are both faint and unfrcquent. Just ere 
winter began to take its place among the seasons^ the fish fit* 
ted for living in a highly heated medium disappeared : they 
were created to inhabit a thermal ocean, and died away as it 
cooled down. Fish of a similar type may now inhabit the 
seas of Venus, or even of Jupiter, which, from its enormous 
b'jlk, though greatly more distant from the sun than oui 
earth, may still powerfully retain the internal heat 
12 



118 THE OLD RED SANDSTOHS. 

I Still pursued mj inquiries, and received a valuable aux- 
iliary in a gentleman from India, Dr. John Malcolmson, of 
Madras — a member of the Liondon Geological Society, and 
a man of high scientific attainments and great general knowl- 
edge. Above all, I found him to possess, in a remarkable 
degree, that spirit of research, almost amounting to a pas- 
sion, virhich invariably marks the superior man. He had 
spent month after month under the burning sun of India, 
amid fever marshes and tiger jungles, acquainting himself 
with the unexplored geological field which, only a few years 
ago, that vast continent presented, and in collecting fossils 
hitherto unnamed and undescribed. He had pursued his in- 
quiries, too, along the coasts of the Red Sea, and far upwards 
on the banks of the Nile ; and now, in returning for a time 
to his own country, he had brought with him the determina- 
tion of knowing it thoroughly as a man of science and a geol- 
ogist. I had the pleasure of first introducing him to the ich- 
thyolites of the Lower Old Red Sandstone, by bringing him 
to my first-discovered bed, and laying open, by a blow of the 
hammer, a beautiful Osteoiepis. He was much interested in 
the fossils of my little collection, and at once decided that 
the formation which contained them could be no representa- 
tive of the Coal Measures. After ranging over the various 
beds on both sides the rectilinear ridge, and acquainting him- 
self thoroughly with their organisms, he set out to explore 
the Lower Old Red Sandstones of Moray and Banff*, hitherto 
deemed peculiarly barren, but whose character too much re- 
sembled that of the rocks which he had now ascertained to 
be so abundant in fossils, not to be held worthy of further 
examination. He explored the banks of the Spey, and found . 
the ichthyolite beds extensively developed at Dipple, in the 
middle of an Old Red Sandstone district. He pursued hi» 



TBB OLD RED SANDSTONE. 119 

ro&earches, and traced the formation in ravines and the beds 
of rivers, from the village of Buckie to near the field of Cul- 
loden ; he found it exposed in the banks of the Nairn, in the 
ravines above Cawdor Castle, on the eastern side of tlie hill 
of Rait, at Clune, Lethenbar, and in the vale of Rothes ^• 
and in every instance low in the Old Red Sandstone. The 
formation hitherto deemed so barren in remains proved one 
of the richest of them all, if not in tribes and families, at 
least in individual fossils ; and the reader may form somo 
idea of the extent in which it has already been proved fossil- 
iferous, when he remembers that the tract includes as its ex- 
tremes Orkney, Gamrie, and the north-eastern gorge of the 
great Caledonian Valley. The ichthyolites were discovered 
in the latter locality in the quarry of Inches, three miles be- 
yond Inverness, by Mr. Greorge Anderson, the gentleman to 
whose geological attainments, as one of the authors of the 
GtUde Book^ I have lately had occasion to refer. 

I had now corresponded for several years with a little circle 
of geological friends, and had described in my letters, and in 
some instances had attempted to figure in them, my newly- 
found fossils. A letter which I wrote early in 1838 to Dr. 
Malcolmson, then at Paris, and which contained a rude draw- 
ing of the PterichthySj was submitted to Agashiz, and the 
curiosity of the naturalist was excited. He examined the 
figure, rather, however, with interest than surprise, and read 
the accompanying description, not in the least inclined to 
scepticism by the singularity of its details. He had looked 
on too many wonders of a similar cast to believe that he had 
exhausted them, or to evince any astonishment that Geology 
should be found to contain one wonder more. Some months 
after, I sent a restored drawing of the same fossil to the Elgin 
Scientific Society. 1 must state, however^ that the restora- 



120 THB OLD RED SANDSTONE. 

tion was by no means complete. The paddle-like arms were 
placed further below the shoulders than in any actual spe- 
cies; and I had transferred, by mistake, to the creature^s 
upper side, some of the plates of the Coecosteus. Still the 
type was unequivocally that of the Pteriehlhys. The secre- 
tary of the Society, Mr. Patrick Dufi*, an excellent geologist, 
to whose labors, in an upper formation of the Old Red Sand- 
stone, I shall have aflerwards occasion to refer, questioned, 
as he well might, some of the details of the figure, and wc 
corresponded for several weeks regarding it, somewhat in the 
style of Jonathan Oldbuck and his fintiquarian friend, who 
succeeded in settling the meaning of two whole words, in an 
antique inscription, in little more than two years. Most of 
the other members looked upon the entire drawing, so strange 
did the appearance seem, as embodying a fiction of the same 
class with those embodied in the pictured griffins and uni- 
corns of mythologic Zoology ; and, in amusing themselves 
with it, they bestowed on its betailed and bepaddled figure, as 
if in anticipation of Agassiz, the name of the draughtsman. 
Not many months after, however, a bona fide Plerichlhys 
turned up in one of the newly discovered beds of Nairnshire, 
and the Association ceased to joke, and began to wonder. I 
merely mention the circumstance in connection with a right 
challenged, at the late meeting of the British Association at 
Glasgow, by a gentleman of Elgin, to be regarded as the 
original discoverer of the Plerichlhys. I am, of course, far 
from supposing that the discovery was not actually made, but 
regret that it should have been kept so closo a secret at a 
time when it might have stood the other discoverer of the 
creature in such stead. 

The exact place of the ichthyolites in the system was still 
to fix. I was spending a day, early in the winter of 1839, 



THB OLD K£P SANDSTONE. 121 

among the nearly vertical strata that lean against the North- 
cm Sutor. The section there presented is washed by the 
tide for nearly three hundred yards from where it rests on 
the granitic gneiss ; and each succeeding stratum in the 
ascending order may be as clearly traced as the alternate 
white and black squares in a marble pavement. First there 
is a bod of conglomefate two hundred and fifteen feet in 
thickness, " identical in structure,'* say Professor Sedgwick 
and Mr. Murchison, ^' with the older red conglomerates of 
Cumberland and the Island of Arran,* and which cannot be 
distinguished from those .conglomerates which lean against 
the southern flank of the Grampians, and on which Dunnot- 
tar Castle is built. Immediately above the conglomerate 
there is a hundred and fourteen feet more of coarse sand- 
stone strata, of a reddish yellow hue, with occasionally a few 
pebbles enclosed, and then twenty-seven feet additional of 
limestone and stratified clay. There are no breaks, no 
faults, no thinning out of strata — all the beds lie parallel, 
showing regular deposition. I had passed over the section 
twenty times before, and had carefully examined the lime- 
stone and the clay, but in vain. On this occasion, however, 
I was more fortunate. I struck off* a fragment It contained 
a vegetable impression of the same character with those of 
the ichthyolite beds ; and af\er an hour's diligent search, I 
had turned out from the heart of the stratum plates and scales 
enough to fill a shelf in a museum — the helmet-like onout 

* Different in one respect from the conglomerates of Arran. It 
abounds in rolled fragments of granite, whereas in those of Arran 
there occur no pebbles of this rock. Arran has now its granite in 
abundance ; the northern locality has none ; though, when the con- 
glomerates of the Lower Old Red Sandstone were in the ccurse of 
forming the case wts exactly the reverse. 
12* 



122 THE OLD RED SANDSIONB. 

of an OsteolepiSj the thorn-like spine of a ChAiraeanthuSj and 
a Coccosteus well nigh entire. I had at length, after a search 
of nearly ten years, found the true place of the ichthyolite 
bed« The reader may smile, hut 1 hope the smile will be a 
good-natured one ; a simple pleasure may be not the less sin- 
cere on account of its simplicity ; and ^^ little things are great 
to little men.*' I passed over and over the strata, and found 
there could be no mistake. The place of the fossil fish in 
the scale is little more than a hundred feet above the top, and 
not much more than a hundred yards above the base of the 
great conglomerate ; and there lie over it in this section about 
fivo hundred feet of soft, arenaceous stone, with here and 
there alternating bands of limestone and beds of clay studded 
with nodules — all belonging to the inferior Old Red Sand- 
stone. 

The enormous depth of the Old Red Sandstone of Eng 
land has been divided by Mr. Murchison into three members, 
or formations — the division adopted in his Elements by Mr. 
Lyell, as quoted in an early chapter. These are, the lowest, 
or Tilestone formation, the middle, or Cornstone formation, 
and the uppermost, or Quartzose conglomerate formation. 
The terms are derived from mineralogical characters, and in* 
adequate as designations, therefore, like that of the Old Red 
Sandstone itself, which, in many of its deposits, is not sand- 
stonej and is not red. But they ser%'e to express great natural 
divisions. Now the Tilestone member of England re pre- 
sents, as I have already stated, this Lower Old Red Sand* 
stone formation of Scotland ; but its extent of vertical de- 
velopment, compared with that of the other two members of 
the sj'stem, is strikingly different in the two c entries. The 
Tilestones compose the least of the three divisions m Eng- 
land; their representative in Scotland forma by much the 



122« 



i 



THS OLD E£J SA1«DST0N£. 123 

greatest of the three ; and there seems to be zoological as 
well as lithological evidence that its formation must have 
occupied no brief period. The same genera occur in its upper 
as in its lower beds^ hut the species appear to he different. 
I shall briefl}' state the evidence of this very curious fact. 

The seat of Sir William Gordon Gumming, of Altyre, is i9 
the neighborhood of one of the Morayshire deposits discov- 
ered by Mr. Malcolmson ; and for the greater part of the last 
two years Lady Gordon Gumming has been engaged in mak- 
ing a collection of its peculiar fossils, which already fills an 
entire apartment. The object of her Ladyship was the illus- 
tration of the Geology of the district, and all she sought in it 
on her own behalf was congenial employment for a singularly 
elegant and comprehensive mind. But her labors have -ren- 
dered her a benefactor to science. Her collection was visited, 
shortly after the late meeting of the British Association in 
Glasgow, by Agassiz and Dr. Buckland ; and great was the 
surprise and delight of the philosophers to find that the whole 
was new to Geology. All the species, amounting to eleven, 
and at least one of the genera, that of the Glyptolepis^ were 
different from any Agassiz had ever seen or described before. 
The deposit so successfully explored by her Ladyship occurs 
high in the lower formation. Agassiz, shortly after, in com- 
paring the collection of Dr. Traill (a collection formed at 
Orkney) with that of the writer, (a collection made at Grom- 
arty,) was struck by the specific identity of the specimens. 
In tRe instances in which the genera agreed, he found that the 
species agreed also, though the ichthyolites of both differed 
specifically from the ichthyolites of Gaithncss, which occur 
chiefly in the upper beds of the formation, and from those 
also of Lady Gumming of Altyre, which occur, as I have 
teid, at the top. And in examining into the cause, it was 



J24 



THE OLD BED SANDSTONE. 



found that the two collections, though furnished hy localities 
more than a hundred miles apart, were yet derived, if I may 
so express myself, from the same low platform, both alike 
representing the fossiliferous base of the system, and both 
removed but by a single stage from the great unfossiliferous 
Conglomerate below. Thus there seem to be what may be 
termed two stories of being in this lower formation — stories 
in which the groups, though generically identical, are specifi- 
cally dissimilar.* 



• Since this period, however, several species identical with those 
of Cromarty have been (bond in the Morayshire deposits. 



CHAPTER Vni. 

Upper Fonnations of the Old Red Sandstone. — Room enough for each 
and to spare. — Middle, or Comstone Formation. — The Cephas 
kupis its most characteristic Organism. — Description. — The Den 
of Bahruddery richer in the Fossils of this middle Formation than 
any other Locality yet discovered. — Various Contemporaries of 
the Cephakupit, — Vegetable Impressions. — Oig^tic Crustacean. 
— Sgraphim, — IchthyodoniUtes. — Sketch of the Geology of For- 
farshire. — Its older Deposits of the Comstone Formation. — The 
Quarries of Carmylie. — Their Vegetable and Animal Remains. — 
The Upper Formation. — Wide Extent of the Fauna and Flora of 
the earlier Formations. — Probable Cause. 

Hitherto I have dwelt almost exclusively on the fossils of 
the Lower Old Red Sandstone, and the history of their dis* 
covery : I shall now ascend to the organisms of its higher 
platforms. The system in Scotland, as in the sister kingdom, 
has its middle and upper groups, and these are in no degree 
less curious than the inferior group already described, nor do 
they more resemble the existences of the present time. 
Does the reader remember the illustration of the pyramid 
employed in an early chapter — its three parallel bars, and 
the strange hieroglyphics of the middle bar? Let him now 
imagine another pyramid, inscribed with the remaining and 
later history of the system. We read, as before, from tho 
base upwards, but fmd the broken and half-defaced characters 
of the second erection descending into the very soil, as in 
those obelisks of Egypt round which the sands of the desert 
have been accumulating for ages. Hence a hiatus in our his- 
tory for future excavators to fill ; and it contains many such 
blanks, every unfossiliferous bar in either pyramid reprcftcnt- 

(125) 



126 TI'B OLD RED SAKDSTOHB. 

ing a gap in the record. Three distinct formations the group 
undoubtedly contains — perhaps more; nor will the fact 
appear strange to the reader who remembers how numerous 
the formations are that lie over and under it, and that its vast 
depth of ten thousand feet equals that of the whole secondary 
system from top to bottom. Eight such formations as the 
Oolite, or ten such formations as the Chalk, could rest, thu 
one over the other, in the space occupied by a group so 
enormous. To the evidence of its three distant formations, 
which is of a very simple character, I shall advert as I go 
along. 

The central or Comstone division of the system in Eng- 
land is characterized throughout its vast depth by a peculiar 
family of ichthyolites, which occur in none of the other 
divisions. I have already had occasion to refer to the Cepha* 
laspis. Four species of this fish have been discovered in 
the Cornstones of Hereford, Salop, Worcester, Monmouth, and 
Brecon ;• " and as they are always found," says Mr. Murch- 
ison, " in the same division of the Old Red System, they 
have become valuable auxiliaries in enabling the geologist to 
identify its subdivisions through England and Wales, and also 
to institute direct comparisons between the different strata of 
the Old Red Sandstone of England and Scotland.^f The 
Cephalaspis is one of the most curious ichthyolites of the sys- 
tem. (See Plate XIII., fig. 1.) Has the reader ever seen a 
saddler^s cutting knife ? — a tool with a crescent-shaped 
blade, and the handle fixed transversely in the centre of its 
concave side. In general outline the Cephalaspii resembled 
this tool — the crescent-shaped blade representing the head 
iie transverse handle the body. We have but to give the 



* Cephalaspis Leirisu, C, Lhydii, C LyeUH^ and C 
t See Note E 2. 



THE OLD RED SANDSTONE. 127 

tiandle an angular, instead of a rounded shape, and to press 
together the pointed horns of the crescent, till they incline 
towards each other, and the convex, or sharpened edge, is 
elongated into a semi-ellipse, cut in the line of its shortest 
diameter, in order to produce the complete form of the Ceph' 
aiaspis. The head, compared with the body, was of great 
size — comprising fully one third the creature's entire length. 
In the centre, and placed closely together, as in many of the 
flat fish, were the eyes. Some of the specimens show two • 
dorsals, and an anal and caudal fin. The thin and angular 
body presents a jointed appearance, somewhat like that of a 
lobster or trilobite. Like the bodies of most of the ichthyolitcs 
of the system, it was covered with variously formed scales of 
bone ; the creature's head was cased in strong plates of the 
same material, the whole upper side lying under one huge 
buckler-:- and hence the name Cephalaspis^ or buckler-heid. 
In proportion to its strength and size, it seems to have bjen 
amply furnished with weapons of defence. Such was the 
strength and massiveness of its covering, that its remains are 
found comparatively entire in arenaceous rocks impregnated 
with iron, in which few other fossils could have survived. 
Its various species, as they occur in the Welsh and English 
Comstones, says Mr. Murchison, seem " not to have been 
suddenly killed and entombed, but to have been long exposed 
to submarine agencies, such as the attacks of animals, cur- 
rents, concretionary action," dec. ; and yet, " though much 
dismembered, the geologist has little difficulty in recognizing 
even the smallest portions of them." Nor does it seem to 
have been quite unfurnished with offensive weapons. The 
sword-fish, with its strong and pointed spear, has been known 
to perforate the oaken ribs of the firmest built vessels ; and 
poised eftid directed by its lesser fins, and i npelled by its 
13 



128 V THE OLD RED SANDSTONE. 

powerful tail, it may be regarded either as an arrow or javelic 
flung with tremendous force, or as a knight speeding to the 
encounter with his lance in rest. Now there are missiles 
employed in Eastern warfare, which, instead of being pointed 
like the arrow or javelin, are edged somewhat like the 
crooked falchion or saddler^s cutting-knife, and which are 
capable of being cast with such force, that they have been 
known to sever a horse's leg through the bone ; and if the 
' sword-fish may be properly compared to an arrow or javelin, 
the combative powers of the Cephalaspis may be illustrated, 
it is probab|e, by a weapon of this kind — the head all around 
its elliptical margin presenting a sharp edge, like that of a 
cutting-knife, or falchion. Its impetus, however, must have 
been comparatively small, for its organs of motion were so : 
it was a bolt carefully fashioned, but a bolt cast from a feeble 
bow. But if weak in the assault, it mudt have been formida- 
ble when assailed. " The pointed horns of the crescent,'' 
said Agassiz to the writer, " seem to have served a similar 
purpose with the spear-like wings of the Pterichthys^'*'* — the 
sole difference consisting in the circumstance, that the spears 
of the one could be elevated or depressed at pleasure, where- 
as those of the other were ever fixed in the warlike attitude. 
And such was the Cephalaspu of the Cornstones — not only 
the most characteristic, but in England and Wales almost 
tlie sole organism of the formation. (See Note F.) 

Now of this curious ichthyoiite we find no trace among 
the fossils of the Lower Old Red Sandstone. It occurs neither 
in Orkney nor Cromarty, Caithness nor Gamrie, Nairnshire 
nor the inferior ichthyoiite beds of Moray. Neither in Eng- 
land nor in Scotland is it to be found in the Tilestone forma- 
tion, or its equivalent. It is common, however, in the Olc? 
Red Sandstone of Forfarshire ; and it occurs nt Balruddery 



128» 



THE (s^D BED SANDSTONE. 129 

in the Gray Sandstones which form on both sides the Tay, 
where the Tilestone formation seems wanting, the apparent 
base of the system. It is exclusively a medal of the middle 
empire. (See Note G.) 

In the last-mentioned locality, in a beautifully wooded dell, 
known as the Den of Balruddery, the Cephalasjris is found 
associated with an entire group of other fossils, the recent 
discovery of Mr. Webster, the proprietor, who, with a zeal 
through which geological knowledge promises to be materially 
extended, and at an expense of much labor, has made a col- 
lection of all the organisms of the Den yet discovered. 
These the writer had the pleasure of examining in the com- 
pany of Mr. Murchison and Dr. Buckland : he was afterwards 
present when they were examined by Agassiz ; and not a 
single organism of the group could be identified on either 
occasion, by any member of the party, with those of the 
lower or upper formations. Even the genera are dissimilar. 
The fossils of the Lias scarce differ more from those of the 
Coal Measures, than the fossils of the Middle Old Red Sand- 
stone from the fossils of the formations that rest over and 
under them. Each formation has its distinct group — a fact 
so important to the geologist, that he may feel an interest in 
its further verification through the decision of yet another high 
authority. The superior Old Red Sandstones of Scotland 
were first ascertained to be fossiliferous by Professor Fleming, 
>f King^s College, Aberdeen,* confessedly one of the first 



• Tlie Upper Old Red Sandstones of Moray were ascertained to 
be fossiliferous at nearly the same time by Mr. Martin, of the Ander- 
•on Institution, Elgin. There is a mouldering conglomerate precipice 
termed the Scal'Craiff, about four miles to the south of the town; 
more abundant in remains than perhaps any of the other deposits of 
13* 



Id*.- TBI QLI' JKI' 

BAiumiiscf o:' lAc met. aod wbo, lo ias 

wiLi exfsucrr lonK^ cf Mnc. ados as 

Mss.^ njioui-. vh: msse iorbs of pxinieYml lafe that no 

ejus: B-. r mY> wo.' ms: OBcoreied. io tbe Upper Old Bed 

San js:ofie> c:' TUtakart.. ibc- imxee scales and plates of tfaat 

erikiDpv cttanctenBzxr jcbsonrafaie of the iiipfaer fonnatiao, 

Dovr Kuovx. as UK HoiapiwcHmfi^-' of whicL more anon : and, 

HDQiKSUoiiaba . nc oik acquaiicec wiuj las wiixbi^, or the 

chancier of his mmL, can doob: that he examined caiefiilhr. 



tJK' ivTTxaiatacL jr. diaoorered : mar, n. t&i? precipiec lir. llntni fiiat 
eosBOK-iscAl ix-^ iihora n. the iLol ^maosstato of tise distriei, and fonnd 
t: L n-.r.v. c: wcauicK. 1: i^ x. pUce- c: Knxsisr interest — n Took of 
ae;*:^c!;:re^ , *»-' sb> tecti.. aeajes. xncl Biurie bane» occur in a statp of 
f!rrji: czlu«3ittft!> . thouzi.. crt bv* depos: -rasxaraGiL thcTrnxiouF ieb- 
tii>o;ii^ vri:«i#i remAia* x: oasssaf- mctsB. tr> iumr been broken up, and 
tLUt: irysz:iic:iit^ taaXZcraL. Accomuiaxiaa^ of ixxver ami smaller peb- 
bie> a:ieTU3X<: ic tiit straLi. : and tiir wilktrT- faonei^ and tce^ kb 
l)uail i.tvaxiab'tv amaxs*: the bulkier pebbie». thus nuvwinp thai they 
wen o^<L-rawc upor nv the aaoK hms a: motiac wbicL operated on 
ti»: luurvrjiui' cmiientr a: the deposii. Ai & coniidcTablr later period 
tiM. ii]iH*Ufr ol thir u}}per {rrom wen* detected in thr preeipitoiB aod 
itmuuitiv luiuu* of tiic- FriifltinTr.. bv Ih llairohnsnn. oi' Madias, when 
proavr^utiiti: ui^ di»cuvexi«» of tiic oxpmisniB of tbe Inwer iormation. 
Hi. i\*\xuC Uitnu, abo, tboup: xn iee^ obnndanec. in« splendid acctian 
ejcUiuiu.'C' ii. tbc- Bum of Lethen. a xivuist of Mnrov. and yet again in 
xhv i«<^igUburbood of Abrre. The Iknr. llx. Gordan, of Himif., and 
Mr. Jbio'uerlMm, of Xuvenipe, have been ako discoverers in tbe dis- 
U'kci. T\> the ^eoiopt»l laboTE of JSz. PatriiA. Buff, of Klgm, in tbe 
•aiue tkoki. I iia^'^ alreadr had Dccasicm incidcntiilhr to rda. Tbe pa> 
tA-Aii in^iuriius of this ^eutienian hare heen pnsemted for yoaxv in all 
tiie furuitftlon* <ji the prorinoe* from the Wesld of T^intfdifld, wxih its 
pci. vlUiij liM^miUijM fcaMUAS — li^:nxtes, xninute freih-irBter i&rBs, and 
HjAi Uki<L,«}Mnes,aiidir«rt«baeoffishandBaiiziass — dosrn tothebase 
<4 Chit Old lUd ftandar«>r, vith ils CoaamUi, D^t^. and PtarieMkjfm^ 



THE OLD RED SANDSTONE. 133 

Now, a few years since, I had the pleasure of introducing 
Professor Fleming to the Organisms of the Lower Old Red 
Sandstone, as they occur in the neighborhood of Cromarty ; 
and, notwithstanding his extensive acquaintance with the 
upper fossils of the system, he found himself, among the 
lower, in an entirely new field. His knowledge of the one 
group served but to show him how very different it was from 
the other. With the organisms of the lower he minutely 
acqaainted himself; he collected specimens from Gamric, 



His aoquaintance with the organisms of the Scat-Craig\A at once more 
extensiye and minute than that of^ perhaps, any other geologist ; and 
his collection of them very Taloable, representing, as it does, a forma- 
tion of much interest, still little known. Mr. Duff is at present en- 
gaged on a volume descriptive of the Geology of the province of 
Moray, a district eztensiyely explored of late years, and abundant in 
its distinct groups of organisms, but of which general readers have 
still much to learn ; and from no one could they learn more regarding 
it than firom Mr. Duff. It is still only a few months since the Upper 
Old Red Sandstones of the southern districts of Scotland were found 
to be foasiliferous ; and the writer is chiefly indebted for his acquaint- 
ance with their organisms to a tradesman of Berwickshire, Mr. Wil- 
liam Stevenson, of Dunse, who, on perusing some of the geological 
articles which appeared in the WUneas newspaper during the course 
of the last autumn, sent him a parcel of fossils disinterred from out the 
deep belt of Red Sandstone which leans to the south in that locality, 
against the grauwacke of the Lammcrmuirs. Mr. Stevenson had 
recently discovered them, he stated, near Preston-haugh, about twu 
miles north of Dunse, in a fine section of alternating Sandstone and 
conglomerate strata that lie unconformably on the grauwacke. They 
consist of scales and occipital plates of the Holoptychius, with the re- 
mains of a bulky, but very imperfectly preserved ichthyodorulite i 
and the coarse, arenaceous matrices which surround them seem iden- 
tical with the red gritty Sandstones of the Findhom and the Scat' 
Crmg, 



f^9tr,^^^0^ ./ V^ift*Rrt — 'tot ie TTjwBrars »' 

// «Vp Vh*f. .-Wfvn^ 'l>^r C'j»a^iJipi< n nmmnn — -iar iK 
<0#*«^y/,«i^ "Vi^^/^m^tni^ -if he ine, ua -iie ipner ^rann jf 
•V^ v*^/ .oivrfip hi^r fiol^jfrkiiis n Tmnmim : md ilea sy 

^iM>fVK «»>/Aff/ «vi«»M»i^k4^. ttL ho^WT^r. -be TOBter sdll ^sflnrr- 

/'/^ t^A An<>A «yffA,m, nrr>m The GtrfMoifemiis EjoKstDae to 
fM f'P^f ^itiit'ififv, driven h^ Mr. Miin:hi«m* in his SSmriam 
f^4hm, (t'ftn if.f t^Ai^ XXXl,^ a^ L) and be will find tbe 
4/^rM y^At^h. f$*fr f/> r^im to the fenls of tike Cb r ns to oe 

7'M Af,<irv<f/Tf'HHu*, fz/Mil of ttik deposit, the C^phalaspis^ 
/#6^ffM )r» /^;fr«f/pifMhU n^Kjnrlance in Forfarshire, and in a 
fhU**U fftfffn Afifirn ninifs than in the Comstones of England 
nwi Wti\f^M. 'Hm nmhi to which it belongs are also deyel- 



THE OLD RED SANDSTONE. 13o 

oped, though more sparingly, in the northern extremity of 
Fife, in a line parallel to the southern shores of the Tay. 
But of all the localities yet known, the Den of Balruddery is 
that in which the peculiar organisms of the formation may he 
studied with best eflfect The oryctology of the Ccinstones of 
England seems restricted to four species of the Cephalaspis. 
In Fife, all the organisms of the formation yet discovered are 
exclusively vegetable — darkened impressions of stems like 
those of the inferior ichthyolite beds, confusedly mixed with 
what seem slender and pointed leaflets drawn in black, and 
numerous circular forms, which have been deemed the re« 
mains of the seed-vessels of some unknown sub-aerial plant 
** These last occur," says Professor Fleming, the original dis- 
coverer, **' in the form of circular flat patches, not equalling 
an inch in diameter, and composed of numerous smaller con- 
tiguous circular pieces ; '^ the totU ensemble resembling ^' what 
might be expected to result from a compressed berry, such as 
the bramble or the rasp." In Forfarshire, the remains of the 
Cephalaspis are found associated with impressions of a difler- 
ent character, though equally obscure — impressions of pol- 
ished surfaces carved into seeming scales ; but in Balruddery 
alone are the vegetable impressions of the one locality, and 
the scaly impressions of the other, together with the charac- 
teristic k^hthyolites of England and Forfarshire, found asso- 
ciated with numerous fossils besides, many of them obscure, 
but all of them of interest, and all of them new to Geology. 
One of the strangest organisms of the formation is a fossil 
lobster, of such huge proportions, that one of the average 
sized lobsters, common in our markets, might stretch its en- 
tile length across the continuous tail-flap in which the crea- 
ture terminated.* And it is a marked characteristic of the 
fossil, that the terminal flap should be continuous ; in all the 
• See Note H. 



134 THE OLD RED SANDSTONE 

existing varieties with which I am acquainted, it is divided into 
angular sections. The claws nearly resembled those of the 
common lobster ; their outline is similar ; there is the same 
hawk-bill curvature outside, and the inner sides of the pincers 
are armed with similar teeth-like tubercles. The immense 
shield which covered the upper part of the creature^s body is 
more angular than in the existing varieties, and resembles, 
both in form and size, one of those lozenge-shaped shields 
worn by knights of the middle ages on gala days, rather for 
ornament than use, and on which the herald still inscribes the 
armorial bearing of ladies who bear title in their own right. 
As shown in some of the larger specimens, the length of this 
gigantic crustacean must have exceeded four feet. Its shelly 
armor was delicately fretted with the forms of circular or 
elliptical scales. On all the many plates of which it was 
composed we see these described by gracefully waved lines, 
and rising apparently from under one another, row beyond 
row. They were, however, as much the mere semblance of 
scales as those relieved by the sculptor on the corslet of a 
warrior's effigy on a Gothic tomb — mere sculpturings on the 
surface of the shell. This peculiarity may be regarded as 
throwing light on the hitherto doubtful impressions of the 
sandstone of Forfarshire — impressions, as has been said, of 
smooth surfaces carved into seeming scales. They occur as 
impressions merely, the sandstone retaining no more of the 
original substance of the organism than the impressed wax 
does of the substance of the seal ; and the workn\cn in the 
quarries in which they occur, finding form without body, and 
struck by the resemblance which the delicately waved scales 
oear to the sculptured markings en the wings of cherubs — of 
all subjects of the chisel the most common — fancifully termed 
»hem Seraphim. They have turned out, as was anticipated. 



- THE OLD RED SANDSTONE. 135 

to l>e the detached plates of some such crustacean as the lob- 
ster of Balruddery. (See Note H 2.) 

The ability displayed by Cuvier in restoring, from a few 
broken fragments of bone, the skeleton of the entire animal 
to which the fragments had belonged, astonished the world 
He had learned to interpret signs as incomprehensible to 
every one else as the mysterious handwriting on the wall had 
been to the courtiers of Belshazzar. The condyle of a jaw 
became in his hands a key to the character of the original 
possessor ; and in a few mouldering vertebrae, or in the dilap- 
idated bones of a fore-arm or a foot, he could read a curioutr 
history of habits and instincts. In common with several gen- 
tlemen of Edinburgh, all men known to science, I was ah 
much struck with the skill displayed by Agassiz in piecing 
together the fragments of the huge crustacean of Balruddery, 
and in demonstrating its nature as such. The numerous 
specimens of Mr. Webster were opened out before us. On 
a previous morning I had examined them, as I have said, in 
the company of Mr. Murchison and Dr. Buckland ; they had 
been seen also by Lord Greenock, Dr. Traill, and Mr. Charles 
McLaren ; and their fragments of new and undescribed fishes 
had been at once recognized with reference to at least their 
class. But the collection contained organisms of a different 
kind, which seemed inexplicable to all — forms of various 
design, but so regularly mathematical in their outlines that 
they might be all described by a ruler and a pair of com- 
passes, and yet the whole were covered by seeming scales. 
There were the fragments of scaly rhombs, of scaly cres- 
cents of scaly circles, with scaly parallelograms attached to 
them, and of several other regular compound figures besides. 
Mr. Murchison, familiar with the older fossils, remarked the 
dofe resemblance of the seeming scales to those of the Ser- 



136 THB OLD BED SANDSTONX. * 

apkim of Forfarshire, but deferred the whole to the judgmen 
of Agassiz ; no one else hazarded a conjecture. Agaasiz 
glanced over the collection. One specimen especially caught 
his attention — an elegantly symmetrical one. It seemed a 
combination of the parallelogram and the crescent: there 
were pointed horns at each end ; but the convex and concave 
lines of the opposite sides passed into almost parallel right 
lines towards the centre. His eye brightened as he contem- 
plated it '^ I will tell you,^^ he said, turning to the company 
— "I will tell you what these are — the remains of a huge 
lobster." He arranged the specimens in the group b^ore 
him with as much apparent ease as I have seen a young girl 
arranging the pieces of ivory or mother-of-pearl in an Indian 
puzzle. A few broken pieces completed the lozenge-shaped 
shield ; two detached specimens, placed on its opposite sides, 
furnished the claws ; two or three semi-rings, with serrated 
edges, composed the jointed body ; the compound figure, 
which but a minute before had so strongly attracted his atten* 
tion, furnished the terminal flap ; and there lay the huge lob- 
ster before us, palpable to all. There is homage due to 
supereminent genius, which nature spontaneously pays when 
there are no low feelings of envy or jealousy to interfere 
with her operations ; and the reader may well believe that it 
A^as willingly rendered on this occasion to the genius of 
Agassiz. 

The terminal flap of this gigantic crustacean was, as I 
have said, continuous. The creature, however, seems to 
have had contemporaries of the same family, whose construc- 
tion in the divisions of the flap resembled more the lol)sters 
of the present day ; and the reader may see in the subjoined 
print the representation of a very characteristic fragment of 
*in animal of this commoner type, from the Middle Sandstones 



THE OLD RED SANDSTONE. 137 

of Forfarshire. (See Plate XI., fig. 1.) It is a terminul 
flap* — one of seyeral divisions — curiously fretted by scale- 
like markings, and l>earing on its lower edge a fringe, cut 
into angular points, somewhat in the style of the Vandyke 
edgings of a rufi* or the lacings of a dead-dress. It may be 
remarked, in passing, that our commoner lobsters bear, on 
the corresponding edge, fringes of strong, reddish-colored 
hair. The form altogether, from its wing-like appearance, 
its feathery markings, and its angular points, will suggest to 
the reader the origin of the name given it by the Forfarshire 
workmen. With another such flap spread ng out in the con- 
trary direction, and a periwigged head between them, we 
would have one of the sandstone cherubs of our country 
churchyards complete. 

There occur among the other organisms of Balruddery 
numerous ichthyodorulites — fin-spines, such as those to 
which I have called the attention of the reader in describing 
the thorny-finned fish of the lower formation.t But the ich- 
tbyodorulites of Balruddery diflfer essentially from those of 
Caithness, Moray, and Cromarty. These last are described 
on both sides, in every instance, by either straight, or slightly 
curved lines ; whereas one of the describing lines in a Bal- 
ruddery variety is broken by projecting prickles, that re- 
semble sharp, hooked teeth set in a jaw, or, rather, the entire 
ichthyodorulite resembles the sprig of a wild rose-bush, 
bearing its peculiar aquiline shaped thorns on oie of its 
sides. Buckland, in his Bridgewaier Treatise^ and Lyell, in 
his Elements^ refer to this peculiarity of structure in ichthy- 
odorulites of the latter formations. The hooks are invariably 
ranged on the concave or posterior edge of the spine, and 
were employed, it is supposed, in elevating the fin. Another 
ichthyodorulite of the formation resembles, in the Gothio 
• See Note H 2. •See Note O 2. 



138 THE OLD RED SANDSTONE. 

cast of Its roddiDgs, those of the Diplacanihus of the Lower 
Old Red Sandstone described in pages 84 and 85 of the 
present volume, and figured in Plate VIII., fig. 2, except that 
it was proportionally stouter, and traversed at its base by 
lines running counter to the striae that furrow it longitudinally. 
Of the other organisms of Balruddery I cannot pretend to 
speak with any degree of certainly. Some of them seem to 
liave belonged to the Radial a ; some are of so doubtful a 
character tliat it can scarce be determined whether they took 
their place among the forms of the vegetable or animal king-^ 
doms. One organism in particular, which was at first deemed 
the jointed stem of some plant resembling a calamite of the 
Coal Measures, was found by Agassiz to be the slender limb 
of a crustacean. A minute description cf this interesting de- 
posit, with illustrative prints, would be of importance to sci- 
ence : it would servo to fill a gap in the scale. The geologi- 
cal pathway, which leads upwards to the present time from 
those ancient formations in which organic existence first 
began, has been the work of well nigh as many hands as 
some of our longer railroads : each contractor has taken his 
part ; very extended parts have fallen to the share of some, 
and admirably have they executed them ; but the pathway is 
not yet complete, and the completion of a highly curious 
portion of it awaits the further labors of Mr. Webster, of 
Balruddery. 

A considerable portion of the rocks of this middle forma- 
tion in Scotland are of a bluish-gray color : inr Balruddery, 
they resemble the mudstones of the Silurian System ; they 
form at Carmylie the fissile, bluish-gray pavement, so well 
known in commerce as the pavement of Arbroath ; they 
occur as a hard, micaceous building-stone in some parts of 
Fifeshire ; in others they exist as beds of friable, stratified 



THE OLD RED SANDSTONE. 139 

clay, that dissoWe into unctuous masses where washed by 
the sea. In England, the formation consists, ihroughout its 
entire depth, of beds of red and green marl, with alternating 
beds of the nodular limestones, to which it owes its name, 
and with here and there an interposing band of indurated 
landstone. 

The Comstone formation is more extensively developed in 
Forfarshire than in any other district in Scotland ; and from 
this circumstance the result of the writer^s observations re- 
garding it, during the course of a recent visit, may be of 
some little interest to the reader. About two thirds the en- 
tire area of this county is composed of Old Red Sandstone. 
It forms a portion of that great belt of the system which, ex- 
tending across the island from the German Ocean to the Frith 
of Clyde, represents the southern bar of the huge sandstone 
frame in which the Highlands of Scotland is set. The Gram- 
pians run along its inner edge — composing part of the pri- 
mary nucleus which the frame encloses: the Sidlaw Hills 
run through its centre in a line nearly parallel to these, and 
separated from them by Strathmore, the great valley of An- 
gus. The valley and the hills thus form, if I may so express 
myself, the mouldings of the frame — mouldings somewhat 
resembling the senii-rccta of the architect. There is first, 
reckoning from the mountains downwards, an immense con- 
cave curve — the valley ; then an immense convex one — the 
hills ; and then a half curve bounded by the sea. The illus- 
tration may further serve to show the present condition of the 
formation: it is a frame much worn by denudation, and — 
just as in a bona fide frame — it is the higher mouldings thai 
have sufiered most. Layer after layer has been worn down 
on tlie ridges, exactly as on a raised moulding we may see 
«be g'>ld leaf, the red pigment, and the whiting, all ground 
14 • 



140 THE OLD RED Si\NDSTONB. 

down to the wood ; while in the hollow moulding beside it, on 
the contraxy, the gilt is still fresh and entire. We find in the 
hollows the superior layers of the frame still overlying the 
inferior ones, and on the heights the inferior ones laid bare. 
To descend in the system, therefore, we have to climb a hill 
— to rise in it, we have to descend into a valley. We find 
the lowest beds of the system any where yet discovered in 
the county on the moory heights of Carmylic ; its newer de- 
posits may be found on the sea-shore, beside the limeworka 
of Hedderwick, and in the central hollows of Strathmore. 

The most ancient beds in the county yet known belong, as 
unequivocally shown by their fossils, to but the middle forma- 
tion of the system. They have been quarried for many 
years in the parish of Carmylie ; and the quarries, as may 
be supposed, are very extensive, stretching along a moory 
hill-side for considerably more than a mile, and furnishing 
employment to from sixty to a hundred workmen. The eye 
is first caught, in approaching them, as we surmount a long, 
flat ridge, which shuts them out from the view of the distant 
sea, by what seems a line of miniature windmills, the sails 
flaring with red lead, and revolving with the lightest breeze 
at more than double the rate of the sails of ordinary mills. 
These are employed — a lesson probably borrowed from the 
Dutch — in draining the quarries, and throw up a very con- 
siderable body of water. The line of the excavations resem- 
bles a huge drain, with nearly perpendicular sides — a conse- 
quence of the regular and well-determined character of the 
joints with which the strata are bisected. The stone itself is 
a gray, close-grained fissile sandstone, of unequal hardness, 
and so very tough and coherent — qualities which it seems 
to owe in part to the vast abundance of mica which it con- 
tains — that it is quite possible to strike a small hammer 



THE OLD RED SANDSTONE. 141 

* 

through some of the latter flags, without shattering the edges 
of the perforation. Hence its value for various ,/urposes 
which common sandstone is too brittle and incoherent to 
serve. It is extensively used in the neighborhood as a roofing 
slate ; it is employed, too, in the making of water cisterns, 
grooved and jointed as if wrought out of wood, and for the 
tops of lobby and billiard tables. I have even seen snuff- 
boxes fashioned out of it, as a sort of mechanical feat by the 
workmen, — a purpose, however, which it seems to serve only 
indiflerently well, — and single slabs of it cut into tolerably 
neat window frames for cottages. It is most extensively used, 
however, merely as a paving-stone for lobbies and lower 
floors, and the footways of streets. When first deposited, and 
when the creatures whose organic remains it still preserves 
careered over its numerous platforms, it seems to have existed 
as a fine, muddy sand, formed apparently of disintegrated 
grauwacke rocks, analogous in their mineral character to the 
similarly colored grauwacke of the Lammermuirs, or of pri- 
mary slates ground down by attrition into mud, and mixed up 
with the pulverized fragments of schistose gneiss and mica 
schist 

I was first struck, on descending among the workmen, by 
the comparative abundance of the vegetable remains. In 
some parts of the quarries almost every layer of the strata is 
covered by carbonaceous markings — irregularly grooved 
stems, branching out into boughs at acute angles, and that at 
the first glance seem the miniature semblances of the trunks 
of gnarled oaks and elms, blackened in a morass, and still 
retaining the rough bark, chopped into furrows : oblong, leaf- 
like impressions, too, and impressions of more slender form, 
thit resemble the narrow, parallel edged leaves of the sea- 
giass weed. I observed, in particular, one large bunch of 



142 THE OLD BED SANDSTONE. 

r.band-Iike leaflets converging into a short stem, so that tho 
whole resembled a scourge of cords ; and I would fain have 
detached it from the rock, but it lay on a mouldering film of 
clay, and broke up with my first attempt to remove it. A 
stalk of sea-grass weed plucked up by the roots, and com- 
pressed in a herbarium, would present a somewhat similar 
appearance. Among the impressions there occur irregularly 
shaped patches, reticulated into the semblance of polygonal 
meshes. They remind one of pieces of ill-woven lace ; for 
tho meshes are unequal in size, and the polygons irregular. 
(See Plate XI., fig. 2.) When first laid open, every mesh is 
filled with a carbonaceous speck ; and from their supposed 
resemblance to the eggs of the frog, the workmen term them 
puddock spawn. They are supposed by Mr. Lyell to form 
the remains of the eggs of some gasteropodous mollusc of the 
period. I saw one flagstone, in particular, so covered with 
these reticulated patches, and so abundant, besides, in vegeta* 
ble impressions of both the irregularly furrowed and grass- 
weed-looking class, that I could compare it to only the bottom 
of a ditch beside a hedge, matted with withered grass, 
strewed with blackened twigs of the hawthorn, and mottled 
with detached masses of the eggs of the frog.* All the larger 
vegetables are resolved into as pure a coal as the plants of 
tho Coal Measures themselves — the kind of data, doubtless, 
on which unfortunate coal speculators have often earned dis- 
appointment at large expense. None of the vegetables 
.hemselves, however, in the least resemble those of the car- 
lK)niferous period. 

The animal remains, though less numerous, are more 
interesting. They are identical with those of the Den of 
Balruddery. I saw, in the possession of the superintend- 
ent of the quarries, a well-preserved head of the Cephalas* 
♦ See Notr I. Plate XII. 



142* 



PLATE Xn. 
PARKA DECIPIENS. 



The above cr. graving i» from a specimen in the private collection of 
Lord Kinnaird, at Kossie Priory. 



TBB OLD RED SaNDSTONE. 143 

pis Lyellii, The crescent-shaped horns were wanting, 
and the outline a little obscure; but the eyes were better 
marked than in almost any other specimen I have yet 
seen, and the circular star-like tubercles which roughen 
the large occipital buckler, to which the creature owes its 
naro^, were tolerably well defined. I was shown the head 
of another individual of the same species in the centre of a 
large slab, and nothing could be more entire than the outline. 
The osseous plate still retained the original brownish- white 
hue of the bone, and its radiated porous texture ; and the 
sharp crescent-shaped horns were as sharply defined as dur- 
ing the lifetime of the strangely organized creature which 
they had defended. In both specimens the thin angular body 
was wanting. Like almost all the other fish of the Old 
Red Sandstone, the bony skeleton of the Cephalaspis was 
external — as much so as the shell of the crab or lobster : it 
presented at all points an armor of bone, as complete as if 
it had been carved by the ivory-turner out of a solid block ; 
while the internal skeleton, which in every instance has dis- 
appeared, seems to have been composed of cartilage. I 
have compared its general appearance to a saddler^s cutting- 
knife ; — I should, perhaps, have said a saddler's cutting- 
knife divested of the wooden handle — the broad, bony head 
representing the blade, and the thin angular body the iron stem 
usually fixed in^e wood. No existence of the present crea- 
tion at all resembles the Cephaiaspis. Were we introduced 
to the living creatures which now inhabit the oceans and riv- 
ers of Mars and Venus, we could find nothing among thenr. 
more strange in appearance, or more unlike our living 
acquaintances of the friths and streams than the Cej}halas- 
pides of Carmylie. (See Note F.) 

I observed, besides, in the quarry, remains of the huge 



144 THE OLD BED SANDSTONE. 

crustacean of Balruddery. The plates of the Cephalaspu 
retain the color of the original bone ; the plates of the crusta- 
cean, on the contrary, are of a deep red tint, which contrasts 
strongly with the cold gray of the stone. They remind one, 
both ii) shape and hue, of pieces of ancient iron armor, fretted 
into semi-elliptical scales, and red with rust. I saw with one 
of the workmen what seemed to have been the continuous 
tail-flap of an individual of very considerable size. It seemed 
curiously puckered where it had joined to the body, much in 
the manner that a gown or Highlander's kilt is puckered 
where it joins to the waistband ; and the outline of the whole 
plate was marked by what I may venture to term architectural 
elegance. The mathematician could have described it with 
his ruler and compasses. The superintendent pointed out to 
me another plate in a slab dressed for a piece of common 
pavement. It was a regularly formed parallelogram, and had 
obviously composed one of the jointed plates which had cov- 
ered the creature's body. I could not so easily assign its 
place to yet a third plate in the possession of the Rev. Mr, 
Wilson, of Carmylie. It is colored, like the others, and like 
them, too, fretted into minute scales, but the form is exactly 
that of a heart — not such a heart as the anatomist would 
draw, but such a heart, rather, as we see at times on valen- 
tines of the humbler order, or on the ace of hearts in a pack 
of cards. Possibly enough it may have been the breastplate 
of this antique crustacean of the Cornstones. The spawn of 
our common blue lobster is composed of spherical black 
grains, of nearly the size of mustard-seed. It struck me as 
not very improbable that the reticulated markings of the flag- 
stones of Carmylie may have been produced by the minute 
eggs of this fossil crustacean, covered up by some hastily 
deposited layer of mingled mud and sand, and forced into the 



THE OLD RED SANDSTONE. 145 

|X>1ygonaI form by pressing against each other, and by the 
weight from above. (See Note I.) 

The gray fissile bed in which these organisms occur was 
perforated to its base on two several occasions, and in difierent 
parts of the quarries — in one instance, merely to ascertain 
its depth ; in the other, in the course of excavating a tunnel. 
In the one case it was found to rest on a bed of trap, which 
seemed to have insinuated itself among the strata with as little 
disturbance, and which lay nearly as conformably to them as 
the greenstone bed of Salisbury Crags does to the alternating 
sandstones and clays which both underlie and overtop it In 
the other instance the excavators arrived at a red, aluminous 
sandstone, veined by a purplish-colored oxide of iron. The 
upper strata of the quarry are overlaid by a thick bed of 
grayish-red conglomerate. 

Leaving behind us the quarries of Carmylie, we descend the 
bill-side, and rise in the system as we lower our level and 
advance upon the sea. For a very considerable distance we 
find the rock covered up by a deep-red diluvial clay, largely 
charged with water-worn boulders, chiefly of the older pri- 
mary rocks, and of the sandstone underneath. The soil on 
the higher grounds is moory and barren — a consequence, 
in great part, of a hard, ferruginous pan, which interposes 
like a paved floor between the diluvium and the upper mould, 
and which prevents the roots of the vegetation from striking 
downwards into the tenacious subsoil. From its impervious 
character, too, it has the effect of rendering the surface a bog 
for one half the year, and an arid, sun-baked waste for the 
other. It seems not improbable that the heaths which must 
have grown and decayed on these heights for many ages, may 
have been main agents in the formation of this pavement oi 
barrenopss. Of all plants, they are wiid to contain most iron 
15 



146 THE OLD RED SANDSTONE. 

According to Fourcroy, a full twelfth part of the weight ol 
oak, when dried, is owing to the presence of this almost uni- 
versally diffused metal ; and the proportion in our common 
heaths is still larger. It seems easy to conceive how that, as 
generation * after generation withered on these heights, and 
were slowly resolved into a little mossy dust, the minute me- 
tallic particles which they had contained would be carried 
downwards by the rains through the lighter stratum of soil, 
till, reaching the impermeable platform of tenacious clay be- 
neath, they would gradually accumulate there, and at length 
bind its upper layer, as is the nature of ferruginous oxide, 
into a continuous stony crust. Bog iron, and the clay iron- 
stone, so abundant in the Coal Measures, and so extensively 
employed in our iron-works, seem to have owed their accu- 
mulation in layers and nodules to a somewhat similar process, 
through the agency of vegetation. But I digress. 

The rock appears in the course of the Elliot, a few h»:n- 
dred yards above the pastoral village of Arbirlot. We find 
it uptilted on a mass of clay stone amygdaloid, that has here 
raised its broad back to the surface amid the middle shales 
and sandstones of the system. The stream runs over the 
intruded mass ; and where the latter terminates, and the 
sandstones lean against it, the waters leap from the harder tc 
the softer rock, immediately beside the quiet parish burying- 
ground, in a cascade of some eight or ten feet. From this 
point, for a full mile downwards, we find an almost continuous 
section of the sandstone — stratum leaning against stratum 
— in an angle of about thirty. The portion of the system 
thus exhibited must amount to many hundred yards in vertical 
extent ; but as I could discover no data by which to deter- 
mine regardmg the space which may intervene between its 
owest stratum and the still lower beds of Carmylie, I could 



THE OLD RED SANDSTOKB. 147 

form no guess respecting the thickness of the whole. In a 
bed of shale, about a quarter of a mile below the village, I 
detected several of the vegetable impressions of Carmylie^ 
especially those of the grass- weed looking class, and an im- 
perfectly preserved organism resembling the parallelogrami- 
cal scale of a CephalaspU. The same plants and animals 
seem to have existed on this high platform as on the Carmy- 
lie platform far beneath. 

A little farther down the course of the stream, and in the 
*mmediate neighborhood of the old weather-worn tower of 
the Ouchterlonies, there occurs what seems a break in the 
strata. The newer sandstones seem to rest unconformably 
on the older sandstones which they overlie. The evening on 
which I explored the course of the Elliot was drizzly and un- 
pleasant, and the stream swollen by a day of continuous rain, 
and so I could not examine so minutely as in other circum- 
stances I would have done, or as was necessary to establish 
the fact. In since turning over the Elements of Lyell, how- 
ever, I find, in his section of Forfarshire, that a newer deposit 
of nearly horizontal strata of sandstone and conglomerate 
lies unconformably, in the neighborhood of the sea, on the 
older sandstones of the district ; and the appearances ob- 
served near the old tower mark, it is probable, one of the 
points of junction — a point of junction also, if I may be so 
bold as venture the suggestion, of the formation of tho 
HoloptychitLS nobilissimus with the formation of the Cepha- 
Jaspis — of the quartzose conglomerate with the Cornstones. 
In ray hurried survey, however, I could find none of the scales 
or plates of the newer ichlhyolite in this upper deposit, though 
the numerous spherical markings of white, with their cen- 
trical points of darker color, show that at one time the organ- 
isms of these upper beds must have been vorv abundant* 



148 THE OLD BED SANDSTONE. 

We pass to the upper formation of the system. Over the 
belt of mingled gray and red there occurs in the pyramid a 
second deep belt of red conglomerate and variegated sand- 
stone, with a band of lime a-top, and over the band a thick 
belt of yellow sandstone, with which the system terminates.* 
Thus the second pyramid consists mineralogically, like the 
first, of three great divisions, or bands ; its two upper bclu 
belonging, like the three belts of the other, to but one forma- 
tion — the formation known in England as the Quartzose 
Conglomerate. It is largely developed in Scotland. Wo 
find it spread over extensive areas in Moray, Fife, Roxburgh, 
smd Berwick shires. In England, it is comparatively barren 
in fossils ; the only animal organic remains yet detected in it 
being a single scale of the Holoptychius found by Mr. Murch- 
ison; and though it contains vegetable organisms in more 
abundance, so imperfectly are they preserved, that little else 
can be ascertained regarding them than that they were land 



^ There still exists some uncertainty regarding the order in which 
the npper beds occur. Mr. Duff, of Elgin, places the limestone band 
above the yellow sandstone ; Messrs. Sedgwick and Murchison assign 
it an intermediate position between the red and yellow. The respec- 
tive places of the gray and red sandstones are also disputed, and bv 
very high authorities ; Dr. Fleming holding that the gray sandstones 
overlie the red, (see Cheek* t Edinburgh Journal for February, 1831,) and 
Mr. Lyell, that the red sandstones overlie the gray, (see Eiements of 
Geology, first edit., pp. 99-100.) The order adopted above consort* 
best with the results of the writer's observations, which have, how- 
ever, been restricted chiefly to the north country. He assigns to th« 
limestone band the middle place assigned to it by Messrs. Sedgwick 
and Murchison, and to the gray sandstone the inferior position as- 
signed to it by Mr. Lyell ; aware, however, that the latter depo)i*t 
has not only a coping, but also a basement, of red sandstone — > *^ 
'casement forming the upper member of the lower formation. 



THE OLD RED SANDSTONE. 149 

plants, but not identical with the plants of the Coal Measures.* 
In Scotland, the formation is richly fossil iferous, and the re- 
mains belong chiqfly to the animal kingdom. It is richly fos- 
siliferous, too, in Russia, where it was discovered by Mr. 
Murchison, during the summer of last year, spread over areas 
many thousand square miles in extent. And there, as in 
Scotland, the Holoptychius seems its most characteristic fossil. 
The fact seems especially worthy of remark. The organ- 
bins of some of the newer formations differ entirely, in 
widely separated localities, from their contemporary organ- 
isms, just as, in the existing state of things, the plants and 
animals of Great Britain differ from the plants and animals 
of Lapland or of Sierra Leone. A geologist who has ac- 
quainted himself with the belemnites, baculites, turrilites, and 
sea-urchins of the Cretaceous group in England and the 
north of France, would discover that he had got into an en- 
tirely new field among the hippurites, sphcerulites, and num- 
mulites of the same formations, in Greece, Italy, and Spain ; 
Dor, in passing the tertiary deposits, would he find less strik- 
ing dissimilarities between the gigantic, mail-clad megatheri- 
uln and huge mastodon of the Ohio and the La Plate, and the 
monsters, their contemporaries, the hairy mammoth of Sibe- 
ria, and the hippopotamus and rhinoceros of England and 
the Continent. In the more ancient geological periods, cro 
the seasons began, the case is essentially different ; the con- 
temporary formations, when widely separated, are often very 
unlike in mineralogical character, but in their fossil contents 
they are almost always identical. In these earlier ages, the 
atmospheric temperature seems to have depended more on 
the internal heat of the earth, only partially cooled" down from 
its original state, than on the earth's configuration or the in- 
fluense of the sun. Hence a widely spread equality of 
15 • * See Note K. 



150 



THB OLD RED SAHDSTONB. 



climate — a greeuhouse equalization of beat, if I may su 
speak ; and hence, too, it would seem, a widely spread Fauna 
and Flora. The greenhouses of Scotland and Sweden pro- 
duce the same plants with the greenhouses of Spain and 
Italy ; and when the world was one vast greenhouse, heated 
from below, the same families of plants, and the same tribes 
of animals, seem to have ranged over spaces immensely 
more extended than those geographical circles in which, in 
the present time, the same plants are found indigenous, and 
the same animals native. The fossil remains of the true 
Coal Measures are the same to the westward of the Alleghany 
Mountains as in New Holland, India, Southern Africa, the 
neighborhood of Newcastle, and the vicinity of Edinburgh. 
And I entertain little doubt that, on a similar principle, the still 
more ancient organisms of the Old Red Sandstone will be 
found to bear the same character all over the world. 



CHAPTER IX. 

FosbiIb of the Upper Old Red Sandstone much more imperfectly pre- 
serred than those of the Lower. — The Causes obvious. — Differ- 
ence between the two Groups, which first strikes the Observer, a 
Difference in Sixe. — The Holoptychiiu a characteristic Ichthyolite 
of the Formation. — <• Description of its huge Scales. — Of its Oc- 
cipital Bones, Fins, Teeth, and General Appearance. — Contempo- 
lazies of the Hohptychiut, — Sponge-like Bodies. — Plates resem- 
bling those of the Sturgeon. — Teeth of various Forms, but all 
evidently the Teeth of Fishes. — Limestone Band, and its probable 
Origin. — Fossils of the YeUow Sandstone. — The Pterichthyt of 
Dura Den. — Member of a Family peculiarly characteristic of the 
System. — No intervening Formation between the Old Bed Sand- 
stone and the Coal Measures. — The Holoptychiut contemporary fix 
a time with the MegaUchthy$, — The Columns of Tubal Cain. 

The different degrees of entireness in which the geologist 
finds his organic remains, depend much less on their age than 
on the nature of the rock in which they occur ; and as the 
arenaceous matrices of the Upper and Middle Old Red Sand- 
stones have been less favorable to the preservation of their 
peculiar fossils than the calcareous and aluminous matrices 
of the Lower, we frequently find the older organisms of the 
system fresh and unbroken, and the more modern existing as 
mere fragments. A (ish thrown into a heap of sah would be 
found entire after the lapse of many years ; a fish thrown 
into a heap of sand would disappear in a mass of putrefac- 
tion in a few weeks ; and only the less destructible parts, 
such as the teeth, the harder bones, and perhaps a few of thcs 
scales, would survive. Now, limestone, if I may so speak, 
is the presernng salt of the geological world ; and the con 

(151) 



152 THE OLD RED SANDSTONE. 

Bervative qualities of the shales and stratified clays of the 
Lower Old Red Sandstone are not much inferior to those of 
lime itself; while, in the Upper Old Red, we have merely 
beds of consolidated sand, and these, in most instances, ren- 
dered less conservative of organic remains than even the 
common sand of our shores, by a mixture of the red oxide of 
iron. The older fossils, therefore, like the mummies of 
Egypt, can be described well nigh as minutely as the exist- 
ences of the present creation ; the newer, like the compara- 
tively modern remains of our churchyards, exist, except in a 
few rare cases, as mere fragments, and demand powers such 
as those of a Cuvier or an Agassiz to restore them to their 
original combinations. But cases, though few and rare, do 
occur in which, through some favorable accident con- 
nected with the death or sepulture of some individual exist- 
ence of the period, its remains have been preserved almost 
entire ; and one such specimen serves to throw light on whole 
heaps of the broken remains of its contemporaries. The 
single elephant, preserved in an iceberg beside the Arctic 
Ocean, illustrated the peculiarities of the numerous extinct 
family to which it belonged, whose bones and huge tusks 
whiten the wastes of Siberia. The human body found in an 
Irish bog, with the ancient sandals of the country still at- 
tached to its feet by thongs, and clothed in a garment of 
coarse hair, gave evidence that bore generally on the degree of 
civilization attain led by the inhabitants of an entire distrfct in 
a remote age. In all such instances, the character and ap- 
pearance of the individual bear on those of the tribe. In at- 
tempting to describe the organisms of the Lower Old Red 
Sandstone, where the fossils lie as thickly in some localities as 
herrings on our coasts in the fishing season, I felt as if I had 
A^hole tribes before me. In describing the fossils of the 



THE OLD RBD SANDSTONE. 153 

Upper Old Red Sandstone, I shall have to draw mostly from 
single specimens. But the evidence may be equally sound 
so far as it goes. 

The difference between the superior and inferior groups 
of the system which first strikes an observer, is a difference 
in the size of the fossils of which these groups are composed. 
The characteristic organisms of the Upper Old Red Sand« 
stone are of much greater bulk than those of the Lower, 
which seem to have been characterized by a mediocrity of size 
throughout the entire extent of the formation. The largest 
xhthyolites of the group do not seem to have much exceeded 
two feet or two feet and a half in length ; its smaller average 
from an inch to three inches. A jaw in the possession of Dr. 
Traill — that of an Orkney species of Platygiiathus^ and by 
much the largest in his collection — does not exceed in bulk 
the jaw of a full-grown coal-fish or cod ; his largest Coccosteus 
must have been a considerably smaller fish than an ordinary- 
sized turbot ; the largest ichthyolite found by the writer was 
a DiplopteruSj of, however, smaller dimensions than the ich- 
thyolite to which the jaw in the possession of Dr. Traill must 
have belonged ; the remains of another Diplopterus from 
Gamrie, the most massy yet discovered in that locality, seem 
to have composed the upper parts of an individual about two 
feet and a half in length. The fish, in short, of the lover 
ocean of the Old Red Sandstone — and I can speak of it 
throughout an area which comprises Orkney and Inverness, 
Cromarty, and Gamrie, and which must have included about 
ten thousand square miles — ranged in size between the 
stickleback and the cod ; whereas some of the fish of its 
upper ocean were covered by scales as large as oyster-shells, 
and armed with teeth that rivalled in bulk those of the croco- 
dile. They must have been fish on an immensely larger 



154 THE OLD RED SANDSTONE. 

scale ihan those wiih which the system began. There have 
been scales of the Holoptychius found in Clashbcnnie wh.^h 
measure three inches in length by two and a half in breadth, 
and a full eighth part of an inch in thickness. There occur 
occipital plates of fishes in the same formation in Moray, a 
full foot in length by half a foot in breadth. The fragment 
of a tooth still attached to a piece of the jaw, found in the 
sandstone cliffs that overhang the Findhom, measures an inch 
in diameter at the base. A second tooth of the same forma- 
tion, of a still larger size, disinterred by Mr. Patrick Duff 
from out the conglomerates of the Scat'Craig^ near Elgin, 
and no»v in his possession, measures two inches in length by 
rather more than an inch in diameter. (See Plate XIII., fig. 4.) 
There occasionally turn Up in the sandstones of Perthshire 
ichthyodorulites that in bulk and appearance resemble the 
teeth of a harrow rounded at the edges by a few months' wear, 
and which must have been attached to fins not inferior io 
general bulk to the dorsal fin of an ordinary-sized porpoise. 
In short, the remains of a Patagonian burying-ground would 
scarcely contrast more strongly with the remains of that bat- 
tle-field described by Addison, in which the pygmies were an- 
nihilated by the cmnes, than the organisms of the upper 
formation of the Old Red Sandstone contrast with those of 
the lower.* 

Of this upper formation the most characteristic and most 
abundant ichthyolite, as has been already said, is the Holojh 



• I have permitted this paragraph to remain as originally writtexi« 
though the comparatively recent discovery of a gigantic Ilohpiyckitts (?) 
in the Lower Old Red Sandstone of Tliurso, by Mr. Robert Dick of 
that place, (see introductory note,) bears shrewdly against its general 
^ino of statement But it "\fill at least, serve to show how large an 



ISyMiyig Lftim^^t*Mt. 



154* 



PIJITEXIIL 



IJoJoptyekhu ^obiUssimas, AgasB, 



THE OLD BED SANDSTONE. 155 

tychius. The large scales and plates, and the huge teeth, 
belong to this genus. It was first introduced to the notice 
of geologists in a paper read before the Wernerian Society 
in May, 1830, by Professor Fleming, and published by him in 
the February of the following year, in Cheek^s Edinburgh 
Journal, Only detached scales and the fragment of a tooth 
had as yet been found ; and these he minutely described as 
such, without venturing to hazard a conjecture regarding the 
character or family :>f the animal to which they had belonged. 
They were submitted some years after to Agassiz, by whom 
they were referred, though not without considerable hesita- 
tion, to the genus Gyrolepis ; and the doubts of both natural- 
ists serve to show how very uncertain .a guide mere analogy 
proves to even men of the first order, when brought to bear on 
organisms of so strange a type as the ichthy elites of the Old 
Red Sandstone. At this stage, however, an almost entire 
specimen of the creature was discovered in the sandstones of 
Clashbennie, by the Rev. James Noble, of St. Madoes, a gen- 
tleman who, by devoting his leisure hours to Geology, has 
extended the knowledge of this upper formation, and whose 
name has been attached by Agassiz to its characteristic fossil, 
now designated the Holoptychius nohilissimus. His speci- 
men at once decided that the creature had been no Gyrolepisy 
but the representative of a new genus not less strangely 
organized, and quite as unlike the existences of the present 
times as any existence of all the past. So marked are the 



amoant of negative eridcnce may be dissipated by a single positive 
(act, and to inculcate on the geologist the necessity of cautious induc- 
tion. An individual Holoptychiiia of Thurso must have been at least 
fhrice the size of the Hohptyehiut of the Upper Old Red formationi 
•a exhibited in the specimen of Mr. Noble, of St. Madoea. 
16 



156 THE OLD BED SANDSTONE. 

peculiarities of the Holoptychius, that they strike iho com* 
monest ohserver. 

The scales are very characteristic. They are massy ellipti- 
cal plates, scarcely less hulky in proportion to their extent of 
surface than our smaller copper coin, composed internally of 
bone, and externally of enamel, and presenting on the one 
side a porous structure, and on the other, when well pre- 
served, a bright, glossy surface. The upper, or glossy side, 
is the more characteristic of the two. I have placed one of 
them before me. Imagine an elliptical ivory counter, an inch 
and a half in length by an inch in breadth, and nearly an 
eighth part of an inch in thickness, the larger diameter 
forming a line which, if extended, would pass longitudinally 
from head to tail through the animal which the scale covered. 
On the upper or anterior margin of this elliptical counter, 
imagine a smooth selvedge or border three eighth parts of an 
inch in breadth. Beneath this border there is an inner border 
of detached tubercles, and beneath the tubercles lai^ undu- 
lating furrows, which stretch longitudinally towards the lower 
end of the ellipsis. Some of these waved furrows run un- 
broken and separate to the bottom, some merge into their 
neighboring furrows at acute angles, some branch out and 
again unite, like streams which enclose islands, and some 
break into chains of detached tubercles. (See Plate XIII, fig. 3.) 
No two scales exactly resemble one another in the minuter 
peculiarities of their sculpture, if I may so speak, just as no 
two pieces of lake or sea may be roughened afler exactly 
the same pattern during a gale ; and yet in general appear- 
ance they are all wonderfully alike. Their style of sculpture 
is the same — a style which has sometimes reminded me of 
the Runic knots of our ancient north country obelisks. Such 
was the scale of the creature.* The head, which was small, 
• See Note L. 



166* 



o 

s 

O 

s 

D 



THE OLD BED SANDSTONE. 157 

compared with the size of the body, was covered with bony 
plates, roughened after a pattern somewhat different from 
that of the scales, being tubercled rather than ridged ; but 
the tubercles present a confluent appearance, just as chains 
of hills may be described as confluent, the base of one hill 
running into the base of another. The operculum seems to 
have been covered by one entire plate — a peculiarity ob- 
servable, as has been remarked, among some of the ichthy- 
elites of the Lower Old Red Sandstone, such as the Diplop* 
terus^ Dipterus^ and Osteolepis. And it, too, has its fields of 
tubercles, and its smooth marginal selvedge, or border, on 
which the lower edges of the upper occipital plates seem to 
have rested, just as, in the roof of a slated building, part of 
the lower tier of slates is overtopped ana covered by the tier 
above. The scales towards the tail suddenly diminish at 
the ventral fins to about one fourth th^ size of those on the 
upper part of the body ; the fins themselves are covered at 
their bases, which seem to have been thick and fleshy like 
the base of the pectoral fin in the cod or haddock, with scales 
still more minute ; and from the scaly base the rays diverge 
like the radii of a circle, and terminate in a semicircular out- 
line. The ventrals are placed nearer the tail, says Agassiz, 
than in any other ganoid fish. (See Plate XIII., fig. 2.) 

But no such description can communicate an adequate con- 
ception to the reader of the strikingly picturesque appearance 
of the HohplychitiSy as shown in Mr. Noble's splendid speci- 
men. There is a general massiveness about the separate 
portions of the creature, that imparts ideas of the gigantic, 
independently of its bulk as a whole ; just as a building of 
moderate size, when composed of very ponderous stones, has 
a more imposing effect than much larger buildings in which 
the stones are smaller. The body measures a foot across, by 
16 • 



: q£ -fw* iota 'IT UL »ni"^g»wr jBHK VOOL. T^C CUT- 
IS 'iusr tip^TPnif irvarrai ae a£. ^n^ more ia 
ae niwi sjie seiav. ami ihtf* ia ^ Tihenrigrf scrie above. 
So &2tj does 3e ■ j»t.iw je cil is anck, ttar dir veutiml 
ics kare £ftZea o^paaalj, <zae oa eocft sde. asL, from their 
«taJeLTrkar 5jR3&. remuKi ooe cf :be rvo poorii holes in a 
^7*s apfoop vich meir bced ftips. The colize oatlioe of 
trjs; {rjmii k cba: </ an e-jnngiard eSipsBS or xatfaer spindle, a 
L!2#e drawn cot lowaids die caadal exrremhr. The places 
c/ail the fins are not iwTaca^ed, hot, as sbovn br odier speci- 
mens, they seem to have been ciovded together towards the 
lower extremity, like those of the GlyptoUpiSj an ichthjolite 
which, in more than one re^>ect, the Holopiyckims must have 
r^embled, and which, from this pecaliaritT, presents a hnisb- 
•fko appearance — the head and shoulders representing the 



THE OLD BED SANDSTONE. 159 

handle, and ihe large and thickly clustered fins the spreading 
bristles.* 

Some of the occipital hones of the Holoptychius are very 
curious and very puzzling. There are pieces rounded at one 
of the ends, somewhat in the manner of the ncick joints of 
our better known quadrupeds, and which have been mistaken 
for vertebrae ; but which present evidently, at the apparent 
joint, the enamel peculiar to the outer surface of all the plates 
and scales of the creature, and which belonged, it is proba- 
ble, to the snout There are saddle-shaped bones, too, which 
have been regarded as the central occipital plates of a new 
species of Coccosieus^ but whose style of confluent tubercle 
belongs evidently to the Holoptychius. The jaws are exceed- 
ingly curious. They are composed of as solid bone as we 
usually find in the jaws of mammalia ; and the outer surface, 
which is covered in animals of commoner structure with por- 
tioDS of the facial integuments, we find polished and japanned, 
and fretted into tubercles. The jaws of the creature, like 
those of the Osleolepis of the lower formation, were naked 
jaws ; it is, indeed, more than probable that all its real bones 
were so, and that the internal skeleton was cartilaginous. A row 
of thickly-set, pointed teeth ran along the japanned edges of 
the mouth — what, in fish of the ordinary construction, would 
be the lips; and inside this row there was a second and 
widely-set row of at least twenty times the bulk of the other, 
and which stood up over and beyond it, like spires in a city 
over the rows of lower buildings in front A nearly similar 
dispositioQ of teeth seems also to have characterized the 



* There are now six species of HolopCy chins enmaerated — H, An* 
d^rmmif H, FUmingUf H, gipanieut, H. Murehitoni, H, nobiiisnmui, 
end H. OmaHutii. 



160 THE OLD BED SANDSTOITB. 

Holoptychius of the Coal Measures, but the contrast io size 
was somewhat less marked. One of the most singularly 
formed bones of the formation will be found, I doubt not, 
when perfect specimens of the upper part of the creature 
sheLI be procured, to have belonged to the Holoptychius. It 
is a huge ichthyodorulite, formed, box-like, of four nearly 
nictangular planes, terminating in a point, and ornamented 
on two of the sides by what, in a work of art, the readci 
would at once term a species of Chinese fretwork. Along 
the centre there runs a line of lozenges, slightly truncated 
where they unite, just as, in plants that exhibit the cellular 
texture, the lozenge-shaped ceils may be said to be truncated. 
At the sides of the central line, there run lines of half loz- 
enges, which occupy the space to the edges. Each lozenge 
is marked by lines parallel to the lines which describe it, 
somewhat in the manner of the plates of the tortoise. The 
centre of each is thickly tubercled ; and what seems to have 
been the anterior plane of the ichthyodorulite is thickly tuber- 
cled also, both in the style of the occipital plates and jaws of 
the Holoptychius, This curious bone, which seems to have 
been either hollow inside, or, what is more probable, filled 
with cartilage, measures, in some of the larger specimens, 
an inch and a half across at the base on its broader planes, 
and rather more than half an inch on its two narrower 
nnes.* 

Geologists have still a great deal to learn regarding the 
contemporaries of the Holoptychius nohUissimus. The 
lower portion of that upper formation to which it more 

* This bone has boen aince assigned by Agassix to a new genua, of 
which no other fragments have yet been found, but whicn has been 
named provitionally Pheothorax paradoxua. 



THE OLD BED SANDSTONE. 16^ 

especially belongs — the portion represented in our second 
pj-fdunid by the conglomerate and sandstone bar — though 
unfavorable to the preservation of animal remains, represents 
assuredly no barren period. It has been found to contain 
bodies apparently organic, that vary in shape like the sponges 
of our existing seas, which in general appearance they some- 
what resemble, but whose class, and even kingdom, are yet 
to fix.* It contains, besides, in considerable abundance, 



* These organisms, if in reality such, are at once very carious and 
Tery puzzling. They occur in some localities in great abundance. A 
piece of Clashbennie flagstone, somewhat more than two feet in length, 
by fifteen inches in breadth, kindly sent me for examination by the Her. 
lir. Noble, of St. Madoes, bears no fewer than twelve of them on its 
upper surface, and presents the appearance of a piece of rude sculpture, 
not very unlike those we sometimes see in country churchyards, on 
the tombstones of the times of the Revolution. All the twelve vary 
in appearance. Some of them are of a pear shape — some are irreg- 
ularly oval — some resemble short cuts of the bole of a tree — some 
are spread out like ancient manuscripts, partially imroUed — one of 
the number seems a huge, though not over neatly formed acorn, an 
apprentice mason's first attempt — the others are of a shape so irreg- 
ular as to set comparison and description at defiance. They almost 
all agree, however, when cut transversely, in presenting flAt, elliptical 
arcs as their sectional lines — in having an upper surface compara- 
tively smooth, and an under surface nearly parallel to it, thickly cor* 
rugated — and in being all coated with a greasy, shining clay, of a 
deeper red than the surrounding stone. I was perhaps rather more 
confident of their organic character after I had examined a few mere- 
ly detached specimens, than now that I have seen a dozen of them 
together. It seems at least a circumstance to awaken doubt, that 
though they occur in various positions on the slab — some extending 
across it, some lying diagonally, some running lengthwise — the cor- 
rugations of their under surfaces should run lengthwise in all — fur* 
re wing them in every possible angle, and giving evidence, not appar 



'TCS ilKlE ; 



aafar:"rotii \ tumm ut' tie-^iaptvcons*; 

OBrc .lice- .x :3e. Andxews .simki. dBxroomiBd bnr tttfaBciai diofr- 

lift" *hft -ieaies it* 'tm- joaaoBm mjrqpmu '*'mKy be uBJime^ 
■or irobnCiulEr.** ^?^ '^ Pi'iiifiiwii> *^tD an eooiiict 
jt* tie jKds JccmiBcr.^ T^ ffiinBt; noa. aimmiii 



mBdr"3Bt d» 



ssbed -lie vaics it :iie 
jftseslr' jitzxuhurfih. :tum ni :im 

.if JOH 

^uc '3» tiTrlwri "in weadm li x 
in 'sraasiai icy^nwirg,. Jt 
vh0 iSCHniTMttt 'C3CBmi» Ic 



iitxjab.^ £iiiiiii 

if the flhioqf^eiuv winck 3S :St2i> ■fiw.ifliwl, ■* mki i finj 
«sSbics joaeiea jf :&■- ibbib .MBommmr^ ** ami die 
4xs«nwvBi7 '3B(fiflBfL and 'tt sms of onr hiiy^nt^ 



itUfM. JLxsHMuK lumMJlL 99ubsBSSsf in. dn f>»na^ doc c£ub ] 
fl»»>A iattv X grfpahi* ffrr?ir, <be!as is iimi niii ■ to 
fh^f^rimm (sanLi hm/m basn& <*aa tsi«aan ai 5h« ^-a 

f^ Iwr^A #url«p»dited s &« Bcr. Dc ATdrrwn. a£ Xc wbuif^^ Aboni 
• t4»i!?i9'«Ni<mtk ilUT tht da i ujui i of Fiirtw FLeniss eb the and- 
#l/yft<«» of In i t m t hjw a, a nixljr dsfeorcrr w nade m ^frHaAitoDei 
^ f^mhhfunnti by s fnlopit of Pev^ who^ on w!aBictirtg bit arv 
///riMf nf^;*!^ to Dr. Aadcfion mnrtwdfd, vith dM Doetot; Onl the j 



THB OLD RED 8A1VDST0IIE. 163 

lo teeth, various enough in Iheir forms to indicate a corre- 
spon ling variety of families and genera among the ichthyolites 
to which they belonged. Some are nearly straight, like those 
of the Holoptychius of the Coal Measures ; some are bent* 
like the beak of a hawk or eagle, into a hook-form ; some 
incline first in one direction, and then in the opposite one, 

could be no other than oyster thetta ; though eventually, on becoming 
acquainted with the decision of Professor Fleming regarding them* 
both g^tlemen were content to alter their opinion, 'and to regard 
them as scales. The Professor,- in his paper on the Old Red Sand- 
•tone in Ch§$k's Journal^ referred incidentally to the oyster shells of 
Clashbennie — a somewhat delicate subject of allusion ; and in Dr. 
Anderson's paper on the same formation, which appeared about seven 
yean after, in the New Journal of Professor Jameson, the geological 
world was told, for the first time, that Professor Fleming had de« 
scribed a scale of Clashbennie similar to those of Drumdryan, (i. e,, 
those of the Holoptyt^ius,) as bearing a <* close resemblance to some 
of the scales on the common sturg^n," and as probably referable to 
some ** extinct species of the genus Accipenser." Now, Professor 
Pleming, instead of stating that the scales -were at all similar, had 
stated very pointedly that they were entirely different ; and not only 
had he described them as different, but he had aXaoJiffured them as dif- 
ferent, and had placed the figures side by side, that the difference 
might be the better seen. To the paper of the Professor, which oon* 
tained this statement, and to which these figures were attached, Dr. 
Anderson referred, as ••read before the Wemerian Society;" — he 
quoted from it in the Professor's words — he drew some of the more 
important fsu^ts of his own paper from it — in his late Essay on the 
Geology of Fife he has availed himself of it still more largely, though 
with no acknowledgment; it has constituted, in short, by far the 
most valuable of all his discoveries in connection with the Old Red 
Sandstone, and apparently the most minutely examined ; and yet, so 
completely did he fail to detect Professor Fleming's carefully drawn 
distinction between the scales of the Holoptychixis and those of its con- 
temporary that when Agassis, misled apparently by the Doctor's own 



IM TEE OLD nS 



EkR noils diat hare beea daim out of a boud bj die car 
peoter at two XTeial wrenciies, and bent m opposite anglet 
at each wrench ; sooie are bolkr and aqnat, some long and 
slender ; and in almost aH die Tanetiesy wiietber carred or 
straight, sqoat or sGm, the base b elegandj striated like the 
llatings of the column. la the spleiidid specxmen fouod in 



, had att hxmadi to show diat Hut wcalr gzaat of thm tormt^ 
taoa eoold bcre been, no itmywi , dig Doctor bad the poaage in 
wiaeh t&e nstxmfirt ertaboihcd dte &ct tinuafaj ed into a Fife news- 
paper, witlLr of eooiaey the laodahle fntmtinn of pRTcntiBg the Fift 
pablie firom fidlin^ into the dkmri nuAdbr of Piufcaww Fleming. 
Iheie seems to be somedmig rather inexplicabte in all this; bat there 
can be little doabc Dr. Andecson could aatiaf j cto t i lT explain the 
whole matter without once referring to the oftUr Mkeiu of Ctaahbennie. 
It is improbable that he coold hare wished or intended to iajoxe the 
repntation of a gentleman to whose freriT-imparted instmctions he is 
indebted far much the greater portion of his geological siuU — whose 
remarks, written and spoken, he has so excenarelT appropriated in 
his sereral papers and essays — and whose character is known &r be- 
yond the limits of his coontrr, for untiring research, philosophic dis- 
crimination, and all the qualities which con5titnte a naturalist of the 
highest order. Dr. Johnston, of Berwick, in his Hiaiory of Briiuk 
ZadphyUM^ (a work of an eminentlj scientific character,) justlj ** as- 
cribes to the labors and writings '* of Professor Fleming ** no small 
share in diffusing that taste for Xatural History which is now abroad." 
And as an interesting corroboration of the £ict, I may state, that Dr. 
Malcolroson, of Madras, lately found an elegant Italian translation of 
Firming B Philosophy of ZoOlo^, high in repute among the elite of 
Rome. Lest it should be supposed I do Dr. Anderson injustice in 
these remarks, I subjoin the grounds of them in the following extracts 
from professor Fleming's paper in Cheek* t Jowmaiy and from the paper 
in Jamesons Seta Edinburgh Journal^ in which the Doctor purports to 
give a digest of the former, niithout once referring, however, to the 
periodical in which it Lb to be found : — 
" In the summer of 1827," says Dr. Fleming, *■ I obtained from 



THE OLD R£D SANDSTONE. 165 

the sandstones of the Findhom, the tooth is still attached to a 
portion of the jaw, and shows, from the nature of the 
attachment, that the creature to which it belonged must have 
been a true fish, not a reptile. The same peculiarity is ob- 
servable in two other very fine specimens in the collection of 
Mr. Patrick Dufif, of Elgin. Both in saurians and in toothed 

Dmmdryan quarry, to the south of Cupar, situate in the higher strata 
of yellow sandstone, certain org^anisms, which I readily referred to 
the scales of vertebrated animals, probably those of a fish. The 
largest (see Plate 11., fig. 1, ^figwn of a scale of the HoloptycfUua ') was 
one inch and one tenth in length, about one inch and two tenths in 
breadth, and not exceeding the fiftieth of an inch in thickness. The 
part which, when in its natural position, had been imbedded in the 
cuticle, is comparatively smooth, exhibiting, however, in a very dis- 
tinct manner, the semicircularly parallel layers of growth with obso- 
lete diver£^g striae, giving to the surface, when under a lens, a reticu- 
lated aspect. The part naturally exposed is marked with longitudinal, 
waved, rounded, anastomosing ridges, which are smooth and glossy. 
The whole of the inside of the scale is smooth, though exhibiting 
with tolerable distinctness the layers of growth. The form and 
structure of the object indicated plainly enough that it had been a 
scale, a conclusion confirmed by the detection of the phosphate of 
lime in its composition. At this period I inserted a short notice of the 
occurrence of these scales in our provincial newspaper, the Fife Her' 
aldf for the purpose of attracting the attention of the workmen and 
others in the neighborhood, in order to secure the preservation of any 
other specimens which might occur. ^ 

** Nearly a year after these scales had been discovered, not only in 
the upper, but even in some of the lower beds of the Yellow Sand- 
atone, I was informed that oyster shetts had been found in a quarry in 
the Old Red Sandstone at Clashbennie, near ErTol, in Perthshire, 
and that specimens were in the possession of a gentleman in Perth. 
Interested in the intelligence, I lost no time in visiting Perth, and was 
gratified to find that the supposed oyster shells were, in fact, similar 
to iiose which I had ascertained to occur in a higher part of the series* 
17 



166 THE OLD BED SANDSTOHB. 

cctacese, such as the porpoise, the teeth are inserted in sockets. 
Id the ichthyolites of this formation, so far as these are illus- 
trated by its better specimens, the teeth, as in existing fish, 
are merely placed flat upon the jaw, or in shallow pits, which 
seem almost to indicate that the contrivance of sockets might 
be aflerwa;rds resorted to. Immediately over the sandstone 

The scales were, however, of a larger size, some of them exceeding 
three inches in length, and one eighth of an inch in thickness. Upon 
my visit to the quarry, I found the scales, as in the Tellow Sand- 
stone, most abundant in those parts of the rock which exhibited a 
Drecciated aspect. Many patches a foot in length, full of scales, 
have occurred ; but as yet no entire impression of a fish has been 
obtained. 

''Another scale, dxtferino fbom thosb alkbadt kotxcbd, (see 
Plate n., fig. 3, ^figure of an obUmtftuberckd plate traversed dieu^onatty 6y 
Unee, tohicht bUecting one another a Utile above the centre, resembles a St* 
Jtndrew's cross, and marked on the edges by faintly radiating lines,') is 
about an inch and a quarter in length, and an inch in breadth. In 
external appearance it bears a very close resemblance to some of the 
scales on the common sturgeon, and may, with some probability, be 
referred to an extinct species of the genuB Accipenser.** — {Cheek's 
Edinburgh Journal, Feb. 1831, p. 85.) 

"Dr. Fleming, in 1830," says Dr. Anderson, "read before the 
Wemerian Society a notice • on the occurrence of scales of vertcbrated 
animals in the Old Red Sandstone of Fifeshire.' These organisms, 
as described by him, occurred in the Yellow Sandstone of Drum- 
dryan and ^le Gray Sandstone of Parkhill. From the former 

locality scales of a fish were obtained 

The same paper (Professor Fleming's) contains a notice of simUiAB 
SCALES in the Old Red Sandstone of Clashbemiie, near Errol, in 
Perthshire, one op "which is described as bearing * a very close re- 
semblance to some of the scales on the common sturgeon, and may 
with some probability be referred to an extinct species of the genus 
Acdpenser. *** — ( Pt\fessor Jamesons Edin, New PhiL Journal^ Oct. 
'887, p 131.) 



THE OLD UED SANDSTONE. 167 

Had conglomerate belt in which these orgr.nisms occur, there 
rests, as has been said, a band of limestone, and over the 
limestone a thick bed of yellow sandstone, in which the sys- 
tern terminates, and which is overlaid in turn by the lower 
beds of the carboniferous group. 

The limestone band is unfossiliferous, and resembling, in 
mincralogical character, the Comstones of England and 
Wales, it has been described as the Comstone of Scotland ; 
but the fact merely furnishes one illustration of many, of tho 
inadequacy of a mincralogical nomenclature for the purposes 
of the geologist. In the neighborhood of Cromarty the lower 
formation abounds in beds of nodular limestone, identical in 
appearance with the Comstone ; — in England similar beds 
occur so abundantly in the middle formation, thai it derives 
its name from them ; — in Fife they occur in the upper 
formation exclusively. Thus the formation of the Coccosteus 
and Dipterus is a comstone formation in the first locality ; 
that of the Cephalaspis and the gigantic lobster in the second ; 
that of the Holoplychius nohilissimus in the third. We 
have but to vary our field of observation to find all the for- 
mations of the system Comstone formations in turn. The 
limestone band of the upper member presents exactly similar 
appearances in Moray as in Fife. It is in both of a yellowish 
green or gray color, and a concretionary stmcture, consisting 
of softer and harder portions, that yield so unequally to tho 
weather, as to exhibit in exposed cliffs and boulders a biecci- 
ated aspect, as if it had been a mechanical, not a chemical 
deposit ; though its origin must unquestionably have been 
chemical. It contains minute crystais of galena, and abounds 
m masses of a cherty, siliceous substance that strikes 
firt: with steel, and which, from the manner in which they 
are incorporated with the rock, show that they must have been 



168 THE OLD RED SAXDSTOXE. 

fonned along with it From this circumstaiice, and from tho 
general resemblance it bears to the deposits of the therma] 
waters of volcanic districts which precipitate siliceous mixed 
with calcareous matter, it has been suggested, and by no mean 
authority, that it must have derived its origin from hot springs, 
llie bed is several yards in thickness ; and as it appears both 
in Moray and in Fife, in localities at least a hundred and 
twenty miles apart, it must have been formed, if formed at 
all, in this manner, at a period when the volcanic agencies 
were in a state of activity at no great distance from the 
surface. 

The upper belt of yellow stone, the terminal layer of the 
pyramid, is fossiliferous both in Moray and Fife — more 
richly so in the latter county than even the conglomerate belt 
that underlies it, and its organisms are better preserved. It 
was in this upper layer, in Drumdryan quarry, to the south 
of Cupar, that Professor Fleming found the first-discovered 
scales of the Holoptyckius. At Dura Den, in the same 
neighborhood, a singularly rich deposit of animal remains 
was laid open a few years ago, by some workmen, when em- 
ployed in excavating a water-course for a mill. The organ- 
isms lay crowded together, a single slab containing no fewer 
than thirty specimens, and all in a singularly perfect state of 
preservation. The whole space excavated did not exceed forty 
square yards in extent, and yet in these forty yards there 
were found several genera of fishes new to Geology, and not 
yet figured nor described — a conclusive proof in itself that 
we have still very much to learn regarding the fossils of the 
Old Red Sandstone. By much the greater portion of the 
remains disinterred on this occasion were preserved by a lady 
in the neighborhood ; and the news of the discovery spread* 
ing over the district, the Rev. Dr. Anderson, of Newburgh, 



THE OLD RED SANDSTONE. 169 

was fortunately led to discover them anew in her possession. 
The most abundant organism of the group was a variety of 
Pterichlhys — the sixth species of this very curious gen.^ now 
discovered in the Old Red Sandstones oi' Scotland ; and as the 
Doctoi had been lucky enough to find out for himself, some 
yea's before, that the scales of the Holoptychius were oyster 
shells, he now ascertained, with quite as little assistance from 
without, that the Pterichlhys must have been surely a huge 
beetle. As a beetle, therefore, he figured and described it in 
the pages of a Glasgow topographical publication — Fife H- 
lustraied. True, the characteristic elytra were wanting, 
and some six or seven tubercle plates substituted in their 
room ; nor could the artist, with all his skill, supply the crea- 
ture with more than two legs ; but ingenuity did much for it, 
notwithstanding; and by lengthening the snout, insect-like, 
into a point — by projecting an eye, insect-like, on what had 
mysteriously grown into a head — by rounding the body, in- 
sect-like, until it exactly resembled that of the large " twilight 
shard '* — by exaggerating the tubercles seen m profile on the 
paddles until they stretched out, insect-like, into bristles —> 
and by carefully sinking the tail, which was not insect-like, and 
for which* no possible use could be discovered at the time —> 
the Doctor succeeded in making the Pterichlhys of Dura Den 
a very respectable beetle indeed. In a later publication, an 
Essay on the Greology ot Fifeshire, which appeared in Sep- 
tember last in the Quarterly Journal of Agriculture^ he states, 
afler referring to his former description, that among the higher 
geological authorities some were disposed to regard the crea- 
ture as an extinct crustaceous animal, and some as belonging 
to a tribe closely allied to the Chelonia. Agassiz, as the 
writer of these chapters ventured some months ago to pre- 
dict, has since pronounced it a fish — a PUrichthys specifica'h 
17* 



170 THB OLD BED SANDSTOSIB. 

different from the five Tarieties of this ichthyilite which occu 
in the lower formation of the system, but generically the 
same. I very lately enjoyed the pleasure of examining the 
hona fide ichthy elite itself — one of the specimens of Dura 
Den, and apparently one of the more entire — in the collec* 
tion of Professor Fleming. Its character as a Fterickthps I 
found very obvious ; but neither the Professor nor myself 
was ingenious enough to discover in it any trace of the beetle 
of Dr. Anderson.* 

Is it not interesting to find this very curious genus in both 
the lowest and highest fossiliferous beds of the system, and 
constituting, like the Trilohite genus of the Silurian group, 
its most characteristic organism ?f The TrilobiU has a wide 
geological range, extendbg from the upper Cambrian rocks 
to the upper Coal Measures. But though the range of the 
genus is wide, that of every bdividual species of which it 
consists is very limited. The TrUohites of the upper Coal 
Measures differ from those of the Mountain Limestone; 

* This interesting Ichthyolite has since been regarded by Agassiz 
as the representative of a distinct genus, to which he gives the name 
Pamphractui, As exhibited in his restoration, however, it seems to 
differ litt'o, if at all, (if I may venture the suggestion,) from a Pter^ 
ichihys viewed on the upper side. In Agassiz's beautiful restoration 
of Pterichthya, and his accompanying pri its of the fossils illustrative 
of that genus, it is, with but one doubtful exception, the under side 
of the animal that is presented ; and hence a striking difference ap- 
parent between his ropresentations of the two genera, which would 
scarce obtain had the upper, not the under si^e of Pterichthya been 
exhibited. In verification of this remark, let the reader who has ac* 
cess to the Monographic Poissoiis Fossiles compare the restoration of 
Pamphractus {Old Red, Tab. VI., fig. 2) with the upper side of Pfer- 
ichthySf as figured in this volume, Plate I., fig. 1, making, of corjee, 
the due allowance for a difference of species. 

t See Note M. 



THE OLD RED SANDSTONE. 171 

these again, with but one exception, from the Trilobites of 
the upper Silurian strata ; these yet again from the Trilobites 
of the underlying middle beds ; and these from the Trilobites 
that occur in the baso of the system. Like the coins and 
medals of the antiquary, each represents its own limited 
period ; and the whole taken together yield a consecutive 
record. But while we f5nd them merely scattered over the 
later formations in which they occur, and that very sparingly, 
in the Silurian System we find them congregated in such 
vast crowds, that their remains enter largely into the compo- 
sition of many of the rocks which compose it. The Trilobite 
is the disting^iishing organism of the group, marrying, if I 
may so express myself, its upper and lower beds ) and what 
the Trilobite is to the Silurian formations, the Pterichthys 
seems to be to the formations of the Old Red Sandstone ; 
with this difference, that, so far as is yet known, it is restricted 
to this system alone, occurring in neither the Silurian System 
below, nor in the Ck>al Measures above. 

I am but imperfectly acquainted with the localities in 
which the upper beds of the Old Red Sandstone undo lie 
the lower beds of the Coal Measures, or where any grada on 
of character appears. The upper yellow sandstone bel is 
extensively developed in Moray, but it contains no trace of 
carbonaceous matter in even its higher strata, and no ot er 
remains than those of the Holoptychius and its contempora- 
ries. The system in the north of Scotland differs as muc 
from the carboniferous group in its upper as in its lower 
rocks ; and a similar difference has been remarked in Fife 
where the groups appear in contact a few miles to the west 
of St. Andrew^s. In England, in repeated instances, the 
junction, as shown by Mr. Murchison, in singularly instructive 
sections, is weli marked, the carboniferous limestones resting 



172 THX OLD K£D SANBCTOHZ. 

coofonnably on the Upper Old Bed Sandslooe. No othei 
sjTStem interposed between them. 

There is a Babbinical traditioo that the sons of Tubal- 
Cam, taught by a prophet of the coming deluge, and onwil« 
ling that their father^s arts should be lost in it to posterity, 
erected two obelisks of brass, on which they inscribed a 
record of his discoTories, and that thus the learning of the 
fiimily sunriTed the cataclysm. The flood subsided, and the 
obelisks, sculptured from pinnacle to ba^e, were found fast 
fixed in the rock. Now, the twin pyramids of the Old Red 
Sandstone, with their party-colored bars, and their thickly 
crowded inscriptions, belong to a period immensely mora 
remote than that of the columns of the antediluvians, and 
they bear a more certain record. I have, perhaps, dwelt too 
.ong on their various compartments ; but the Artist by whom 
they have been erected, and who has preserved in them so 
wonderful a chronicle of his earlier works, has willed surely 
that they should be read, and I have perused but a small por^ 
tion of the whole. Years must pass ere the entire record 
can be deciphered ; but, of all its curiously inscribed 8en« 
tences, the result will prove the same — they will all be found 
to tes'.ify cf the Infinite Mind. 



CHAPTER X, 

Speculations in the Old Red Sandstone, and their Character. «- 
George, first Earl of Cromarty. — His Sagacity as a Naturalist at 
£Eiiilt in one Instance. — Sets himself to dig for Coal in the Lower 
Old Red Sandstone. — Discoyers a fine Artesian Well. — Value of 
Geological Knowledge in an economic View. — Scarce a Secondary 
Formation in the Kingdom in which Coal has not been sought for. 
— Mineral Springs of the Lower Old Red Sandstone. — Strathpef- 
fer. — Its Peculiarities whence derived. — Chalybeate Springs of 
Easter Ross and the Black Isle. — Petrifjring Springs. — Building- 
Stone and Lime of the Old Red Sandstone. — Its yarious Soils. 

There has been much money lost, and a good deal won, 
in speculations connected with the Old Red Sandstone. The 
speculations in which money has been won have consorted, 
if I may so speak, with the character of the system, and 
those in which money has been lost have not. Instead, how- 
ever, of producing a formal chapter on the economic uses 
to which its various deposits have been applied, or the unfor- 
tunate undertakings which an acquaintance with its geology 
would have prevented, 1 shall throw together, as they occur 
to me, a few simple facts illustrative of both. 

George, first Earl of Cromarty, seems, like his namesake 
and contemporary, the too celebrated Sir George M'Kenzio, 
of Roseavoch, to have been a man of an eminently activo 
and inquiring mind. He found leisure, in the course of a 
very busy life, to write several historical dissertations of grca« 
research, and a very elaborate Synopsis Apocalyptica, Ho i« 
the author, too, of an exceedingly curious letter on the " Sec- 
ond Sight," addressed to the philosophic Boyle, which con- 

(178) 



174 THE OLD KED SANDSTONE. 

tains a large amount of araxising and extraordinary &ct ; and 
his description of the formation of a peat-moss in the central 
Highlands of Ross-shire has been quoted by almost every 
naturalist who, since the days of the sagacious nobleman, 
has written on the formation of peat His life was extended 
to extreme old age ; and as his literary ardor remained un- 
diminished till the last, some of his writings were produced 
at a period when most other men are sunk in the incurious 
indifierency and languor of old age. And among these later 
productions are his remarks on peat. He relates that, when 
a very young man, he had marked, in passing on a journey 
through the central Highlands of Ross-shire, a wood of very 
ancient trees, doddered and moss-grown, and evidently pass- 
ing into a state of death through the last stages of decay. 
He had been led by business into the same district many 
years after, when in middle life, and found that the wood had 
entirely disappeared, and that the heathy hollow which it had 
covered was now occupied by a green, stagnant morass, un- 
varied in its tame and level extent by either bush or tree. 
In his old age he again visited the locality, and saw the green 
surface roughened with dingy-colored hollows, and several 
Highlanders engaged in it in cutting peat in a stratum several 
feet in depth. What he had once seen an aged forest had 
now become an extensive peat-moss. 

Some time towards the close of the seventeenth century 
ho purchased the lands of Cromarty, where his turn for mi- 
nute observation seems to have anticipated — little, however, 
to his own profit — some of the later geological discoveries. 
There is a deep, wooded ravine in the neighborhood of the 
town, traversed by a small stream, which has laid bare, for 
the space of about forty yards in the opening of the hollow, 
the gra} sandstone and stratified clays of the inferior fish 



7HB OLD BED SANDSTONE. 175 

bed. The locality is rather poor in ichthyolites, though I have 
found in it, after minute search, a few scales of the Osteolepis^ 
and on one occasion one of the better marked plates of 
the Coccosteus ; but in the vegetable impressions peculiar to 
the formation it is very abundant. These are invariably car- 
bonaceous, and are not unfrequently associated with minute 
patches of bitumen, which, in the harder specimens, present a 
cool-like appearance ; and the vegetable r.npressions and the 
bitumen seem to have misled the sagacious nobleman into the 
oelief that coal might be found on his new property. He 
accordingly brought miners from the south, and set them to 
bore for coal in the gorge of the ravine. Though there was 
probably a register kept of the various strata through which 
they passed, it must have long since been lost ; but from my 
acquaintance with this portion of the formation, as shown in 
the neighboring sections, where it lies uptilted against the 
granitic gneiss of the Sutors, I think I could pretty nearly 
restore it They would first have had to pass for about thirty 
feet through the stratified clays and shales of the ichthyolite 
bed, with here and there a thin band of gray sandstone, 
and here and there a stratum of lime ; they would next 
have had to penetrate through from eighty to a hundred feet 
of coarse red and yellow sandstone, the red greatly predom- 
inating. They would then have entered the great conglom- 
erate, the lowest member of the formation ; and in time, if 
they continued to urge their fruitless labors, they would arrive 
at the primary rock, with its belts of granite, and its veins and 
huge masses of hornblende. In short, there might be some 
possibility of their penetrating to the central fire, but none 
whatever of their ever reaching a vein of coal. From ix 
curious circumstance, however, they were prevented from 
ascertaining, by actui>l experience, the utter barrenness of the 
fotmutioD. 



176 THE OLD BKD 8A1C08TOIIB. 

Directly in the gorge of the ravine, where we may see 
the partially wooded banks receding as they ascend from 
the base to the centre, and then bellying aver from the 
centre to the summit, there is a fine chalybeate spring, sur- 
mounted by a dome of hewn stone. It was discovered by 
the miners when in quest of the mineral which they did 
not and could not discover, and forms one of the finest speci- 
mens of a true An<;sian well which I have any where seen. 
They had bored to a considerable depth, when, on withdraw- 
ing the kind of auger used for the purpose, a bolt of water, 
which occupied the whole diameter of the bore, came rushing 
after, like the jet of a fountain, and the work was prosecuted 
no further ; for, as steam-engines were not yet invented, no 
pit could have been wrought with so large a stream issuing 
into it ; and as the volume was evidently restricted by the size 
of the bore, it was impossible to say how much greater a 
stream the source might have supplied. The spring still con- 
tinues to flow towards the sea, between its double row of 
cresses, at the rate of about a hogshead per minute — a rate 
considerably diminished, it is said, from its earlier volume, by 
some obstruction in the bore. The watera are not strongly 
tinctured — a consequence, perhaps, of their great abundance ; 
but we may see every pebble and stock in their course envel- 
oped by a ferruginous coagulum, resembling burnt sienna, 
that has probably been disengaged from the dark red sand- 
stone below, which is known to owe its color to the oxide of 
iron. A Greek poet would probably have described the inci- 
dent as the birth of the Naiad ; in the north, however, which, 
in an earlier age, had also its Naiads, though, like the fish of 
the Old Red Sandstone, they have long since become extinct 
the recollection of it is merely preserved by tradition, as a cu 
rious, thrugh by no means poetical fact, and by the name of 



THE OLD RED SANDSTONE. 177 

ihe well, which is still known as the well of the ccal-heugh — 
the old Scotch name for a coal-pit. Calderwooi tells us, vn 
his description of a violent tempest which burst out immedi- 
ately as his persecutor, James VI., breathed his last, that in 
Scothnd the sea rose high upon the land, and that many 
" coal'heughs were drowned." 

There is no science whose value can be adequately esti- 
mated by economists and utilitarians of the lower order. Its 
true quantities cannot be represented by arithmetical figures or 
monetary tables ; for its effects on mind must be as surely 
taken into account as its operations on matter, and what it has 
accomplished for the human intellect as certainly as what it 
has done for the comforts of society or the interests of com- 
merce. Who can attach a marketable value to the discov- 
eries of Newton ? I need hardly refer to the often-quoted 
remark of Johnson ; the beauty of the language in which it is 
couched has rendered patent to all the truth which it conveys. 
" Whatever withdraws us from the power of the senses," says 
the moralist — " whatever makes the past, the distant, or the 
future, predominate over the present, advances us in the dig- 
nity of thinking beings." And Geology, in a peculiar man- 
ner, supplies to the intellect an exercise of this ennobling 
character. But it has, also, its cash value. The time and 
money squandered in Great Britain alone in searching for 
coal in districts where the well-informed geologist could have 
at once pronounced the search hopeless, would much more 
than cover the expense at which geological research has been 
prosecuted throughout the world. There are few districts in 
Britain occupied by the secondary deposits, in which, at ono 
time or another the attempt has not been made. It has been 
tlie occasion of enormous expenditure in the south of Eng- 
land among the newer formations, where the coal, if it at all 
18 



178 THE OLD RED SANDSTONE. 

occurs, (for wc occasionally meet with wide gaps ii the scale,) 
must be buried at an unapproachable depth. It led in 
Scotland — in the northern county of Sutherland — to an 
unprofitable working for many years of a sulphureous lignito 
of the inferior Oolite, far above the true Coal Measures. Tlio 
attempt I have just been describing was made in a locality as 
far beneath them. There is the scene of another and more 
modern attempt in the same district, on the shores of the 
Moray Frith, in a detached patch of Lias, where n fossilized 
wood would no doubt be found in considerable abundance, 
but no continuous vein even of lignite. And it is related by 
Dr. Anderson, of Newburgh, that a fruitless and expensive 
search after coal has lately been instituted in the Old Red < 
Sandstone beds which traverse Stratheam and the Carse of 
Gowrie, in the belief that they belong not to the Old, but to 
the New Red Sandstone — a formation which has been suc- 
cessfully perforated in prosecuting a similar search in various 
parts of England. All these instances — and there are hun- 
dreds such — show the economic importance of the study of 
fossils. The Oolite has its veins of apparent coal on the 
, coast of Yorkshire, and its still more amply developed veins 
— one of them nearly four feet in thickness — on the eastern 
coast of Sutherlandshire ; the Lias has its coniferous fossils in 
great abundance, some of them converted into a lignite which 
can scarce be distinguished from a true coal ; and the bitu- 
minous masses of the Lower Old Red, and its carbonaceous 
markings, appear identical, to an unpractised eye, with the 
impressions on the carboniferous sandstones, and the bitumi- 
nous masses which they, too, are occasionally found to enclose. 
Nor does the mineralogical character of its middle beds dif- 
fer m many cases from that of the lower membcre of the 
New Red Sandstone. I have seen the older rock in the north 



THE OLD RED SANDSTONE. 179 

of Scotland as strongly saliferous as any of the newer sand- 
stones, of well nigh as bright a brick-red tint, of as friable and 
mouldering a texture, and variegated as thickly with its specks 
and streaks of green and buff-color. But in all these instances 
there are strongly characterized groups of fossils, which, like 
the landmarks of the navigator, or the findings of his quad- 
rant, establish the true place of the formations to which they 
belong. Like the patches of leather, of scarlet, and of blue, 
which mark the line attached to the deep-sea lead, they show 
the various depths at which we arrive. The Earls of Suth- 
erland set themselves to establish a coal-work among the 
chambered univalves of the Oolite, and a vast abundance of 
its peculiar bivalves. The coal-borers who perforated the 
Lias near Cromarty passed every day to and from their work 
over one of the richest deposits of animal remains in the 
kingdom — a deposit full of the most characteristic fossils; 
and drove their auger through a thousand belemnites and 
ammonites of the upper and inferior Lias, and through gryph- 
ites and ichthyodorulites innumerable. The sandstones of 
Stratheam and the Carse of Gdwrie yield their plates and 
scales of the Holoptychius^ the most abundant fossil of the 
Upper Old Red ; and the shale of the little dell in which the 
first Earl of Cromarty set his miners to work, contains, as I 
have said, plates of the Coccosteus and scales of the Osteoh' 
pis — fossils found only in the Lower Old Red. Nature, in 
all these localities, furnished the index, but men lacked the 
skill necessary to decipher it.* I may mention that, iudc- 



* There occurs in Mr. Murchison's Silurian Sytiem a singularly 
amusing account of one of the most unfortunate of all coal-boring 
enterprises ; the unlucky projector, a Welsh farmer, having set him- 
self to dig for coal in the lowest member of the system, at least six 



180 THE OLD RED SANDSTONE. 

pendcntlv of tlieir well-marked organisms, there is a simple 
test through which the lignites of the newer formations may 
be distinguished i'rom the true coal of the carboniferous sys- 
tem. Coal, though ground into an impalpable powder, re- 
tains its deep black color, and may be used as a black pig- 
ment ; lignite, on the contrary, when fully levigated, assumes 
. a reddish, or, rather, umbry hue. 

I have said that the waters of the well of the coal-heugh 
are chalybeate — a probable consequence of their infiltration 
through the iron oxides of the superior beds of the formation, 
and their subsequent passage through the deep red strata of 

formations beneath the only one at which the object of his search 
could have been found. Mr. Murchison thus relates the storj : — 

** At Iin-y-coed I found a credulous fjEomer ruining himself in ex- 
caratuig a horizontal gallery in search of coal, an ignorant miner 
being his engineer. The case may serve as a striking example of the 
coal- boring mania in districts which cannot by possibility contain that 
mineral ; and a few words concerning it may, therefore, prove a sal- 
utary warning to those who speculate for coal in the Silurian Rocks. 
The farmhouse of Tin-y-coed is situated on the sloping sides of a hill 
of trap, which throw ofi^ upon its north-western flank, thin beds of 
black grauwacke shale, dipping to the west-north-west at a high an- 
gle. The color of the shale, and of the water that flowed down its 
sides, the pyritous veins, and other vulgar symptoms of coal-bearing 
strata, had long convinced the farmer that he possessed a large hid- 
den mass of coal, and, unfortunately, a small fragment of real anthra- 
cite was diijcovered, which burnt like the best coal. Miners wore 
sent for, and operations commenced. To sink a shaft was imprac- 
ticable, both from the want of means, and the large volume of water. 
A slightly inclined gallery was therefore commenced, the mouth of 
which was opened at the bottom of the hill, on the side of the little 
brook which waters the dell. I have already stated that, in many 
canes, where the intrusive trap throws oflf the shale, the latter pre- 
lerves its natural and unaltered condition to within a certain dictance 



THE OLD RED SANDSTONE. 181 

tbe inferior bed. There could be very curious chapters writ- 
ten on mineral springs, in their connection with the formations 
through which they pass. SmoUett^s masterpiece, honest old 
Matthew Bramble, became thoroughly disgusted with the Bath 
waters on discovering that they filtered through an ancient 
bjrying-ground belonging to the Abbey, and that much of 
their peculiar taste and odor might probably be owing to the 
** lotten bones and mouldering carcasses " through which 
they were strained. Some of the springs of the Old Red 
Sandstone have also the churchyard taste, but the bones and 
carcasses through which they strain are much older than 
those of the Abbey burying-ground at Bath. The bitumen 

of the trap ; and so it was at Tin-y-coed, for the level proceeded for 
155 feet with little or no obstacle. Mounds of soft black shale attest- 
ed the rapid progress of the adventurers, when suddenly they came 
to a • change of metal/ They were now approaching the nucleus of 
the little ridge ; and the rock they encountered was, as the men in- 
formed me, < a* hard a$ irojit* viz., of lydianized schist, precisely anal- 
ogous to that which is exposed naturally in ravines where all the 
phenomena are laid bare. The deluded people, however, endeavored 
to penetrate the hardened mass, but the vast expense of blasting it 
put a stop to the undertaking, not, however, without a thorough con- 
viction on the part of the farmer, that, could he but have got through 
that hard stuff, he would most surely have been well recompensed, 
for it was just thereabouts that they began to find 'tmall vehu of 
eoaL' It has been before shown, that portions of anthracite are not 
unfrequent in the altered shale, where it is in contact with the intru- 
sive rock. And the occurrence of the smallest portion of anthracite 
is always sufficient to lead the Radnorshire farmer to suppose that 
he is very near < El Dorado.' Amid all their failures, I never met 
with an individual who was really disheartened ; a frequent exclama- 
tion being, * 0, if our squires were only men of »p rit^ we should 
have as fine coal as any in the world I ' " — (SUuricm Syttem, Part I., 
p. 828.) 

18* 



182 THE OLD REl/ SANDSTOICB. 

of the slrongly impregnated rocks and clay-beds of this foi 
mation, like the bitumen of the still more strongly impreg* 
nated limestones and shales of the Lias, seems to have had 
rather an animal than vegetable origin. The shales of the 
Eathie Lias burn like turf soaked in oil, and yet they hardly 
contain one per cent, of vegetable matter. In a single cubic 
inch, however, I have counted about eighty molluscous 
organisms, mostly ammonites, and minute striated scallops; 
and the mass, when struck with the hammer, still yields the 
heavy odor of animal matter in a state of decay. The lower 
fish-beds of the Old Red are, in some localities, scarcely lesf 
bituminous. The fossil scales and plates, which they enclose 
burn at the candle ; they contain small cavities filled with a 
strongly scented, semi-fiuid bitumen, as adhesive as tar, and 
as inflammable ; and for many square miles together the bed 
is composed almost exclusively of a dark-colored, semi-calca- 
reous, semi-aluminous schist, scarcely less fetid, from the 
great quantity of this substance which it contains, than the 
swinc-stones of England. Its vegetable remains bear but a 
small proportion to its animal organisms ; and from huge ac- 
cumulations of these last decomposing amid the mud of a 
still sea, little disturbed by tempests or currents, and then sud- 
denly interred by some widely spread catastrophe, to ferment 
and consolidate ■ under vast beds of sand and conglomerate 
the bitumen • seems to have been elaborated. These bitu- 
minous schists, largely charged with sulphurct of iron, run 
far into the interior, along the flanks of the gigantic Ben Wo- 



• •• In the slaty schists of Seefeld, in the Tyrol," say Messrs. Sedg- 
wick and Murchison, ** there is such an abundance of a fidmilar bitu- 
men, that it . is largely extracted for medicinal purposes." — {Gml 
Tni/ut. for 1820, p. 134.) 



THE OLD KE9 SUmSTOXE. 183 

?is, and throogfa the ezqiuslelj psskiral rafler of Stiatfapef- 
fer. Tbe hi^ier bills which rise aver the Taller mre formed 
mostly of tbe gient congloczieiate — KDOckferril, w'nh lis t'iI- 
rified fort — tbe wooded and preciphous lid^ orer Bra ban 
— and tbe middle emineoces of ibe gigantic moontaLin on tbe 
nonh ; but tbe bottom and tbe lover SiOpes of tbe railej are 
occupied by tbe bitaminoos and solj^nreoos aciuFis of tbe 
fisb-bed, and in tbese, largely impregnated ariib tbe peculiar 
ingredients of tbe formatioa, tbe iamoos medicinal r^nngs of 
tbe Stiatb baTe tbeir rise. They cnfrtaip, as sbofwn by cbem- 
ical analysis, tbe sulpbates o£ soda, of lime, of magnem, 
common salt, and, abore all, salpbmetled hydrogen gas — 
elements whicb masses of sea-mod, charged vith animal 
matter, would yield as leadily to tbe chemist as the medicinal 
springs of Stratbpefier. is it not a curious reflection, that 
tbe commercial greatness of Britain, in the present day, should 
be closely connected with the towering and thickly ^lead 
forests of arbc»aceoos iems and gigantic reeds — reliables 
of strange form and oncouth names' — which flouiisbed and 
decayed on its surface, age after age, during the rastly ex- 
tended term of tbe carboniferous period, ere the mountains 
were yet upheaved, and when there was as yet no man to till 
tbe ground ? Is it not a reflection equally curious, that the 
invalids of tbe present summer should be drinking health, 
amid tbe recesses of Stratbpefl^r, from the still more ancient 
mineral and animal debris of the lower ocean of tbe Old Red 
Sandstone, strangely elaborated for vast but un reckoned peri- 
ods in the bowels of tbe earth ? Tbe fact may remind us of 
one of the specifics of a now obsolete scboc^l of medicine, 
which flourished in this country about two centuries ago, and 
which included in its wuitaria mediea portions of the human 
frame. Among these was the flesh of Egyptian mummies 



184 THE OLD R£D SANDSTONE. 

impregnated with the embalming drugs — the dried muacleft 
and sinews of human creatures who had walked in the streets 
of Thobes or of Luxor three thousand years ago. 

The commoner mineral springs of the formation, as might 
be anticipated, from the very gen3ral diffusion of the oxide 
to which it owes its color, are chalybeate. There are dis- 
tricts in Easter-Ross and the Black Isle in which the traveller 
scarcely sees a runnel by the way-side that is not half choked 
up by its fox-colored coagulum of oxide. Two of the most 
strongly impregnated chalybeates with which I am acquainted 
gush out of a sandstone bed, a few yards apart, among the 
woods of Tarbat House, on the northern shore of the Frith 
of Cromarty. They splash among the pebbles with a half- 
gurgling, half-tinkling sound, in a solitary but not unpleasing 
recess, darkened by alders and willows ; and their waters, 
aAer uniting in the same runnel, form a little, melancholy 
looking lochan^ matted over with weeds, and edged with flags 
and rushes, and which swarms in early summer with the 
young of the frog in its* tad pole state, and in the after months 
with the black water-beetle and the newt. The circumstance 
is a somewhat curious one, as the presence of iron as an ox- 
ide has been held so unfavorable to both animal and vegeta- 
ble life, that the supposed poverty of the Old Red Sandstone 
in fossil remains has been attributed to its almost universal 
diffusion at the period the deposition was taking place. Were 
the system as poor as has been alleged, however, it might be 
questioned, on the strength of a fact such as this, whether 
the iron militated so much against the living existences of 
the formation, as against the preservation of their remains 
when dead. 

Some of the spn ngs which issue from the ichthyolite beds 
along the shores of the Moray Frith are largely charged, not 



T9S OLD RED SA2iDST0NE. 185 

with iron, like the well of the coal-heugh, or the springs of 
Tarhat House, nor yet with hydrogen and soda, like the spa 
of Strathpeffer, but with carbonate of lime. When employed 
for domestic purposes, they choke up, in a few years, with a 
stony deposition, the spouts of tea-kettles. On a similai 
principle, they plug up their older channels, and then burst 
out in new ones ; nor is it uncommon to find among the clifis 
little hollow recesses, long since divested of their waters by 
this process, that are still thickly surroimded by coral-like in- 
crustations of moss and lichens, grass and nettle-stalks, and 
roofed with marble-like stalactites. I am acquainted with at 
least one of these springs of very considerable volume, and ded- 
icated of old to an obscure Roman Catholic saint, whose name 
it still bears, (St Bennet,) which presents phenomena not un- 
worthy the attention of the young geologist. It comes gush- 
ing from out the ichthyolite bed, where the latter extends, in 
the neighborhood of Cromarty, along the shores of the Moray 
Frith ; and after depositing in a stagnant morass an accumu- 
lation of a grayish-colored and partially consolidated traver- 
tin, escapes by two openings to the shore, where it is absorbed 
among the sand and gravel. A storm about three years ago 
swept the beach several feet beneath its ordinary level, and 
two little moles of conglomerate and sandstone, the work of 
the spring, were found to occupy the two openings. Each 
had its fossils — comminuted sea-shells, and stalks of hardened 
moss ; and in one of the moles I found imbedded a few of 
the vertebral joints of a sheep. It was a recent formation 
on a small scale, bound together by a calcareous cement fur- 
nished by the fish-beds of the inferior Old Red Sandstone, 
%nd composed of sand and pebbles, mostly from the granitic 
gneiss of the neighboring hill, and organisms, vegetable and 
animal, fron both the land and the sea. 



186 THE OLD BKD SANDSTONE. 

The Old Red Sandstone of Scotland has been extenmvcly 
employed for the purposes of the architect, and its limestones 
occasionally applied to those of the agriculturist. As migh. 
be anticipated in reference to a deposit so widely spread, the 
quality of both its sandstones and its lime is found to vary 
exceedingly in even the same beds when examined in differ- 
ent localities. Its inferior conglomerate, for instance, in the 
neighborhood of Cromarty, weathers so rapidly, that a fence 
built of stones furnished by it little more than half a century 
ago, has mouldered in some places into a mere grass*covered 
mound. The same bed in the neighborhood of Inverness is 
composed of a stone nearly as hard and quite as durable as 
granite, and which has been employed in paving the streets of 
the place — a purpose which it serves as well as any of the 
igneous or primary rocks could have done. At Redcastle, 
on the northern shore of the Frith of Beauly, the same con- 
glomerate assumes an intermediate character, and forms, 
though coarse, an excellent building stone, which, in some of 
the older ruins of the district, presents the marks of the tool 
as sharply indented as when under the hands of the work- 
man. Some of the sandstone beds of the system are strongly 
saliferous; and these, however coherent they may appear, 
never resist the weather until first divested of their salt. The 
main ichthyolite bed on the northern shore of the Moray 
Frith is overlaid by a thick deposit of a finely- tinted yellow 
sandstone of this character, which, unlike most sandstones of 
a mouldering quality, resists the frosts and storms of winter, 
and wastes only when the weather becomes warm and dry. 
A few days of sunshine affect it more than whole months of 
high winds and showers. The heat crystallizes at the surface 
the salt wl.ich it contains ; the crystals, acting as wedges, 
*hrow off minute particles of the stone ; and thus, mechani- 



THE OLD BED SANDSTONE. 187 

cally at least, the degrading process is the same as that to 
which sindstones of a diflerent but equally inferior quality 
anj exposed during severe frosts. In the course of years, 
however, this sandstone, when employed in building, loses its 
salt ; crust after crust is formed on the surface, and either 
forced off by the crystals underneath, or washed away by the 
rains ; and then the stone ceases to waste, and gathers on its 
weathered inequalities a protecting mantle of lichens.* The 
most valuable quarries in the Old Red System of Scotland yet 
discoven^d, are the flagstone quarries of Caithness and Car- 
mylie. The former have been opened in the middle schists 
of the lower, or Tilestone formation of the system ; the latter, 
as I have had occasion to remark oftener than once, in the 
Comstone, or middle formation. The quarries of both Car- 
mylie and Caithness employ hundreds of workmen, and their 
flagstones form an article of commerce. The best building- 
stone of the north of Scotland — best both for beauty and 
durability — is a pure Quartzose Sandstone furnished by the 
upper beds of the system. These are extensively quarried 
in Moray, near the village of Burghead, and exported to all 
parts of the kingdom. The famous obelisk of Forres, so 

* When left to time the process is a tedious one, and, ere its accom- 
plishment, the beauty of the masonry is always in some degree de • 
•troycd. The following passage, from a popular work, points out a 
mode by which it might possibly be anticipated, and the waste of sur- 
facc prevented : — ** A hall of which the walls were constantly damp 
though every means were employed to keep them dry, was about to 
be pulled down, when M. Schmithall recommended, as a last resource, 
that the walls should be washed with sulphuric acid, (vitriol.) It 
was done, and Zue deliquescesft salts heing decomposed by acid, the 
walls dried, and t^e hall was afterwards free from dampness." — (i?ec 
reaiions in Sdsnee*) 



188 THE OLD BED SANDSTONE. 

interesting to the antiquary — which has been described by 
some writers as formed of a species of stone unknown in the 
district, and which, according to a popular tradition, was 
transported from the Continent — is evidently composed of 
this Quartzose Sandstone, and must have been dug out of 
one of the neighboring quarries. And so coherent is its tex- 
ture, that the storms of, perhaps, ten centuries have failed 
to obliterate its rude but impressive sculptures. 

The limestones of both the upper and lower formations of 
the system have been wrought in Moray with tolerable suc- 
cess. In both, however, they contain a considerable pei 
centage of siliceous and argillaceous earth. The system, 
though occupying an intermiBdtate place between two metal- 
liferous deposits, — the grauwacke and the carboniferous 
limestone, — has not been found to contain workable veins 
any where in Britain, and in Scotland no metallic veins of any 
kind, with the exception of here and there a few slender 
threads of ironstone, and here and there a few detached crys- 
tals of galena. Its wealth consists exclusively in building 
and paving stone, and in lime. Some of the richest tracts of 
com land in the kingdom rest on the Old Red Sandstone — 
the agricultural valley of Strathmore, for instance, and the 
fertile plains of Easter-Ross: Caithness has also its deep, 
corn-bearing soils, and Moray has been well known for cen- 
turies as the granary of Scotland. But in all these localities 
the fertility seems derived rather from an intervening subsoil 
of tenacious diluvial clay, than from the rocks of the system. 
Wherever the clay is wanting, the soil is barren. In the moor 
of the Milbuy — a tract about firty square miles in extent, and 
lying within an nojr's walk of the Friths of Cromarty and 
Beauty, — a thin covering of soil rests on the sandstones of the 



THB OLD RBD SANDSTONE. 



189 



lower formatioD. And so extreme is the barrenness of this moor, 
that notwithstanding the advantages of its semi-insular situation, 
it was sufiered to lie as an unclaimed common until about 
' twenty-five years ago, when it was parcelled out among tlM 
neighboring propnctors 

19 



CHAPTER XL 

y>Iogical 1 hys^ognomy. — Scenery of the Primary Fonnations ; 
QneiM, ML a Schist, Quartz Rock. — Of the Secondary ; the Chalk 
Formations, the Oolite, the New Red Sandstone, the Coal Measures. 
— Scenery in the Neighborhood of Edinburgh. — Aspect of the 
Trap Rocks. — The Disturbing and Denuding Agencies. — Distinc- 
tive Features of the Old Red Sandstone. — Of the Great Conglom- 
erate. ~ Of the Ichthyolite Beds. — The Bum of £athie.~Tha 
Upper Old Red Sandstones. — Scene in Moray. 

Phtsioonomt Is no idle or doubtful science in connection 
wllh Greology. The physiognomy of a country indicates, 
almost invariably, its geological character. There is scarce a 
rock among the more ancient groups that does not afiect its 
peculiar form of hill and valley. Each has its style of land- 
scape ; and as the vegetation of a district depends oAen on 
the nature of the underlying deposits, not only are the main 
outlines regulated by the mineralogy of the formations which 
they define, but also in many cases the manner in which these 
outlines are filled up. The coloring of the landscape is well 
nigh as intimately connected with its Geology as the drawing. 
The traveller passes through a mountainous region of gneiss. 
The hills, which, though bulky, are shapeless, raise their huge 
backs so high over the brown, dreary moors, which, unvaried 
by precipice or ravine, stretch away for miles from their 
feet, that even amid the heats of midsummer the snow gleams 
in streaks and patches from their summits. And yet so vast is 
their extent of base, and their tops so truncated, that they 
seem but half-finished hills notwithstanding — hills interdicted 
wmehow in the forming, ana the work stopped ere the upper 

(190) 



THB OLD RED SANDSTONE. 191 

Stories had been added. He pursues his journey and onteis 
a district of micaceous schist. The hills are no longt>r 
truncated, or the moors unbroken ; the heavy ground-swell of 
the former landscape has become a tempestuous sea, agitated 
by powerful winds and conflicting tides. The picturesque and 
nomewhat fantastic outline is composed of high, sharp peaks, 
bold, craggy domes, steep, broken acclivities, and deeply ser- 
rated ridges ; and the higher hills seem as if set round with a 
framework of props and buttresses, that stretch out on every 
side like the roots of an ancient oak. He passes on, and tho 
landscape varies ; the surrounding hills, though lofty, pyram- 
idal, and abrupt, are less rugged than before ; and the ra- 
vines, though still deep and narrow, are walled by ridges no 
longer serrated and angular, but comparatively rectilinear and 
smooth. But the vegetation is even more scanty than for- 
merly ; the steeper slopes are covered with streams of debris, 
CD which scarce a moss or lichen finds root ; and the conoidal 
hills, bare of soil from their summits half way down, seem so 
many naked skeletons, that speak of the decay and death of 
nature. All is solitude and sterility. The territory is one of 
Quartz rock. Still the traveller passes on: the mountains 
sink into low swellings ; long rectilinear ridges nm out 
towards the distant sea, and tenninate in bluff, precipitous 
headlands. The valleys, soft and pastoral, widen into plains, 
or incline in long-drawn slopes of gentlest declivity. The 
streams, hitherto so headlong and broken, linger beside their 
banks, and then widen into friths and estuaries. The deep 
soil is covered by a thick mantle of vegetation — by forest 
trees of largest growth, and rich fields of corn ; and the soli- 
tude of the mountains has given place to a busy population. 
He has left behind him the primary regions, and entered on 
one of the secondary districts. 



193 THE OLD SSD SANOSTOITB. 

And these less rugged formations have also their respective 
styles — marred and obliterated oflen by the Plutonic agency, 
which imparts to them in some instances its own character, 
and in some an intermediate one, but in general distinctly 
marked, and easily recognized. The Chalk presents its long 
inland lines of apparent coast, that send out their rounded 
headlands, cape beyond cape, into the wooded or corn-covered 
plains below. Here and there, there juts up at the base of the 
escarpement a white, obelisk-like stack; here and there, 
there opens into the interior a narrow, grassy bay, in which 
noble beeches have cast anchor. There are valleys without 
streams ; and the landscape a-top is a scene of arid and un- 
even downs, that seem to rise and fall like the sea aAer a 
storm. We pass on to the Oolite : the slopes are more gen- 
tle, the lines of rising ground less continuous, and less coast- 
like ; the valleys have their rivulets, and the undulating sur- 
face is covered by a richer vegetation. We enter on a dis- 
trict of New Red Sandstone. Deep, narrow ravines intersect 
elevated platforms. There are lines of low precipices, so 
perpendicular and so red, that they seem as if walled over 
with new brick ; and here and there, amid the speckled and 
mouldering sandstones, that gather no covering of lichen, 
there stands up a huge, altar-like mass of lime, mossy and 
gray, as if it represented a remoter antiquity than the rocks 
around it. The Coal Measures present often the appearance 
of vast lakes frozen over during a high wind, partially broken 
afterwards by a sudden thaw, and then frozen again. Their 
shores stand up around them in the form of ridges and moun- 
tain chains of the older rocks ; and their surfaces are grooved 
into flat valleys and long lines of elevation. Take, as an in- 
stance, the scenery about Edinburgh. The Ochil Hills and 
the Grampians form the distant shores of the seeming lake 



THS OLD RED SANDSTONE. 193 

or basin on the one side, the range of the Lammermuirs and 
the Pentland group on the other ; the space between is ridged 
and furrowed in long lines, that run in nearly the same dirce* 
tion from north-east to south-west, as if, when the binding 
frost was first setting in, tlie wind had blown from off the 
northern or southern shore. 

But whence these abrupt, precipitous hills that stud the 
landscape, and form, in the immediate neighborhood of the 
city, its more striking features ? They belong — to return tc 
the illustration of the twice-frozen lake — to the middle peri- 
od of thaw, when the ice broke up ; and, as they are com- 
posed chiefly of matter ejected from the abyss, might have 
characterized equally any of the other formations. Their 
very* striking forms, however, illustrate happily the operations 
of the great agencies on which, in the secondary and transi- 
tion deposits, all the peculiarities of scenery depend. The 
molten matter from beneath seems to have been injected, in 
the first instance, through rents and fissures among the car- 
boniferous shales and sandstones of the district, where it lay 
cooling in its subterranean matrices, in beds and dikes, like 
metal in the moulds of the founder ; and the places which it 
occupied must have been indicated on the surface but by 
curves and swellings of the strata. The denuding power 
then came into operation in the form of tides and currents, 
and ground down the superincumbent rocks. The injected 
masses, now cooled and hardened, were laid bare ; and the 
softer framework of the moulds in which they had been cast 
was washed from their summits and sides, except where -ong 
ridges remained attached to them in the lines of the current, 
uS if to indicate the direction in which they had broken its 
force. Every larger stone in a water-course, after the tor- 
rent fed by a thundei shower has just subsided, shows on the 
19 



194 THE OLD RED SANDSTONE. 

mne pnnciple, its trail of sand and shingle piled up behind 
it. The outlines of the landscape were modified yet further 
by the yielding character of the basement of sandstone or 
shale on which the Plutonic beds so often rest The base 
nient crumbled away as the tides and waves broke against it 
The injected beds above, undermined in the process, and ^ ith 
a vertical cleavage, induced by their columnar tendency, fell 
down in masses that left a front perpendicular as a wall. 
Each bed came thus to present its own upright line of preci- 
pice ; and hence — when they rise bed above bed, as oAea 
occurs — the stair-like outline of hill to which the trap rocks 
owe their name ; hence the outline of the Dalmahoy Crags, 
for instance, and of the southern and western front of Salis- 
bury Crags. 

In all the sedimentary formations the peculiarities of sce- 
nery depend on three circumstances — on the Plutonic agen- 
cies, the denuding agencies, and the manner and proportions 
in which the harder and softer beds of the deposits on which 
these operated alternate with one another. There is an union 
of the active and the passive in the formation of landscape ; 
that which disturbs and grinus down, and that which, accord- 
ing to its texture and composition, aflects, if I may so speak, 
a peculiar style of being ground down and disturbed ; and it 
is in the passive circumstar.oes that the peculiarities chiefly 
originate. Hence it is that the scenery of the Chalk differs 
from the scenery of the Oolite, and both from that of the 
Coal ^feasures. The Old R^d Sandstone has also its pccu- 
liarilies of prospect, which vary according to its formations, 
and the amount and character of the disturbing and denudmg 
agencies to which these have been exposed. Instead, how- 
ever, of crowding its various, and, in some instances, dissim- 
ilar features into one landscape, I shall introduce to the reader 



THE OLD RED SANDSTONE. 195 

a few of its more striking and characteristic scenes, as ex- 
hibited in various localities, and by different deposits, begin* 
Ding first with its conglomerate base. 

The great antiquity of this deposit is unequivocally indi- 
cated by the manner in which we find it capping, far in the 
interior, in insulated beds and patches, some of our loftier 
hills, or, in some instances, wrapping them round, as with 9 
caul, from base to summit. It mixes largely, in our northern 
districts, with the mountain scenery of the country, and im- 
parts strength and boldness of outline to every landscape in 
which it occurs. Its island-like patches aflfect generally a 
bluff parabolic or conical outline ; its loftier hills present 
rounded, dome-like summits, which sink to the plain on the 
one hand in steep, slightly concave lines, and on the other in 
lines decidedly convex, and a little less steep. The moun- 
tain of boldest outline in the line of the Caledonian Valley 
(Mealforvony) is composed externally of this rock. Except 
where covered by the diluvium, it seems little friendly to 
vegetation. Its higher summits are well nigh as bare as 
those of the primary rocks ; and when a public road crosses 
its lower ridges, the traveller generally finds that there is no 
paving process necessary to procure a hardened surlace, for 
his wheels rattle over the pebbles embedded in the rock. On 
the sea-coast, in several localities, the deposit presents strik- 
ing peculiarities of outline. The bluff and rounded preci- 
pices stand out in vast masses, that affect the mural form, and 
present few of the minuter angularities of the primary rocks. 
Here and there a square buttress of huge proportions leans 
against the front of some low-browed crag, that seems little 
to need any such support, and casis a length of shadow 
athwart its face. There opens along the base of the rock a 
line of rounded, shallow caves, or what seem rather the open- 



196 THE OLD RED SAMDSTOICE. 

ings of caves not yet dug, and which testify of a period when 
the sea stood about thirty feet higher on our coasts than at 
present. A multitude of stacks and tabular masses lie 
grouped in front, perforated often by squat, heavy arches ; 
and stacks, caverns, buttresses, crags, and arches, are all 
alike mottled over by the thickly-set and variously colored 
pebbles. There is a tract of scenery of this strangely 
marked character in the neighborhood of Dunottar, and two 
other similar tracts in the far north, where the hill of Nigg, 
in Ross-shire, declines towards the Lias deposit in the Bay of 
Shandwick, and where, in the vicinity of Inverness, a line 
of bold, precipitous coast runs between the pyramidal wooded 
eminence which occupies the south-eastern comer of Ross, 
and the tower-like headlands that guard the entrance of the 
Bay of Munlochy. In the latter tract, however, the conglom- 
erate is much less cavernous than in the other two.* 

The sea-coast of St. Vigeans, in Forfarshire, has been 
long celebrated for its romantic scenery and its caves ; and 
though it belongs rather to the conglomerate base of the up- 
per formation than to the great conglomerate base of the 
lower, it is marked, from the nature of the materials — ma- 
terials common to both — by features indistinguishable from 
those which characterize the sea-coasts of the older deposit. 
Its wall of precipices averages from a hundred to a hundred 
and eighty feet in height — no very great matter compared 
with some of our northern lines, but the cliffs make up for 
their want of altitude by their bold and picturesque combina- 
tions of form ; and I scarce know where a long summcr^s 
day could well be passed more agreeably than among their 
wild and solitary recesses. The incessant lashings of the sea 
bavo ground them down into shapes the most fantastic. Huge 
stacks, that stand up from amid the breakers, are here and 



THE OLD K£D 8A1TDST0NB. 197 

there perforated by round, heavy-browed arches, and cast the 
morning shadows inlmd athwart the cavern-hollowed preci« 
pices behind. The never-ceasing echoes reply, in long and 
gloomy caves, to the wild tones of the sea. Here a bluff 
promontory projects into the deep, green water, and the white 
foam, in times of tempest, dashes up a hundred feet against 
its face. There a narrow strip of vegetation, spangled with 
wild flowers, intervenes between the beach and the foot of the 
cliffs that sweep along the bottom of some semicircular bay ; 
but we see, from the rounded caves by which they are stud- 
ded, and the polish which has blunted their lower angularities, 
that at some early period the breakers must have dashed for 
ages against their bases. The Gayltt Pot^ a place of inter- 
est, from its very striking appearance, to more than geologists, 
is connected with one of the deep-sea promontories. We 
see an oblong hollow in the centre of a corn-field, that borders 
on the cliffs. It deepens as we approach it, and on reaching 
the edge we find ourselves standing on the verge of a precipice 
about a hundred and fifty feet in depth, and see the waves 
dashing along the bottom. On descending by a somewhat 
precarious path, we find that a long, tunnel-like cavern com- 
municates with the sea, and mark, through the deep gloom of 
the passage, the sunlight playing beyond ; and now and then 
a white sail passing the opening, as if flitting across the field 
of a telescope. The Gaylet Pot seems originally to have 
been merely a deep, straight cave, hollowed in the line of a 
fault by the waves ; and it owes evidently its present appear- 
ance to the falling in of the roof for about a hundred yards, 
at its inner extremity. 

We pass from the conglomerate to the middle and upper 
beds of the lower formation, and find scenery of a different 
character in the districts in which they prevail The aspect \n 



190 TBM €fLD BXII SAHmTOHX. 

tes bold and ra^ged^and afiects often long horizontal lines 
that stretch away without rise or depression, amid the surround- 
ing inequalities of the landscape for miles and leagues, and 
that decline to either side, like roofs of what the architect 
would term a low pitch. The ridge of the Leys in the east- 
em opening of the Caledonian Valley, so rectilinear in its 
outline, and so sloping in its sides, presents a good illustration 
of this peculiarity. The rectilinear ridge which runs from 
the Southern Sutor of Cromarty far into the interior of the 
country, and which has heen compared in a former chapter 
to the shaft of a spear, furnishes another illustration equally 
apt* Where the sloping sides of these rooMike ridges 
decline, as in the latter instance, towards an exposed sea- 
coast, we find the slope terminating often in an abrupt line of 
rock dug out by the waves. It is thus a roof set on walls, 
and furnished with eaves. A ditch just finished by the labor- 
er presents regularly sloping sides ; but the little stream that 
comes running through gradually widens its bed by digging 
furrows into the slopes, the undermined masses fall in and are 
swept away, and, in the course of a few months, the sides are 
no longer sloping, but abrupt. And such, on a great scale. 



♦ The valleys which separate these ridges form often spacious frithe 
and ba}'s, the frequent occurrence of which in the Old Red Sandstone 
constitutes, in some localities, one of the characteristics of the system. 
Mark in a map of the north of Scotland, how closely friths and estu- 
aries lie crowded together between the counties of Sutherland and In- 
verness. In a line of coast little more than forty miles in extent, 
there occur four arms of the sea — the Friths of Cromarty, Beauly, 
and Dornoch, and the Bay of Munlochy. The Frith of Tay and the 
U^sinof Montrose are also semi-marine valleys of the OldHed Sand- 
stone. Two of the finest harbors in Britain, or the world, belong to it 
— MUford Uai on, in Soutli Wales, and the Bay of Cromarty. 



TH£ OLD K£D SANDSTONE. 199 

lias been the process through which coast- Snes that were 
originally paved slopes have become walls of precipices. 
The waves cut first through the outer strata; and eveiy 
stratum thus divided comes to present two faces — a perpen- 
dicular face in the newly-formed line of precipice, and another 
horizontal face lying parallel to it, along the shore. One 
half the severed stratum seems as if rising out of the 
sea, the other half as if descending from the hill : the 
geologist who walks along the beach finds the various beds 
presented in duplicate — a hill-bed on the one side, and a 
sea-bed on the other. There occurs a very interesting 
instance of this arrangement in the bold line of coast on the 
northern shore of the Moray Frith, so often alluded to in a 
previous chapter, as extending between the Southern Sutor 
and the Hill of Eathie ; and which forms the wall of a por- 
tion of the roof-like ridge last described. The sea first broke 
in a long line through strata of red and gray shale, next 
through a thick bed of pale-yellow stone, then through a con- 
tinuous bed of stratified clays and nodular limestone, and, 
last of all, through a bed, thicker than any of the others, of 
indurated red sandstone. The line of clifis formed in this 
way rises abruptly for about a hundred yards on the one 
hand ; the shore stretches out for more than double the same 
space on the other ; on both sides the beds exactly correspond ; 
and to ascend in the line of the strata from the foot of the 
clifls, we have either to climb the hill, or to pass downwards at 
low ebb to the edge of the sea. The section is of inteiest, 
not onh* from the numerous organisms, animal and vegetable, 
which Its ichthyolite beds contain, but from the illustration 
which it also furnishes of denudation to a vast extent from 
causes still in active operation. A line of precipices a bun- 
d* ?d yards in height, and more than two miles in length, hoM 



200 THE OLD RED SANDSTONE. 

been dug out of the slope by the slow wear of the waves, in 
the unreckoned course of that period during which the 
present sea was bounded in this locality by the existing line 
of coast (See Frontispiece, sect 3.) 

I know not a more instructive walk for the young geolc^t 
Ihan that furnished by the two miles of shore along which this 
section extends. Years of examination and inquiry would 
fail to exhaust it It presents us, I have said, with the numer- 
ous organisms of the Lower Old Red Sandstone ; it presents 
us also, towards its western extremity, with the still naore 
numerous organisms of the Lower and Upper Lias ; nor are 
the inflections and faults which its strata exhibit less instruc- 
tive than its fossils or its vast denuded hollow. I have climbed 
along its wall of clifls during the height of a tempestuous 
winter tide, when waves of huge volume, that had begun to 
gather strength under the night of the Northern Ocean, were 
bursting and foaming below ; and as the harder pebbles, up- 
lifted, by the surge, rolled by thousands and tens of thousands 
along the rocky bottom, and the work of denudation went on, 
I have thought of the remote past, when the same agents had 
first begun to grind down the upper strata, whose broken edges 
now projected high over my head on the one hand, and lay 
buried far under the waves at my feet on the other. Almost 
all mountain chains present their abrupter escarpements to the 
sea, though separated from it in many instances by hundreds 
of miles — a consequence, it is probable, of a sin^lar course 
of denudation, ere they had attained their present altitude, or 
the plains at their feet had been elevated over the level of 
the ocean. Had a rise of a hundred feet taken place in this 
northern district in the days of Caesar, the whole upper part 
of the Moray Frith would have been laid dry, and it would 
now have seemed as inexplicable that this ioof-lik« ridge 



THE OLD BSD SANDSTONB* 201 

•hould present so rugged a line of wall to the distant sea, aM 
that the Western Ghauts of India should invariably turn their 
steepest declivities to the basin of the Indian Ocean, or that, 
from the Arctic Circle to the southern extremity of Patagonia, 
the huge mountain-chain of America should elevate its dizzy 
precipices in the line of the Pacific. 

Let us take another view of this section. It stretches be« 
'Aveen two of the granitic knobs or wedges to which I have 
had such frequent occasion to refer — the Southern Sutor of 
Cromarty, and the Hill of Eathie ; and the edges of the strata 
somewhat remind one of the edges of a bundle of deals laid 
flatways on two stones, and bent towards the middle by their 
own weight But their more brittle character is shown by 
the manner in which their ends are broken and uptilted against 
the granitic knobs on which they seem to rest ; and towards 
the western knob the whole bundle has been broken across 
from below, and the opening occasioned by the fracture forms 
a deep, savage ravine, skirted by precipices, that runs far into 
the interior, and exhibits the lower portion of the system to 
well nigh its base. Will the reader spend a very few minutes 
in exploring the solitary recesses of this rocky trench — it 
matters not whether as a scene-hunter or a geologist ? We 
pass onwards along the beach through the middle line of the 
denuded hollow. The natural rampart that rises on the right 
ascends towards the uplands in steep slopes, lined horizontally 
by sheep-walks, and fretted by mossy knolls, and churchyard 
like ridges — or juts out into abrupt and weathered crags, 
crusted with lichens and festooned with ivy — or recedes into 
bosky hollows, roughened by the sloe-thorn, the wild-rose, 
and the juniper ; on the left the wide extent of the Moray 
Frith stretches out to the dim horizon, with its vein-like cur- 
ie its, and its undulating lines of coast; while before us we 



THB f.LD KSD SANI>STOIfS. 

see, far in the distance, the blue vista of the Great Valley 
with its double wall of jagged and serrated hills, and directljr 
in the ojvening, the gray, diminished spires of Inverness. We 
reach a brown mossy stream, of just volume enough to sweep 
away the pebbles and shells that have been strewed in its 
course by the last tide ; and see, on turning a sudden angle, 
the precipices cleft to their base by the ravine that has yielded 
its waters a passage from the interior. 

We enter along the bed of the stream. A line of mural 
precipices rises on either hand — here advancing in ponderous 
overhanging buttresses, there receding into deep, damp recess- 
es, tapestried with ivy, and darkened with birch and hazeL 
A powerful spring, charged with lime, comes pouring by a 
hundred different threads over the rounded brow of a beetling 
crag, and the decaying vegetation around it is hardening into 
stone. The clifis vary their outline at every step, as if assum- 
ing in succession all the various combinations of form that 
constitute the wild and the picturesque ; and the pale hues of 
the stone seem, when brightened by the sun, the very tints a 
painter would choose to heighten the effect of his shades, or to 
contrast most delicately with the luxuriant profusion of bushes 
and flowers that wave over the higher shelves and crannies. 
A colony of swallows have built from time immemorial under 
t^e overhanging strata of one of the loAier precipices ; the fox 
and badger harbor in the clefls of the steeper and more inac- 
cessible banks. As we proceed, the dell becomes wilder 
and more deeply wooded ; the stream frets and toils at our 
feet — here leaping over an opposing ridge — there struggling 
in a pool — yonder escaping to the light from under some 
broken fragment ^f cliff. There is a richer profusion of 
flowers, a thicker mantling of ivy and honeysuckle ; and after 
missing o semicircular inflection of the bank, that waves 



THE OLD RED E4NDST0IfE. 203 

from base to summit with birch, hazel, and hawthorn, wo 
find the passage shut up by a perpendicular wall of rock 
about thirty feet in height, over which the stream precipitates 
itself, in a slender column of foam, into a dark, mossy basin. 
The long arms of an intermingled clump of birches and ha- 
zels stretch half way across, tripling with their shade the ap- 
parent depth of the pool, and heightening in an equal ratio 
%he white flicker of the cascade, and the eflect of the bright 
]>atches of foam which, flung from the rock, incessantly 
icvolve on the eddy. 

Mark now the geology of the ravine. For about half way 
from where it opens to the shore, to where the path is ob- 
tftrocted by the deep mossy pool and the cascade, its precip* 
itous sides consist of three bars or stories. There is first, 
reckoning from the stream upwards, a broad bar of pale red ; 
then a broad bar of pale lead color ; last and highest, a broad 
bar of pale yellow ; and above all, there rises a steep green 
slope, that continues its ascent till it gains the top of the 
ridge. The middle, lead-colored bar is an ichthyolite bed, a 
place of sepulture among the rocks, where the dead lie by 
myriads. The yellow bar above is a thick bed of saliferous 
sandstone. We may see the projections on which the sun has 
beat most powerfully covered with a white crust of salt ; and 
it may be deemed worthy of remark, in connection with the 
circumstance, that its shelves and crannies are richer in vege- 
tation than those of the other bars. The pale red bar below 
IS compose! of a coarser and harder sandstone, which forms 
an upper moiety of the arenaceous portion of the great con- 
glomerate. Now mark, further, that on reaching a midway 
point between the beach and the cascade, this triple-barred 
line of precipices abruptly terminates, and a line of preci- 
pices of coarse cor glomerate as abruptly begins. I occa- 



204 TBS OLD RED SANDSTONE. 

sioDally pass a continuous wall, built at two difierent periodb 
and composed of two different kinds of materials : the one 
half of it is formed of white sandstone, the other half of a 
dark-colored basalt ; and the place where the sandstone ends 
and the basalt be^ns is nnarked by a vertical line, on the one 
side of which all is dark colored, while all is of a light color 
on the other. Equally marked and abrupt is the vertical line 
which separates the triple-barred from the conglomerate cli& 
of the ravine of Eathie. The ravine itself may be described 
as a fault in the strata ; but here is a fault, lying at right an- 
gles with it, on a much larger scale :' the great conglomerate 
on which the triple bars rest has been cast up at least two 
hundred feet, and placed side by side with them. And yet 
the surface above bears no trace of the catastrophe. Denud- 
ing agencies of even greater power than those which have 
hollowed out the cliffs of the neighboring coast, or whose 
operations have been prolonged through periods of even more 
extended duration, have ground down the projected line of 
the upheaved mass to the level of the undisturbed masses be- 
side it. Now, mark further, as we ascend the ravine, that 
the grand cause of the disturbance appears to illustrate, as it 
were, and that very happily, the manner in which the fault 
was originally produced. The precipice, over which the 
stream leaps at one bound into the mossy he How, is com- 
posed of granitic gneiss, and seems evidently to have intrud- 
ed itself, with much disturbance, among the surrounding 
conglomerate and sandstones. A few hundred yards higher 
up the dell, there is another much loftier precipice of gneiss, 
round which we find the traces of still greater disturbance; 
and, higher still, yet a third abrupt precipice of the same 
rock. The gneiss rose, trap-like, in steps, and carried up the 
sandstone before in detached squares. Each step has its 



THB OLD BED SANDSTOMB. 205 

answering fault immediately over it ; and the fa^^t where the 
triple bars and the conglomerate meet is merely a fault whose 
step of granitic gneiss stopped short ere it reached the sur< 
face. But the accompanying section (see Frontispiece, sect. 
4) will better illustrate tlie geology of this interesting ravine, 
than it can be illustrated by any written description. I may 
remark, ere taking leave of it, however, that its conglomer- 
ates exhibit a singularly large amount of false stratification at 
an acute angle with the planes of the real strata, and that a 
bed of mouldering sandstone near the base of the system 
may be described, from its fissile character, as a tilestone.* 

* There is a natural connection, it is said, between wUd scenes and 
wUd legends ; and some of the traditions connected with this roman- 
tic and solitary dell illustrate the remark. TiU a comparatively late 
period, it was known at many a winter fireside as a favorite haunt of 
the £edries — the most poetical of all our old tribes of spectres, and at 
one time one of the most popular. I have conversed with an old 
woman, who, when a very little girl, had seen myriads of them dan- 
cing, as the sun was setting, on the further edge of the dell ; and with 
a stiU older man, who had the temerity to offer one of them a pinch 
of snuff at the foot of the cascade. Nearly a nule from where the 
ravine opens to the sea, it assumes a gentler and more pastoral char- 
acter ; the sides, no longer precipitous, descend towards the stream in 
green, sloping banks ; and a beaten path, which runs between Crom- 
arty and Rosemarkie, winds down the one side and ascends the other. 
More than sixty years ago, one Donald Calder, a Cromarty shop- 
keeper, was journeying by this path shortly after nighttalL The 
moon, at full, had just risen ; but there was a silvery mist sleeping on 
the lower grounds, that obscured her light ; and the dell, in all its 
extent, was so overcharged by the vapor, that it seemed an immense, 
overflooded river winding through the landscape. Donald had 
leached its farther edge, and could hear the rush of the stream from 
the deep obscurity of the abyss below, when there rose from the op- 
posite side a strain of the most delightful music he had ever heard. 
20* 



206 THE OLD RED SAUDSTOIIX. 

I know comparatively little of the aceneiy of the middle, 
or Cornstone formatioQ. Its features in Englaiid are Ivld 
and striking ; in Scotland, of a tamer and more various char- 
acter. The Den of Balruddery is a sweet, wooded dell, 
marked by no characteristic peculiarities. Many of the 
seeming peculiarities of the formation in Forfarshire, as in 
Fife, may be traced to the disturbing trap. The appearance 
exhibited b that of uneven plains, that rise and fall in long, 
undulating ridges — an appearance which any other member 
of the system might have presented. We find the upper for- 
mation associated with scenery of great, though oAen wild 

He staid and listened. Hie words of a song, of such simple beauty 
that thej seemed without effint to stamp themselyes on his memory, 
came wafted in the music ; and the chorus, in which a thousand tiny 
voices seemed to join, was a familiar address to himself — "Hey, 
Donald Calder ; ho, Donald Calder." ** There are nane of my Navi- 
ty acquaintance," thought Donald, '* who sing like that. Wha can 
it be?" He descended into the cloud; but in passing the little 
stream the music ceased ; and on reaching the spot on which the 
singer had seemed stationed, he saw only a bare bank sinking into a 
solitary moor, unvaried by either bush or hollow in which the musi- 
cian might have lain concealed. He had hardly time, however, to 
estimate the marvels of the case, when the music again struck up, 
but on the opposite side of the dell, and apparently from the very 
knoll on which he had so recently listened to it. The conviction that 
it could not be other than supernatural overpowered him ; and he 
hurried homewards under the influence of a terror so extreme, that, 
unfortunately for our knowledge of fairy literature, it had the effect 
of obliterating from his memory every part of the song except the 
chorus, llie sun rose as ho reached Cromarty ; and he found that. 
Instead of having lingered at the edge of the dell for only a few min- 
utes — and the time had seemed no longer — he had spent beside it 
the greater part of the night. 
The fairies have deserted the Bum of Eathie ; but we have ptoot, 



THE OLD RED SANDSTONE. 207 

beauty ; and nowhere is this more strikingly the case than in 
the province of Moray, where it leans against the granitic 
gneiss of the uplands, and slopes towards the sea in long plai^ns 
of various fertility, deep and rich, as in the neighborhood 
of Elgin, or singularly bleak and unproductive, as in the far* 
famed ** heath near Forres/' Let us select the scene where 

qtiite as conclusive as the nature of the case admits, that when they 
ceased to be seen there it would have been vain to have looked for 
them any where else. There is a cluster of turf-built cottages 
grouped on the southern side of the ravine ; a few scattered knolls, 
and a long, partially wooded hollow, that seems a sort of covered 
way leading to the recesses of the dell, interpose between them and 
the nearer edge, and the hill rises behind. On a Sabbath morning, 
neazly sixty years ag^, the inmates of this little hamlet had all gone 
to church, all except a herd-boy and a little girl, his sister, who were 
loanging beside one of the cottages ; when, just as the shadow of the 
garden dial had fiedlen on the line of noon, they saw a long cavalcade 
ascending out of the ravine through the wooded hollow. It winded 
among the knolls and bushes ; and, turning round the northern ga- 
ble of the cottage beside which the sole spectators of the scene were 
stationed, began to ascend the eminence towards the south. The 
horses were shaggy, diminutive things, speckled dun and gray ; the 
riders, stunted, misgrown, ugly creatures, attired in antique jerkins 
of plaid, long gray cloaks, and little red caps, from under which their 
wild, uncombed locks shot out over their cheeks and foreheads. 
The boy and his sister stood gazing in utter dismay and astonishment, 
as rider after rider, each one more uncouth and dwarfish than the 
one that had preceded it, passed the cottage and disappeared among 
the brushwood, which at that period covered the hill, until at length 
the entire rout, except the last rider, who lingered a few yards be- 
hind the others, had gone by. " "What are ye, little mannie ? and 
where are ye going ? " inquired the boy, his curiosity getting the 
better of his fears and his prudence. " Not of the race of Adam," 
saiil the creature, turning for a moment in his saddle ; ** the People 
of Peace shall nevei more be seen in Scotland." 



- 208 THE OLD RED SA2COSTONX. 

the Findborn, aAer harr3riiig over ridge and s.a11ow, amid 
combinations of rock an J wood, wildly pictaresque as anj 
^ kingdom afibrds, enters on the lower country, with a 
course less headlong, through a yast trench scooped in the 
pale red sandstone of the upper formation. For miles above 
the junction of the newer and older rocks the river has been 
toiling in a narrow and uneven channel, between two upright 
walls of hard gray gneiss, thickly traversed, in every com- 
plexity of pattern, by veins of a light red, large grained 
granite. The gneiss abruptly terminates, but not so the wall 
of precipices. A loAy front of gneiss is joined to a loAy 
front of sandstone, like the front walls of two adjoining 
houses ; and the broken and uptilted strata of the soAer stone 
show that the older and harder rocks must have invaded it 
from below. A little farther down the stream, the strata as- 
sume what seems, in a short extent of frontage, a horizontal 
position, like courses of ashlar in a building, but which, when 
viewed in the range, is found to incline at a low angle towards 
the distant sea. Here, as in many other localities, the young 
geologist must guard against the conclusion, that the rock is 
necessarily low in the geological scale which he finds resting 
against the gneiss. The gneiss, occupying a vciy different 
place from that on which it was originally formed, has been 
thrust into close neighborhood with widely separated forma- 
tions. The great conglomerate base of the system rests over 
it in Orkney, Caithness, Ross, Cromarty, and Inverness ; and 
there is no trace of what should be the intervening grau- 
wacke. The upper formation of the system leans upon it 
here. We find the Lower Lias uptilted against it at the Hill 
of Eathie — the great Oolite on the eastern coast of Suther- 
land ; and as the flints and chalk fossils of Banff and Aber- 
iecn it re found lying immediately over it in these counties, 



THB OLD BED flANDSTONS. 209 

it is probable that the denuded members of the Cretaceous 
group once rested upon it there. The fact that a deposit 
should be found lying in contact with the gneiss, furnishes no 
argument for the great antiquity or the fundamental charac- 
ter of that deposit ; and it were well that the geologist who 
sets himself to estimate the depth of the Old Red Sandstone, 
or the succession of its various formations, should keep the 
circumstance in view. That may be in reality but a small 
and upper portion of the system which he finds bounded by 
the gneiss on its under side, and by the diluvium on its upper. 
We stand on a wooded eminence, that sinks perpendicu- 
larly into the river on the left, in a mural precipice, and de- 
scends with a billowy swell into the broad, fertile plain in 
front, as if the uplands were breaking in one vast wave upon 
the low country. There is a patch of meadow on the oppo- 
site side of the stream, shaded by a group of ancient trees, 
gnarled and mossy, and with half their topmost branches 
dead and white as the bones of a skeleton. We look down 
upon them from an elevation so commanding, that their up- 
permost twigs seem on well nigh the same level with their 
interlaced and twisted roots, washed bare on the bank edge 
by the winter floods. A colony of herons has built from time 
immemorial among the branches. There are trees so laden 
with nests that the boughs bend earthwards on every side, 
like the boughs of orchard trees in autumn ; and the bleached 
and feathered masses which they bear — the cradles of suc- 
ceeding generations — glitter gray through the foliage in con- 
tinuous groups, as if each tree bore on its single head all the 
wigs of the Court of Session. The solitude is busy with ihe 
occupations and enjoyments of instinct. The birds, tall and 
stately, stand by troops in the shallows, or wade warily, as 
the fish glance by, to the edge of the current, or rising, with 



210 THE OLD RED 8AND9T0ICB. 

the rIow flap of wing and sharp creak peculiar to the tribe« 
drop suddenly into their nests. The great forest of Dama« 
way stretches beyond, feathering a thousand knolls, that r^ 
fleet a colder and grayer tint as they recede, and lessen, and 
present on the horizon a billowy line of blue. The river 
brawls along under pale red cliffs, wooded a-top. It is through 
a vast burial-yard that it has cut its way — a field of the 
djad so ancient, that the sepulchres of Thebes and Luxor are 
but of the present day in comparison — resting-places for 
the recently departed, whose funerals are but just over. 
These mouldering strata are charged with remains, scattered 
and detached as those of a churchyard, but not less entire in 
their parts — occipital bones, jaws, teeth, spines, scales — the 
dust and rubbish of a departed creation. The clifis sink as 
tje plain flattens, and green, sloping banks of diluvium take 
heir place ; but they again rise in the middle distance into 
an abrupt and lofty promontory, that, stretching like an im« 
mense rib athwart the level country, projects far into the 
stream, and gives an angular inflection to its course. There 
ascends from the apex a thin, blue column of smoke — that of 
a lime-kiln. That ridge and promontory are composed of the 
thick limestone band, which, in Moray as in Fife, separates the 
pale red from the pale yellow beds of the Upper Old Red 
Sandstone ; and the flattened tracts on both sides show how 
much better it has resisted the denuding agencies than either 
the yellow strata that rests over it, or the pale red strata 
which it overbes. 



CHAPTER XL. 

Ilia two Aspects in which Matter can be viewed ; Space and Time. 
— Geological History of the Earlier Periods. — The Cambrian Sys- 
tem. — Its Annelids. — The Silurian System. — Its Corals, Encrin- 
' itcs. Molluscs, and Trilobites. — Its Fish. — These of a high Order, 
and called into Existence apparently by Myriads. — Opening Scene 
in the History of the Old Red Sajidstone a Scene of Tempest. — 
Bepresented by the Great Conglomerate. — Red a prevailing Color 
among the Ancient Rocks contained in this Deposit. — Amazing 
Abundance of Animal Life. — Exemplified by a Scene in the Her- 
ring Fishery. — Platform of Death. — Probable Cause of the Catas- 
trophe which rendered it such. 

" These are only two different aspects," says Dr. Thomas 
Brown, ** in which matter can be viewed.* We may consider 
it simply as it exists in space, or as it exists in time. As it 
exists in space we inquire into its composition, or, in other 
words, endeavor to discover what are the elementary bodies 
that coexist in the space which it occupies ; as it exists in 
time, we inquire into its susceptibilities or its powers, or, in 
other words, endeavor to trace all the various changes which 
have already passed over it, or of which it may yet become 
the subject." 

Hitherto I have very much restricted myself to the consid- 
eration of the Old Red Sandstone as it exists in space — to 
the consideration of it as we now find it I shall now attempt 
presenting it to the reader as it existed in time — during the 
succeeding periods of its formation, and when its existences 
lived and moved as the denizens of primeval oceans. It is 
one thing to describe the appearance of a forsaken and des* 

(2in 



213 THE OLD K£D SAlfDSTOZCX. 

ert couDtrv, with its wide wastes of unprofitable s&od, its 
broken citadels and '^mples, its solitary battle-plains, and its 
gloomy streets of cavemeJ and lonely sepulchres ; and quite 
another to record its history during its days of smiling fields, 
populous cities, busy trade, and monarchical spier dor. Wq 
pass from the dead to the living — from the cemetery, with 
its high piles of mummies and its vast heaps of bones, to the 
ancient city, full of life and animation in all its streets and 
dwellings. 

Two great geological periods have already come to their 
close ; and the floor of a widely-spread ocean, to which we 
can afluL no limits, and of whose shores or their inhabitants 
nothing is yet known, is occupied to the depth of many thou- 
sand feet by the remains of bygone existences. Of late, the 
geologist has learned from Murchison to distinguish the rocks 
of these two periods — the lower as those of the Cambrian, 
the upper as those of the Silurian group. The lower — rep- 
resentative of the first glimmering twilight of being — of 
a dawn so feeble that it may seem doubtful whether in reality 
the gloom had lightened — must still be regarded as a period 
of uncertainty. Its ripple-marked sandstones, and its half 
coherent accumulations of dark-colored strata, which decom- 
pose into mud, show that every one of its many plains must 
have formed in succession an upper surface of the bottom of 
the sea ; but it remains for future discoverers to determine 
regarding the shapes of life that burrowed in its ooze, or cu 
rcered through the incumbent waters. In one locality it 
would seem as if a few worms had crawled to the surface, 
and left their involved and tortuous fold? doubtfully impressed 
on the stone. Some of them resemble miniature cables, care- 
lessly coiled ; others, furnished with what seem numerous 
leg^, remind us of the existing Nereidina of our sandy 



THB OLD RED SANDSTONE. 213 

shores — those red-blooded, many-legged worms, resembliog 
elongated centipedes, that wriggle with such activity among 
the mingled mud and water, as we turn over the stones under 
which they had shelter 3d. Were creatures such as these the 
lords of this lower ocean ? Did they enter first on the stage, 
in that great drama of being in which poets and philosophers, 
monarchs and mighty conquerors, were afterwards to mingle 
as actors ? Does the reader remember that story in the Ara- 
Han Nights, in which the battle of the mligicians is described ? 
At an early stage of the combat a little worm creeps over the 
pavement; at its close two terrible dragons contend in an 
'atmosphere of fire. But even the worms of the Cambrian 
System can scarce be regarded as established. The evidence 
respecting their place and their nature must still be held as 
involved in some such degree of doubt as attaches to the 
researches of the antiquary, when engaged in tracing what 
their remains much resemble — the involved sculpturings of 
some Runic obelisk, weathered by the storms of a thousand 
winters. There is less of doubt, however, regarding the 
existences of the upper group of rocks — the Silurian. 

The depth of this group, as estimated by Mr. Murchison, is 
equal to double the height of our highest Scottish mountains; 
and four distinct platforms of being range in it, the one over 
the other, like stories in a building. Life abounded on all 
these platforms, and in shapes the most wonderful. Tho pe- 
culiar encrinites of the group rose in miniature forests, and 
spread forth their sentient petals by millions and tens of 
millions amid the waters ; vast ridges of corals peopled 
by their innumerable builders, — numbers without nunnber, 
— rose high amid the shallows; the chambered shells had 
become abundant — the simpler testacea still more so ; ex- 
tinct forms of the graptolite, or sea-pen, existed by myriads ; 
21 



314 THE OLD RLD SAXDST02CE. 

ano the formatioa had a class of creatures in adTance cff the 
many-legged annelids of the other. It had its numerous family 
of trilobites, — crustaceans nearly as high in the scale as the 
common crah, — creatures with crescent-ahaped heads, and 
jointed bodies, and wonderfully constructed eyes, which, like the 
eyes of the bee and the butterfly, had the cornea cut into facets 
resembling those of a multiplying glass. Is the rea'der ac- 
quainted with the form of the common CkUon of our ahores 
— - the little boat-shaped shell-fish, that adheres to stones and 
locks like the limpet, but which difiera from every variety of 
limpet, in bearing as its covering a jointed, not a continuous shell? 
Suppose a chiton with two of its terminal joints cut away, and a 
single plate of much the same shape and size, but with two eyes 
near the centre, substituted instead, and the animal, in form at 
least, would be no longer a chiton, but a trilobite. There are 
appearances, too, which lead to the inference that the habits 
of the two families, though representing difierent orders of 
being, may not have been very unlike. The chiton attaches 
itself to the rock by a muscular sucker or foot, which, extend- 
ing vent rally along its entire length, resembles that of the 
slug or the snail, and enables it to crawl like them, but still 
more slowly, by a succession of adhesions. The locomotive 
powers of the trilobite seem to have been little superior to 
those of the chiton. If furnished with legs at all, it must 
have been with soft rudimentary membranaceous legs, little 
fitted for walking with ; and it seems quite as probable, from 
the peculiarly shaped under margin of its shell, formed, like 
that of the chiton, for adhering to flat surfaces, that, like the 
slug and the snail, it was unfurnished with legs of any kind, 
and crept on the abdomen. The vast conglomerations of 
trilobitcs for which the Silurian rocks are remarkable, aro 
rogaHcd as furthei evidence of a sedentary condition Lik^» 



THB OLD RED SANDSTONE. 215 

Ostrtay ChitoneSy and other sedentary animals^ (hey seemed 
to have adhered together in vast clusters, trilobite over trilo* 
bite, in the hollows of submarine precipices, or on the flat, 
muddy bottom below. And such were the master existences 
of three of the four Silurian platforms, and of the greater 
part of the fourth, if, indeed, we may not regard the cham- 
bered molluscs, their contemporaries, — creatures with their 
arms clustered round their heads, and with a nervous system 
composed of a mere knotted cord, — as equally high in the 
scale. We rise to the topmost layers of the system, — to 
an upper gallery of its highest platform, — and find nature 
mightily in advance. 

Another and superior order of existences had sprung into 
being at the fiat of the Creator — creatures with the brain 
lodged in the head, and the spinal cord enclosed in a vertebrated 
column. In the period of the Upper Silurian, fish properly so 
called, and of very perfect organization, had become denizens 
of the watery element, and had taken precedence of the crusta- 
cean, as, at a period long previous, the crustacean had taken pre- 
cedence of the annelid. In what form do these, the most ancient 
beings of their class, appear ? As cartilaginous fishes of the 
higher order. Some of them were furnished with bony pal- 
ates, and squat, firmly-based teeth, well adapted for crushing 
the stone-cased zoophytes and shells of the period, fragments 
of which occur in their foecal remains ; some with teeth that, 
like those of the fossil sharks of the later formations, resem- 
ble hues of miniature pyramids, larger and smaller alternat- 
ing ; some with teeth sharp, thin, and so deeply serrated that 
every individual tooth resembles a row of poniards set upright 
against the walls of an armory ; and these last, says Agassiz, 
furnished with weapons so murderous, must have been the 
pirates of the period. Some had their fins guarded with long 



216 THE OLD KEO SAXOSTUNE. 

^ioes, hooked like the beak of an eagle ; some with spines 
of straighter and more slender form, and ribbed and furrowed 
longitudinally like columns ; some were shielded by an armor 
of bony points; and some thickly covered with glistening 
scales. If many ages must have passed ere fishes appeared, 
there was assuredly no time required to elevate their lower 
into their higher families. Judging, too, from this 'ancient 
deposit, they seem to have been introduced, not by individu- 
als and pairs, but by whole myriads. 

** Forthwith the aoiindi and seas, each creek and bay, 
'With firy innumfarable awanned ; and shoala 
Of fiah, that with their fins and shining scales 
Glide nnder the green wave in plumps and sculls. 
Banked the mid sea." 

The fish-bed of the Upper Ludlow Rock abounds more in 
osseous remains than an ancient burying-ground. The stratum, 
over wide areas, seems an almost continuous layer of matted 
bones, jaws, teeth, spines, scales, palatal plates, and shagreen- 
like prickles, all massed together, and converted into a sub- 
stance of so deep and shining a jet color, that the bed, when 
" first discovered, conveyed the impression," says Mr. Murch 
ison, ^^ that it enclosed a triturated heap of black beetles.^ 
And such are the remains of what seem to have been the first 
existing vertebrata. Thus, ere our history begins, the exist- 
ences of two great systems, the Cambrian and the Silurian, 
had passed into extinction, with the exception of what seem a 
few connecting links, exclusively molluscs, that are found in 
England to pass from the higher beds of the Ludlow rocks 
mto the Lower or Tilestone beds of the Old Red Sandstone.* 

* ** Upwards of eight hundred extinct species of animals have been 
iescribed as belonging to the earliest, or Protozoic and Silurian period. 



THE OLD RED SANDSTO>B. 217 

The exuYisB of at least four platforms of being lay entombed 
furlong below furlong, amid the gray, mouldering mudstones» 
the harder arenaceous beds, the consolidated clays, and the 
roncretidnary limestones, that underlay the ancient ocean of 
the Lower Old Red. The earth had already become a vasi 
sepulchre, to a depth beneath the bed of the sea equal to a? 
least twice the height of Ben Nevis over its surface. 

The first scene in the Tempest opens amid the confusion 
and turmoil of the hurricane — amid thunders and lightnings, 
the roar of the wind, the shouts of the seamen, the rattling 
of cordage, and the wild dash of the billows. The history 
of the period represented by the Old Red Sandstone seems, in 
what now forms the northern half of Scotland, to have opened 
in a similar manner. The finely-laminated lower Tilestones 
of England were deposited evidently in a calm sea. During 
the contemporary period in our own country, the vast space 
which now includes Orkney and Liochness, Dingwall, and 
Gamrie, and many a thousand square mile besides, was the 
scene of a shallow ocean, perplexed by powerful currents, and 
agitated by waves. A vast stratum of water-rolled pebbles, 
varying in depth from a hundred feet to a hundred yards, 
remains in a thousand different localities, to testify of the dis 
turbing agencies of this time of commotion. The hardest 
masses which the stratum encloses, — porphyries of vitreous 
fracture that cut glass as readily as fiint, and masses of 
quartz that strike fire quite as profusely from steel, — are yet 
polished and ground down into bullet-like forms, not an angu- 



and of these only about one hundred are found also in the overlying 
Devonian scries ; while but fifteen aie common to the whole Palseo- 
zoic period, and not one extends beyond it" — (Jf. de Vemeuil and 
Cowit D'Archiae, quoted by Mr. D. T. Ansted. 1844.) 
21 • 



218 TB£ OLD EED SANDSTOITE. 

kr fragment appearing in scMne parts of the mass for yanli 
together. The debris of oar harder rocks rolled for centuries 
in the beds of our more impetuous rirers, or tossed for ages 
along our more exposed and precipitous sea-shores could not 
present less equivocallj the marks of riolent and prolonged 
atiritioo than the pebbles of this bed. And yet it is surely 
difficult to cooceiTe how the bottom of any tea should have 
been so violently and so equally agitated for so greatly ex* 
tended a space as that which intenrenes between Mealfonrony 
in Inverness-shire and Pomona in Orkney in one direction, and 
between Applecross and Trouphead in another — and for a 
period so prolonged, that the entire area should have come to 
be covered with a stratum of rolled pebbles of almost every 
variety o^ ancient rock, fiAeen stories^ height in thickness. 
The very variety of its contents shows that the period roust 
have been prolonged. A sudden flood sweeps away with it 
the accumulated debris of a range of mountains ; but to blend 
together, in equal mixture, the debris of many such ranges, 
as well as to grind down their roughnesses and angularities, 
and fill up the interstices with the sand and gravel produced 
in the process, must be a worl^of time. I have examined 
with much interest, in various localities, the fragments of 
ancient rock inclosed in this formation. Many of them are no 
longer to be found in «i7u, and the group is essentially dif- 
ferent from that presented by the more modem gravels. On 
the shores of the Frith of Cromarty, for instance, by far the 
most abundant pebbles are of a blue schistose gneiss : frag- 
ments of gray granite and white quartz are also common ; and 
the sea-shore at half ebb presents at a short distance the ap- 
pearance of a long belt of bluish gray, from the color of the 
prevailing stones which compose it. The prevailing color of 
I lie conglomerate of the district, on the contrary, is a deep 



TUB OLD RED SANDSTONE. 219 

red. It contains pebbles of small-grained, red granite, red 
quartz rock, red feldspar, red porpbyry, an impure red 
jasper, red bomstone, and a red granitic gneiss, identical witb 
the well-marked gneiss of tbe neighboring Sutors. This last 
is the only rock now found in the district, of which fragments 
occur in the conglomerate. It must have been exposed at 
the time to the action of the waves, though afterwards buried 
deep under succeeding formations, until again thrust to the 
surface by some great internal convulsion, of a date compar- 
atively recent.* 

Tbe period of this shallow and stormy ocean passed. Tho 
bottom, composed of the identical conglomerate which now 
forms the summit of some of our lofliest mountains, sank 
throughout its wide area to a depth so profound as to be little 
affected by tides or tempests. During this second period 
there took place a vast deposit of coarse sandstone strata, 
with here and there a few thin beds of rolled pebbles. The 
general subsidence of the bottom still continued, and, aAer a 

* The vast beds of unconsolidaied gravel with which one of the 
later geological revolutions has half filled some of our northern val- 
leys, and covered the slopes of the adjacent hills, present, in a few 
localities, appearances somewhat analogous to those exhibited by this 
ancient formation. There are uncemented accumtdations of water- 
xoUed pebbles, in the neighborhood of Inverness, from ninety to a 
hundred feet in thickness. But this stratum, unlike the more aneient 
one, wanted continuity. It must have been accumulated, too, under 
the operation of more partial, though immensely more powerful agen- 
cies. There is a mediocrity of size in the enclosed fragments of the 
old conglomerate, which gives evidence of a mediocrity of power in 
the transporting agent. In the upper gravels, on the contrary, one 
of the agents could convey from vast distances blocks of stone eighty 
and a hundred tons in weight. A new cause of tremendous ei ergy 
had come into operation in the geological world. 



220 TB£ OLD ESD SANDSTOMS: 

deposit of full ninety feet had overlain the conglomerate, the 
depth became still more profound than at first A fine, temi* 
cal<:arcous, semi-aluminous deposition took place in waten 
perfectly undisturbed. And here we first find proof tliat 
this ancient ocean literally swarmed with life — that its 
bottom was covered with miniature forests of algse, and iti 
meters darkened by immense shoals of fish. 

In middle autumn, at the close of the herring season, when 
the fish have just spawned, and the congregated masses are 
breaking up on shallow and skerry, and dispersing by myri« 
ads over the deeper seas, they rise at times to the surface by 
a movement so simultaneous, that for miles and miles around 
the skiff of the fisherman nothmg may be seen but the bright 
glitter of scales, as if the entire face of the deep were a blue 
robe spangled with silver. I have watched them at sunrise 
at such seasons on the middle of the Moray Frith, when, far 
as the eye could reach, the surface has been ruffled by the 
splash of fins, as if a light breeze swept over it, and the red 
light has flashed in gleams of an instant on the millions and 
tens of millions that were leaping around me, a handbreadth 
into the air, thick as hail-stones in a thunder-shower. The 
amazing amount of life which the scene included, has im- 
parted to it an indescribable interest On most occasions the 
inhabitants of ocean are seen but by scores and hundreds ; 
for in looking down into their green twilight haunts, we find 
the view bounded by a few yards, or at most a few fathoms ; 
and we can but calculate on the unseen myriads of the sur^ 
rDunding expanse by the seen few that occupy the narrow 
space visible. Here, however, it was not the few, but the 
myriads, that were seen — the innumerable and inconceiva- 
ble whole — all palpable to the sight as a flock on a hill-eide ; 
or, at least, if all was not palpable, it was only because sense 



THS OLD RED SAICDSTONB. 221 

has Its limits in the lighter as well as in the denser medium -— 
tliat the multitudinous distracts it, and the distant eludes it^ 
and the far horizon bounds it. If the scene spoke not of in- 
^i ity in llie sense in which Deity comprehends it, it spoke 
of it in at least the only sense in which man can compre* 
hcnd it. 

^ow, we are much in the habit of thinking of such amaz- 
ing multiplicity of being — when we think of it at all — with 
reference to but the later times of the world's history. We 
think of the remote past as a time of comparative solitude. 
We forget that the now uninhabited desert was once a popu- 
lous city. Is the reader prepared to realize, in connection 
with the Lower Old Red Sandstone — the second period of 
vertebrated existence — scenes as amazingly fertile in life as 
the scene just described — oceans as thoroughly occupied 
with being as our friths and estuaries when the herrings con- 
gregate most abundantly on our coasts? There are evi- 
dences too sure to be disputed that such must have been the 
pase. I have seen the ichthyolite bods, where washed bare 
in the line of the strata, as thickly covered with oblong, spin- 
dle-shaped nodules as I have ever seen a fishing bank cov- 
ered with herrings; and have ascertained that every individ- 
ual nodule had its nucleus of animal matter — that it was 
a stone coffin in miniature, holding enclosed its organic mass 
of bitumen or bone — its winged, or enamelled, or thorn- 
covered ichthyolite. 

At this period of our history, some terrible catastrophe in- 
volved in sudden destruction the fish of an area at least a 
hundred miles from boundary to boundary, perhaps much 
more. The same platform in Orkney as at Cromarty is 
strewed thick with remains, which exhibit unequivocally the 
uiurks of violent death. The figures are contorted, contract- 



299 TH£ OLD &ED SANDSTONE 

ed, curred ; he tail io many instances is be. t round to tbe 
head ; the spines stick out ; the fins are spread to the full, as 
in fish that die in convulsions. The Plericklhyt shows its 
arms extended at their stifiest angle^ as if prepared for an 
enemy. The attitudes of all the ichthyolites on this platform 
arc attimdes of fear, anger, and pain. The remains, too, 
appear to hare sufiered nothing from the af\er attacks of pre* 
daceous fishes ; none such seem to have survived. The rcc- 
ord is one of destruction at once widely spread and total, so 
for as it extended. There are proofs that, whatever may 
have been the cause of the catastrophe, it must have taken 
place in a sea unusually still. The scales, when scattered by 
some slight undulation, are scattered to the distance of only a 
few inches, and still exhibit their enamel entire, and their 
peculiar fineness of edge. The spines, even when separated, 
retain their original needle-like sharpness of point Rays, 
well nigh as slender as horse-hairs, are enclosed unbroken in 
the mass. \\lM>le ichthyolites occur, in which not only all 
the |Hirts survive, but even the expression which the stifiT and 
threatening attitude conveyed when the last struggle was 
over. Destruction must have come in the calm, and it must 
have been of a kind by which the calm was nothing dis- 
turbed. In what could it have originated ? By what quiet 
but potent agency of destruction were the innumerable exist* 
ences of an area perhaps ten thousand square miles in extent 
annihilated at once, and yet the medium in which they had 
lived left undisturlied by its operations ? Conjecture lacks 
footing in grappling with the enigma, and expatiates in un* 
certainty over all the known phenomena of death. Diseases 
of mysterious origin break out at times in the animal king- 
doms And well nigh exterminate the tribes on which they full. 
The present genenttion has seen a hundred millions of the 



TBS OLD RED SANDSTONE. 223 

human family swept away by a disease unknown to our 
fathers. Virgil describes the fatal murrain that once depop- 
ulated the Alps, not more as a poet than as a historian. The 
shell-fish of the rivers of North America died in such vast 
abundance during a year of the present century, that the ani- 
mals, washed out of their shells, lay rotting in masses beside 
the banks, infecting the very air. About the close of the last 
century, the haddock well nigh disappeared, for several sea- 
sons together, from the eastern coasts of Scotland ; and it is 
related by Creech, that a Scotch shipmaster of the period 
sailed for several leagues on the coast of Norway, about the 
time the scarcity began, through a floating shoal of dead 
haddocks.* But the ravages of no such disease, however 

* I have heard elderly fishermen of the Moray Frith state, in con- 
nection with what they used to term ** the haddock dearth " of this 
period, that, for several weeks ere the fish entirely disappeared, they 
aequixed an extremely disagreeable taste, as if they had been boiled 
in tobacco juice, and became unfit for the table. For the three fol- 
lowing years they were extremely rare on the coast, and several years 
more elapsed ere they were caught in the usual abundance. The 
fJKt related by Creech, a very curious one, I subjoin in his own 
words ; it occurs in his third Letter to Sir John Sinclair : ** On Friday, 
the 4th December, 1789, the ship Brothers, Captain Stewart, arrived 
at Leith from Archangel, who reported that, on the coast of Lapland 
and Norway, he sailed many leagues through immense quantities of 
d«ad haddocks floating on the sea. He spoke several English ships, 
who reported the same fact. It is certain that haddocks, which was 
the fish in the greatest abundance in the Edinburgh market, havo 
fcarcely been seen there these three years. In February, 1790, threo 
haddocks were brought to market, which, from their scarcity, sold 
for 7s. 6d." 

The dead haddocks seen by the Leith shipmaster were floating by 
thousands; and m^st of their congeners among what fishermen term 
** the white fish," sucl- as cod, ling, and whiting, also fioat When 



224 THE OLD t£D SANDSTOHS. 

extensive, could well account for some of the pbenomenA 
of this platform of death. It is rarely that djsease falls 
equally on many difierent tribes at once, and never does it 
fall with instantaneous suddenness ; whereas in the ruin of 
this platform from ten to twelve distinct genera seem to have 
been equally involved ; and so suddenly did it perform its 
work, that its victims were fixed in their first attitude of ter- 
ror and surprise. I have observed, too, that groups of ad- 
joming nodules are charged frequendy with fragments of the 



dead ; whereas the bodies of fish whose bowels and air-bladders an 
comparatively small and tender, lie at the bottom. The herring fish- 
erman, if the fish die in his nets, finds it no easy matter to buoy them 
up ; and if the shoal entangled be a large one, he £gu1s at times, from 
the great weight, in recovering them at all, losing both nets and her- 
rings. Now, if a corresponding difference obtained among fish of the 
extinct period — if some rose to the surfsce when they died, whUe 
others remained at the bottom — we must, of course, expect to find 
their remains in very different degrees of preservation — to find only 
scattered fragments of the floaters, while of the others many may oc« 
cur comparatively entire. Even should they have died on the same 
beds, too, we may ^^over their remains separated by hundreds of 
miles. The haddocks that disappeared from the coast of Britain were 
found floating in shoals on the coasts of Norway. The remains of 
an immense body of herrings, that weighed down, a few seasons since, 
the nets of a crew of fishermen, in a muddy hoUow of the Moray 
Frith, and defied the utmost exertions of three crews united to wrigh 
them from the bottom, are, I doubt not, in the muddy hollow ttilL 
On a principle thus obvious it may be deemed not improbable that 
the ichthyolites of the Lower Old Red Sandstone might have had 
numerous contemporaries, of which, unless in some instances the 
same accident which killed also entombed them, we can know noth- 
ing in their character as such, and whose broken fragments may yet 
be found in some other locality, where they may be regarded as cha^- 
ACterftUc of a difibrent formation. 



TBE OLD RED SAND&rONB. • 22ft 

same variety of ichthyolile ; and the circumstance seems 
fraught with evidence regarding both the original habits of 
the creatures, and the instantaneous suddenness of the dc- 
struction by which they were overtaken. They seem, like 
many of our existing fish, to have been gregarious, and to 
have perished together ere their crowds had time to break up 
and disperse. 

Fish have been found floating dead in shoals beside sub- 
marine volcanoes — killed either by the heated water, or by 
mephitic gEises. There are, however, no marks of volcanic 
activity in connection with the ichthyolite beds — no marks, 
at least, which belong to nearly the same age with the fossils- 
The disturbing granite of the neighboring eminences was not 
upheaved until aAer the times of the Oolite. But the volcano, 
if such was the destroying agent, might have been distant ; 
nay, from some of the points in an area of such immense 
extent, it must have been distant. The beds abound, as has 
been said, in lime ; and the thought has of\en struck me that 
calcined lime, cast out as ashes from some distant crater, and 
carried by the winds, might have been the cause of the wide- 
ly-spread destruction to which their organisms testify. I have 
seen the fish of a small trouting stream, over which a bridge 
was in the course of building, destroyed in a single hour, for 
a full mile below the erection, by the few troughfuls of limo 
h&i fell ipto the water when the centring was removed. 

22 



CHAPTER Xffl. 

Sacccflson of tbe exterminmted Tribes. — The Gap alowlj fiDed.— 
Proof tbot the Vegetation of a Fonnation may long BonriTe iti 
Animal Tribes. •* Probable Cause. — Immensely extended Period 
during which Fishes Trere the Master-existences of our Planet. — 
Extreme FoUy of an Infidel Objection illustrated by the Fact. — 
Singular Analogy between the History of Fishes as Indiriduals 
and as a Class. — Chemistry of the Lower Formation. — Principles 
on which the Fish^endosing Nodules were probably formed. — 
Chemical ESect of Animal Matter in discharging the Color from 
Red Sandstone. — Origin of the prevailing tint to which the Sys- 
tem owes its Name. — Successive Modes in which a Metal may ex- 
ist. — The Restorations of the Geologist void of Color. — Very dif- 
ferent ApiKarance of the Ichthyolitcs of Cromarty and Moray. 

Thb period of death passed, and over the innumerable 
dead there settled a sofl, muddy sediment, that hid them from 
the light, bestowing upon them such burial as a November 
snow-storm bestows on the sere and blighted vegetation of 
the previous summer and autumn. For an unknown space 
of time, represented in the formation by a deposit about fiAy 
feet in thickness, the waters of the depopulated area seem to 
have remained devoid of animal life. A few scales and 
plates then begin to appear. The fish that hod existed out- 
Fide the chasm seem to have gradually gained upon it, as 
tlieir numbers increased, just as the European settlers of 
America have been gaining on the backwoods, and making 
themselves homes amid the burial-mounds of a race extinct 
for centuries. For a lengthened period, however, these finn}r 
settlers must have been comparatively few — mere squattcre 
\n the waste. In the beds of stratified clay in which thcii 

(226) 



TB£ OLD BED SANDSTONE. 227 

remains first occur, over what we may term the densely 
crowded platform of violent death, the explorer may labor 
for hours together without finding a single scale. 

It is worthy of remark, however, that this upper bed 
abounds quite as much in the peculiar vegetable impressions 
of the formation as the lower platform itself. An abundance 
equally great occurs in some localities only a few inches over 
the line of the exterminating catastrophe. Thickets of ex- 
actly the same algae, amid which the fish of the formation 
had sheltered when living, grew luxuriantly over their graves 
when dead. The agencies of destruction which annihilated 
the animal life of so extended an area, spared its vegetation ; 
just as the identical forests that had waved over the semi- 
civilized aborigines of North America continued to wave over 
the more savage red men, their successors, long after the 
original race had been exterminated. The inference deduci* 
ble from the fact, though sufficiently simple, seems in a geo- 
logical point of view a not unimportant one. The flora of a 
system may long survive its fauna ; so that that may he hut 
one formation^ regarded with reference to plants^ which may 
he two or more formations^ regarded with reference to ani* 
mals. No instance of any such phenomenon occurs in the 
later geological periods. The changes in animal and vege- 
table life appear to have run parallel to each other from the 
times of the tertiary formations down to those of the coal ; 
but in the earlier deposits the case must have been different. 
The animal organisms of the newer Silurian strata form es- 
sentially difTorent groups from those of the Lower Old Red 
Sandstone, and both differ from those of the Cornstone divis- 
ions ; and yet the greater porfion of their vegetable remains 
seem the same. The stem-like impressions of the fucoid bed 
of the Uppei Ludlow Hocks cannot be distinguished from 



228 THB OLD RED SANDSTONB. 

those of tho ichthyoHte beds of Cromarty and Ross, nor then 
again from the impressions of the Arbroath pavement, or the 
I>en of Balruddcry. Nor is there much difficulty in cod« 
cciv'ng low the vegetation of a formation should come to sur- 
vi\e its animals. What is fraught with health to the exist- 
ciKcs of the vegetable kingdom, is in many instances a 
deadly poison to those of the animal. The grasses and water- 
lilies of the neighborhood of Naples flourish luxuriantly amid 
tho carbonic acid gas which rests so densely over the pools 
and runnels out of which they spring, that the bird stoops to 
drink, and falls dead into the water. The lime that destroys 
the reptiles, fish, and insects of a thickly inhabited lake or 
stream, injures not a single flag or bulrush among the millions 
that line its edges. The two kingdoms exist under laws 
of life and death so essentially dissimilar, that it has become 
one of the common-places of poetry to indicate the blight and 
decline of the tribes of the one by the unwonted luxuriancy 
of tho productions of the other. Otway tells us, in describ- 
ing the horrors of the plague which almost depopulated 
London, that the ^' destroying angel stretched his arm ^' over 
the city, 

** Till in th' imtroddon streets xinwholesoine gran 
Grow of great stalk, and color gross, 
A melancholio poisonous green." 

The work of deposition went on ; a bed of pale yellow 
saliferous sandstone settled, tier over tier, on a bed of strati- 
fied clay, and was itself overlaid by another bed of stratified 
clny in turn. And this upper bed had also its organisms. 
The remains of its sea-weed still spreod out thick and dark 
amid the foldings of the strata, and occasionally its clusters 
of detached scales. But the circumstances were less favors* 



TB£ OLD RED SANDSTONE. 229 

ble to the preservation of entire ichthyolites thnn thcee under 
which the organisms of the lower platform were wrapped up 
io their stony coverings. The matrix, which is more niicacev>i^ 
than the other, seems to have heen less conservative, and tl 
waters were probably less still. The process went on. Ag 
succeeded age, and one stratum covered up another. Gener 
ations lived, died, and were entombed in the ever-growing 
depositions. Succeeding generations pursued their instincts b} 
myriads, happy in existence, over the surface which covered 
the broken and perishing remains of their predecessors, and 
then died and were entombed in turn, leaving a higher plat- 
form, and a similar destiny to the generations that succeeded 
Whole races became extinct, through what process of destruc- 
tion who can tell ? Other races sprang into existence through 
that adorable power which One only can conceive, and One 
only can exert. An inexhaustible variety of design expatiated 
freely within the limits of the ancient type. The main con- 
ditions remained the same — the minor details were dissimilar. 
Vast periods passed ; a class low in the scale still continued to 
furnish the master existences of creation ; and so immensely 
extended was the term of its sovereignty, that a being of lim- 
ited faculties, if such could have existed uncreated, and wit- 
nessed the whole, would have inferred that the power of the 
Creator had reached its extreme boundary, when fishes had 
been called into existence, and that our planet was destined 
to be the dwelling-place of no nobler inhabitants. If there 
be men dignified by the name of philosophers, who can hold 
that the present state of being, with all its moral evil, and all 
its physical suffering, is to be succeeded by no better and 
happier state, just because " all things have continued as they 
were " for some five or six thousand years, how much sounder 
and more conclusive would the inference have been which 
22 • 



S90 TBE OLD MED SAMDSTOHB. 

coM hkx^ been based, as ia the supposed case, on a period 
perbaps a hondred tiroes more extended ? 

Tbcre exist wooderful analogies in nature between the 
geological history of the vertebrated animals as an oider, and 
the individual histoiy of every mammifer — between the his- 
tory, too, of fish as a class, and that of every single lisli. 
^ It has been found by Tiedemann,*^ says Mr. Lyell, ^ that 
the brain of the foetus in the higher class of vertebratcd ani- 
mals assumes in succession the various forms which belong 
to fishes, reptiles, and birds, before it acquires those additions 
and modifications which are peculiar to the mammiferous 
tribes.^ ^ In examining the brain of the mammalia,*^ says ^L 
Scrrcs, ** aran early stage of life, you perceive the cerebral 
hemispheres consolidated, as in fish, in two vesicles isolated 
one fixNn the other ; at a later period you see them aflect 
the configuration of the cerebral hemispheres of reptiles; 
still later, again, they present you with the forms of those of 
birds ; and finally, at the era of birth, the permanent forms 
which the adult mammalia present.^^ And such seems to 
ha\*e been the history of the vertebrata as an order, as cer* 
tainly as that of the individual mammifer. The fish prcnreded 
the reptile in the order of creation, just as the crustacean had 
pieccdcd the fish, and the annelid the crustacean. Again, 
though the fact be somewhat more obscure, the reptile seems 
to have preceded tlic bird. We find, however, unequivocal 
tmces of the feathered tribes in well-marked foot-prints ira- 
presjsed on a sandstone in North America, at most not more 
modem than the Lias, but which is generally supposed to bo 
of the same age with the New Red Sandstone of Germany 
and our own country. In the Oolite — at least one, perhaps 
two formations later — the bones of the two specie « of mammif- 
srous quadrupeds have been found, apparently of the niarsu- 



TBB OLD RBD SANDSTONE. 231 

pial family ; and these^ 8a3r8 Mr. Lyell, afford the only exam- 
ple yet known of terrestrial mammalia in rocks of a date an- 
terior to the older tertiary formations. The reptile seems to 
have preceded the bird, and the bird the mnmmiferous ani- 
mal. Thus the foetal history of the nervous system in the in- 
dividual mammifer seems typical, in every stage of its prog- 
ress, of the history of the grand division at the head of 
which the mammifer stands. Agassiz, at the late meeting of 
the British Association in Glasgow, mentioned an analogous 
fact. Af\er describing the one-sided tail of the more ancient 
fish, especially the fish of the Old Red Sandstone, — the sub- 
jects of his illustration at the time, — he stated, as the result 
of a recent discovery, that the young of the salmon in their 
fcetal state exhibit the same imequally-sided condition of tail 
which characterizes those existences of the earlier ages of 
the world. The individual fish, just as it begins to exist, pre- 
sents the identical appearances which were exhibited by the 
order when the order began to exist Is there nothing won- 
derful in analogies such as these — analogies that point through 
the embryos of the present time to the womb of Nature, big 
with its multitudinous forms of being ? Are they charged 
with no such nice evidence as a Butler would delight to con- 
template, regarding that unique style of Deity, if 1 may so ex- 
press myself, which runs through all his works, whether we 
consider him as God of Nature, or Author of Revelation ? 
In this style of type and symbol did He reveal himself of 
old to his chosen people ; in this style of allegory and para- 
ble did He again address himself to them, when he sojourned 
among them on earth. 

The chem stry of the formation seems scarce inferior in 
mtercst to its zoology ; but the chemist had still much to do 
for Geology and the processes are but imperfectly known. 



232 THE OLD RED SANDSTONX. 

There is no field in which more laurels await the philosophi- 
cal chemist than the geological one. I have said that all the 
calcareous nodules of the ichthyolite beds seem to have had 
originally their nucleus of organic matter. In nine cases out 
of ten the organism can be distinctly traced ; and in the tenth 
there is almost always something to indicate where it lay — an 
elliptical patch of black, or an oblong spot, from which the 
prevailing color of the stone has been discharged, and a 
lighter hue substituted. Is the reader acquainted with Mr. 
Pepys^s accidental experiment, as related by Mr. Lyell, and 
recorded in the first volume of the Geological Dransaclians 1 
It affords an interesting proof that animal matter, in a state 
of putrefaction, proves a powerful agent in the decomposition 
of mineral substances held in solution, and of their conso* t 
quent precipitation. An earthen pitcher, containing several 
quarts of sulphate of iron, had been suffered to remain undis- 
turbed and unexamined in a comer of Mr. Pepys^s laboratory 
for about a twelvemonth. Some luckless mice had mean* 
while fallen into it, and been drowned ; and when it at length 
came to be examined, an oily scum, and a yellow, sulphu- 
reous powder, mixed with hairs, were seen floating on the 
top, and the bones of the mice discovered lying at the bottom ; 
and it was found, that over the decaying bodies the mineral 
components of the fluid had been separated and precipitated 
in a dark-colored sediment, consisting of grains of pyrites 
and of sulphur, of copperas in its green and crystalline form, 
and of black oxide of iron. The animal and mineral mat- 
ters had mutually acted upon one another ; and the metallic 
sulphate, deprived of its oxygen in the process, had thus cost 
down its ingredients. It would seem that over the putrefying 
bodies of the fish of the Lower Old Red Sandstone the water 
nad deposited ir like manner the lime with which it was 



THE OLD R£D SANDSTONE. 23!) 

charged ; and hence the calcareous nodules in which we find 
their remains enclosed. The form of the nodule almost in- 
variably agrees with that of the ichthyolite within ; it is a 
cofBu in the ancient Egyptian style. Was the ichthyolite 
twisted half round in the contorted attitude of violent death ? 
the nodule has also its t^\nst. Did it retain its natural pos- 
ture ? the nodule presents tlie corresponding spindle form. 
Was it broken up, and the outline destroyed ? the nodule is 
flattened and shapeless. In almost every instance the form 
of the organism seems to have regulated that of the stone. 
We may trace, in many of these concretionary masses, the 
operations of three distinct principles, all of which must have 
been in activity at one and the same time. They are wrapped 
concentrically each round its organism: they split readily 
in the line of the enclosing stratum, and are marked by its 
alternating rectilinear bars of lighter and darker color ; and 
they are radiated from the centre to the circumference. 
Their concentric condition shows the chemical influences of 
the decaying animal matter ; their fissile character and par- 
allel layers of color indicate the general deposition which 
was taking place at the time ; and their radiated structure 
testifies to that law of crystalline attraction, through which, 
by a wonderful masonry, the invisible but well-cut atoms 
build up their cubes, their rhombs, their hexagons, and their 
pyramids, and are at once the architects and the materials of 
tlie structure which they rear. 

Another and very different chemical effect of organic mat- 
ter may be remarked in the darker colored arenaceous de- 
posits of the formation, and occasionally in the stratified clays 
and nodules of the ichthyolite bed. In a print-work, the 
whole web is frequently thrown into the vat and dyed of one 
color; but there aflerwards comes a discharging process; 



ttl THE OLD RED SANDSTONB. 

some cfiemica! mixture is dropped on the fabric; the dya 
disappears wherever the mixture touches ; and in leaves, and 
aprtgs 9^^ patches, according to the printer^s pattern, the 
cloth assumes its original white. Now the colored deposits 
of the Old Red Sandstone have, in like manner, been subject- 
ed to a discharging process. The dye has disappeared in 
oblong or cifcular patches of various sizes, from the eighth 
of an inch to a foot in diameter; the original white has 
taken its place ; and so thickly are these speckles grouped in 
some of the darker-tinted beds, that the surfaces, where 
washed by the sea, present the appearance of sheets of caU 
ico. The discharging agent was organic matter ; the uncol- 
oied patches are no mere surface films, for, when cut at right 
angles, their depth is found to correspond with their breadth, 
the circle is a sphere, the ellipsis forms the section of an egg- 
shaped body, and in the centre of each we generally find 
traces of the organism in whose decay it originated. I have 
Repeatedly found single scales, in the ichthyoUte beds, sur- 
i\>unded by uncolorcd spheres about the size of musket bul- 
lets. It is >»*oil for the young geologist carefully to marie 
such appearances — to trace them through the various in- 
stances in which the organism may be recognized and iden- 
tified, to those in which its last vestiges have disappeared. 
They are the hatchments of the geological world, and indi- 
cate that life once existed where all other record of it has 
perished.* 



* Some of the day-slates of the primaxy formatioiit abound in 
Iheae circular, uncolored patches, bearing in their centres, like the 
patches of the Old lied Sandstone, half obliterated nuclei of black. 
Wore thoj, too, once (bssiliferous ? and do these blank erasures remain 
JO testify to the fact ? I find the ocganio origin of the patobat in ths 



THE OLD RED SAHDSTOIfB. 235 

It is the part of the chemist to tell us by what peculiar ac- 
tion of the organic matter the dye was discharged in these 
spots and patches. But how was the dye itself procured ? 
From what source was the immense amount of iron derived, 
which gives to nearly five sixths of the Old Red Sandstone 
the characteristic color to which it owes its name ? An ex» 
amination of its lowest member, the great conglomerate, 
suggests a solution of the query. I have adverted to the largo 
proportion of red-colored pebbles which this member con- 



Old "ELrd Sandstone remarked by Professor Fleming as early as the 
year 1830, and the remark reiterated by Dr. Anderson, of Newburgh, 
in neariy the same words, but with no acknowledgment, ten yearn 
later. The following is the minute and singularly faithful description 
of the Professor : — 

** On the surfjEice of the strata in the lower beds, circular spots, 
nearly a foot in diameter, may be readily perceived by their pale yel- 
low colors, contrasted with the dark red of the surroimding rock. 
These spots, however, are not, as may at first be supposed, mere su- 
perficial films, but derive their circular form from a colored sphere to 
^ which they belong. This sphere is not to be distinguished from the 
rest of the bed by any difference in mechanical structure, but merely 
by the absence of much of that oxide of iron with which the other 
portion of the mass is charged. The circumference of this colored 
sphere is usually well defined ; and at its centre may always be ob 
served matter of a darker color. In some cases disposed in concentrio 
layers, in others of calcareous and crystalline matter, the remains 
probably of some vegetable or animal organism, the decomposition of 
which exercised a limited influence on the coloring matter of the 4sur 
rounding rock. In some cases I have observed these spheres slightly 
compressed at opposite sides, in a direction parallel with the plane of 
stratification — the result, without doubt, of Uie subsidence or con- 
traction of the mass, after the central matter or nucleus had ceased 
to exerciar: i^s influence." — (CAmA'< Edinburgh Journal, Feb. 1831, 
l». 82.) 



THE OLD KBD SANDSTOIIK. 

tains and, among the rest, to a red granitic gneis^ whicl 
must have heen expo9cd orer wide areas at the time of its 
deposition, and which, aAer the lapse of a period which ex* 
tended from at least the times of the Lower Old Red to those 
of the Upper Oolite, was again thrust upwards to the surface, 
to form the rectilinear chain of precipitous eminences to 
which the hills of Cromarty and of Nigg belong. This rock 
is now almost the sole representative, in the north of Scot- 
land, of the ancient rocks whence the materials of the Oki 
Red Sandstone were derived. It abounds in hsematic iron ore, 
diffused as a component of the stone throughout the entire 
mass, and which also occurs in it in ponderous insulated 
blocks of great richness, and in thin, thread-like veins. 
When ground down, it forms a deep red pigment, undi^itin- 
guishable in tint from the prevailing color of the sandstone, 
and which leaves a stain so difficult to be effaced, that shep- 
herds employ it in some parts of the Highlands for marking 
their sheep. Every rawer fragment of the rock bears its 
hcematic tinge ; and were the whole ground by some median- 
ical process into sand, and again consolidated, the produce 
of the experiment would be undoubtedly a deep red sand- 
stone. In an upper member of the lower formation — that 
immediately over the ichthyolite beds — different materials 
seem to have been employed. A white, quartzy sand and a 
pale-colored clay form the chief ingredients; and though 
the ochry-tinted coloring matter be also iron, it is iron ejcisting 
in a different condition, and in a more diluted form. The 
oxide deposited by tho chalybeate springs which pass through 
the lower members of the formation, would give to white 
sand a tinge exactly resembling the tint borne by this upper 
member. 
The passage of metals from lower to higher formations, 



THE OLD RED SANDSTONE. 237 

and from one combination to another, constitutes surely a 
highly interesting subject of inquiry. The transmission of 
iron in a chemical form, through chalybeate springs, from 
deposits in which it had been diffused in a form merely me- 
chanical, is of itself curious ; but how much more so its pas- 
sage and subsequent accumulation, as in bog-iron and the 
iron of the Coal Measures, through the agency of vegetation I 
How strange, if the steel axe of the woodman should have 
once formed part of an ancient forest ! — if, aAer first exist 
ing as a solid mass in a primary rock, it should next have 
come to be diffused as a red pigment in a transition conglom- 
erate — then as a brown oxide in a chalybeate spring — then 
as a yellowish ochre in a secondary sandstone — then as a 
component part in the stems and twigs of a thick forest of 
arboraceous plants — then again as an iron carbonate, slowly 
accumulating at the bottom of a morass of the Ck>al Meas- 
ures — then as a layer of indurated bands and nodules of 
brown ore, underlying a seam of coal — and then, finally, 
that it should have been dug out, and smelted, and fashioned, 
and employed for the purpose of handicraft, and yet occupy, 
even at this stage, merely a middle place between the trans- 
migrations which have passed, and the changes which are yet 
to come. Crystals of galena sometimes occur in the nodu- 
lar limestones of the Old Red Sandstone ; but I am afraid 
the chemist would find it difficult to fix their probable 
genealogy. 

In at least one respect, every geological History must of 
necessity be unsatisfactory ; and, ere I pass to the history of 
the two upper formations of the system, the reader must per- 
mit me to remind him of it. There have been individuals, it 
has been s^id, who, though they could see clearly the forms 
of objcTts wanted, through some strange organic defect, the 
23 



238 THE OLD RED SAIIDSTONB. 

faculty of percetviDg their distinguishing colors, however 
well marked these might he. The petals of the rose have 
appeared to them of the same somhre hue with its stalk ; and 
they have regarded the ripe scarlet cherry as undistinguisha- 
hlo in tint from the green leaves under which it hung. The 
face of nature to such men must have for ever rested under 
a cloud ; and a cloud of similar character hangs over tlie pic- 
torial restorations of the geologist. The history of this and 
the last chapter is a mere profile drawn in hlack, an outline 
witlH>ut color — in short, such a chronicle of past ages as 
might be reconstructed, in the lack of other and ampler ma- 
terials, from tombstones and charnel-houses. I have had to 
draw the portrait from the skeleton. My specimens show 
the general form of the creatures I attempt to describe, and 
not a few of their more marked peculiarities ; but many of 
the nicer elegancies are wanting ; and the " complexion to 
which they have come '* leaves no trace by which to discover 
the complexion they originally bore. And yet color is a 
mighty matter to the ichthyologist. The ^' fins and shining 
scales," '* the waved coats, dropt with gold," the rainbow 
dyes of beauty of the watery tribes, are connected often with 
more than mere external character. It is a curious ond in- 
teresting fact, that the hues of splendor in which they are 
bedecked are, in some instances, as intimately associated 
with their instincts — with their feelings, if I may so speak — 
as the blush which suffuses the human countenance is asso- 
ciated with the sense of shame, or its tint of ashy paleness or 
of sallow with emotions of rage, or feelings of a panic ter- 
ror. P&in and triumph have each their index of color amon^ 
the mute inhabitants of our seas and nvers. Poets tficmselves 
have bowailed the utter inadequacy of words to describe the 
var}nng tints and shades of beauty with which the agonies of 



THE OLU RED SANDSTONE. 239 

death dye the scales of the dolphin, and how every various 
pang calls up a various suffusion of splendor.* Even the 
common stickleback of our ponds and ditches can put on its 
colors to picture its emotions. There is, it seems, a mighty 
amount of ambition, and a vast deal of fighting sheerly for 
conquests* sake, among the myriads of this pygmy little dsh 



* The description of Falconer must be familiar to every reader, but 
I cannot resist quoting it. It shows how minutely the sailor i>oet 
must have observed. Byron tells us how 

••Parting day 
Dies like the dolphin, whom each pang imbues 
With a new color, as it gasps away, 
The last still loveliest, till — tis gone, and all la gray." 

Falconer, in anticipating, reversed the simile. The huge animal, 
•truck by the ** unerring barb " of Rodmond, has been drawn on board, 
and 

** On deck he struggles with conyulsive pain ; 
But while his heart the fatal javelin thrills, 
And flitting life escapes in sanguine rills. 
What radiant changes strike the astonished sight I 
What glowing hues of mingled shade and light I 
Not equal beauties gild the lucid West 
With parting beams o'er all profusely drest ; 
Not lovelier colors paint the yemal dawn. 
When Orient dews impearl the enamelled lawn ; 
Than from his sides in bright suffusion flow, ^ 
That now with gold empyreal seem to glow ; 
Now in pellucid sapphires meet the view, 
And emulate the soft celestial hue ; 
Now beam a flaming crimson on the eye. 
And now assiune the purple's deeper dye. 
But here description clouds each shining ray — - 
What terms of art can Nature's powers display } ** 



24D TRB OLD RED SANDSTONE. 

which iDhabit our smaller streams ; and no sooner does an 
individual succeed in expelling his weaker companions from 
some eighteen inches or two feet of territory, than straight 
way the exultation of conquest converts the faded and 
freckled olive of his back and sides into a glow of crimson 
and bright green. Nature furnishes him with a regal robe for 
the occasion. Immediately on his deposition, however, — 
and events of this kind are even more common under than 
out of the water, — his gay colors disappear, and he sinks 
into his original and native ugliness.* 

But of color, as I have said, though thus important, the 
ichthyologist can learn almost nothing from Geology. The 
perfect restoration of even a Cuvier are blank outlines. We 
just know by a wonderful accident that the Siberian ele- 
phant was red. A very few of the original tints still remain 
among the fossils of our north country Lias. The ammonite. 



* ** In the Magazine of Xalural History^* says Captain Brown, in 
one of his notes to White's Sethome, " we have a curious account of 
the pugnacioiis propensities of these little animals. * Having at vari- 
ous times/ says a correspondent, * kept these little fish during the spring 
and part of the summer months, and paid close attention to their habits. 
I am enabled from my own experience to vouch for the facts I am about 
to relate. I have frequently kept them in a deal tub. about three feet 
two inches wide, and about two feet deep. ^Vhen they are put in for 
some time, probably a day or two, they swim about in a shoal, apparent- 
ly exploring their new habitation. Suddenly one urill take possession 
of the tub, or, as it will sometimes happen, the bottom, and will instant- 
ly commence an attack upon his companions ; and if any of them 
venture to oppose his sway, a regular and most furious battle ensues. 
They svnxa round and round each other with the greatest rapidity, 
biting, (their mouths being well furnished with teeth,) and endeavor- 
ing to pierce each other with their lateral spines, which, on this occa- 
sion, are projected. I have witnessed a battle of this sort which lasted 



THB OLD RED SANDSTONE. 241 

when struck fresh from the surrounding lime, reflects the pris- 
matic colors, as of old ; a huge Modiola still retains its tinge 
of tawny and yellow; and the fossilized wood of the forma- 
tion preserves a shade of the native tint, though darkened 
into brown. But there is considerably less of color in the 
fi)ssils of the Old Red Sandstone. I have caught, and barely 
caught, in some of the n^wly disinten*ed specimens, the faint 
and evanescent reflection of a tinge of pearl ; and were I ac- 
quainted with my own collection only, imagination, borrowing 
from the prevailing color, would be apt to people the ancient 
oceans, m which its forms existed, with swarthy races exclu- 
sively. But a view of the Altyre fossils would correct the 
impression. They are enclosed, like those of Cromarty, in 
nodules of an argillaceous limestone. The color, however, 
from the presence of iron, and the absence of bitumen, is 
difierent. It presents a mixture of gray, of pink, and of 



several minutes before either wotdd give way ; and when one does 
submit, imagination can hardly conceiye the vindictive fury of tLo 
conqueror, who, in the most persevering and unrelenting way, chases 
his rival from one part of the tub to another, imtil fairly exhausted 
with fatigue. From this period an interesting change takes place in 
the conqueror, who, from being a speckled and greenish-looking fish, 
assumes the most beautiful colors ; the belly and lower jaws becoming 
a deep crimson, and the back sometimes a cream color, but gener- 
ally a fine green, and the whole appearance full of animation and 
spirit I have occasionally known three or four parts of the tub 
taken possession of by these little tyrants, who guard their ter- 
ritories with the strictest vigilance, and the slightest invasion 
brings on invariably a battle. A strange alteration immediately 
takes place in the defeated party: his gallant bearing forsakes 
him, his gay colors fade away, he becomes again speckled and 
ugly, and he hides his disgrace among his peaceable compan- 
ions. • " 

23» 



242 



THX OLD KSD SANDSTOIIB. 



brown ; and on this ground the fossil is spread out in suoogly 
contrasted masses of white and dark red, of blue, und of pur- 
ple. Where the exuvtoe lie thickest, the white appears tinged 
with delicate blue — the bone is but little clianged. Where 
they are sprcad out more thinly, the iron has pervaded them, 
and the purple and deep red prevail. Thus the same ich- 
thyolite presents, in some specimens, a body of white and 
plum-blue attached to fins of deep red, and with detached 
scales of red and of purple lying scattered around it. I need 
hardly add, however, that all this variety of coloring is, like 
the unvaried black of the Cromarty specimens, the result« 
merely, of a curious chemistry. 



CHAPTER XIV. 

Tt» Comstone Formation and its Organisms. — Dwarf Vegetation. «* 
CepluUaapUUt, — Huge Lobster. — Habitats of the existing Crusta- 
cea. — No unapt representation of the Deposit of Balruddery, fur- 
nished by a land-lockcd Bay in the neighborhood of Cromarty. — 
Vast Space occupied by the Geological Formations. — Contrasted 
irith the half-formed Deposits -^^hich represent the existing Crea* 
Hon. — Inference. — The formation of the Holoptyehius. — )*robable 
origin of its Siliceous Limestone. — Marked increase in the Bulk of 
the Existences of the System. — Conjectural Cause. — The Coal 
Measures. — The Limestone of Burdie House. — Conclusion. 

The curtain rises, and the scene is new. The myriads of 
the lower formation have disappeared, and we are surrounded, 
on an upper platform, by the existences of a later creation. 
There is sea all around, as before ; and we find beneath a 
dark-colored, muddy bottom, thickly covered by a dwarf vege- 
tation. The circumstances differ little from those in which 
the ichthyolite beds of the preceding period were deposited ; 
but forms of life, essentially different, career through the 
green depths, or creep over the ooze. Shoals of CepkalaS' 
pides^ with their broad, arrow-like heads, and their slender, 
angular bodies, feathered with fins, sweep past like clouds of 
crossbow bolts in an ancient battle. We see the distant 
gleam of scales, but the forms are indistinct and dim : we can 
merely ascertain that the fins are elevated by spines of vari- 
ous shape and pattern ; that of some the coats glitter with 
enamel ; and that others — the sharks of this ancient period — 
bristle over with minute thorny points. A huge crustacean, 
of uncouth proportions, stalks over the weedy bottom or bur* 
rows in the hollows of the banks. 

C243) 



244 THE OLD RED SANDSTONE. 

Let US attempt brining our knowledge of the present to 
bear upon the past. The larger Crustacea of the British seas 
abound most on iron-bound coasts, where they find sheltering 
places in the deeper fisures of sea-clifis covered up by kelp 
and tangle, or under the lower edges of detached boulders, 
that rest unequally on uneven platforms of rock, amid for^ 
osts of the rough-stemmed cuvy. We may traverse sandy 
or muddy shores for miles together, without finding a single 
crab, unless a belt of pebbles lines the upper zone of beach, 
where the forked and serrated fuci first appear, or a few 
weed-covered fragments of rock here and there occur in 
groups on the lower zones. In this formation, however, the 
bottom must have been formed of mingled sand and mud, 
and yet the Crustacea were abundant. How account for the 
fact ? There is, in most instances, an interesting conformity 
between the character of the ancient rocks, in which we find 
groups of peculiar fossils, and the habitats of those existences 
of the present creation which these fossils most resemble. 
The fisherman casts his nets in a central hollow of the Moray 
Frith, about thirty fathoms in depth, and draws them up foul 
with masses of a fetid mud, charged with multitudes ol that 
curious purple-colored zoophyte the sea-pen, invariably an 
inhabitant of such recesses. The graptolite of the most 
ancient fossiliferous rocks, an existence of unequivocally the 
same type, occurs in greatest abundance in a finely-levigated 
mudstone, for it, too, was a dweller in the mud. In like man- 
ner, wc may find the ancient Modiola of the Lias in habitats 
analogous to those of its modern representative the muscle, 
and the cncrinite of the Mountain Limestone fast rooted to 
its rocky platform, just as wc may see the Helianthoida and 
Ascidioida of our seas fixed to their boulders and rocky 
xk<riies. But is not analogy at fault in the present instance .' 



TB£ OLD RED SANDSTONE. 245 

Quite the reverse. Mark how thickly these carbonuceous 
impressions cover the muddy-colored and fissile sandstones 
of the formation, giving evidence of an abundant vegetation. 
We may learn from these obscure markings, that the place 
in which they grew could have been no unfit habitat for the 
cnistaceous tribes. 

There is a little, land-locked bay on the southern shore of 
the Frith of Cromarty, effectually screened from the easterly 
winds by the promontory on which the town is built, and but 
little affected by those of any other quarter, from the proxim- 
ity of the neighboring shores. The bottom, at low ebb, pre* 
sents a level plain of sand, so thickly covered by the green 
grass-weed of our more sheltered sandy bays and estuaries, 
that it presents almost the appearance of a meadow. The 
roots penetrate the sand to the depth of nearly a foot, binding 
it firmly together ; and as they have grown and decayed in it 
for centuries, it has acquired, from the disseminated particles 
of vegetable matter, a deep leaden tint, more nearly ap- 
proaching to black than even the dark gray mudstones of 
Balruddery. Nor is this the only effect: the intertwisted 
fibres impart to it such coherence, that, where scooped out 
mto pools, the edges stand up perpendicular from the water, 
like banks of clay ; and where these are hollowed into cave- 
like recesses, — and tnere are few of them that are not so 
hollowed, — the recesses remain unbroken and unfilled for 
years. The weeds have imparted to the sand a character 
different from its own, and have rendered it a suitable hab- 
itat for numerous tribes, which, in other cTcumstances, would 
have found no shelter in it. Now, aniong these we find in 
abundance the larger crustaceans of our coasts. The brown 
edible crab harbors in the hollows beside the pools ; occasion- 
al y we may find in them an overgrown lobster, studded with 



Sm TMK QftB mSB SAXDSTOICE. 



puasxical siiefls aod aooplnrtes — proof that the creature 
{nrnng at&uned bs riil soe, bas ceased to cast its plated cof> 
erine. Crotaceaas oi tlie sfnalkr Tarieties abound. Her- 
mit crabs traverse the pools, or creep ainoDg the weed ; the 
dark f-c^^a and 'Jfee diztgr, hump-backed crabs occur nearly 
as fr-.-^'ieary : die raJiaca corer the banks by thousands. 
We Qxsd occastonalaT die lemaiDS of dead fish left by the re- 
Ireadog tide ; but the Emiig are much more numerous than 
tbe dead ; fer ^e sand-eel bas suffered the water to retire, 
and jet xeaBaoKd behind in its burrow ; and the yiyiparoos 
bienoT and eoaaama goanri still shelter beside their fuci* 
covered masses of rock. Imagine the bottom of this little bay 
covered up by thick beds of sand and gravel, and the whole 
coosolidated into stone, and we have in it all the conditions 
of the deposit of Balruddery — a mud-colored, arenaceous 
deposit, abounding in vegetable impressions, and enclosing 
numerous remains of crustaceans, fish, and radiata, as its 
characteristic organisms of the animal kingdom. There 
would be but one circumstance of difiereix^e : the little bay 
ibounds in shells ; whereas no shells have yet been found in 
the mudstooes of Balruddery, or the gray sandstones of 
the same formation, which in Forfar, Fife, and Moray shines 
represent the Comstone division of the system. 

Ages and centuries passed, but who can sum up their num- 
her ? In England, the depth of this middle formation greatly 
exceeds that of any of the other two ; in Scotland, it is much 
loss amply developed ; but in either country it must rep- 
resent periods of scarce conceivable extent I have listened 
to the controversies of opposite schools of geologists, who, 
from the earth^s strata, extract registers of the earth^s age of 
an amount amazingly different. One class, regarding ihe 
geological field as if under the influence of those principles 



THE OLD RED 8A1VDST0NE. 247 

of perspective which give to the cottage in front more than 
the hulk and altitude of the mountain behind, would assign to 
the present scene of things its thousands of years, but to all 
the extinct periods united merely their few centuries; while 
with their opponents, the remoter periods stretch out far into 
the bygone eternity, and the present scene seems but a nar- 
row strip running along the foreground. Both classes appeal 
to facts ; and, leaving them to their disputes, I have gone out 
to examine and judge for myself. The better to compare the 
present with the past, I have regarded the existing scene 
merely as 2^. formation — not as superficies, but as depth; 
and have sought to ascertain the extent to which, in different 
localities, and under difierent circumstances, it has overlaid 
the surface. 

The slopes of an ancient forest incline towards a river ihut 
flows sluggishly onwards through a deep alluvial plain, once 
an extensive lake. A recent landslip has opened up one of 
the hanging thickets. Uprooted trees, mingled with bushes, 
lie at the foot of the slope, half buried in broken masses of 
turf; and we see above a section of the soil, from the line of 
vegetation to the bare rock. There is an under belt of clay, 
and an upper belt of gravel, neither of which contains any 
thing organic ; and overtopping the whole we may see a dark- 
colored bar of mould, barely a foot in thickness, studded 
with stumps and interlaced with roots. Mark that narrow 
bar : it is the geological representative of six thousand years. 
A. stony bar of similar appearance runs through the strata of 
the Wealden : it, too, has its dingy color, its stumps, and its 
interlacing roots ; but it forms only a very inconsiderable 
portion of one of the least considerable of all the formations * 
and yet who shall venture to say that it does not represent u 
period as evt3nded as that n*presented by the dark bar in the 



248 THE OLD RED SANDSTONE. 

ancient forest, teeing there is not a circumstance of differeDce 
between them ? 

We descend to the river side. The incessant action of the 
current has worn a deep channel through the leaden-colored 
silt ; the banks stand up perpendicularly over the water, and 
downwards, for twenty feet together, — for such is the deptli 
of the deposit, — we may trace layer af\er layer of reeds, 
and flags, and fragments of driAwood, and find here and 
thero a few fresh-water shells of the existing species. In 
tliis locality, six thousand years are represented by twenty 
feet. The depth of the various fossiliferous formations united 
is at least fifteen hundred times as great. 

We pursue our walk, and pass through a morass. Three 
tiers of forest trees appear in the section laid open by the 
stream, the one above the other. Overlying these there is a 
congeries of the remains of aquatic plants, which must have 
grown and decayed on the spot for many ages after the soil 
had so changed that trees could be produced by it no longer; 
and over the whole there occur layers of mosses, that must 
have found root on the surface after the waters had been 
drained away by the deepening channel of the river. The 
six thousand years are here represented by that morass, its 
three succeeding forests, its beds of aquatic vegetation, its 
bands of moss, and the thin stratum of soil which overlies 
the whole. Well, but it forms, notwithstanding, only the 
mere beginning of a formation. Pile up twenty such mo- 
rasses, the one over the other ; separate them by a hundred 
such bands of alluvial silt as we have just examined a little 
higher up the stream ; throw in some forty or fifty thick beds 
of sand to swell the amount ; and the whole together will but 
barely equal the Coal Measures, one of many formations. 

But the marine deposits of the present creation have been, 



THE OLD RED SANDSTONE. 249 

perhaps accumulating more rapidly than those of oar lakes, 
forests, or rivers ? Yes, unquestionably, in friths and estua- 
ries, in the neighborhood of streams that drain vast tracts of 
country, and roll down the soil and clay swept by the winter 
rains from thousands of hill-sides ; but what is there to lead 
to the formation of sudden deposits in those profounder depths 
of the sea, in which the water retains its blue transparency 
all the year round, let the waves rise as they may ? And do 
we not know that, along many of our shores, the process of 
accumulation is well nigh as slow as on the land itself? The 
3xi8dng creation is represented in the little land-locked bay, 
where the Crustacea harbor so thickly, by a deposit hardly 
three feet in thickness. In a more exposed locality, on the 
opposite side of the promontory, it finds its representative in 
a deposit of barely nine inches. It is surely the present scene 
of things that is in its infancy I Into how slender a bulk 
have the organisms of six thousand years been compressed I 
History tells us of populous nations, now extinct, that flour- 
ished for ages : do we not find their remains crowded into a 
few streets of sepulchres ? 'Tis but a thin layer of soil that 
covers the ancient plain of Marathon. I have stood on Ban- 
nockbum, and seen no trace of the battle. In what lower 
stratum shall we set ourselves to discover the skeletons of the 
wolves and bears that once infested our forests? Where 
shall we find accumulations of the remains of the wild bisons 
and gigantic elks, their contemporaries ? They must have 
existed for but comparatively a short period, or they would 
surely have leA more marked traces behind them. 

When we appeal to the historians, we hear much of a re- 
mote antiquity in the history of man : a more than twilight 
gloom pervades the earlier periods; and the distances are 
exaggerated, as objects appear large in a fog. We measure, 
24 



250 THE OLD KED SANDSTONE. 

too, by a minute scale. There is a tacit reference to the 
threescore and ten years of human life ; and its term of a 
day appears long to the ephemera. We turn fron the histo- 
rians to the prophets, and find the dissimilarity of style indi* 
eating a different speaker. EzekiePs measunng-reed is grad* 
uated into cubits of the temple. The vast periods of the 
short-lived historian dwindled down into weeks and iajtL 
Seventy weeks indicated to Daniel, in the first year of Darius, 
the time of the Messiah^s coming. Three years and a half 
limit the term of the Mohammedan delusion. Seventeen 
years have not yet gone by since Adam first arose from the 
mould ; nor has the race, as such, attained to the maturity of 
even early manhood. But while prophecy sums up merely 
weeks and days, when it refers to the past, it looks forward 
into the future, and speaks of a thousand years. Are scales 
of unequally graduated parts ever used in measuring different 
portions of the same map or section — scales so very une- 
qually graduated, that, while the parts'in some places expand 
to the natural size, they are in others more than three hun- 
dred times diminished ? If not, — for what save inextricable 
confusion would result from their use, — how avoid the con- 
clusion, that the typical scale employed in the same book by 
the same prophet represents similar quantities by correspond- 
ing parts, whether applied to times of outrage, delusion, and 
calamity, or set off against that long and happy period in 
which the spirit of evil shall be bound in chains and dark- 
ness, and the kingdom of Christ shall have come ? Aiod if 
su3h be the case — if each single year of the thousand years 
of the future represents a term as extended as each single 
year of the seventeen years of the past — if the present 
Bc^ne of things be thus merety in its beginning — should we at 
all wonder to find that the formation which represents it has 
laid down merely its few first strata ? 



THB OLD RED 8A1VDST0ICS. 251 

Tlie curtain again rises. A last day had at length come 
to the period of the middle formation; and in an ocean 
roughened by waves, and agitated by currents, like the ocean 
which flowed over the conglomerate base of the system, we 
find new races of existences. We may mark the clumsy 
bulk of the Holoplychius conspicuous in the group ; the shark 
family have their representatives as before ; a new variety of 
the Fterichthys spreads out its spear-like wings at ever} 
alarm, like its predecessors of the lower formation ; shoals of 
fish of a type more common, but still unnamed and undc« 
scribed, sport amid the eddies ; and we may see attached to 
the rocks below substances of uncouth form and doubtful 
structure, with which the oryctologist has still to acquaint 
himself. The depositions of this upper ocean are of a mixed 
character : the beds are less uniform and continuous than at a 
greater depth. In some places they consist exclusively of sand- 
stone, in others of conglomerate ; and yet the sandstone and 
conglomerate seem, from their frequent occurrence on the 
same platform, to have been formed simultaneously. The 
transporting and depositing agents must have become more 
partial in their action than during the earlier period. They 
had their foci of strength and their circumferences of com- 
parative weakness ; and while the heavier pebbles which 
composed the conglomerate were in the course of being de- 
posited in the foci, the lighter sand which composes the sand- 
stone was settling in those outer skirts by which the foci wero 
surrounded. At this stage, too, there are unequivocal marks, 
in the northern localities, of extensive denudation. The older 
strata are cut away in some places to a considerable depth, 
and newer strata of the same formation deposited unconforma- 
bly over them. There must have been partial upheaviiigs 
and depressions, ^corresponding with the partial character tj£ 



252 TH£ OLD RED SANDSTOMB. 

the depositions ; and, as a necessary conseqaence, frequent 
shiftings of currents. The ocean, too, seems to have les- 
sened its general depth, and the bottom to have fain more ex- 
posed to the influence of the waves. And hence one cause, 
added to the porous nature of the matrix, and the diffused 
oxide, of the detached, and, if I may so express myself, 
churchyard character of its organisms. 

Above the blended conglomerates and sandstones of this 
band a deposition of lime took place. Thermal springs, 
charged with calcareous matter slightly mixed with silex, seem 
to have abounded, during the period which it represents, over 
widely-extended areas ; and hence, probably, its origin. An 
increase of heat from beneath, through some new activity 
imparted to the Plutonic agencies, would be of itself sufficient 
to account for the formation. I have resided in a district in 
which almost every spring was charged with calcareous earth ; 
but in cisterns or draw-wells, or the utensils in which the 
housewife stored up for use the water which these supplied, 
no deposition took place. With boilers and tea-kettles, how- 
ever, the case was different The agency of heat was 
brought to operate upon these ; and their sides and bottoms 
were covered, in consequence, with a thick crust of lime. 
Now, we have but to apply the simple principles on which 
such phenomena occur, to account for widely-spread precipi- 
tates of the same earth by either springs or seas, which at 
a lower temperature would have been active in the forma- 
tion of mechanical deposits alone. The temperature sunk 
gradually to its former state ; the purely chemical deposit 
ceased ; the waters became populous as before with animals 
of the same character and appearance as those of the up- 
per conglomerate ; and layer after layer of yellow sand- 
stone, to the depth of several hundred feet, were formed as 



THB OLD KEB S^HHSTOlfS. 253 

the period passed. With this upper deposit the system 
termioated. 

Though fish still remained the lords of creation, and fish 
of apparently no superior order to those with which the ver- 
tehrata began at least th^ formations earlier, they had 
mightily advanced in one striking particular. If their organ- 
ization was in no degree more perfect than at first, their bulk 
at least had become immensely more great The period had 
gone by in which a mediocrity of dimension characterized 
the existences of the ancient oceans, and fish armed ofiTen- 
sively and defensively with scales and teeth scarcely inferior 
in size to the scales and teeth of the gavial or the alligator, 
sprung into existence. It must have been a large jaw and a 
lai^ head that contained, doubtless among many others, a 
tooth an inch in diameter at the base. I may remark, in the 
passing, that most of the teeth found in the several forma- 
tions of the system are not instruments of mastication, but, 
like those in most of the existing fish, mere hooks for 
penetrating slippery substances, and thus holding them fast 
The rude angler who first fashioned a crooked bone, or a bit 
of native silver or copper, into a hook, might have found liis 
invention anticipated in the jaws of the first fish he drew 
ashore by its means ; and we find the hook structure as com- 
plete in the earlier ichthyoUtes of the Old Red Sandstone as 
in the fish that exist now. The evidence of the geologist \a 
of necessity circumstantial evidence, and he need look for 
none other ; but it is interesting to observe how directly the 
separate facts bear, in many examples, on one and the same 
point The hooked and slender teeth tell exactly the same 
story with the undigested scales in the foecal remains alluded 
to in an early chapter. 

In what could this increase in bulk have originated ? Is 
there a high but yet comparatively medium temperature ui 
24» 



254 TBB OLD RED SANDSTONE. 

which animals attain their greatest size, and corresponding 
gradations of descent on both sides, whether we increase tbA 
heat until we reach the point at which life can no longer 
exist, or diminish it until we arrive at the same result from 
intensity of cold ? The line of existence bisects on both sides 
the line of extinction. May it not probably form a curve, 
descending equally from an elevated centre to the points of 
bisection on the level of death ? But whatever may have 
been the cause, the change furnishes another instance of 
analogy .between the progress of individuals and of orders. 
The shark and the sword-fish begin to exist as little creatures 
of a span in length ; they expand into monsters whose bodies 
equal in hugeness the trunks of ancient oaks ; and thus has 
it been with the order to which they belong. The teeth, 
spines, and palatal bones of the fish of the Upper Ludlow 
Rocks are of almost microscopic minuteness ; an invariable 
mediocrity of dimension characterizes the ichthyolites of the 
Lower Old Red Sandstone ; a marked increase in size takes 
place among the existences of the middle formation ; in the 
upper the bulky Holoptychius appears ; the close of the sys- 
tem ushers in the still bulkier Megalichthys ; and low in the 
Ck>al Measures we find the ponderous bones, buckler-like 
scales, and enormons teeth of another and immensely more 
gigantic Holoptychius — a creature pronounced by Agassis 
the largest of all osseous fishes.* We bcgiu with an age of 
dwarfs — we end with an age of giants. The march of Nature 
is an onward and an ascending march ; the stages are slow, 
but the tread is stately ; and to Him who has commanded, 



* There have been fish scales found in Bordie House five inches ic 
Imgth, by rather more than four in breadth. Of the gigantic Hohp- 
ttfchiuM of this deposit we have still much to learn. The fragment of 
« jotv in the posaestioa of the Royal Society of Edinburgh* which 



THE OLD MED SACT6T03nC 2S5 

and who overiooks it, a dioosaiid jeais are as Imt a single 
day, and a single day as a thousaDd yearsL* 

We have entered the Coal Measures. For seven forma- 
tions together — frocn the Lower Silarian to the Upper Old 
Bed Sandstone — oar cooiae has lain over oceans without a 
visible shore, thoogh, like Columbus, in his voyage of dis- 
covery, we have now and then found a little floating weed, to 
indicate the approaching coast The water is fast shallow* 
ing. Yonder passes a broken branch, with the leaves still 
unwithered ; and there floats a tuft of fern. Land, from the 
mast-head ! land I land ! — a low shore, thickly covered with 
vegetation. Huge trees, of wonderful form, stand out far 
into the water. There seems no mtervening beach. A thick 
hedge of reeds, tall as the masts of pmnaces, runs along the 
deeper bays, like water-flags at the edge of a lake. A river 
of vast volume comes rolling from the interior, daricening 
the water for leagues with its slime and mud, and bearing 
with it, to the open sea, reeds, and fern, and cones of the 
pine, and immense floats of leaves, and now and then some 
bulky tree, undermined and uprooted by the current We 
near the coast, and now enter the opening of the stream. A 
scarce penetrable phalanx of reeds, that attain to the height 
and well nigh the bulk of forest trees, is ranged on either hand. 
The bright and glossy stems seem rodded like Gothic col- 
umns ; the pointed leaves stand out green at every joint, tier 
above tier, each tier resembling a coronal wreath or an an- 
cicnt crown, with the rays turned outwards ; and we see a-top 



belonged to an indiridaal of the species, is 18| inches in length ; and 
it is funuahed with teeth, one of which, from base to point, measoxes 
fire inches, and another four and a halt 

* See, on this subject, the introductory note to the present edition, 
and note f . 164. 



256 THE OLD BED 8ANDSTONB. 

nrhat nmy be either large spikes or catkins. What straDge 
forms of vegetable life appear in the forest behind ! Cao 
that be a club-moss that raises its slender height for more 
than fif\y feet from the soil ? Or can these tall, palm-like 
trees be actually ferns, and these spreading branches mere 
fronds ? And then these gigantic reeds ! — are they not 
mere varieties of the common horse-tail of our bogs and mo- 
rasses, magnified some sixty or a hundred times ? Have we 
arrived at some such country as the continent visited by Gulli- 
ver, in which he found thickets of weeds and grass tall as woods 
of twenty years^ growth, and lost himself amid a forest of 
com, fifty feet in height? The lesser vegetation of our own 
country, reeds, mosses, and ferns, seems here as if viewed 
through a microscope : the dwarfs have sprung up into giants, 
and yet there appears to be no proportional increase in size 
among what are unequivocally its trees. Yonder is a group 
of what seem to be pines — tall and bulky, 'tis true, but 
neither taller nor bulkier than the pines of Norway and 
America; an4 the club-moss behind shoots up its green, 
hairy arms, loaded with what seems catkins above their top- 
most cones. But what monster of the vegetable world comes 
floating down the stream — now circling round in the eddies, 
now dancing on the ripple, now shooting down the rapid ? It 
resembles a gigantic star-fish, or an immense coach-wheel, 
divested of the rim. There is a green, dome-like mass in the 
centre, that corresponds to the nave of the wheel, or the 
body of the star-fish ; and the boughs shoot out horizontally 
on every side, like spokes from the nave, or rays from the 
central body. The diameter considerably exceeds forty feet ; 
the branches, originally of a deep green, are assuming the 
golden tinge of decay ; the cylindrical and hollow leaves 
stand out thick on every side, like prickles of the wild rose on 
tl)e red, fleshy, bnce-like shoots of a year's growth^ that will 



THE OLD RBD SANDSTONE* 257 

be covered, two seasons hence, with flowers and fruit. Thai 
strangely formed organism presents no existing type among 
all the numerous families of the vegetable kingdom.* There 
is an annazing luxuriance of growth all around us. Scarce 
can the current make way through the thickets of aquatic 
plants that rise thick from the muddy bottom ; and though 
the sunshine falls bright on the upper boughs of the tangled 
forest beyond, not a ray penetrates the more than twilight 
gloom that broods over the marshy platform below. The 
rank steam of decaying vegetation forms a thick blue haze, 
that partially obscures the underwood ; deadly lakes of car- 
bonic acid gas have accumulated in the hollows ; there is 
silence all around, uninterrupted save by the sudden splash 
of some reptile fish that has risen to the surface in pursuit of 
its prey, or when a sudden breeze stirs the hot air, and shakes 
the fronds of the giant ferns or the catkins of the reeds 
The wide continent before us is a continent devoid of animal 
life, save that its pools and rivers abound in fish and melius- 
ca, and that millions and tens of millions of the infusory 
tribes swarm in the bogs and marshes. Here and there, too, 
an insect of strange form flutters among the leaves. It ia 
more than probable that no creature furnished with lungs of 
the more perfect construction could have breathed the at 
mosphere of this early period, and have lived. 

Doubts have been entertained whether the limestone of 
Burdie House belongs to the Upper Old Red Sandstone or to 
the inferior Coal Measures. And the fact may yet come to 
be quoted as a very direct proof of the ignorance which ob- 
tained regarding the fossils of the older formation, at a time 
when the organisms of most of the other formations, both 
above and below it, had been carefully explored. The Lime- 
stone of Burdie House is unequivocally and most character- 
istically a Coal Measure limestone. It abounds in vegetable 
♦ See Note O. 



258 THB OLD SBD BAIIDSTONB. 

remains of terrestrial or lacustrine growth, and these, too, 
the vegetables common to the Ck)al Measures — ferns, reeds, 
and cIub*mosses. One can scarce detach a fragment from 
the mass, that has not its leaflet or seed-cone enclosed, and 
in a state of such perfect preservation, that there can be no 
possibility of mistaking its character. If in reality a marine 
deposit, it must have been formed in the immediate neighbor- 
hood of a land covered with vegetation. The dove set loose 
by Noah bore not back with it a less equivocal sign that the 
waters had abated. Now, in the Upper Old Red Sandstone 
none of these plants occur. The deposit is exclusively an 
ocean deposit, and the remains in Scotland, until we arrive at 
Its inferior and middle formations, are exclusively animal re* 
mains. Its upper member, " the yellow sandstone,^^ says Dr. 
Anderson, of Newburgh, " does not exhibit a single particle 
of carbonaceous matter — no trace or film of a branch hav- 
ing been detected in it, though, if such in reality existed, 
there are not wanting opportunities of obtaining specimens 
in some one of the twenty or thirty quarries which have been 
opened in the county of Fife in this deposit alone." No two 
bordering formations in the geological scale have their boun- 
daries better defined by the character of their fossils than the 
Old Red Sandstone and the Coal Measures. 

We pursue our history no further. Its after course is com- 
paratively well known. The huge sauroid fish was succeed- 
ed by the equally huge reptile — the reptile by the bird — 
the bird by the marsupial quadruped ; and at length, after 
races higher in the scale of instinct had taken precedence in 
succession, the one of the other, the sagacious elephant ap- 
peared, as the lord of that latest creation which immediately 
preceded our own. How natural does the thought seem 
which suggested itself to the profound mind of Cuvier, when 
indulging in a sim.lar review ! Has the last scene in the 



THE OLD KSD SASOSTOSTK 



259 



series arisen, or has Deity expended his infinitode ct resooree , 
and reached the oltimate stage of prt^ressioo at which per- 
fection can arrive ? The philosopher hesitated, and then de- 
ciied in the negative, for he was too intimate! j acqaainted 
with the works of the Omnipotent Creator to diink of limit- 
ing his power ; and he coold, therefore, anticipate a coming 
period in which man would have to resign his post of honor 
to some nohler and wiser creature — the monarch of a better 
and happier worid. How well it is, to be permitted to indulge 
in the ezpanaon of Covier's thought, withool sharing in the 
melancholy of Covier^s feeling — to be enabled to look for- 
ward to the coming of a new heaven and a new earth, not in 
terror, but in hope — to be encouraged to believe in the sjrs- 
tem of unendmg progression, but to entertain no fear of the 
degradation or depositioo of man ! The adorable Monarch 
of the future, with all its unsummed perfection, has already 
passed into the heavens, flesh of our flesh, and bone of our 
bone, and Enoch and Elias are there with him — fit repre- 
sentatives of that dominant race, which no other race shall 
ever supplant or succeed, and to whose onward and upward 
march the deep echoes of eternity shall never cease to 
respond. 



r 

1 


ii : 


i 

; 1 


1 1 


■ 


|- 


■ f 

1 



:| 


» 


1 



IGHTHTOUIES OF THE OLD RED SANDSTONE. 



AGASSIZ^S **P0I8801I8 F08SILK8. 



*0* Tlie tjnaaymm here — now supplanted, howerer — with thf 
Lmmes of a few doabtfnl or fictitious tpeciea, are given in ItaUet ; — 
the former opposite the names ultimately adopted, the Utter immedi- 
ately imder the names of the detenained species. 



▲eanthodes pusillus. 

Actinolepis tuberculatusi. 

Asterolepis AsmunL — Snr. CMonickth^ ilMMwtt. 

•* apicalis.- 

** granulate. 

•• HceninghausiL 

•• MalcohnsonL 

• minor. — Stw. CMomehihft mmurm 

** omata. 

*« spedosa. 

** eonettUnaiua> 

** ilepretstu, 

ik>thriolepis &YOsa. — Stk. Gfyptottma favotut. 

•* omata •• ** reftculsda 

Byasacanthus arcuatus. 

** crenulatus. 

•• Iteris. 

Cephalaspis LewisiL 

•• LloydiL 

•* Lyellii. 

•* rostratus. 

25 



262 ICBTHYOLITES OF TBI 



Cheiracanthiis inicrolepidotus. 

•* minor. 

M MurchiflonL 

Clieiiolepift CammingU». 

M IVaiUiL 

•* XJragus. 

** splendent. 

** uniloteroUe* 

Chelyophoros pustnlatuB. 

** VemeuilU. 

Cladodiu simplex. 
Climatiixs leticiilatui. 
Coccosteus cuspidatuB. 

** decipiens. — ST^ . lotus. 

<« oblongus. 

Cosmacanthus Malcolmsoni 
Cricodus incurnis. — Syn. Dendrodua 
Ctenacanthus omatuk 

•• serrulatus. 

Ctenodus Keyscrlingu. 

** marginalia. 

* panmlus. 

•• WorthiL 

** radiattu. 

** temUui. 
Ctenoptychius priaciia. 
DendroduB latus. 

•• minor. 

*• sig^oider , 

« Btrigatns. 

•< tenuiatriatut 
Diplacantliils craBsispiniA 

•* longi8pinu4. 

** Btriatulua. 

•• strintufi. 

Diplopteruff afitnis. 



OLD BSD SAlfllSTCWft. 



W3 



Diploptenu oomlk. ^ Bnu 

** IIIMSn>06|nUyUn> 

Dipteros maoolepidotaB. 



Glyptolepis elegam. 
** leptopttms. 

Gljptopomm minor. — Bul FUtgfmaA'm — mr . 
Hsplftcsntlms nunrnmlisa 
Holoptycbhis AndenonL 

•« FlaningiL 

** gigantaoa. 

M MarchisoaL 

•« nobOiBiuiiiiA. 

M OmaHufliL 

Homaesnthm •rcnatos. 
Homothorax FlemmgiL 
Lamnodua biporcatiia. — Snr. Demdndmt biporcatu*, 

•* hutMtaa. ^Sym, PmmdmrL Dmdntku Mcakum, eompre\»m9. 

•* aolcatua. 
Narcodea pnatili£er. 
Kanlaa aulcatna. 
Odontaeanthua crenatoa. — St«. CUmopiifekiMi «r wmkm. 

** hfltenidooa 

Onchna heterogyrua. 

^ aemiatriatna. 

«« aablsTia. 
Oateolepia arenatoa. 

•* maoolepidoitiia 

M migor. 

M microlepidotus. 

•* intermedin. 

** nanta. 
Pamphractus Andersom. 



264 ICHTBTOLITES OF THE OLD SSD 8AND8T01CB 

Pamphractns hydrophilos. ^ Stn. Puriektkfft MjfdnphUtm 
Parexus recurrus. 
Phyllolepis concentricus. 
Placothoraz paradoxus. 
PlatygnathuB JametonL 

** pauddens. 

Polyphractus platycephaloa. 
PsammoateoB arenatus. — Stw. PkM>iteua arenatvt, 

*< maeandziniia. ** ** wueandrinMt. 

" paradozua. ** Piommolepii pttradtufrnt. 

*• undulatna. ** PlaeoiteuM undulaitm. 

Pteriohthya arenatus. 

** caneiifonnia. 

•< comutos. 

•• major. 

" Milleri. 

•« lattw- 

** oblongus. 

•• productua. 

*• testudinariva. 

Ptychaeanthus dubiua. 
Stagonclepia RobertaooL 



K T E S . 



KOTE A, Taom 18. 

Lc the last edition of lus '"Elements" (1855)^ Sir Charies Ljell 
has considerablj altered and amplified Has dewmpdon^ for which 
he has been to a lai^ extent indebted to the disroreries and pub- 
lications of Mr. Miller. See "* ElemenU of GetAogf^" chap. xztL 



KOTE B, Taob 40. 

^ And in the latter fbnnation [Coal Measores] the first reptOes 
appear.** This statement requires now to be slightljr modified, 
in consequence of the discoveiy in 1851, bjr Mr. Patrick Duff of 
Elgin, of a true reptile (Telerpeton Elginse) in the Upper Old 
Red of Morayshire. The fact is referred to in " The Testimony 
of the Bocks," pages 46 and 104. See also LyeU's ^ Elements " for 
a figure and description of the creature. The ai^g^mnent fdlow- 
ing the above quotation is not, however, in anjr wajr affected bjr 
this discovery. It b right, however, to add, that np to a very 
recent period, 3Ir. Miller was known to have expressed some 
doubts as to whether the rock in which the Telerpeton was found 
did not belong to a much higher formatiofn than the Old Bed Sand- 
stone. 



KOTE C, Taos M. 

For a more minute description of the head-plates of the Coc- 
costeus, see ** Foot-PrinU of the Creator,** pages 73 and 74. See 
also Plate iz. 



266 NOTES. 



KOTB D, Taos 72. 

Sec " Foot-Prints of the Creator," pages 75-80, where the struo 
tare of tlie Lead of the Osteolepis is full/ described and figured. 



KOTE £, Paos 03. 

In " The Testimony of the Rocks " the flora of the Old Red is 
treated at great length. See pages 433-462. See also, on the 
same subject, " Foot-Prints of the Creator," pages 209-222. 



KOTE E, (Xo. 2) Paoe 128. 

The genus Cephalaspis (Agas.) has been confounded "with the 
Pteraspii (Kner.). Cephalanpis rostratus is a Pteraspis ; and Professor 
Iluxlcy and Mr. Salter describe Cephalaspis Lctcu<ii' and Lloydii as 
PteraspiiJes, Sir P. de Grey Egerton has determined two new 
species of Cephalaspis (C. Saltceyi and C Murchisoni), — Proc, 
GeoL Soc.f August f 1857. 



KOTE F, Pages 128 axd 143. 

Sixteen years ago, when " The Old Red Sandstone " was writ- 
ten, the Cephalaspis was little understood. Since then, however, 
a few specimens have been found in the neighborhood of Ar- 
broath, which demonstrate that the animal was provided with a 
large and powerful tail, and with ccjually powerful pectorals, so 
that its impetus need not have been, as here stated, "compara- 
tively slow.** It is now also well ascertained that the peculiar 
"cutting-knife" or " bolt "-like shape of the head, so generally 
noticeable in the earlier specimens, was the result of accident 
A single cephalic shield of bone, thickly covered with discoidal 
bony plates of beautiful workmanship, was bent round the whole 
of the upper portion of the creature's head, including the sides, 
somewhat after the fashion of a lady*s bonnet shade ; with this 
difference, that, instead of the pointed ends, or "boms," being 
fastened, as in the case of the bonnet, they projected freely back- 



JfOTXS. 



1^67 



wards in tlie fisL It was altx^tber, therefore, an annatnre of 
defence, and not partly of offence, as hinted at in the text Of this 
Mr. Miller had long been quite aware, and, in consequence, had 
expressed himself approvingly of the restoration figured in Plate x. 
An Arbroath specimen, in the possession of Mr. Powrie of Rcs- 
wallie, which shows the head in profile, has the cephalic shield 
bent round in the manner described. In the large majority of in* 
stances, however, the fish being found lying on its belly, the curva- 
ture of the shield has yielded to the pressure of the overlying stone, 
and the appearance of the head is consequently that of a perfectly 
flat crescent, as represented in Plate xiiL fig. 1. 



l^OTE G, Taoes 120 ▲3n> 137,— "IDddle Empin.** 



Here, and elsewhere in these pages, the Forfarshire gray beds 
are spoken of as constituting the middle portion of the formation. 
BAxauDDsar arnm. In ** The Testimony of the Rocks," 

however, pages 452-455, Mr. Miller 
remarks, that " the evidence on the 
point is certainly not so conclusive 
as I deemed it fifteen years ago " (p. 
452) ; and again (p. 455), ^* It must, 
however, be stated, on the other 
hand, that the crustaceans of the 
gray tilestones of Forfar and Kin- 
cardine not a little resemble those of 
the upper Silurian and red tilestone 
beds of England ; and that, judging 
from the ichthyodonilites found in 
both, their fishes must have been at 
least generically allied. The crusta- 
- . ceansofthe upper Silurian of Lesma- 

I jM hagow, too, seem certainly much akin 

l^^^jj^jj,.^^ (^ to Aoseofthe Forfarshire tilestones." 

^^m^BaSmmimm,tmammt^ rpjj^ spiucs figured in the accompany- 
ing cut, when compared with those in Sir R. Murchison's ^* Siluria," 
may help the scientific reader to determine the question. 
Additional Note, bt Bb v. W. S. Stmonds. — In Worcester- 



268 NOTES. 

•hire, in the neigbborliood of Kidderminster, the Cephalafpu Lyell'L 
has been detected in beds that appear to be intermediate between 
the Tilcstones and Comstones and associated with other fossils snp- 
posed to be characteristic of the Tilesttones. Mr. Roberts of Kidder- 
minster has found the Pterygotus of the Kington Tilestoncs and 
the Pteraspis of Mr. Banks in the same Gray Sandstones and Com- 
stones which contain Cephalaspis Lyellii and Pteraspis omatus. I 
exhibited these fossils at a meeting of the Geological Society of Lon- 
don, April 1857, in the presence of Sir P. Egerton, Sir R Murdiison 
and Sir C. LyelL 



NOTE H, Taoes 133 ahd 137. 

The correctness of the term " tail-flap," used by Mr. Miller 
when describing a peculiar-looking plate of the Balruddcry lob- 
ster, has been (questioned. Sir Charles Lyell and Mr. Page both 
believe it to have been a jaw-foot. Several fine specimens of 
tliis organism have been sent up to Mr. Salter of the Jermyn 
Street Museum, London, whose decision will probably definitely 
settle the matter 



KOTE H, (No. 2) Paob 133. Bt Bxv. W. S. Stxcitds. 

Near Ludlow, Hereford, and several other localities, the Upper 
Ludlow fish-bed has been traced over an extensive area ; but in 
several places the fishes appear to be absent, and their places 
supplied by large Crustaceans, chiefly Pterygotus, Ilimantopterus^ 
Eurypterus, and Pterygotus, have been found by Mr. Banks asso- 
ciated with Pteraspides and Lingula cornea ; while Mr. Roberts has 
Pteraspis and Pterygotus in the same beds as Cephalaspis Lyellii 
The Pterygotus of Kidderminster seems identical with the Scotch 
Seraphim, 



KOTE I, Paoks 142 avd 14S. 

This organism Mr. Miller had some time ago definitely con- 
cJoded to be vegetabla. Sea '* The Testimony of the Rocks," p. 



KOTS8. 269 

448, wliere he sa^rs,— << There now seems eTidence enough to con- 
clude that they are the remains, not of the ^gs of an animal, but 
of the seed of a plant* 

Additional Nots, bt Be v. W. S. Stxonds. — These fossils 
— Parka decipiens — now known to be the seeds of a plant, are 
abundant in the Kidderminster beds. See also Plate ziL 



KOTE K, Faos 149. 

For recent additions made to the flora and fauna of the English 
and Irish Old Red Sandstone, see SUurioj in ''L jell's Elements" 
and ** The Gedogical Joumal,** toL ziL 



KOTE L, Faos ISfti 

See ^ The Testimony of the Bocks," pages 247 and 248. See 
also Plata xir 

VOTE M, Faos 170. 

See, in connecdon with this remaik, the quotations in note G. 
May not the fad here mentioned of the Pterichthys occurring in 
the Caithness and Fifeshire beds, and not in the For&rshire* be 
another axgument for the greater antiquity of the latter ? 



KOTE K, Faox 198. 

From the tenor of the remarks at p. 453 of " The Testimony 
of the Bocks," it will be seen that Mr. MiDer had come latteriy 
to regard the conglomerate of the south of the Grampians as the 
analogue of that of Caithness. In November 1856 he decidedly 
expressed this ^ his matured opinion, in conversation with the 



KOTE O, Faox 257. 

The oig ani sm here referred to is now ascertained to have been 
a rootj and not an independent plant, — the root, namely, of the 
SigilUffia. See ''The Testimony of the Bocks," pa«|we&-7. 



270 



iroTSt. 



NOTE BY THE BEY. W. 8. 8T1C0KD8. 

A Pterichihys has been discoTered by Mr. Baxter of Worcester 
in the yellow sandstone of the Clee Hill district, Salop. This 
yellow sandstone is below the carboniferoos limestone of the 
Clees, and is the equivalent of the Cycloptems Hibemicos sand- 
stones of Ireland and the Dora Den beds of Scotland. The Pter- 
ichthys has not before been discovered in England, and is there- 
fore an important addition to the tipper Old Red fossils of £ng-> 
land. A new speei^ of Euiypterus has also been descri b od" by 
the Ber. W. S. Symonds, in the '' Edinbargh New Fhilosophiod 
Jonmal," October 1857, from the Upper Comstones of Heneibrd- 
shire. 



GEOLOGICAL PAPERS 



BEAD BXrOBX THB 



ROYAL PHYSICAL SOCIETY OP EDINBURGH. 



m 



• ■ f 



CONTENTS- 



GEOLOGICAL ETIDLXCES 15 FATOS OF RETEALED BEUGID5. . . 903 

OX THE A5CIEXT GHAUWACa ROCKS OF SCOTLAND. Z\5 

05 RED SA5I)ST0XE.XA£BL£,A5BQrA£nD£F0SIIS OF ASSIST. 343 

ON THE CORALS OF THE OOLHIC STSTEX 363 

05 THE FOSSILIFEROUS DEFOSHS OF SC0ILA5II. 374 



,fi'i 



^ 

i 



GEOLOGICAL £Yn)£!?C£S 



TX FATOm OP 



REVEALED RELIGION. 



The following treatise was read hj Mr. Millee, on taking 
the chair, for the first time, as President of the Sodetj, on 7th 
Jannarjy 1852: — 

Gentlexsk, — Ton hare done me the honor of electing me, 
hj a unanimons vote, to he one of the Prendents of the Royal 
Physical Society. I little thought, some two-and-thirty yean 
ago, when, rather in obedience to a native instinct than with 
any ulterior object, I sought to acquaint myself with geological 
phenomena, that there awaited me any such honor. For, una- 
ware at the time that there even existed sndi a science as Ge- 
ology, or that the field which it opens has its many laborers, 
6ome of whom meet with less, and some with more success in 
their labors, I could not so much as imagine that distinction 
was to be achieyed by studying the forms and structures of the 
strange organisms which I laid open amid rocks and in quar- 
ries, or in inquiring into the drcomstances in which they had 
lived and died, or into the causes to which, in ages long gone 
by, they had owed their entombment in the stone. But it seems 
to be one of the characteristics of a true science, that it should 
promise little and perform much; and that for those who 
devote themselves to it simply for its own sake, it should 



804 OEOLOOICAL EVIDENCES 

reserve a class of favors of a purely exterior character, rarely 
vouchsafed to the suitors who make court to it for that dowry 
of the extrinsic and the adventitious which it occasionally 
brings. 

It certainly is one of the characteristics of geological science, 
though in a far higher sense than that to which I have adverted, 
that it promises little and performs much. It contrasts strongly 
in this respect with those purely mental sciences still properly 
taught in our higher schools, — for they constitute the true 
gymnastics of mind, but, like other gymnastics, are to be 
regarded, not as actual work, but simply as a preparation for it. 
The use of the dumb-bells opens the chest and strengthens the 
muscles ; but it is Icfl to labor of quite another kind to supply 
the wants of the present, or to provide for the necessities of the 
future. And such appears to be the sort of relation borne by 
the purely mental to the natural sciences. How very different, 
however, the prospects which tliey seemed to open to the curious 
inquirer in the earlier ages of their history, or even in the 
earlier history of individual minds among ourselves ! Mental 
science must have appeared to many of us, when we first 
approached it, as a magnificent gateway, giving access to a vast 
province, in which not only all knowledge regarding the nature 
of mind was to be acquired, but in which also, through the 
study of the intellectual faculties, we were to be introduced to 
the best possible modes of acquiring all other knowledge. But 
have we not been disappointed in our hopes ? nay, from the 
doubts and uncertainties conjured up by the nice dialectics of the 
science, have we not had eventually to cast ourselves for escape 
on the simple instincts of our nature ? and, ultimately, have we 
not gained well nigh as little through the process, so impera- 
tively demanded by the metaphysician, of turning the mind 
upon itself, instead of exercising it on things external to it, as 
if we had been engaged in turning the eye upon itself, instead 



IN FAVO& OF REYSALED RELIOIOM. 805 

of directing it on all the objects which it has been spedallj 
framed to see, — among the rest, on other eyes, and the pecu- 
liarities of their structure? In both natural and physical 
science, on the contrary, have wc not oden found, that while 
the promise has been slight, the fulfilment has been ample far 
beyond the reach of anticipation ? When the boy James "Watt 
was playing, as Arago tells the story, with the steam of the 
family tea-kettle, — now marking how its expansive force rabed 
the lid of the utensil, and now how, condensed into water, it 
trickled powerlessly adown the sides of the cold china cup, 
which he had inverted over it, — who could have imagined 
that in these simple processes there lay wrapped up the princi- 
ple of by fur the mightiest agent of civilization which man has 
yet seen, — im agent that, in a century after the experiment 
of the boy, would have succeeded in giving a new cliaracter to 
the arts both of peace and of war ? Or who could have sur- 
mised, when, at nearly the same period, the Philadelphian 
printer was raising for the first time his silken kite in the 
fields, that there was an age coming in which, through a know- 
ledge of laws hitherto unknown, but whose existence he was 
then determining, man would be enabled to bind on his 
thoughts to the winged lightning, and to send them, witli an 
instantaneousness that would annihilate time and space, across 
land and sea? Nor in that geological branch of natural sci- 
ence to which, with the cognate branches, our Society has 
specially devoted itself^ has performance in proportion to pre- 
vious promise been less great. "When it was first ascertained 
by the father of English geology, William Smith, — a man 
not yet more than twelve years dead, — that the Oolitic beds 
of England have always a uniform order of succession, and 
that this uniformity is attended by a certain equally uniform 
succession of groups of fossils, could it be once inferred that 
he was laying hold of a principle which, in the course of a 
26* 



S06 OECyLOOIOAI. btidbnces 

single age, was destined mairelloasly to unlock the past history 
of our planet, and to acquaint us with God's doings upon it, as 
the Creator of aU, for myriads of ages ere he had first breathed 
the spirit of life into human nostrils, or man had become a 
living soul ? It is one of the great marvels of our day, that 
through the key furnished by geologic science we can now 
peruse the history of past creations more clearly, and arrive at 
a more thorough and certain knowledge of at least the struct- 
ural peculiarities of their organisms, than we can read the 
early histories of the old djmasties of our own species, that 
flourished and decayed on the banks of the Euphrates or of 
the Nile, or ascertain the true character of the half-forgotten 
tyrants with whom they terminated, or from whom they began. 
It seems scarce possible that, in at least the leading facts 
of geologic historj', we shall witness any very considerable 
change. There is no truth more thoroughly ascertained than 
that the great Tertiary, Secondary, and Palteozoic divisions 
represent in the history of the globe, periods as definitely dis- 
tinct and separate from each other as the modem from the 
ancient history of Europe, or the events which took place pre- 
vious to the Christian era from those that date in the subsequent 
centuries which we reckon from it All over the globe, too, in 
the great Palaeozoic division, the Carboniferous system is found 
to overlie the system of the Old Red Sandstone, and that, in 
turn, the widely developed Silurian system. It is not less cer- 
tain, that in the Secondary division, the Triassic deposits are 
overlaid by the Oolitic ones, and both by the Cretaceous ; nor 
yet, that in the Tertiary division, the beds of the Pliocene, with 
their large per centages of existing shells, as exemplified in 
the Red and Coraline Crags, belong to a greatly later period 
than that old Eocene age represented by the extinct shells and 
strange mammals of the Paris basin and the London claj. 
There is no human history more definitely ranged into centu- 



IK FAVOR OP REVEALED RELIGION. 307 

ries than the geological mto periods and epochas ; nor is the 
certaintj less great, or the chance of transposition in any degree 
less slight in the one case than in the other. For, respecting at 
least the main geologic systems, their order of succession, and 
the organisms which they contain, the evidence is as positive 
and conclusive as it is regarding any piece of human history 
whatever. There are, however, certain geologic inferences 
very extensively adopted, which are founded rather on nega- 
tive than on positive evidence ; and these must of necessity, be 
subject, during the course of discovery, to modification and 
change. And we find resting mainly on this department of 
the n^ative, — I should, perhaps, rather say of the assump- 
tive, — two of the extremer schools of the present day, — that 
school which, founding on a certain progressive rise, in the 
course of the geologic periods, from lower to higher types, both 
animal and vegetable, would infer that what we term creation 
b in reality but development, — the low, in the lapse of un- 
measured ages, having passed, it is alleged, into the high ; and 
another school, represented by at least one very masterly geolo- 
gist, which teaches that there has been no upward progress in 
creation, but that the earth, in all the periods of its history 
represented by the geologic systems, must have existed under 
the same great conditions in which it now exists, and have pro- 
duced, mingled with inferior forms, plants of the same superior 
classes, and, if we except man himself, animals of the same 
high divisions of the vcrtebrata. 

What, however, are the positive facts with which, as geolo- 
gists, we are called on to deal ? In the Tertiary Flora we find 
great abundance of true dicotyledonous trees, — in its Fauna, 
frequent forms of the mammals, which, in at least the later ages 
of the division, are of higli types. We pass into the great 
Secondary division, and find trees as abundant in its Flora, in 
at lea^t some of the middle deposits, as in any of the Tertiary 



308 OEOLOGICAL EVIDENOBS 

beds ; but we have not yet succeeded in detecting among them 
a single dicotjledonous tree of the higher sub-dasses, and onl j 
a few dicotyledonous leaves. They are all coniferous gymno- 
spermse, chiefly of the pine and araucarian families ; and in 
the Fauna associated with them, we find that the prevailing 
forms are reptilian. The reptile occupied as large a place in 
these Secondary periods as that occupied by the mammal in 
the Tertiary ones. So far, indeed, as we yet definitely know, 
there existed during these herpetological ages only two species 
of nuunmals, — a small marsupial and small insectivorous ani- 
mal. Again, in the Flora of the Palaeozoic division, we still 
find the pine and the araucarian, mixed, however, with extra- 
ordinary vegetable types, some of which have become wholly 
obsolete, and some of which are linked by but faint analogies 
to alight that now exists ; but which, generally speaking, seem 
to be, though high representatives of their kind, of a kind in 
itself not high. In the Fauna of the period, down till at least 
the base of the middle Palaeozoic system, fishes seem the dom- 
inant forms, — fishes, many of them of great size, formidably 
armed, and uniting in their organization, reptilian to the ordi- 
nary ichthyic peculiarities, but in not a few of their number 
destitute of an internal skeleton of bone. True, during these 
ages the reptile also existed, but in such scanty proportions, 
that wliile the Coal Measures have yielded their ichthyic re- 
mains by thousands and tens of thousands, they have yielded 
to the sedulous search of the geologist only three reptiles and 
the trace of a fourth ; and, while in single platforms of the 
Old Red Sandstone there are perhaps as many fishes entombed 
as are at present living on all the fishing banks of the country, 
the entire system has furnished the remains of but one reptile 
(if, indeed, the lacertian of Spynie in reality belong to it), and 
the foot-tracks of a few others. In the Lower Palaeozoic forma- 
tions, the trace of even the fish becomes unfrequent, and the 



IN FATOR OF BETEAUCD KSUGIOH. 809 

dominant oi^ganisms are cmstaceans and molluscs. Now, such 
being the ascertained £aucts of our science, we are, I think, jus- 
tified in still holding against the disciples of the one school to 
which I have referred, that there has been progress in creation 
from a lower to a hi^er leveL So far as there exists any evi- 
dence on the subject at all, we must hold that, in at least the 
group, the Paheozoic existences were of a lower and humbler 
order than those of the Secondary ages, and those of the 
Secondary ages of a lower and humbler order than those of 
the periods of the Tertiary. As shown by the vertebrate 
remains of the geologic epochs, the balance, which greatly 
preponderated in the times of the Tertiary in fiiror of the 
mammals, greatly preponderated in the times of the Seoond- 
ary in favor of the reptiles, and in the long evanished Faheo- 
zoic ages, in favor of the fishes. And so now, as before, these 
three great periods may be properly described as the periods 
of the fish, the reptile, and the mammal; nor do the late excep- 
tional cases, in which traces of reptiles have been found among 
the Palaeozoic fishes, or of mammals among the Secondary rep- 
tiles, interfere more with the justness of such designations than 
the existence in New Zealand of one small indigenous mam- 
mal of the rat family, among its some fifty or sixty ornithic 
species, interferes with the propriety of designating it a land of 
birds, or the existence among the some forty-six pouched spe- 
cies of Australia of a few mammals that are not pouched, with 
Ike propriety of designating it a land of marsupials. Let us 
be content, then, as geologists, to found our deductions, until 
our science shall have pro\ided us with a new class of facts, on 
the facts which we already possess. No sooner were we intro- 
duced, through the discovery of his grace the Duke of Argyll, 
to a small Tertiary deposit in the island of Mull, than we found 
that it yielded in abundance leaves of the buckthorn and the 
plane. No sooner had our boulder days and drifl gravels b^^n 



310 GEOLOOICAL BTIDENCE8 

to exhibit their organisms, than we found that what thej sub- 
mitted to our examination were tusks of the elephant and the 
mastodon, and bones of the rhinoceros, the ox, and the deer. 
If trees of the same dicotyledonous class as the plane and the 
buckthorn occurred in our Secondary or Paksozoic periods, in 
at least aught approaching to the recent or Tertiary propor- 
tions, how is it that amid their fossil woods, though they have 
yielded their specimens by thousands, not a single dicotyledon- 
ous specimen, save of the gymnosperms, has yet been found ? 
Or if the great Palaeozoic period indeed abounded in mam- 
mals, such a3 the elephant and the deer, how is it that, while 
in the Paleozoic deposits of even our own neighborhood and 
country we have met with the remains of fishes by tens of 
thousands, and of molluscs by millions, all the PaUeozoic sys- 
tems of the world have hitherto failed to present us with a 
single mammalian tooth or bone ? Or even if in these ancient 
deposits a few dicotyledonous woods or mammalian fragments 
were, after the search of years, to be found, what could we infer 
regarding the proportions in which either dicotyledons or mam- 
mals had existed in the periods which the deposits repi^sented, 
save from the proportions in which we found their remains 
occurring in them ? Nay, do we not find Sir Charles Lyell 
setting his imprimatur on an exactly similar style of induction 
as that upon which we found, when, in determining the various 
formations of the Tertiary division, he has recourse to his prin- 
ciple of per centages ? He would assuredly not deem tha^ 
a Pliocene or Miocene deposit among whose numerous organ- 
isms he had failed to find an existing plant or shelL In the 
geologic, as in other departments, 

" Wliat can we reason but from what we know." 

The gulf between mental and geologic science is still too 
broad, and perhaps too carelessly surveyed on the theologio 



IN FAVOR or RSVEALED RELIGION. dll 

side, to permit ns to judge of the influence which the disooT- 
eries of the geologist are jet to exercise on the ethical depart- 
ments of literature. liVe can, however, already see that the 
vastlj extended knowledge of God's woi^ings of old which 
the science communicates, must exercise no slight influence 
upon certain departments of natural theologj, and give a new 
tone to those controversies regarding the evidences of our faith 
which the Church has ever and anon to maintain with the 
world. Geologj has already put an end to that old fiction 
of an infinite series of beings which the atheist was wont to 
substitute in his reasonings for the great First Cause through 
which all exists ; nor does it leave other than very unsolid 
ground to the men who would fiiin find an equivalent for the 
exploded infinite series of their predecessors in a developing 
principle. Nay, I would ask such of the gentlemen whom I 
now address as have studied the subject most thoroughly, 
whether, at those grand lines of division between the Paheo- 
soic and Secondary, and again between the Secondary and 
Tertiary periods, at which the entire type of organic being 
alters, so that all on the one side of the gap belongs to one 
fashion, and all on the other to another and wholly diflerent 
fiishion, — whether they have not been as th(m>ughly impressed 
with the conviction that there existed a Creative Agent to 
whom the sudden change was owing, as if they themselves 
had witnessed the miracle of creation ? Further, may we not 
hold that that acquaintance with bygone creations, each in suc- 
cession of a higher type than the one which preceded it, which 
geology enables us to form, must soon greatly afiect the state 
of arguments employed on the skeptical side, which, framed on 
the assumption that creation is but a '^singular effect, — an 
effect without duplicate, — have urged, that from that one effect 
only can we know aught regarding the producing Cause? 
Knowing of the Cause but bom the effect, and having expe- 



312 0E0L06ICAL EVIDENCES 

rience of but one effect, we could not rationally hold, it has 
been argued, that that producing Cause could have originated 
effects of a higher or more perfect kind. The creation which 
it had produced we knew ; but, having no other measure of its 
power, we could not, it was contended, regard it as competent 
to the production of a better or nobler creation, or, of course, 
hold that it could originate such a state of things as that perfect 
future state which Faith delights to contemplate. Now, it has 
been well said of the author of this ingenious sophism, — by 
far the most sagacious of the skeptics, — that if we admit his 
premises, we will find it difficult indeed to set aside his con- 
clusions. And how, in this case, does geology deal with his 
premises? By opening to us the history of the remote past of 
our planet, and introducing us, through the present, to former 
creations, it breaks down that singularity of effect on which he 
built, and for one creation gives us many. It gives us exactly 
tliat which, as he truly argued, his contemporaries had not, — 
an experience in creations. And let us mark how, applied to 
each of these in succession, his argument would tell. There 
was a time when life, animal or vegetable, did not exist on our 
planet, and when all creation, from its centre to its circumfer- 
ence, was but a creation of dead matter. To what effect in 
that early age would have been the argument of Hume ? Sim- 
ply to this effect would it have borne, — that, though the pro- 
ducing Cause of what appeared was competent to the formation 
of earths, metals, and minerals, it would be unphilosophic to 
deem it adequate to the origination of a single plant or animal, 
— even to that of a spore or of a monad. Ages pass by, and 
the Palaeozoic creation is ushered in, with its tall araucarians 
and pines, its highly organized fishes, and its reptiles of a com- 
paratively low standing. And how now, and with what effect, 
does the argument apply ? It is now found that in the earlier 
creation the producing Cause had exerted but a portion of its 



IN FAVOR OF REVEALED RELIGION. 313 

power, and that it could have done greatly more than it actually 
did, seeing that we now find it to be a Cause adequate to the 
origination of vitality and organization in two great types, — 
the vegetable and the animal, — as exemplified in pines and 
araucarians, in fishes and in reptiles. But still confining our- 
selves with cautious skepticism within the limits of our argu- 
ment, we continue to hold tliat, as fishes of a high, and reptiles 
of a low order, with trees of the cone-bearing family, are the 
most perfect specimens of their respective classes which the 
producing Cause has originated, it would be unphilosophic to 
hold, in the absence of proof, that it would originate aught 
higher or more perfect. And now, as yet other ages pass 
away, tlie creation of the great Seconddry division takes the 
place of the vanished Palaeozoic ; and we find jn its few dico- 
tyledonous plants, in its reptiles of highest standing, and in 
its some two or three comparatively humble mammals, that in 
the previous, as in the earlier creation, the producing Cause 
had been, if I may so express myself, working greatly under 
its strength, and that in this third creation we have a still 
higher display of its potency. With some misgivings, how- 
ever, we again apply our argument. And now yet another 
creation, — tliat of the Tertiary period, with its noble forests 
of dicotyledonous trees, and its sagacious and gigantic mam- 
mals, — rises upon the scene ; and, as our experience in crea- 
tion has now become very considerable indeed, and as we have 
seen each in succession higher than that which preceded it, we 
find that, notwitLstanding our assumed skepticism, we had, — 
compelled by one of the most deeply-seated instincts of our 
nature, — been secretly anticipating the advance which the 
new state of things actually realizes. But, applying the argu- 
ment yet once more, we at least assume to hold, that as the 
sagacious elephant is the highest example of animal life pro- 
duced by the originating Cause, it would be unphilosophic to 
27 



314 GEOLOOICAL EVIDENCES 

deem it capable of prodacing a higher example ; and, while 
we are thus reasoning, man appears upon creation, — a crea- 
ture immeasurably superior to all the others, and whose very- 
nature it is to make use of his experience of the past for his 
guidance in the future. And if that only be solid experience 
or just reasoning which enables man truly to anticipate the 
events which are to come, and so to make provision for them, 
and if that experience be not solid, and that reasoning not 
just, which would serve but to darken his disceniment, and 
prevent him from correctly predicating the cast and complex- 
ion of coming events, what ought to be his decision regarding 
an argument which, had it been employed in each of the van- 
ished creations of the past, would have had but the effect of 
arresting all just anticipation regarding the creation imme- 
diately succeeding, and which, thus reversing the main end 
and object of philosophy, would render the philosopher who 
clung to it less sagacious in divining the future than even the 
ordinary man ? But, in truth, the existing premises, whdlly 
altered by geologic science, are no longer those of Hume. 
The foot-print of his unhappy illustration does not now stand 
alone. Instead of one, we see many foot-prints, each in ad- 
vance of and on a higher level than the print immediately 
bi'hind it ; and, founding at once on an acquaintance with the 
past, extended throughout all the periods of the geologist, and 
on that instinct of our nature whose peculiar function it is to 
anticipate at least one creation more, we must regard the expec- 
tation of "a new heavens and new earth, wherein dwelleth 
righteousness,^* a^ not unphilosophic, but as, on the contrary, 
altogether rational, and fully according to experience. 



OK THS 



ANCIENT GRATJWACKE ROCKS OF SCOTLAND. 



PAST FIBST— HISTORICAL. 



" From Portpatrick on the west coast, to St. Abb's Head on 
the east," says Dr. James Hutton, in his far-famed Theory of 
the Earth, *' there is a tract of schistus mountains, in which 
the strata are generally much- inclined, or approaching to 
the vertical situation ; and in these inclined strata,** he adds, 
"geologists allege there is not to be found any vestige of or- 
ganized body." But the opinion can be " proved," he further 
states, " to be erroneous." He himself, indeed, though he had 
been occasionally employed in examining the rocks of this 
" south Alpine country of Scotland " for more than forty years, 
had failed to find in them any traces of the organic ; but his 
distinguished friend Sir James Hall, when travelling, in the 
summer of 1792, between Noblehouse «and Crook, had de- 
tected sea-shells in "an Alpine limestone" by the wayside, 
at Wrae Hill, in the parish of Broughton, and thus demon* 
strated, as the limestone is intercalated with the schistus 
rocks, the fossiliferous character of the deposit. Even geo- 
logists had not yet become pahcontological ; and we find Sir 
James, in a passage quoted in the ** Theory," describing the 
shells which he had detected simply as " forms of cockles." 



316 ON THE ANCIENt ORAUWACKE 

He was greatly more exact, however, in his appreciation of 
the mechanical peculiarities of the deposit ; and his descrip- 
tion of those strange convolutions of the strata which give to 
tlie south of Scotland its series of axial lines, and its repeti- 
tions of heds and bands that come ever and anon to the sur- 
face, and continue to render the place of at least its nether 
groups of rock so obscure., is still approvingly referred to by 
our higher geologists. To account for these strange foldings, 
Sir James, in his paper in the " Transactions of the Royal 
Society of Edinburgh," on the Vertical Position and Convo- 
lutions of certain Strata, and their relations with Granite, 
broached that theory of lateral pressure api)lied by some un- 
known force outside the area of the foldings themselves, which 
is still regarded as the best yet originated on this subject ; and 
illustrated it by his famous experiments of the bands of vari- 
ously-tinted clays, and the layers of differently-colored cloths, 
which he succeeded in pressing, by the application of lateral 
force, from a horizontal into a convoluted position. His paper 
did not appear in its completed form until the year 1812 ; 
but as his theory had been originated more than twenty years 
previously, when, on visiting, in the company of Dr. Ilutton 
and Professor Playfair, a portion of the cast coast of Ber- 
wicksliire, he found no fewer than "sixteen distinct bend- 
ings of the strata in the course of about six miles," and as 
long ere the publication of his view and experiments, they 
were well known to Jiis scientific friends, I refer to them at 
tliis early stage in my brief sketch of the history of geologi- 
cal discovery in our Scottish Gi-auwaeke. 

Dr. Ilutton had described the " Alphine Schistus " of the 
South of Scothmd as belonging to the Primar}^ class of rocks, 
and founded an argument for his theory on the fact that, in 
direct opposition to the belief of geologists regarding the de- 
posits of this special division, they yet do contain fossils. In 



ROCKS OF SCOTLAND. 317 

1805, Professor Jameson published his " Mineralogical De- 
scription of Dumfriesshire ; " and to him must be assigned 
the merit of first determining that these ancient schists belong, 
not to the Primary, but to what Werner has termed the 
Transition or Grauwacke Series. He states in this work, 
that he had traced these Transition rocks in Scotland ''from 
the northern extremity of the Pentland Hills, which is about 
six miles distant from the shores of the Frith of Forth, to 
Lang-robie, in Dumfriesshire, about three miles from the Sol- 
way Frith." We find him, too, giving very correctly the other 
limits of the system as developed in our southern counties, 
and classifying with much precision the mechanical and min- 
eralogical peculiarities of the rocks which compose it- But 
when he comes to speak of its organisms, he is content to dis- 
cuss the subjects in a single sentence, founded apparently, from 
its vague generality, less on his own observations in the field 
which he describes, than on the general conclusions of his 
master, Werner. After stating that " Transition or Grau- 
wacke slates contain petrifactions," whereas " primitive clay 
slate " does not, he goes on to say that the ** petrifactions found 
in transition rocks are of animals and plants of the lower 
orders, that probably no longer exist on the face of the earth." 
An anonymous critic, who in the succeeding year, 1806, re- 
viewed his work in a London periodical (the " Literary Jour- 
nal,") and who was evidently acquainted with the Grauwackes 
of Dumfriesshire, took up the subject, and regretted that the 
Professor had not been more specific " Our author might 
have added," we find him saying, " that vegetable petrifactions 
are very common in the Grauwacke slates of Dumfriesshire. 
The omitting of this circumstance is rather unaccountable," 
it is added, ^ as he could not possibly have avoided making 
the observation. He has been very properly punished for 
the omission. The assertion that Grauwacke contains petrl- 

27* 



318 ON THE AXCIEXT GRAUWACKE 

factions has been denied, and our author has been challenged 
to produce a single petrifaction in the Grauwacke of Dum- 
friesshire. To us, who know perfectly well that vegetable 
petrifactions are very common in that Grauwacke, this chal- 
lenge appears not a little bold." Thus far the reviewer. He 
seems to have observed for himself, but not very correctly. 
Mr. Harkness tells us, in a paper which appeared in the 
" €leological Journal " for 1851, that though the Dumfries 
Grauwackes contain their thick bands of anthracite, of ap- 
parently vegetable origin, there has been detected in them 
no vegetable remains whatever. They abound, however, in 
graptolites ; and it was probably these leaf-like zoophj-te?, 
whose nature is still so imperfectly understood, that caught 
the eye of the reviewer, and constituted his " vegetable petri- 
factions." The Grauwacke of Scotland does, however, con- 
tain vegetable impressions apparently fucoidal ; though they 
are far from common in any of the rocks which I have yet 
seen, and yield no characters by which they can be distin- 
guished from the simpler fucoids of the Old Red Sandstone. 
In one of the specimens now on the Society's table, derived 
from the shales of Girvan, there occurs a fucoidal stem of this 
latter description, associated with graptolites of the double- 
sided genus diprion^ — a genus never found, it is said, save 
in the Lower Silurian. 

In 1808, Professor Jameson published that third volume 
of his " System of Mineralogy, in which he fully developed 
his geological views, and described in language that has since 
become obsolete, the character and order of succession of the 
various formations. Tiie work, however, added nothing to 
the previous knowledge of our Scotch Grauwacke, save per- 
haps, a very curious hypothesis regarding its convoluted 
Ftriitn, framed evidently to meet the theories of Ilutton and 
Sir Jan es HalL " Very strildng curvatures sometimes oc- 



iLLi- 



The '•rar^i aai -aiiiirffnr-jT •rr-mair nrrirrsrrait-^ irr 1!»ff ^'•?» 
of cjysraZSzizrSiaL. "rijT^asr inutr !nr-'*rL iHiL a^Tii^ii* :—•-««- 

asce? s^tea -;■ >» !anii«»*=:.-L ttj. liii bhhk ir ti-.'>v- - if 

the scjaiL xnL tsxlt 'i#t imssc sisLfsr n jutstnaihuKis' & iji 

stnia ii»^aa=-»lT*:i.'^ TT* ch no: nnr »33«5: ¥i mu^ innx. 
cry staZIicadaL : and ttiisl ▼=»: ■*• iiy=i»> sic-^aiL on: in. t '*r- 
tkal f«ja>:. ^ -»■■* rrj ii ifsiifT^ -nac ji bKdamrt o"' "Mt 'nxr 
of grxTiaaaL. ^Sier joil ihbi^l "UKauf^iivvs^ iu!3» tf in^ i*.- 
one |;a5C*-? jraD ts^ol i. aijr^a. ; inn » i. iv^ -:u»nr7- 11217- 
bc in r«c»» iitsjziwr soct* js^ ^xcDKfiR "fian X. ii*=*I }«-;iii: iir 
MiimaT, :i«e 11=*?: af 'ii**: tszrur:: vll^ I iriiau 1^ i jrr: '>a. m*- 

work, ibe Ise Mr. Tjtumw ALsl u: iiue d:^' r<!aiL 1. ^^77 mut 
pdqxT l^&rt !«• Z^mxTuir^ l»v^ Suchtt. ol "iijt T.nnMi:iub 
BodLa of ii*rD?2i 3L viuo. ▼ h iniL T»d*s"ai«r 311116* It tiitar 
foaalHercof c2sBniCc*r ix. our soicii^rx H'igi/anid>. I>u: 'u*?*: 
are no new jci^aLEcME p^^i^ C*v»r "Uit uat tuv^t e^ '.*^ -^ir 
James IIjuI ti Wth*: tUl. onr S^ftn^j. ;p»r'jj'.rp*r.f is^^fn. '.v iarre 
hTbemaieii J:r hkc* 'jloel i\frrr rtxTf^^ xl vanL. 'jut j^-*3ac 
contn>r€r?j wiii'i iii»ai drrjd*^ '-i**ai. imv Kitntniiriir nuc 

gress of ««KTfcI dL"«r."T err. It r^jujoxz ^^^ 'JC V.»mc-««*:;t** 
for sosne vasvd t-xiszi*:. ir^e ficrjc frjOMr v^ laid Tim: v^^ Lsr*: 
ejes ibr oq2t i:, and uac nI iii^ 'xL^ Tviuiw» iadl '.-^ ac^mwi 
Dotioe or as«c>jCL Ai»i en'i «»^j«iih iv Jwsi*: li»3*^ li^ *ai** 
wiih IMC a lew of wr .SwftdL jpwiko*-:* : iii*7 w^fsrt <«rt v> 
search amoo? ii*e tii*£'T*?f rjf liac jET*ac is^J^fj^, Y^xmsj iu 
whidi ibe earij Litior^;* <jf lii^ :!5v»^ aj* «/,iff»ri uji. i'/r » ijoc^ 
ever could lue xzoHde 10 t*rli in i«T4'/r '/" lii^ar </wxi i:r;>/i>r^i^ 
or to tw^l^fif. a^aioii iLa: of iLxirlr u^lpihMjn ; asid. *^^'j^ib^^ 
hj thk one ol9€ct, tiaftj Maesa to liare btven bdCdBSerefiSi jr cnittd 



.•^.^O ON THE ANCIENT ORAUWACKB 

for the accomplishment of any other. In the varioas notices 
of our Scotch Grauwacke which cccur in the Transactions of 
the Edinburgh scientific societies during the years in which 
the battle raged between the two schools, I do not find trace 
of a single discovery worthy of being introduced into a his- 
tory of the system. Curious observers, however, outside the 
area of the conflict, seem to have been now and then finding 
in the deposit occasional traces of the organic I have been 
told by the late Mr. William Laidlaw (the trusted friend of 
Sir "Walter Scott), whose acquaintance I had the pleasure of 
forming early in 1839, that on two several occasions, many 
years before, he had found minute bivalves, and what he 
deemed vegetable impressions, in the Grauwacke slates of 
Peebleshire. 

The second notice of fossils in our Grauwacke at all defi- 
nite in its details, and which intimated original discover}', oc- 
curred long after the first, — at a time when geology had made 
rapid strides towards the position which it at present occu- 
pies, — .and was of a peculiar interest to Edinburgh geologists, 
from the near neighborhood of the locality which it indicated 
to the Scottish metropolis. In 1839, Mr. Charles Macklaren 
published his " Geology of Fife and the Lothians ; " and in 
that ingenious work, — equally remarkable for the boldness 
of its theories and the truthfulness of its observation, — geo- 
logists were first told that there exist fossils in the Grau- 
wacke slate of the Pentlands. The organisms of the older 
rocks are not unfrequently restricted to a single stratum : 
even in the Lower Old Red Sandstone one may pass along 
sections of the strata many hundred feet in thickness, with- 
out detecting a trace of aught organic, and then find in some 
tliin layer, perhaps not a foot in thickness, the fucoids, or 
fishes, or minute bivalves, of the formation, congregated by 
hundreds and thousands; and in the Scotch Grauwacke this 



ROCKS OP SCOTLAND. 321 

peculiar arrangement obtains in a still more marked degree. 
Tlie organisms of a wide district of country are confined often 
to a single layer, occupying scarce half an inch, in a section 
thousands of feet in vertical extent. And such seems to be 
the arrangement among the ancient slates of the Pentlands. 
Mr. Maclaren found his fossils near Deerhope-foot, at the 
side of a small stream that falls into the North £sk ; and 
he describes them, in the portion of his work devoted to the 
geology of the Pentland range, as of two kinds. In one, 
fragments of what seem minute trilobites are congregated 
together in thin layers ; in the other, there are the dis- 
tinctly marked impressions of what appear to be orthocer- 
atites. I owe two of those Pentland fossils to the kindness 
of IMr. Maclaren. The one, apparently a portion of an or- 
thoceratite, exhibits a side view of what seem to be five of the 
septa; the other greatly resembles that curious and still but 
imperfectly understood vegetable of the Coal Measures, Stem" 
hergia approximata ; but it is in all probability not a vegetable, 
but an animal organism, — very possibly an orthoceratite also. 
One of these specimens bears on the label the date of its dis- 
covery (7th of April 1834), — a date five years anterior to 
that of the publication of Mr. Maclaren's volume, and forty- 
two years posterior to the discovery of Sir James Ilall. The 
fact that by much the greater part of half a century should 
have intervened between the first and second discoveries of 
organic remains in our Grauwackes, — for, waving the claim 
of Mr. Laidlaw, whose discovery seems never to have been re- 
corded, and can now be associated with neither locality nor 
date, Mr. Maclaren's is decidedly the second, — is a fact of 
itself sulficient to show that our Scotch schools wore in those 
days not zealously palajontological ; and wc know from other 
Fonrces, that arguments were sought after within their pre- 
cincts, with much more avidity than fossils. But the error 

Jr 



3^ ON THS AHOISIIT OSAUWACKC 

tm* h^n »ef n imd in part corrected ; and the fntme aCScxA 
Chvk^ bul« fair to bo characterized hj the doing of more 
imhI (htt i^^viug of lo!M». 

h\ (ho namo yi'ar in which Mr. Madaren publithed hb 
^ ()tH4o^v ot* Fitb and the Lothians," the "" Sihrnan Sjstem* 
of Sir UwUTick Murt'hi:M>n appeared, — one of those great 
w^$ whioh fonn ems in the history of scienoey and horn 
wh)«4u M tVoni the chart:) of some distingubhed yqjager, after 
fiX|Uoror» havo UHinuHl to nhape tlieir course aright, and to 
nHH)^ii«o ait familiar and caailj definable, tracts previotialj un- 
naMtn) and unkiH>wn. In both the old world and the new, 
tW itrtHit divistiuiM Ur«t laid down in this work bj Sir Bode- 
rtok havt^ Uvn dottH'ttnl and idi'ntified, and an introductorj 
Uhi^ aihUxl to tht> organic history of our planet, from the rich 
and viiri^nl iimtrritUsi whioh tln^y supply. For, however, sev- 
*^ml vnu>t «t\rr ii>* publioation, our Scottish Grauwackc con- 
tinutnl tv> ivmaiu a terra inroj^mVa, as before ; for though there 
ap|HH*r\Hl tWm time to time truthful descriptions of the de- 
IHXHiit itj*eU» il:» pluot^ in the scale was still doubtful. Two 
yearn «t)er (ISU)» Mr. James Nii*ol, — now Professor of Ge- 
oloj^N* in t^uwus rulle^\ Cork — produced his Prize Essay 
wi the (ile\»U»^v of Pet^blesshire ; and to an accurate descrip- 
tion of the minendogical com}M>nonts of the Grauwacke of 
that tH>untY aiKUnl a new locaility for its fossils, in Grierston, 
ntHir Tnujuair* whert\ in a slate quarry, there occur thin but 
ctuUimuuis layers of gniptolites, often in a state of the mort 
ex4iui>ile ket^pinjr* Sinne of the finest Scottish specimens of 
this ancient or}*;mism which I have yet seen I have derived 
iVom this Grierston de|x>sit. We also find Mr. Nicol refer- 
rinjj, in his Kssixy* to that limestone quany of Wrae Hill in 
which Sir James Uall had found his fossil shells ; but iis 
lime, when ho >\T»te, had Irhju cxhaustetl, or so covered up 
by the rubbish of the workings, that its organisms could to 



BOCKS OF 8COTLAHB. 823 

detected no longer. ^ It strikes one as a melancbol j rcfleo- 
tion/' we find him sajing, ^ when leaving this deserted quany^ 
where the wild whistle of the mountain sheep shows how 
seldom their solitude is invaded, that these relics of former 
creations, which, if preserved to science, might have added 
an interesting page to the world*s history, should have thus 
perished hj the hand of man at so recent a period, afu.^r hav- 
ing remained safelj stored up in the cabinet of nature ibr to 
many ages, and throughout so manj awful revolutions*^ I 
maj here add, however, that shells have since been detected 
in the limestones of the Wrae Hill, both hj Ids, Nicol htm' 
self, and bj Mr. Robert Chambers, and the discovery of Sir 
James fully verified. In 1S42, one of the memben c{ our 
Royal Physical Society, 3Ir. William Rhind, publish/xl his 
brief but interesting treatti$e on the '^ Geology of SrxHland.^ 
And in referring, in a general notice, to our Grauwacke de* 
posits, we find him stating, that the ^formatum" to which 
they^long ^ correifponds to some of the beds of the Cambrian 
system, as existing in Wales ; " and that in graptolites diacov' 
ered in the Grauwad^ slates of Innerieitlu;n, *^ the fir^t in* 
dications of organized fossils appear.** lie addii, tliat ^ dis- 
tinct specimens of these lay before him as he wrote, which 
had been presented to him by the discoverer, llr. James 
KicoL" In 1845, 3Ir. Xicol published his ** Guide to the 
Geology of Scotland,** — a work which I liave ever since 
carried about with me in my geologic rambles, and whidi, 
in every instance in which its author has dcMribed from his 
own observations, I have found correct. In this useful work 
we find him again referring to the graptolites of Grienston and 
the sheUs of Wrae Hill ; and, further, briefly intimating yet 
another Granwad^ locality rich in fbssilj, tljough he wa.4 evi- 
dently in doubt regarding iu true place in the scale. ^In 
a limestone bekm the oool near Girvan,** he remariu, ** Silu- 



324 ON THE ANCIENT GBAUWACKS 

rian fossils are said to occur," — a circumstance not unfrc- 
quent/* it is added, " in the Mountain Limestone of Scotland." 
No one, however, is now more thoroughly convinced than Pro- 
fessor Nicol, that the Silurian organisms of Girvan are not 
organisms of the Carboniferous series ; that, on the contrar}', 
they definitely determine the place and age of the deposits in 
which they occur as Lower Silurian ; and further, that they 
throw more light on the history of this ancient system, in its 
development in the southern Highlands, than the fossils of all 
our other Scottish localities put together. 

Li January 1848, Mr. Nicol, at that time Assistant Secre- 
tary of the London Geological Society, read before that body 
a paper on the Silurian Rocks of the Valley of the Tweed, 
which was afterwards published in the Journal of the Society. 
Even at a period so recent he could properly state, in his intro- 
duction, " that there is perhaps no extensive formation in the 
British islands of which we possess less certain geological 
knowledge than of the rocks constituting the great mountain 
chain which crosses the southern counties of Scotland from 
east to west." His paper, however, served to add considerably 
to the little previously known regarding the deposit. Among 
the fossils by which it was illustrated, Mr. Salter recognized 
the fragments of five genera of trilobites, and an equal number 
of genera of shells, chiefly brachipods, all of a character indi- 
cative of the Lower Silurian group. About the same time 
a collection made from the Grauwackes of the shores of Kirk- 
cudbright was submitted to the London Geological Society by 
Lord Selkirk, and was found to be of an Upper Silurian char- 
acter; indeed, as appeared from the identity of some of the 
fossils, of the age of the Wcnlock shale. In the May of the 
same year in which Professor Nicol submitted his paper to the 
public, the subject was still further elucidated in a valuable 
memoir, by Mr. Carrick Moore, Secretary to the Geological 



ROCKS OF SCOTLAND. 325 

Society, on the Silurian Hocks of Ayr and Wigtonshire, which 
added yet further to our knowledge of the fossils of these an- 
cient rocks, and in which, in its published form, the first Scot- 
tish Maclurea was figured and described, though somewhat 
doubtfully, from the imperfect state of keeping of the specimen, 
and under another name. At the meeting of the British Asso- 
ciation held in this city in 1850, Professor Sedgwick read a 
paper on the Geological Structure and Relations of the Fron- 
tier Chain of Scotland, which derived a peculiar value from the 
previous labors of that great geologist in the older Silurian 
rocks of England, and in which he divided our Grauwackes, 
though with much hesitation, especially with respect to both 
the earlier and later beds, into five great divisions, — four of 
them belonging to the Lower, and the fifth frohaUy^ as he 
stated, to the Upper Silurian. In comparing the Scottish with 
the Cambrian chains, he remarked that the lowest and oldest 
fossils of both appear to be graptolites ; and in a paper on the 
Graptolites of the Black Slates of Dumfriesshire, by Mr. R. 
Harkness, which appeared in the " Geological Jouraal " of 
last year, we find a minute description, accompanied by good 
figures, of these earliest inhabitants of what is now Scotland. 
They are judged to have been zoophiles, akin in some of their 
forms to our modern Pennatuladae, and in others, it is supposed, 
to the Sertularia ; but the relationship of these last is deemed 
less clear. It is, I suspect, remote in both cases. Some of 
my Girvan specimens of Graptolithus foliaceus, — one of the 
species deemed akin to the Pennatulada;, — exhibit the central 
axis prolonged beyond its double row of cells, but, unlike our 
common sea-pen (Pennatida phosphorea), always at the upper 
end ; and in specimens of Graptolithus tenuis, derived from the 
same neighborhood, and which is one of the species regarded 
as akin to the Sertularia, though some of the stems seem fringed 
on both sides with short, oblique, alternate cells, somewhat 
28 



326 on THE ANCIENT GBAUWACCE 

resembling those of the common Sertularia haleetnoj we find, 
on examination, that they are in reality restricted to one side, 
and that the apparent fringes of the other are but mere notches 
in the stem. In one respect, however, judging from the rocks 
in which we usually find them, these organisms must have re- 
sembled the sea-pens. There is a deep submarine ravine, which 
runs for some distance along one of the middle reaches of the 
Moray Frith, and at the steep edges of which the water deepens 
suddenly from about twelve to about thirty figithoms. The 
bottom on either side is gravelly and hard, whereas the ravine 
is chturged with a dark adhesive mud-, abounding in fish bones, 
and which intimates to the sense of smell, when brought to the 
surface, that there must have entered into its composition no 
smiUl portion of organized matter. Now, this muddy ravine 
abounds with sea-pens. When not a specimen can be procured 
on the hard ground on cither side, the fisherman's lines, when 
his boat drifts across the hollow, becomes charged with them : 
every muscle bait brings up attached to it what the fishers of 
the Frith term its " sea-tree ; " so that specimens may be pro- 
cured by the hundred. And from the dark-colored, finely- 
gi-ained, semi-bituminous character of the slates in which the 
graptolites chiefly occur, it is apparent that they also loved a 
muddy habitat. 

I have now to refer to but two other papers on our Scotch 
Grauwacke. h\ 1849, Professor Nicol made the Silurian 
deposits of the south-east of Scotland the subject of yet another 
very able memoir, in which he specified several new localities 
for its fossils, and added to the previous list at least one new 
fossil more, — a hitherto undescribed species of Graptolite. 
lie bestowed much care, too, in ascertaining the general direc- 
tion of the beds and mountain ranges of our southern High- 
lands ; and found it coincident, on an average drawn from no 
fewer than sixty-six several observations, with the direction of 



ROCKS OF SCOTLAND. 327 

the continaoas band of clay-slate which, running diagonally 
from sea to sea, reclines, at a steep angle on the northern side 
of the great Lowland valley of Scotland, against the flanks of 
the Grampians. And, — to conclude the purely historical por- 
tion of my subject, — in 1851 Sir Roderick Murchison contrib- 
uted a paper on the Silurian Rocks of the South of Scotland, 
accompanied with descriptions and figures of its characteristic 
fossils (especially of those of the Girvan deposits), which gives 
us to know, on certainly the highest authority, that whilst the 
true place of those apparently older members of the Lower 
Silurian system in Scotland which, represented by what are 
the first and second of Professor Sedgwick's five great divisions, 
is, as the Professor himself observes, exceedingly doubtful, 
there can be scarce any doubt entertained, that in the deposits 
of Girvan and Kirkcudbright we possess the analogues and 
representatives of the middle and upper members of the Lower 
Silurians of England, and the lowest member of its Upper 
Silurians. For many years we have been accustomed to regard 
our Scotch Grauwackes and Grauwacke slates as remarkable 
for their paucity in organisms. Sir Roderick seems, on the 
contrary, to have been struck by their abundance, and the dis- 
tinctness with which they tell the story and exhibit the charac- 
ter of the deposits which inclose them. ^' Fossils abound," says 
this first of geologists, in describing Mulloch Hill, in the neigh- 
borhood of Girvan, " and for the most part their shells are so 
well preserved, that great was my astonishment when I cast 
my eye over the surfaces of this rock, and thought of the long 
time which had elapsed before such unequivocal and really 
beautiful Silurian types had been made known in Scotland." 
The perusal of Sir Roderick's paper greatly excited my curi- 
osity. I had visited, nearly seven years before, — guided by 
the descriptions of his " Silurian System," — the rich deposits 
of middle England, the Wenlock limestones and shales of 



328 ON THE ANCIENT OBACWACKB 

Dudlej, and the Upper Ludlow and Armistiy deposits of 
Sedgley and its neighborhood ; and I was now desirous to de- 
cipher, under his guidance, the characters of those added pages 
to the geologic history of our country, from which' his paper 
had led me to expect so much. And, ayailing myself of a 
l>auso in my professional labors, towards the close of last May, 
when the two General Assemblies were sitting, and when all 
our abler clergy were speaking articles in the form of speeches, 
and so rendering it unnecessary that I should write any, I set 
out, in the middle of a tract of very delightful weather, for 
Girvan. 

PABT SECOND — DESCRIPTIYE. 

As the traveller |)asses downward along the valley of the Gir- 
van, the scenery, which had been hitherto of a pleasing but 
purely Lowhmd chanicter, begins to assume somewliat bolder 
features. The hills on either side heighten into heath-covered 
mountain ranges ; and we remember that Scotland has its south- 
em as certainly as its northern Highlands. " The mountain- 
ous country in the south-western borders of Scotland," says 
Sir Walter Scott, in one of his novels, " is called Hieland, 
though totally different from the much more mountainous and 
more extensive district of the north, usually accented Highland.^ 
The bottom of the valley, however, which these hills overlook, 
is of a soft and pastoral character, with perhaps more of wood 
than is common in a Lowland valley, but laid out into rich fields 
that recline along the lower slopes, and occupied by a quiet 
stream, — the Girvan. "Within a few miles of where it opens 
into the sea, we see on its northern side, high over field and 
meadow, a steep prominent range of gray crag^s that at once 
remind us of those pale-tinted mural rocks of Silurian Lime- 
stone which form so striking a feature in the scenery of Dudley 



ROCKS OF SCOTLAND. 329 

and its neighborhood. And they, too, like the English preci- 
pices, are composed of a Silurian Limestone, rich in fossils. 
Far beneath, however, and in what at first seems an inferior 
position, we see rising among the trees the peculiar groups of 
buildings, with their tall chimneys and long armed engines, 
that indicate a coal-producing district, and mark on a sloping 
hill-side, immediately over a thick wood, a slim column of smoke 
ascending out of the ground, — where one of the seams beneath 
has been burning for years, — like the smoke of some subordi- 
nate volcano. The valley of the Girvan forms a deep and 
very irregular basin, composed of Silurian rocks, but occupied 
for several miles by a small though not unproductive patch of 
the Coal Measures, which abuts unconformably against the 
older deposits, and lies so low in the system as to be overlaid 
by the Mountain Limestone. The explorer, in passing down- 
wards, should strike off to the north from the public road at 
the pleasant village of New Dailly, and rise on the hill-side, 
after crossing the stream and passing the Castle of Dalquhar- 
ran, towards the older rocks, turning first, however, by the way, 
to visit the coal-workings immediately above the Castle, and 
then, a little further on, to examine, in a chance opening among 
the trees, the overlying fossils of the Carboniferous Limestone. 
He would do well, however, if desirous to economize time, and 
make himself sure of seeing all in the district that is worthy 
of being seen, to secure the services of Mr. Alexander M'Cal- 
lum, the ingenious fossil collector of Girvan, under whose guid- 
ance he will leam more in a day than he could perhaps find 
out for himself in a week. Under the intelligent direction of 
Mr. M'Callum, whose services Sir Roderick Murchison has 
deemed worthy of special acknowledgment in his paper, I struck 
up from the coal-works and overlying limestone and shale, in 
which well known fossils, such as Productus giganteus and 
Produciui Martinij may be detected, and reached the steep 
28» 



330 ON THE ANCIENT ORAUWACKS 

nde of a rockj hill overhang by wood, in which several quar* 
ries have been opened, chiefly for the repair of roads. The 
rock, a ding)% olive-tinted sandstone, which in color and quality 
reminded mc of some of the Caradoc sandstones, abounds in 
fossils, — at one place, where a dccply-sliaded and rarely-trod- 
den rond lias been cut into it, chiefly corals, apparently of the 
species FavosiU$ JibrostiS. But though, from tlieir light color, 
conspicuous on the dark rock, their state of keeping is usually 
bad. In a deserted quarry a little further on I found the 
Silurian forms in great abundance, — trilobites, orthoceratites, 
crinoidal stems, brachipods of the ancient genera orthis, and 
atrypa, a large Maclurea, a bellerophon, casts of what seem to 
be turritella, a large trochus, and corals of the genus petraia, 
and of anotlier more composite genus which was wholly unfa- 
miliar to me, but which I find figured by Murchiion as a 
nidulites. I found in this quarry a unique-looking univalve, 
somewhat resembling a trochus, which, if not encrusted by 
some mat-like coral, that has imparted to it a style of orna- 
ment not its own, must be new ; and the remains of moie tril- 
obites, shells, and corals, than I had at one time supposed all 
the Grauwacke deposits of the south of Scotland could have 
furnished. The place, long deserted apparently by the quar- 
rier, — rich in mosses and herbaceous plants that love the 
shade, and shut in on every side by a thick wood, — is one in 
which the geologist might profitably pass many hours in a sol- 
itude not unfavorable to thought, and rarely indeed interrupted 
by the foot of man. 

On ascending yet further towards the hill-top, and exchang- 
ing for the gloom of the wood a lone and somewhat dreary 
heath, I found the organic remains of the rock becoming still 
more numerous. Shells occur in beds and hiyers ; and not in 
the rich limestone beds of Dudley have I seen them lie more 
thickly. The stone here is of a firmer texture than in the 



BOCKS OF SCOTLAin). 331 

quarry, and, where unweathered, of a darker gray ; and, as 
the organisms which it encloses yield more readily on expo- 
sure than the surrounding matrix, they exist upon the surface 
a3 mere darkened casts, but in the fresh fracture are of a pearly 
white. And here, a^so, trilobites and corals occur among the 
shells. A little further on, the reck assumes yet a different 
hue ; it abounds in iron, which imparts to it in some places a 
deep red, in others a buff-yellow hue ; and the fossils, converted 
into a bright yellow ochre, present, when broken, an almost 
golden aspect, and are of great, though from their state of 
extreme oxidization, of short-lived beauty. I have rarely seen 
anything richer in appearance than the bright yellow trilobites 
on a deep red ground which I laid open in one of the higher- 
lying quarries of the hill. They reminded me of the trilo- 
bites in the collection of a certain noble lord, now deceased, 
who became eccentric as he grew old, and, to improve their 
appearance, got them gilded and burnished. Sheets of festi- 
nella of the same bright hue, that, when first exposed by the 
hammer, resemble pieces of gold lace, mingled with sprigs of 
golden coral, and deeply sulcatod golden petraia, also occur in 
great abundance ; with bronze-looking shells by the million, 
chiefly of the genera orthus, atrypa, and terebratula. So 
thickly do these lie in some of the beds, as to give to the other- 
wise solid rock a fissile cliaracter. One of the most remaka- 
ble-looking fossils of the group, is, however, a large trilobite, — 
an Illoinus, furnished with a caudal shield as large as that 
wliich covers its head, and of a decidedly Lower Silurian type, 
as are almost all the other accompanying organisms, though 
some of them have a wide range in the system, and occur in 
the lower beds of its upper division. I may mention, that I 
found here, at the height of many hundred feet over the sea, the 
l:oulder clay, with its characteristic pebbles scored and pol- 
ished, and in most cases bearing their, strise in the line of their 



332 ON THE ANCIENT ORAUWACKS 

longer axes ; that, in general correspondence with the average 
color of the rocks of the district, it was of a deep graj color ; 
and tliat its boulders were chiefly of Silurian rocks, charged 
with the characteristic fossils of the system. 

Quitting the upper part of the hill, with its richly fossillfer- 
ous quarries, and striking downwards to the west and south, 
I |)assed through a series of corn-fields, and, on reaching a 
little stream which flows through a valley nearly parallel to 
that of the Girvan, found the rock partially exposed along its 
course. It consists here, not, as in the hill above, of an indu- 
nited sanilstone, but of a gray rubbly shale, much broken by 
transverse dries and fractures, and which, though its relations 
to the sandstone arc not clearly seen, seems, as premised by 
Sir Roderick Murchison, to rest over them. In localities to 
tlio south of the Girvan, as at Ardwell, Piedmont-Glen, and 
Poawha[H*l-Bum, it is rich in orthoceratites, and contains 
numerous beds of graptolites ; in this locality, known as the 
farm of Drummuck, it abounds in trilobites. Mr. M'Callum 
had wrought out the exposed front, to which he introduced me, 
until arrested by a field-fence, on which he was not permitted 
to encroach. But though I could procure, in consequence, no 
specimens for myself, I acquired several very interesting ones 
from Mr. M*Callum, which, with many others, he had dug out 
of this front ; and I certainly at one time never expected to 
see a group of these curious crustaceans at once so ample 
and so characteristic, from the Grauwacke slates of Scotland. 
Ccdtpneni lilnmenhachiiy the well-known Dudley trilobite, is 
the prevailing form of the deposit, — a form abundant, a-^ its 
common English name testifies, in the lower deposits of the 
Upper Silurians of England, but which in North Wales also 
occurs in the Lower Silurians. I found, associated with this 
trilobite, in the same fragment of shale, what seems to be a 
f orbesia, — hitherto excluaively an Irish form ; and was lucky 



EOCKS OF SCOTLAND. 333 

enough to procure a complete Cheirurus gelasinosus, — a spe- 
cies of which Sir Roderick figures from this deposit a detached 
head, and which, though I find no trace of it in his ^ Siluj-ian 
System," is described by M'Coy as a not rare trilobite in the 
Silurian rocks of Kildarc. It is a circumstance not unworthy 
of notice, that the Scottish Silurian fossils are more completely 
identical with those of the Irish than with those of the Eng- 
lish group. They are CeltSj if I may so speak, rather of the 
old Scoto-Irish than of the old Welsh type. I have said that 
to the south of Girvan these trilobite shales are rich in grap- 
tolites and orthoceratites. The graptolites are usually of that 
double fringed section {diprion), with an axis in the centre, 
to which the typical Graptolithus foltacetis belongs ; the only 
exceptional species, so far as I know, being Graptolithus tenuis^ 
a member of that single fringed section (manoprion) repre- 
sented by the typical Graptolithus Ludenses. Associated with 
these, but rarely, we sometimes find a large dark-colored lin- 
gula, probably the Liiigvla ovata of M'Coy, also a Kildare 
species ; and Orbicula crassa, a finely stratied shell, bearing 
usually the same dark hue, as if both organisms had been cov- 
ered by an epidermis, which had alone survived when their 
shelly substance had been absorbed in the rock. The orthoce- 
ratites of the deposit exist in a peculiar state of keeping. They 
have been converted, with the filling of all their chambers, into 
a pure chocolate-colored lime ; whilst the gray shale in which 
they lie is so little calcareous as to remain impassive under 
the strongest acids. Many of them seem to have been broken 
across ere they were committed to the rock, and exist as de- 
tached though very entire fragments, consisting of from six to 
ten chambers a-piece. It is stated by Sir Roderick Murchison, 
that one of the largest of the Girvan orthoceratites being of a 
kind unknown to him, he referred it to M. Barrande, then on 
a visit to our country, who recognized it as a Bohemian spe- 



334 ON THE ANCIENT ORAUWACKS 

cies, occurring in the lower part of the Upper Silurian diTision. 
Sir Roderick adds, as further remarkable, that on submitting to 
the Continental geologist some of the shales and nodules in 
which these A^-rshire shells are imbedded, "he declared to 
him that he might produce our Scottish rocks as Bohemian 
specimens." The Bohemian species of orthoceratite has, of 
late, I may mention, been found in Ireland by M'Coy. 

Taking leave of the interesting shale deposit at Drummuck, 
I scaled the southern side of the little valley in which it oc- 
curs, and came down upon the range of bold limestone difis, 
whose picturesque appearance, rising high over the woods, 
had, at the distance of several miles, attracted my notice in 
the valley of the Girvan. The relations of this limestone to 
either the indurated sandstones or the trilobite shales, is, from 
the covered character of the ground, not distinctly traceable ; 
but its fossils belong to the Lower Silurian group, and it is 
idL^tical in structure and appearance with a limestone which 
crops out in several localities to the south of the valley, and 
whicli, underlying the sandstone, is evidently the oldest deposit 
in the district. It is an exceedingly hard sub-crystalline stone, 
and looks as if an outburst of the trap rocks which rise around 
it, and at certain points send out enormous dikes into its sub- 
stance, had given it, for the purposes of the pala?ontologi^•t, 
rather too much of the fire. And so, though it abounds in 
fossils, — corals, trilobites, and shells, — they are rarely suffi- 
ciently distinct enough to be identified. Occasionally, how- 
ever, on the argillaceous surfaces of the thick beds of which 
the rock consists, we find a trilobite or shell impressed with 
characters sufficiently leg'ble ; and its more massive corals and 
encrinal stems are, from their lighter color, and the trace which 
they still retain of internal structure, usually distinguishable 
enough in the body of the stone. It is a curious circumstance, 
that not odly in the group do the fossils of this rock resemble 



SOCKS OF SCOTLAND. 335 

those of the Silurians of Canada and tho United States, but 
that some of its organisms not yet found in England seem to 
be even identical with those of the other side of the Atlantic. 
It contains a terebratula indistinguishable from a Canadian 
species, and a Maclurea determined by M'Coy to be the Mac- 
lurea magna of the United States. This last massive genus, 
which resembles that of Euomphalus, save that its whorls lie 
in nearly the same plane, is by no means rare in the limestones 
of the Girvan district, but so much so in the Silurians of the 
sister kingdom, that it does not appear in Murchison's great 
work. Some of our graptolites are also identical, it is said, 
with American species ; and, on lately exhibitmg my small 
collection of Scoto-Silurian fossils to a geologist of the United 
States, he told me that none of the organisms which he had 
yet seen in the museums of our country so reminded him, 
from their general appearance, of those of his own. It is 
surely not uninteresting thus to find the hitherto little known 
Silurian deposits of Scotland connecting its geology, by links 
not elsewhere found in Britain with the geology of Bohemia 
on the one hand, and with that of the New World on the other. 
I need scarce add, that our Old Red Sandstone, in its Holopty- 
chii and Asterolepi, furnishes similar links that connect it with 
the Old Red Sandstones of Russia and tlie American colonies. 
Both systems, — though deemed, at a comparatively recent 
time, so poor in the organic, that in the one, according to Hut- 
ton, " geologists alleged there was not to be found any vestige 
of organized body," and that in the other, according to Mur^ 
chison, geologists contended there were no organisms, at least 
peculiar to it as a deposit, — are now recognized as not only 
important depositories of the geologic records of the country', 
that fill up vast periods in its physical history which would 
have otherwise remained unsatisfactory blanks, but as also 
establishing, by their remains, the identity of its character, in 



S36 ox THZ ANCIBXT OKAUWACKK 

the remote ages of primieval life, with other and Tiidclj-distant 
repoQS of the glohe. I have said, that the limestone difis of 
this deposit are singularly picturesque. At one point we find 
ihcm traTersed hy a hroad dyke of compact greenstone, which 
La* l>con followed hy the quarrier into the very bowels of the 
L'.U : and so, for several hundred feet together, we can see the 
yawning rent in the carth*s surface which it had so lately filled, 
with its corresponding angles and its answering protuberances 
and inflcctioQSf existing as it must have existed when first torn 
asunder by the convulsion to which it owed its origin, and ere 
the molten matter had come boiling through it from the abyss. 
It is a wild recess, tapestried by mosses and overhung by brush- 
wood ; and, from where it opens into the richly fossilifcrous 
rock, in which lie entombed by millions the organisms of per- 
haps the earliest creation, the eye glances ndown a noble val- 
ley, bosky with green woods, and checkered with smiling 
fields, and marks, where it opens to the broad Atlantic, a bu^y 
sea-port town, or rests far beyond on the dim cloud-like Ailsa. 
Wlien I last stood in its opening, at the close of a long sum- 
mer's day delightfijlly spent, the broad sun, then resting on the 
far horizon, was casting its last red gleam on bush, and crag, 
and brown hill-top, and the deep slant shadows of evening 
lay stretcheil along the bottom of the valley. And then, as 
the light decline<l, the moon, in her first quarter, began to show 
her slender form through the dappled cloudlets, like a silver 
scimitar, and I saw her brightening image as I passed, reflected 
on the stiller poob of the Girvan. How widely different mu>t 
not the scene have been when those organisms of the rock lived 
at the bottom of their old PalaK>zoic ocean, and the light of 
that sun and moon, — mayhap the only unchanged objects on 
M'hich the eye rested, — was caught by the many-sided eyes 
of the trilobite, or guided the carnivorous orthoceratite to its 
prey J Let me indulge for a brief space, ere I conclude, in an 



EOCKS OF SCOTLAND. 337 

attempted restoration of the probable scenes and events of the 
period, in what is now Scotland. 

For many ages, a wide ocean, from which the eye fails to 
see any shore, or the sounding-lead to find any bo^m, rolls 
over what is now our country. Its profound depths, wrapped 
up in darkness, sink beneath the zero line of animal or vege- 
table life ; and the fine gray mud, or light micaceous sand, that 
settles upon its unseen bottom, as the impalpable dust that 
mottles the sunbeam sinks on the fioor of some deserted hall or 
old haunted chamber, scarce forms, after the lapse of years, a 
layer as thick as the ropfing slate into which, in these latter 
times, we find it consolidated. Gradually, however, and per- 
sistently, the deposition goes on. Besides, under the deep- 
seated impulsions of the Plutonic forces, vigorous in their early 
youth, there is a general rising of the platform. At length the 
light of day reaches it through the lessening space, in a dim 
green twilight, and it becomes a scene of organic existence. 
Vast fields of nameless algae, still represented amid the rocks 
by our anthracite bands, embrown for many leagues the ocean 
bottom ; and millions of zoophytes, not higher in the scale than 
the moderfi pennatuladae, which they not a little resemble, crowd 
every square rood of surface. And here, at wide intervals, 
some ancient terebratula fastens its fleshy cable to the rock, or 
there some lingula stands erect, flower-like, in its homy stem. 
There are changes taking place, now gradual, anon abrupt. 
At one time death itself serves but to furnish fresh platforms 
for new life ; at another, through Eome subsidence in the gen- 
eral floor, the zero line of vitality is again reached, and over 
perished myriads, the dead, sluggish strata settle down. At 
length, when unreckoned centuries — mayhap hundreds of cen- 
turies — have passed, the middle ages of the Lower Silurian 
period are ushered in ; and when the Llandeilo flags and Bala 
limestones are in the course of deposition in what is now the 

20 



338 ON THE ANCIENT 6RAUWACKE 

principality of Wales, the transition limestones of Ayrshire 
are also gradually forming, in no small part, — so abundant has 
life now become in the waters, — of massive corals, and of the 
stony exuviae of encrinites and molluscs. But to the period 
of this calcareous deposit, — so vastly prolonged, that the mas- 
sive corals of its later ages grow upon rock formed of the re- 
mains of their early predecessors, — there comes a last day ; 
a sandy deposit begins to be cast down over it, and, in the 
altered circumstances, many of the corals die, to re-appear no 
more. But life in other forms is not less abundant than in the 
previous time. The sedentary brachipods, — pentamerus, with 
its strange internal partitions, — terebratula, with its perforated 
umbone, — orthis, spirifcr, and atrypa, with their long tendril- 
shaped arras, — lie so thickly upon the arenaceous bottom, that 
their remains, as they yield to the inexorable law of death, form 
no inconsiderable proportion of the ever-rising platform on 
which their successors spend also their determined day, and 
yield, in turn, to the destroyer. And thus, during the earlier 
and middle ages of the Caradoc Sandstones, stratum after stra- 
tum is laid down, each, in succession, a home for the living and 
a burying-ground for the dead. And then yet another change 
takes phice. The arenaceous deposit is succeeded by a deposit 
of gray argillaceous mud : the fauna, too, alters in at least its 
aspect, in the proportions borne in it by families and genera. 
Though in one certain bed, and for a comparatively short 
period, a small species of terebratula abounds, the brachipods 
generally greatly decrease, — a consequence, mayhap, of the 
altered nature of the bottom, now considerably softer than be- 
fore ; but, on the other hand, the cephalopoda, represented 
chiefly by tlie orthoccratites, very much increase, and the trilo- 
bites attiiin to their numerical maximum. Scales of fishes, 
somewhat resembling the bony plates on the sides of the stur- 
geon, have been found by Mr. M'Coy in the Silurians of Ire- 



ROCKS OF SCOTLAND. 339 

land, Id a deposit at least as old as these shales ; whereas the 
system in Scotland has hitherto failed to yield any trace of the 
vertehrata. But though not yet prepared to demonstrate that 
fishes swam in this c(H*ner of the ancient Scoto-Silurian ocean 
over the argillaceous shales, these must have heen traversed hy 
many a restless mollusc and crustacean, — the one-chambered 
bellerophon, and the many-chambered orthoceratites, — by 
Calymene, Cheimras, and Phacops, with their nicely-adjusted 
armor of many joints, and by the massive Illaenus, with its 
double buckler. With this upper formation of the Lower Silu- 
rian division, deposition in the earlier Palaeozoic period seems 
to have ceased in this district. Farther to the south, however, 
on the shores of the Solway, the shales, in a somewhat altered 
form, pass into the lower beds of the Upper Silurian, and ex- 
hibit some of its characteristic fossils. And with these the Old 
Grauwacke record, as a record of life and death, abruptly closes 
in Scotland, and a chapter of purely physical revolution begins, 
— a chapter perplexed by passages of doubtful meaning, and 
by many different readings, but which tells, in every page, of 
widely-extended convulsion and upheaval, and of the operations 
of deeply-seated forces of a power incalculably great. 

During the ages of either the Upper Silurian or the inferior 
Old Red Sandstone, the deposits of the Lower Grauwacke 
division in Scotland seem to have been the subject of enormous 
lateral pressure, which raised their strata into many folds and 
ridges over wide districts, and, as there is reason to believe, 
elevated them above the sea level. Sir Roderick Murchison 
reckoned in the neighborhood of Girvan from five to six axial 
lines in a section of less than eight miles ; and on the east 
coast, in the instances made so famous by Sir James Hall, axial 
lines are, as I have already had occasion to state, still more 
numerous. Nay, the great difficulty which lies in the way of 
determining the true place of the older locks of our southern 



340 ON THE ANCIENT GRAUWACKE 

Highlands arises from the inability geologists have hitherto 
experienced of drawing, amid the perplexities of these conyo- 
lutions, a base line for the whole ; and from the further circum- 
stance that, for great distances together, so completely vertical 
are the strata, that the ascending cannot be dstinguished from 
the descending direction. On visiting the Pentland range of 
hills for the first time, many years ago, there was nothing which 
so impressed me as that vertical position in which I invariably 
found the Grauwacke slates of the district. Forming the fun- 
damental rock on which all the other rocks, sedimentary or 
igneous, had been in succession cast down or erupted, I saw it 
assuming the appearance of a foundation of piles, and present- 
ing to even the very oldest of them, — the Old Red conglom- 
erate, — its upturned edges. This vertical Grauwacke, I said, 
must have assumed its present character and position, — nay, 
must have presented all its present marks of great antiquity, — 
at a time when the materials of the conglomerate existed at 
the bottom of an Old Red Sandstone ocean, as beds of un- 
fixed water-rolled pebbles, mixed with loose sand. Nor is it 
easy, surely, to affix limits to the tremendous potency of the 
earth-tempest that must have originally raised it, over so ex- 
tensive an area, from the horizontal to the vertical position. 
Unacquainted at the time with the experiments of Sir James 
Hall, I was reminded, during my visit, of a phenomenon which 
I had witnessed when a boy, many years before, but whicli now 
came to assume in my memory a new character as an illustra- 
tion. A severe long protracted frost had just broken up, and 
the lower reaches of the Cromarty Frith were covered by im- 
mense floats of ice, which had formed in its upper flats and 
shallows ; when one of those dead calms which in our climate 
in the winter season so frequently herald a storm was disturbed 
by a smart breeze from the south-east, and the loose floats borne 
occanwards by the tide were drifted back, from between the 



ROCKS OF SCOTLAND. 341 

Sutors, into an inflection of the shore which intervenes between 
the town and tlie hill of Cromarty. When the tide fell, and 
the bottom of the bay was laid bare, we found it occupied for 
many acres by the stranded ice, mass crowded upon mass, so 
ihat scarce an interstice could be seen between them, and all 
occupying the horizontal position of their original formation. 
^Vs the tide rose, however, and the night fell, the gale freshened 
into a hurricane ; the ice, jambed against the steep shore on 
the one hand, and exposed to the heavy roll of the waves on 
the other, began to pcu:k^ not so much by rising, as in a choked 
up river, mass over mass, as by rising on edge ; and in the 
morning, when the tide had again fallen, we found it occupying, 
not the whole, as before, but only the inner portion of the bay, 
and uptilted on edge, for roods together, like, in short, the up- 
tilted Grauwacke slates of the Pcntlands. And may not, I 
asked, as the scene rose fresh in memory amid the recesses of 
the hills, — may not I be now witnessing the somewhat similar 
results of some tremendous earth-storm, in which the molten 
waves of the abyss first broke up the consolidated but still com- 
paratively thin crust of our planet, as ice is broken up under 
the joint operations of storm and thaw ; and then packed into 
this comer, as the ice-floats were packed into the little bay, 
those ruins of the surface which, while yet unbroken, and in 
the horizontal position, must have extended over a much greater 
space ? It does seem, from the appearance of many of our 
more dislocated and older formations, that there came a time 
in the history of the globe in which there was, if I may so 
speak, no longer room to spread them out, and they had to be 
compressed, in consequence, into many a fold and wrinkle. 
Are we to infer that these ancient robings of the earth, with 
their many convolutions, which, as it were, hang loose about it, 
indicate a shrinking in its general bulk ? or are they merely 
but locally too large for the portions of surface which they oc- 
29» 



342 ON THE ANCIENT 6RAUWACKB 

cap7 ? We are, I suspect, not jet in circumstances to answer 
the question. But to conclude , — I have said it is probable 
that our convoluted Grauwackes were raised at a veiy earlj 
period over the level of the sea. At least, in the beds of Bed 
Sandstone which rest unconformablj over their lower slopes, 
and along their deeper valleys, we detect the first traces in the 
south of Scotland of a terrestrial flora. The ^na is decidedly 
that of the Upper Old Bed Sandstone ; and, mingled with 
scales of Holaptychius NohiUsiimtiSy and plates of Pterichthys 
major^ there occur what seem to be fragments of calamites, and 
what are unequivocally the fronds of a fern. And though 
shadow and darkness still envelop the land upon which they 
grew, we may be permitted to indulge at least in the provisional 
belief, that its framework was formed of our convoluted Lower 
Silurians, already existing as solid rock, and charged, as now, 
with the remains of a creation that had perished ; that it was 
encircled by an Old Bed Sandstone ocean, inhabited by fishes 
of uncouth form and gigantic size ; and that it presented on 
its sloping hill-sides its primsBval denizens of the vegetable 
kingdom, now to the dews of the night, and anon to the light of 
day. Who would not wish to know somewhat regarding the 
geography, and the organisms, vegetable and animal, of this 
ancient land of the Lammermoors, — this Scotland emphati- 
cally of the olden time ? But, save in a few tattered fragments, 
its chronicles have perished, and we can but darkly surmise, 
from the existing evidence, that such a land there once was. 



ON THB 

RED SANDSTONE, MARBLE, AND QUARTZ 
DEPOSITS OF ASSTNT; 

WITH THEIB SUPPOSED OBGANISMS AND PROBABLE 
ANALOGUES. 



In hurriedly joumejring, two years ago, through the upper 
parts of Assynt, on my way to Loch Inver, I was so struck hy 
the appearance of the stratified limestone deposit to which 
the marble beds of that locality belong, that I returned last 
season to examine it more at my leisure, and to trace, if possi- 
ble, its relations to the other rocks of the country, I had been 
impressed, in the passing, both by its peculiar aspect, and its 
occurrence in the same wild tract with a remarkable system of 
sandstone mountains, unique in the British islands, which have 
been represented by M*Culloch as formed of the Old Red 
Sandstone, and which, from the nearly horizontal disposition 
of their strata, he regarded as hills of denudation. It is impos- 
sible, he argued, carefully to examine these widely-separated 
mountains, formed of thin nearly horizontal beds of ripple- 
marked sandstone, that rest unconformably on the fundamental 
gneiss of the district, without coming to the conclusion that 
they are but the mere fragments of a once continuous sandstone 
bed, from one to three thousand feet in thickness, of which by 



341 ON THE RED SANDSTONE, MARBLE, 

much the greater part has been washed awaj by the waves and 
currents of unreckoned ages. But if this sandstone belong in 
reality to the Old Red system, what, I asked, are these appar- 
rently associated beds of stratified limestone and shale ? Are 
they not the representatives, though mayhap in an altered state, 
of those Old Red ichthyolitic beds which, overlying the great 
conglomerate, exist in Ross, Cromarty, and Moray, as alternat- 
ing layers of lime, clay, and sandstone, and occur in Caithness 
as the extensively developed flagstones so well known in com- 
merce as Caithness flag ? And it was chiefly in the hope of 
finding some data on which to determine the true answer to the 
query that I last autumn visited Assynt. 

I had examined, in the previous year, the Old Red Sandstone 
of Ru-Store and Durness, and satisfied myself that it b the 
same rock which is developed in these localities that forms the 
insulated hills of Sulvein, Coul-beg, and Coul-more, and which 
occurs at Gairloch in Ross-shire, in the southern parts of Skye, 
and in the island of Rum ; and further, that in Sutherland, as 
in Ross and Ivemess-shires, it rests unconformably on a base 
of gneiss. I now fixed on Inch-na-damph, near the head of 
Loch Assynt, as the best possible centre for examining the 
associated deposits of the district. It lies within less than two 
hours' walk of both the upper and lower beds of the great sys- 
tem to which all the upper rocks of Assynt belong, and is in 
the immediate neighborhood of a range of noble precipices, — 
the crags of Stronchrubie, — which present a magnificent sec- 
tion of the stratified limestone. Beginning with these, I traced 
them upwards from near their base to the deposit which rests 
over them (an immense bed of quartz rock, that forms by much 
the greater part of one of the loftiest of the Sutherlandshire 
hills, — Benmore) ; and then, reversing my course, traced them 
downwards, with the deposits which lie under them, until I 
reached the fundamental gneiss of the country. Without, how* 



AND QUARTZ DEPOSITS OF AS8TNT. 345 

ever, detailing the results of single excursions, let me attempt 
briefly describing the entire system in the ascending order, from 
the base upwards. 

The gneiss upon which the system rests is exactly the same 
fundamental deposit here that we find it to be in the Highlands 
of Scotland generally. It is of the ordinary mineralogical 
composition, too, and mixed up, as elsewhere, with the usually 
associated rocks and minerals, existing in the character of veins, 
beds, and included masses. It presents, however, a peculiarity 
in the cast of its scenery, — shared also by the gneiss districts 
of Wester Ross, — which renders what I may term its pictorial 
aspect widely different from that of the gneiss of the central 
and eastern Highlands. Our gneiss hills generally are squat^ 
truncated, confluent, massive prominences, traversed by wide 
straths, and open glens ; and, though imposing often from their 
vast proportions, they are somewhat monotonous when spread 
over a wide tract, from their obtuse and rounded outlines, and 
and from their lack of height in proportion to their great breadth 
of base. Ben Weavis in Boss-shire, that rises to an altitude 
of little more than three thousand feet from a base some five 
or six miles either way, and on whose flat summit another hill 
as tall as itself might be set down, may be regarded as a some- 
what extreme but characteristic specimen of the class. And 
such, over an area of some seven or eight thousand square 
miles, is the ordinary scenic character of our gneiss hills. The 
gneiss hills of Assynt, with those of the adjoining districts, — 
Eddrachilles on the one hand, and Wester Ross on the other, 
— arc, on the contrary, not massive, and rarely confluent: they 
never rise more than a few hundred feet in height ; they are 
seldom traversed by continuous valleys ; and they are extremely 
abrupt and rugged in their outline. Seen from one of their 
summits, the appearance presented is that of a rough cockling 
8ea ; while in travelling among them, so thickly do they stand to- 



346 ON THE RED SANDSTOyE, MARBLE, 

gethcr, and so perplexing is the intricacy, that I felt as if I had 
got into & forest of hills, and was in danger of losing my way. 
From the imperfect drainage occasioned by the want of con- 
tinuous valleys, the district abounds in mossy swamps and little 
shallow lakes, or rather lochans, remarkable for the vast num- 
ber of water-lilies that, in the flowering season, mottle their 
surface, and relieve, by their quiet beauty, the general rug- 
gedness of the scenes in which they occur. A brown and 
scanty vegetation, much interrupted by gray predpioesy par- 
tially clothes the hill-sides ; and, among the groups of turf 
cottages which the traveller occasionally sees embosomed in 
solitary recesses beside their scanty patches of com, he may 
find the last lingering remains of rude and primitive contri- 
vances that have become obsolete in every other part of the 
British islands. Those small cottage-mills, — the immediate 
successors of the hand-mill, — in which the water-wheel moves 
horizontally, and which, when laid open by the antiquary in 
some encroaching moss or drifted sand-hill, he regards as the 
relics of a remote time, — are still extant and in use in this 
rugged gneiss region. 

The Red Sandstone of the district rests immediately over 
the gneiss, but belongs to a widely different epoch. The gneiss 
we find uptilted in every direction, as if it had been operated 
upon by the disturbing forces from many centres, and for many 
ages ; whereas the sandsone which rests unconformably over 
it presents a series of unbroken strata, reclining usually at low 
angles, and which had no share in the deep-seated convulsions 
which uptilted and broke up tlie rocks below. Along the 
coast, — as in Durness in the Cape Wrath district, at Ru- 
Store, and on towards Loch Broom, Gairloch, and Applecross, 
it presents very much the scenic character of the Old Red 
Sandstone on the east coast ; and notliing can be more striking 
than the change which takes place in the landscape, in passing 



AND QUARTZ DEPOSITS OF ASSTNT. 347 

from the wild niggedness of a gneiss region, to the level fields, 
swelling moors, and long undulating ridges of a sandstone one. 
But in the interior of the country, where the sandstone occurs 
chieflj in detached hills, it lends to the prospect features of 
surpassing boldness and grandeur. Rising over a basement of 
rugged gneiss hills, that present the ^pearance of a dark 
tumbling sea, we descry a line of stupendous pyramids from 
two to three thousand feet in height, which, though several 
miles distant in the background, dwarf, by their great size, the 
nearer eminences into the mere protuberances of an uneven 
plain. Their mural character has the effect of adding to their 
apparent magnitude. Almost devoid of vegetation, we see 
them barred by the lines of the nearly horizontal strata, as 
edifices of man's erection are barred by their courses of dressed 
stone ; and, while some of their number, such as the peaked 
hill of Suilvein, rise at an angle at least as steep and nearly as 
regular as that of an Egyptian pyramid, in height and bulk 
they surpass the highest Egyptian pyramid many times. Their 
color, too, lends to the illusion. Of a deep red hue, which in 
the light of the setting sun brightens into a glowing purple, 
they contrast as strongly with the cold gray tone of the gneiss 
tract beneath as a warm-colored building contrasts with the 
earth-tinted street or roadway over which it rises. The stone 
of which they are composed is a hard, compact, arenaceous 
rock, usually of a chocolate tint, and varying in grain from an 
ordinary sandstone to a conglomerate. But the pebbles which 
it encloses, and which usually occur in thin beds, are greatly 
smaller than those of the Great Old Red conglomerate on the 
east coast, — ranging in bulk from the size of a pea to that of 
an egg. They are almost all water-rolled, — usually quartzose 
or feldopathic in their composition, though in considerable pro- 
portion jasperuns ; and, as I have oflen remarked of the peb- 
ples of the Great Gongk>merate, the prevailing color among 



348 ON THE RED SANDSTONE, MARBLE, 

them is red, in a proportion which no longer obtains among 
the primary rocks of the country. I detected in this sand- 
stone, in the island of Rum, thin beds of a gray stratified clay, 
resembling the clay of the ichthyolite beds of Ross and Cro- 
marty ; but, though they inclose occasional nodules, I failed to 
discover in them aught organic The Old Red Sandstone of 
the west coast, like its probable analogue the Great Conglom- 
erate of the east, is, so far as we yet know, an unfossiliferous 
deposit I may here mention, that I found at Gairloch in 
Ross-shire, nearly thirty years ago, a variety of this sandstone 
of a finer and closer grain than ordinary, which yielded freely 
to the chisel, and made, — what is by no means common in the 
formation, — an excellent hewing stone. M'Culloch had not 
yet published his geological map of Scotland ; and the limits 
of the various rock-systems in the more inaccessible parts of 
the country were scarce at all known, when I was despatched, 
in advance of a party of workmen engaged to erect a dwelling- 
house on the shores of Gairloch, to find some suitable quarry 
for the rubble-work, — a sort of commission which it was 
thought, though I was but a mere lad at the time, my habit at 
looking at rocks might qualify me to execute. I was struck, 
on my arrival, by the flatness of the promontory which forms 
the northern barrier of the loch, and the general softness of its 
outline, compared with that of the rugged gneiss region around ; 
and, immediately setting out to ascertain what sort of a roek 
entered into its composition, I fount^ somewhat to my sui*prise, 
that it consisted entirely of red sandstone. But, though I pro- 
cured in abundance ashlar and conier-slones for our pur|K)sed 
building, my discovery did not stand my master, the contractor, 
so much in stead as it might ; as, in despair of finding sand- 
stone in Gairloch, he had previously freighted a vessel with 
stones for the hewn work from the quarries of Burghead in 
the Moray Frith. As I have already incidentally remarked. 



A3n> QVAKTZ HEFOSrTS OT ASSTXT. 519 

}irCuIlocli csiimaics ihe tUckD^e o^ die Ojd B^ed cf die ve«s 
coast, in his descfiptaoo of the hauk sooopitd cim of i: It -Jj^ 
denuding agendes. ax from ooe «> tiirce lixMBasd ^«<^ 

^6ore the Bed Sxodstooe there atOMrs m bed of qcaitz rcuriL. 
seyeial handred feet in thidmeas. vhidk bean in some of iis 
layers a pore white, in other* m fle^i-ooSored tixst. It is a 
stratified rock, bat leas re^rilir: j $0 tiias ibe fani^iocie whidh 
it oyeiiies ; and. thoogh hapfL fj-cinij. and iadestrcc:?. > in aH 
its strata, it is decidedlr mechanical in zis ccmpodiior:. TLb 
indurated depo?it ina?t hare at coe time ^^r»***^ as a qsaruore 
sand, — at another as an ofdisanr sauid<loiie. Its upper itiara 
are of a red color, mottled viih wbius ; and in ooeof these the 
white portions take the ibnn of minute cjlinders. TerticaSr 
arranged across the straium. like jarr in a case. Where ex- 
posed to the weather, the red parts of the stone waste finom 
around these, leaving them <taDdii^ op orer the surface, as the 
little pipes in the cistem of a shower-bath stand up orer the 
plane of the bottom; and these cnrkm^lr reliered cjlinders 
M^CuUoch regarded as probablj organic. I cou!<L bowrrrer, 
find no grounds whaterer for the conclofion. as in tfacir me- 
chanical structure thej differ in 00 respect from the red matrix 
which incloses them. Thej i^rTe- howerer, to remind one of 
similar appearances in the Okl Bed Sandstone of the east coast. 
Tlib bed of quartz rock forms some of the more picturesque 
mountains of Asfnmt. Seen from the inn at Inch-na-damph, 
the tall hill of Spike-an-Quenaig. which is entirelj composed 
of it, is one of the most remarkalile in a landscape which, for 
the bold grace of its ffratures, is scarcel v surpassed in Scotland. 
An outline of flowing curvature divests it of the stiffness neces- 
sanly associated with the perfectly conical form. It swells 
slightly outwards where the architect would place his cornice, 
and then terminates in a horizontal table of small extent, re- 
sembling the plane oi a pedestaL The entire hill is in truth a 
30 



350 ON THE BED SANDSTONE, MA&DLE, 

noble pedestal, on which some colossal statue, vastly greater 
than that of Hhodes, might be advantageously placed, to form, 
like the memory of some great man in the history of a people, 
the central object of the landscape ; and when I first looked 
upon its fine proportions, relieved against the bright amber- 
tinted clouds of a gorgeous sunset, and marked how its summit 
seemed, according to the poet, " to kiss the sky," I felt I could 
have understood, had it been told that some hoary seer had, in 
ancient times, ascended from its top into the heavens, how the 
legend had originated. 

On this quartz bed the stratified limestone rests, with its 
associated marbles. Less bold in its features than the other 
rocks of the district, apparently because of a texture less suited 
to resist the denuding and weathering influences, we find its 
place marked, amid the brown heaths which lie over the Red 
Sandstones, or amid the stony nakedness of the qnartz-rock 
regions, by the rich green of the vendure which covers it. All 
the more valuable farms of Assynt lie on the limestone. At 
one point, however, on the farm of Stronchiubie, in the imme- 
diate neighborhood of Inch-na-damph, it presents a magnificent 
range of precipices, a full mile in length by about three hun- 
dred feet in height, which rises immediately above the road, 
and forms at this point the most striking feature in the pro - 
pect The steep face of the range is barred horizontally by 
the strata, black, red, and gray, and relieved and softened 
by the bright green verdure that waves over its shelves and 
ledges, and bristles from every recess and crany. As we pass 
on to the west, the precipitous range flattens into a gentle slope, 
still, however, lined longitudinally by the projecting strata, 
which, easier of access than in the precipices, can here be 
examined in detail. Though chiefly calcareous, the rock pre- 
sents, from its decidedly flaggy structure, so much the appear- 
ance of Caithness flagstone (which, however, in some of its 



AND QUARTZ DEPOSITS OF ASSTNT. 351 

beds is also calcareous), that, on laying open some of the 
masses with the hammer, my first impulse was to examine 
them for the characteristic ichthyolites. In brief, the stone of 
not a few of the subordinate beds of this deposit cannot be dis- 
tinguished from Caithness flagstones of the more rubbly kind, 
and are totally unlike any primary rock with which I am ac- 
quainted. We find them associated, however, with other rocks 
of a widely different character, such as traps of the porphyri- 
tic and green-stone series ; but though these assume, in con- 
formity with the genend arrangement of the deposit, the form 
of strata, they are in all probability mere plutonic injections 
into the body of the deposit, and newer, not only than the 
strata over which they rest, but also than the strata by which 
they are overlaid. In some instances, these trap beds cross 
the line of stratification. There occur, however, in the lower 
parts of the limestone division, intercalated strata of quartz 
rock, mechanical in its structure, which must be regarded as of 
the same age as the calcareous beds with which it alternates. 
The limestone is of various colors and qualities ; and we find 
each stratum retaining its peculiar character and tint for gre.it 
distances together. Some of the strata are earthy, and of a 
chocolate brown approaching to red; some minutely crystal- 
line, and of various tints of gray ; some nearly white, on at 
least their weathered surfaces ; and some, as on the farm of 
Auchmore, about a mile from the parish church, well nigh 
black, and, like the limestones of the ichthyolite beds of the 
east coast, strongly bituminous. Like the limestone of most 
other localities, and of almost all ages, this calcareous deposit 
is a cavernous rock. There occur in it in this neighborhood 
several picturesque caves by the side of a tumbling stream, 
within less than half an hour's walk of Inch-na-damph ; and 
the famous cave of Smoo, at Durness, so graphically described 
by Sir Walter Scott, is hollowed in what appears to be the 



352 ON THE RED SANDSTONE, MARBLE, 

same deposit. It is remarkable, too, for the singolar copious- 
ness and number of its springs, — equally, I may mention, a 
peculiarity of the ichthyolite beds of Cromarty and Ross. 
Where the highway runs along the base of the tall limestone 
escarpment of Stronchrubie, we see that every hollow has its 
little stream of sparkling crystalline water, that comes leaping 
to the light from amid the lower strata of the precipices ; and 
on the farm of Auchmore we find a spring — perhaps the larg- 
est in Scotland — which constantly discharges a current of 
four cubic feet of pure water, and goes roaring down the hill 
in its rocky channel, rapid and copious as the water of a mill- 
lade just as the miller has raised the sluice. It is really a fine 
object, — finer and more imposing than I had previously sup- 
posed a mere spring could be. It comes bursting up out of 
the earth, a little river, very clear, and in summer very cool, 
though in winter it feels warm to the hand, and during hard 
frosts smokes, as if heated over a fire ; and rank aquatic plants 
of richest green, never scathed by the frosts of winter, spring 
up in a broad fringe along its edges. 

It is with this great limestone deposit that, as I have 
already intimated, the marbles of Assynt are associated. 
Though unstratified themselves, they usually occur in the 
deposit as detached strata, or beds rather, more or less con- 
tinuous for considerable distances. They are of various col- 
ors, each bed bearing its own, such as, of a pure white, or a 
white mottled with a delicate greenish yellow, or white clouded 
with gray, or altogether of a diffused light gray tint, or of a 
deej) gray streaked with red ; and they were wrought for orna- 
mental purposes in two several places about thirty years ago, 
by a Mr. Jopling from Newcastle. " But owing principally," 
say the Messrs. Anderson of Inverness, in their admirable 
" Guide Book," " to the disadvantages arising from the want 
of roads fit for the conveyance to the coast of the weighty 



▲XD QUASTZ DEPOSITS OF AS8TXT. 353 

blocks, the speculatioD did not sacceed ; and altlxxigfa this diief 
obstacle has since been removed, no attempt has been nmde to 
renew the undertaking." One of the old workings occurs in 
the neighborhood of the parish chordi, where a large block, 
operated upon bj the saw, maj still be seen in the hollow 
whence it was excavated. The marble here is <^ the daik 
gray variety, streaked and veined with red ; but, as shown by 
the dressed surfaces of the mass left behind by iLe workers, it 
seems but indifferently suited to resist the action of the 
weather, in at least a climate such as that of Assynt. In little 
more than a quarter of a century the marks of the tool have 
almost entirely disappeared from the stone ; and the sparry 
substance which fills the red veins has sunk considerably 
beneath the level of the darker portions which it traverses. 
At the other old working, near Ledbeg, about six miles higher 
up the valley, the white and gray varieties c€ marble occur ; 
and bare rounded masses may be seen from the road, rising 
over the brown heath or peaty soil, like those wasted and par- 
tially soiled wreaths of snow that mottle at midsunmier the 
upper zones of our higher hills. It formed a subject of com- 
plaint to the workmen, that the rock in this locality is so 
traversed by cradu and flaws, that they failed to procure from 
it blocks at once solid throug^iout, and of a size sufficient for 
such purposes as the manufacture o( table-slabs or large chim- 
ney-lintels ; and I have been informed that the noble propric- 
trix of the county at the time, — the late Countess Duchess of 
Sutherland, — desirous to procure for the ancient family seat 
of Dunrobin a fine specimen of the native marble of the dis- 
trict, in the form of a chimney-piece for one of the public 
rooms, had to content herself, instead, from this cause, with 
simply a chimney-piece for one of the smaller bed-rooms. As 
the workings, however^ — prosecuted for but a short time, — 
were but mere scralchings of the mtAce^ it is probable that 
SO* 



354 ON THE RED SANDSTONE, MAEBLE, 

the masses at a greater depth are greatlj more sound, and 
that — as is common in marbles — what occurs as a flaw 
within the influence of the percolating rains and penetrating 
frosts, may exist, removed beyond their reach, as merely a 
streak or vein. I find it stated by Mr. Carmichael, in an elab- 
orate essay on the Limestone Quarries of Scotland, which re- 
ceived the prize of the Highland Society, that no real marble 
has ever been found in this country, — no stone, at least, fitted 
to stand what he terms the three criteria of a true marble, 
viz., susceptibility of a high polish, chemical composition, and 
compact homogeneous structure. He states that Sutherland 
marble leaves three per cent of residuum when subjected to 
the testing muriatic acid, whereas Carrara marble leaves none ; 
and that every attempt to polish Scotch marbles has shown 
them to be " coarse, dissimilar in their texture, full of flaws, 
and of a dull lustre, even when smoothed to the best advan- 
tage." To the flaws of the Assynt marble I have already re- 
ferred as probably of a surface character ; with regard to its 
chemical composition, I may venture to remark, that a marble 
may surely be less pure by three per cent, than that of Car- 
rara, and yet be a real marble notwithstanding; and with 
respect to the polish of which the Sutherland marble is suscep- 
tible, it may be enough to state, that though pieces which I 
attempted polishing for myself are, as may be seen from speci- 
mens on the Society's table, dull in their lustre, those beside 
them, which I submitted to a marble cutter, bear quite as high 
a gloss as most of the finely variegated marbles of the Conti- 
nent. 

Above this great limestone bed there occurs a second more 
than equally great deposit of quartz rock, generally of a white 
color, but in some of its strata tinged with red. It is truly a 
vast formation ; forming, though laid along the surface at a 
low angle, by much the greater part of some of the loftiest 



A2n> QUASTZ DEPOSITS OF ASSTXT. 355 

hills <^ the oountiy^ — such a5 Ghisreen, Ben-Uie, and Ben- 
more. Even where most indnnted, it is ereijvheie, like the 
resembling bed whidi nnderiies the limestme. pnrelj mechan- 
ical in its stractnre, — an indmated, indestmcsihle sandstone, 
in short ; and how Tery indniated and indestnusible it is, the 
graj and hoaxj nakedness of the masdre eminences composed 
of it serves verj coodasivelv to show. It never lesolves into 
soil : the on] j tracts of s(h1 which oocor over it are of a peatj 
character, formed simply throagh the agency of water, and of 
that low vegetation which, in a weeping Himaie, water can of 
itself sostain. Where the hiQ-sidea^ formed of this depodt, 
rise steeply, they admit of no covering at aD^ — not even of a 
crust of moss or of lichen ; and their summits g^eam white and 
bright to the summer son, as if overlaid by a oontinnoas layer 
of snow. I may add that, from its great durability, it bears 
with singular distinctness, in this region, maiks of the old gla- 
cial action. High above the sorely weathered limestones, that 
retain not a trace on their surface save of the recent storms 
that last washed them, we find the white quartz rock still as 
smoothly polished, as distinctly grooved, as sharply lined and 
furrowed, as if the great ice-river which produced the phenom- 
ena had grated over them but yesterday. This upper deposit 
<^ quartz enters largely into the composition of some of the 
wildest and most degolaie scenery of Jj^ynt. In looking up 
the dark narrow lake whidi takes its name from the district, 
we see the broad bas^ and naked storm-riven summits of 
Benmore and the nei^iboring mountain Glasveen, forming the 
back-ground of the landscape. The ancient castle c^ Ardvo- 
rack, and the M mansion-house of EddrachaMay — both broken 
and roofless ruins, situated within a few hundred yards of 
each other, — the cme shattered by lightning, the other scathed 
by fire, — comprise, from one interesting point of view, the 
only human dwellings Tisible in the ^fnmpeei: sditode broods 



356 ON TUE RED SANDSTONE, MARBLE, 

around ; the distant hills, bald, verdureless, and hoary, seem 
the hills of a worn-out and desolate planet, and liarmonize 
well with the deserted ruins and the dark, lonely lake beneath; 
and altogether so impressive and unique is the scene, tliat, 
when I first looked upon it through the lurid haze of a stormy 
evening, it seemed suggestive of universal death and extinc- 
tion, and the lifeless old age of creation. According to the 
poet, — 

" The sun's eye had a lightless glare ; 
The earth with age was wan." 

I have already referred to M'Culloch*s supposed organisms 
of the bed of quartz rock which underlies the Limestone. 
Other supposed organisms of, as has been thought, a less 
equivocal character, also occur in the deposit, though I failed 
to detect them in this neighborhood, where, however, they are 
said to be found, though more rarely than on the northern 
coast of Sutherland, on the shores of Loch EribolL I visited 
that locality in the previous year, mainly that I might acquaint 
myself with what at the time were deemed the most ancient of 
Scottish fossils, — these supposed organisms; but though, un- 
der the intelligent guidance of ]Mr. Clark, of Eriboll, I suc- 
ceeded in finding them, I found the evidence regarding both 
their place and character of a very unsatisfactory kind. They 
occur not in situ, but in detached boulders spread over a lime- 
stone district, though derived apparently from the neighboring 
quartz rock. Unlike, however, the quartz rock of Assynt, the 
stone yields to the weather, in consequence, it would seem, of 
a considerable admixture of iron in its composition. In break- 
ing open a boulder, we see an oxydized, discolored ring run- 
ning parallel to its outer surface ; and it is almost always in 
the discolored ring that the supposed fossils occur. They are 
small tubular bodies, from one to three lines in length, by 
about half a line in breadth, of a grayish or brownish-white 



AXD QUAKTZ DEPOSITS OF AS^TXT. 357 

color, iioii-calcareoiiS;( — for ther do noi efierresce oo the api^ 
cation of the most powerful acids, — and oontaining nsnallT a 
brown oxjdized sohstance in their interior. In the better, at 
least more distinct, specimens, thej somewhat resemble frag- 
ments of serpula, or tho?e segments of ^^"^^11^ whaA one oo- 
casionallj finds in the boulder-daj of Caithness ; but thej are 
in all probability not the rc-mains of either annelid &r mollnsc, 
. bat mere effects of the oxrdization, under peculiar circumstan- 
ces, that has discolored the matrix in which thej lie. Iron 
pins or nails we find not imfreqaentlj represented on sea- 
beaches where wredLs hare taken plaee, or near some dock." 
yard or harbor, by mere oxydized tnbes, hollow within ; and it 
is not improbaUe that to minnte, pin4ike crystals of some min- 
eral or metal now represented by only the oxydized substance 
enclosed within the hoUow, do these little tubes owe their ori- 
gin. I at least wholly iaOed to satisfy myself that they are 
organic in their character ; nor do I suppose that they would 
be by any means the oldest of Scottish fossils, even if they 
were. 

This upper quartz rod^ forms the highest and most modem 
deposit of the marble districts. Taking the sunmiit of Ben- 
more as its apex, a shaft sunk on the top <^ that noble hill, to 
the depth of perhaps ei^t or ten thousand feet, would pass in 
succession through the first or upper quartz, through the lime- 
stone with its associated marbles and flagstones, through the 
second or lower quartz, through the red sandstone, with its 
conglomerate beds; and finally, it would reach the uncon- 
formable gneiss, on which the whole system rests ; for as one 
system must these four great deposits be regarded. Where, 
among the other systems of Scotland, I ask, are we to seek for 
its analogue and representative ? 

Let me first lemaik, that the Lower Old Bed Sandstone of 
the east coast of Scotland, as dereloped in Inverness, Boss, 



338 ON THE RED SANDSTONE, MARBLE, 

Cromarty, Sutherland, Caithness, and the Orkney Islands, con- 
sists of exactly the same number of great divisions as this 
system of the western coast. That subordinate Red Sand- 
stone of the western system which has been colored as Old 
Red in every geological map of Scotland ever published, and 
which extends, in an interrupted belt, from Eilan Garbh, be- 
yond Capfe Wrath, to the Island of Rum, a distance of more 
than a hundred and twenty miles, corresponds in place to the 
Great Conglomerate of the east coast, — a deposit equally con- 
tinuous. The lower quartz bed which overlies the red sand- 
stone we find occupying exactly the place of a thick arenaceous 
bed, by which, on the east coast, the Great Conglomerate is 
overlaid. The stratified limestones, with their associated flag- 
stones and marbles, occupy exactly the place of the flagstones 
and associated limestones of Caithness, and the stratified, semi- 
calcareous, nodule-bearing clays of Cromarty and Ross. And, 
finally, we see the vast upper quartz deposit of the west occu- 
pying exactly the place of that thick deposit of sandstone, red, 
white, and yellow, which overlies the ichthyolitic flagstones and 
stratified clays of the east, and which may be found immensely 
developed in the Wiird-hill of Hoy, and in the promontories 
of Dunnet-head, Cannisbay, and Tarbet-ness. Bed for bed, 
the two systems correspond not only in number, but in charac- 
ter and place ; for even the quartz-roCk beds that are altered 
most cannot be regarded as other than indurated beds of quart- 
zose sandstone. Let me further remark, that both systems rest 
i:nconfbrmably on the same ancient rock, — the fundamental 
gneiss of the country. Were the systems not indentical, we 
would have to account for the curious fact, tliat, resting on ap- 
parently the same rock, the number, character, and relative 
position of their beds should also be the same, — a contingency, 
regarded simply as such, that would exhaust many chances. 
Why, for instance, should the stratified limestone and flagstone 



AND QUARTZ DEPOSITS OF ASSTVT. 3^9 

bed, which occapies, in Caithness and elsewhere on the east 
coast, the second place in the sjslem red^oned from the top 
downwards, and the third from the bottom upwards, occupj 
exactly the same place in Assjnt, and not the place of anj of 
the other beds ? Or wh j should the red, roagfa-grained sand- 
stone, with its included pebbles, which occupies the first place 
in the system <^ the east coast led^oning upwards, occupj also 
the first place, reckoning upwards, in that of the west coast, 
and not the place <^ anj of the three beds which oTeriie it? 
Or, further, wh j should the place of the two great sandstone 
beds of the east-coast system, in their position as second and 
fourth, be occupied in the west-coast system by arenaceous 
beds also second and fourth in the series, instead of being 
occupied by beds not arenaceous? The number of the 
chances against such thorough coincidences as that exemplified 
here, regarded amply as chances, are so great, that they will 
be found to occur in no two British systems not indenticaL 
The probability, so to speak, that an unaltered system which 
in one locality is fossiliferous in one of its beds and non-fossilif- 
erous in any of the others, should in another locality be slightly 
altered in all its beds, and, in consequence, noo-lbssilifenMis in 
them all, is a probability which must be regarded as having 
many more chances in its favor. 

Let me also remark, that the Old Red system of the east 
coast, which rests, as I have said, on the unconformable gneiss, 
is overhud in several localities, as at Eathie and Shandwick, by 
beds <^ the Liassic formation. A wide gap occurs in the geo- 
logic scale in these northern districts : the CarixmifexxMis, Per- 
mian, and Triassic systems, are wanting; and along the northern 
side of the Moray Frith generally the Old Bed Sandstone 
forms tlie immediate base of the Lias, — a formation which, 
though it barely appears on the edge of the land there, is 
apparently largelj developed under the bed of the German 



360 ON THE RED SANDSTONE, MA&BLE, 

Ocean. And it is worthj of being noted, as bearing on oar 
question, that the Scottish Lias of the Atlantic holds — as at 
Broadford and Applecross — exactly the same relation to the 
Red Sandstone of the west coast that the Scottish Lias of the 
German Ocean does to the Old Red Sandstone of the east. 
Both Red Sandstone deposits maj be equally described as 
resting on the gneiss and overiaid by the Lias. Farther, I 
may be permitted to ask, to what system known to the geolo- 
gist does the Red Sandstone of our north-western coasts 
belong, if .not to the Old Red System? Quartz rock, in all its 
various modifications, from a purely mechanical to a purely 
crystalline stone, is of common occurrence in what are known 
as the primary districts; a bed of mica-schist is not unfre- 
quently found to pass almost imperceptibly, by gradually 
dropping its mica, into a true quartz rock ; nor are such tran- 
sitions unfrcquent in gneiss deposits ; but the only true Red 
Sandstone I ever yet met in a so-called primary district is the 
Red Sandstone of the north-western coast of Scotland. It 
must represent, with the overlying quartzose and calcareous 
beds, an enormously extended period. AVhere, among the pri- 
mary rocks of the southern Highlands, for instance, or of any 
other region, shall we look for the deposits representative of 
the same age ? Regarded as primary, it forms an intercalated 
period in the geologic history of this north-western tract of 
country, which we find unrepresented in every other districL 
I may add, that the quartz-rock formation, which runs diajro- 
nally athwart the kingdom in detached patches, from Islay on 
the west to Banff and Aberdeen shires on the east, and which 
holds geologically a middle |iosition between the gneiss and the 
mica-schist, is an altogether different deposit from the quartz- 
rock of A^synt. 

Both Dr. M'Culloch and the late Mr. Cunningham of Edin- 
burgh liave stated, that a great formation of gneiss in the 



AND QUARTZ DEPOSITS OF ASSTHT. 361 

northern parts of Sathcrland is found OTerlajing its quartz 
rock ; and ^ this relation of quartz rock of undoubted mechani- 
cal origin to highlj crystalline gneiss is a fact," remarks 
Professor James Nicol, in his '^ Cruide to the Geology of Scot- 
land/' ** of considerable importance, though merely what might 
have been anticipated on the metamorphic theory." I visited, 
two years ago, the district near Whiton Head, in which the 
sections occur that are said most thoroughly to demonstrate 
this superiority of the gneiss to the quartz, rock, but was pre- 
vented from examining them by a tract of wet and very 
boisterous weather. There seems, however, to be a link want- 
ing in the evidence, in its bearing on the matter specially in 
hand, — the position of the Assynt deposits. The gneiss of the 
Moin, — a dreary waste, that stretches between Loch Eriboll 
and the Kyle of Tongue, — doe$ seem to overiie the quartz 
rock of Whiton Head, just as in many other localities genuine 
gneiss holds, on the small scale, a superior position to genuine 
quartz rock ; but it has, perhaps, still to be shown that the 
quartz rock here is at all of the same age, or occupies rela- 
tively the same place, as that which in Assynt overlies the 
calcareous flagstones, and forms the summit of Ben More. 
The nearest Bed Sandstone to the gneiss and underlying 
quartz rock of Whiton Head is that of Craig na Yrechan, at 
Tongue ; and it very decidedly averUes the gneiss. But this 
special point I do not profess to have examined. 

In conclusion fet me remark, that while, from the reasons 
adduced, I have been led to conclude that the sandstone 
deposit of the west of Sutherland, with its assodated quartz 
rock and limestone bedj^ represents the Lower Old Bed Sand- 
stone of the eastern coast, I do not r^ard the collciu>^ion as 
founded on other than merely a strong probability. In spc*cu- 
lating on the true place of a deposit in which fossils do not 
occur, and wbo!«e stratigraphical relations to the well-known 
SI 



862 SANDSTONE, MARBLE AND QUARTZ DEPOSITS. 

fbssiliferous rocks cannot be traced, we must, I suspect, be con- 
tent with simply the probable. For my own part, the occur- 
rence in one of the flagstones of Strongchrubie, of the spine 
of a Cheiracanthus, or of a few scales of Dipterus, or of the 
plates of a Coccosteus, would satisfy me more thoroughly than 
all the arguments ever derived from mineralogical character, 
or from the occurrence, in a certain order, of certain peculiarly 
marked beds. But while I must regard the identity of the 
Bed Sandstone of the north-eastern and north-western coasts 
of Scotland as by no means fully established, I am at least 
•trongly of opinion that, as they are essentially the same in their 
aspect, order, and components, they represent also the same 
period in the history of the globe. From finding the strata of 
the Old Red Sandstone upturned against our primary moun- 
tains, and truncated atop, and from those detached fragments 
of the system which occur as insulated hills far in the High- 
land interior, I was led to conclude, many years ago, that this 
deposit had at one time overlaid all the primary rocks of 
Scotland, from the southern flanks of the Grampians to the 
northern boundary of Sutherland, — a conclusion to which 
Sir Charles Lyell, in the later editions of his "Elements," has 
approvingly referred, as coincident with views on the subject 
entertained by himself. And these arenaceous rocks of 
Assynt, with their associated limestones and marbles, I must 
regard as in all probability a portion of this once continuous 
system, hardened by metamorphic action, and which having, in 
consequence, resisted the denuding agencies that swept away 
the contemporary beds, still continue to wi'ap over the con- 
torted and broken gneisses and granites of the district, and to 
form its most elevated mountains. It is the surviving frag- 
ment of a covering of whicli almost all the other portions have 
crumbled away piecemeal and disappeared. 



OS 



CORALS OF THE OOLmC STSTEM OP 
SCOTLAND. 



CORAI3 are eztreaMiT nrt m die litt. Meffirs. 

Edwards and Haime figure, in their eUborate ^Kanq^rapli of 

tbe British Fossil Conk,** onlj three LikBac if^eciee, tvo <if 

them exeeedinghr minnie TmriitKiidtt. and the third appar^ 

entl J a CydbopkfBmm. q[ doohtf ol linea^ and renr prohaUr, 

it is stated, a miff4nped pabaoeok ^lecamen. In the Lias of the 

eastern eoasl of Soodand. at JEdithie, Kij^ and Bhandwid^ I 

have not saeoe^ded^ wAar the seardb of jearc. in finding a idn^ 

ooral ; in that of SSkje, hcnrercr, I have been more lorUinale 

When ezandmng, nearij €d^ rears a^ lite liaae deposit U 

Brottdlbrd, — bj har the most exien^re derciofanent of thi* 

IbrmalioniB Seodaiid, lor it rnne aeroes the i^bod Irooa sea to 

•ea, in a bek fitiin two lo lonr stiles in breadth, — I came, near 

the base of the fbcmalioe* and at a little distanoe from where it 

leans a^unst the ao^alled Old fied Sandiitone of Slate , oo « bat 

aeemed to be a dark-eokiiied bed of eoncretionary hme«ione, of 

Tcry irre^nhH- aar&oe, and Tarring from three to four £bet in 

thic^nesfi. The aeemtng oooereliooary uafliee were separated 

by what mppeved to be a gr»J. iadumted mud, whkh wrapped 

thesB roond, eoooealisig their true <iiaraeter; but w\y^ tlie 

edge rftiiehodwaa «3«ed to 4he JaAingB of tbe aurf; t^ 



364 ON THE CORALS OF THE 

hardened mud had been washed away from the calcareous 
nuclei ; and I was not a little surprised to find, that the seem- 
ing concretions were massive corals, apparently all of one 
species, and evidently of the family Astreidae. The masses 
in this unique bed, each a condlum, are of irregular form, 
but usually flat and oblong, and vary in size, from nine or ten 
inches in length by six or eight in breadth, to from three to 
four inches in length by from two or three in breadth ; while 
in thickness they vary from about two-and-a-half inches to less 
than an inch. They are thickly covered on all sides by shal- 
low polygonal calices, irregular both in size and form, for they 
vary from nearly half an inch to little more than a line and 
a-half in breadth, and present from four to six sides. The 
dividing walls are thin, and not prominent, and each calice is 
traversed by from thirty to sixty septa of unequal size. A 
coral of the Inferior Oolite, Isastrea (enuisiriafa, rcsembles this 
Isastrea of the Lias more closely than any otlicr fossil species 
yet figured ; but in the Oolitic Isastrea the calices seem to be 
more equal in size, and more regular in form ; and, from the 
smallness and fragmentary character of the specimen given in 
the monograph, I was unable to determine whetlier it possessed 
what seemed to be the most marked characteristic of the Skye 
coral. In all the other species of Isastrea I have yet seen, 
each corallum has a determinate base, from which the coralites 
radiate ; whereas in the Liassic species they seem congregated 
together on all sides of the corallum (which appears to have 
had no base), like the cells in a honeycomb, and even cover 
wen-hke protuberances on the general surface, in a way that 
precludes the possibility of their liaving radiated f.om any 
common axis or centre. 

Tlie history of lliis coral bed of Skye, so unique in the Lias, 
seems to be simply as follows: In what is now the Inner 
Hebrides, as in other parts of the British islands, the Liassic 



OOLITIC STBTEM 07 SOOTI.AJni. 30^ 

deposit ^ypears to bxve been a mnddr one, and imfiironble, in 
conseqaence, to tlie grcywtli of oorils. CooipanaiTeilj earij in 
the period, howerer, a pan^e took place in the prooes of deposi- 
tioQ , massiTe oonls began to ibnn al tlie bottom of a dear Bea: 
the term of rest was protracted for ages ; as one ooralliim died, 
another formed orer it, until at length the bed had become ser- 
eral feet tluck, and then the deposit snddenlj retorDed to its old 
conditions. An arenaceous mad began to be cast down, which 
insinuated itsdf into all the interstices o£ the bed, as the mn 
lime of the medisTal boildere insinuated itself among the loose 
stones with whidi thej filled np the interior portions of their 
walls. In qrcomstanees so migenial the caraKtes died; Kiraliim 
after stratom, — not a few of these ridilj chaxged with the 
pfMmliar shells of the lias, — ammonites, belemnites, and the 
characteristic grrphaea incorra, — were heaped over them to 
the depth of sereral hondred feet In a few of the oreii jing 
strata the same coral again appeared, but onlj in small and 
imfiieqnent specimens ; and, so far as we jet know, not until 
the times of the Lower Oc^ite did corals in anj considerable 
abundance again live in the seas of the Scottish Oolitic system. 
The Lower Oolite, as developed in the neighborhood of 
Helmsdale, on the north-eastern coast of the kingdom, is cant- 
parativelj rich in corals ; at least, if species be not nnmeitMis, 
individaal spedmens are far finom rare. I stated to the Sodetj 
on a previous occasion, that on examining, some jears since, a 
heap of materials collected akmg the beach in that neighbor- 
hood for homing into lime, I found that aboot two-thirds of 
the whole consisted of fbssO wood, and the remaining third of 
a massive fossil ooraL This coral, also an Isastrea, is of great 
size : I have seen spedmens which a strong man conld scarce 
raise from the ground ; and a specimen on the table of the 
Society, selected, however, rather for its fine form than for its 
bulk, measures full ei^bteen indies in length, bjr about a foot 

SI* 



366 ON THE CORALS OF THE 

in height Its coralites, unlike those of the Liassic species, are 
verj tall, extending in some specimens from the base to the 
upper surface. Its calices, however, are considerably smaller, 
and of more equal size, averaging about two lines across. Their 
walls, which are thick and well-defined, stand iip abruptly, with 
mural erectness, over the central depression, which varies from 
a line to a line and a-half in depth. They are divided by from 
twenty to twenty-four septa, of which, however, more than the 
one-half are rudimentary, leaving but from four to eight of 
their number to meet in the centre of the visceral cavity. In 
the thickness of its walls and the character of its septa, this 
Helmsdale Isastrea greatly resembles the Isastrea Monga of 
the superior Oolite, — a species which has been found hitherto 
only at Tibbury, Wiltshire. It also resembles, however, though 
in a less degree, Isastrea Richardsoni^ — a coral of the Lower 
Oolite ; but it is possibly a new species. I have found in the 
same beds, though much more rarely, what seemed to be a 
different species of Isastrea, though closely allied to the one 
described. The corallum, massive like that of the other, is 
always greatly smaller. The calices, however, are considera- 
bly larger, and rather thinner in the walls, which do not stand 
up so abruptly over the central hollow^s ; the septa vary from 
about twenty to twenty -four in number ; and, where they meet 
in the centre, they rise in many of the calices into a protu- 
berant knob, like the termination of a true columella, which, 
however, like all the other species of the extinct genus Isastrea, 
it wants. A Thanmastrea is also found in the same beds, but 
always hitherto in a state of bad keeping. Unlike any of the 
Oolitic Thamnastrea figured by Messrs. Milne-Edwards and 
Ilaime, the corallum forms a mere incrustation on rocks and 
stones of older deposits than the Oolite, and is in some speci- 
mens less than half a line in thickness ; the calices are small 
and sliallow, and rather thickly set. The circular elevation, 



OOlJTiC •Ti^TXH 07 hOOTUJK^ 367 

ii'LIch corresyaodB in ilus gamf to die iiick><3ii^ wuR of Isi&- 
trca, is rerr aj>|Birei ii in wexL^ri'd FjKThxHm^ Irn:, as in 
T/ionmastrea LycUtL imij fiiinilT vi-ilile in iL^*-^ tha: i:re less 
worn; wliOe, &s in iLe Fjiecies 77iamaa.trti ,-r.'ra. ibfr (•<*iuia- 
ella, if it at all possessed cme, «:as mdimemarr. I Lavi* 
usoaDr found tliis ppeoes esicrasting masBes cif iodnzaled OH 
EcJ Sanistone of tLe flagstone iormal^on. wbidi must liare 
been as ancient a looiiing rock in ibe times of tLe Oolite as il 
is now, and, when laid open Inr tLe wares along tLe beach, 
must hare exLIbiied its ichiLTolide remains in tLeir ]-r*'-erA 
state of keeping. In fioe, in ixs rocks and stones tLif br^acL of 
tLe Ooliie on wLa: is ifeow tLe eastern coast of SotLerland iXiU<t 
have resfi-mbled thai of tLe nei^iLoring countr of CaiiLaes* in 
the present daj. And. as on iLe Liner sLore. as we ajiprcach 
tLe line of extreme ebb, we find rolled mikSi^ts of dark grar 
flagstone, partiaUj covered wiiL pale-ookired nulliporite en- 
crustations, tLere would Lave been found. Lad tLere becm an 
inqoiiing eve to prosecute tLe seardi, similar dark grav masses, 
bearing tLeir eiKTasiatians of TLamnastrea, akmg tLe oild 
shores of tLe Oolite. 

Bat wLile tLe irunework of tLe scenenr must Lave been 
thus the same in bodi eras, azMi tLe saxiM; incalcolablv ancient 
sea most Lave broken in boiL against tLe same old fossil-bear- 
ing rocks, Low entirelv diflerent must xxit tLe vital scenery of 
the two periods Lave been '. WLere we now see micTo>copic 
Lepralia aiMi dwarfish Sertularia. Luge Isastrea. embroidered 
bj tLeir flower-like polvpes^ and wide-spreading sLeets of 
Thamnastrea, similarlj mottled, must have gleamed white 
throagh the green depths of tLe water, as tLeir existing repre- 
sentadves mav be seen gleaming from the quiet recesses of 
tropical lagoons in tLe present dav ; tLe ammonite and bt-lem- 
nite must Lave careered OTer and around tLem aznid tLe sLeen 
of ganoidal scales ; and, where the seal nov disports^ the pksSo- 



368 ON THE CORALS OF THE 

Boarus must have gambolled, and the goggle-eyed ichthjosaiiras 
have darted along the tracts now traversed bj the porpoise and 
the whale. 

The Oolitic deposits in the neighborhood of Helmsdale con- 
sist mainlj of beds of a laminated, dark-colored, arenaceous 
shale (charged with ammonites and belemnites, serpula and ter- 
ebratula), which alternate with beds of a rough conglomerate, 
formed chieflj, as has been already intimated, of Old Red 
Sandstone materials. The corals, especiallj those of the genus 
Isastrea, occur both in the shales and the conglomerates ; but 
it is amid the rockj masses of which the latter are composed that 
they seem to have grown ; and in the shale we not unfrequently 
find them overturned, as if they had been torn with violence 
from their proper habitats on some stony ridge or hard bottom, 
and buried head-downwards in the mud. Corals, apparently 
of two different species, occur at Brora, but in so defective a 
state of keeping, that little else can be said regarding them than 
that they are said to belong to the genus Thecosmilia. In both, 
the corallum is composite and dendroid; but in the one the 
branches strike off at more acute angles than in the other. Its 
calices, too, are more rounded at their edges, and its septa less 
simple, more fiexuous, and more prominently denticulated. So 
imperfect is their state of preservation, that neither species 
exhibits the exterior coating or epitheca characteristic of the 
genus. The place in the system in which they occur is higher 
than that of the beds at Helmsdale, but not higher than the 
base of the Great Oolite. And such are all the corals of the 
Oolitic system in Scotland with which the explorations of years 
have brought me acquainted. 

The other subject to which I purpose directing for a brief 
space the attention of the Society has a connection, rather in- 
cidental than direct, with the fossil corals of our country. On 
first acquainting myself, about ten years ago, with the massive 



OOUTIC SYSTEM OF SCOTULXD. 369 

IsxLstrea of Helmsdale, whose resemblance to Jkastrea oblonga 
I have pointed oat, I remarked that cot a few of the larger 
specimens had been perforated, r^parentlj in the recent state, 
bj circular openings, resembling those made bj oar recent pho- 
ladfls, and which were usnallj filled op bj a graji£h-co!ored 
grit, identical with that which formed the miiting cement of the 
conglomerate in which the corab occorrecL I at once attrib- 
uted their formation to lithodomous shells of the Oolite, and 
ventured to describe, in the Witneu for 1843, one of mj first- 
found specimens as ^ a curious fragment of coral perforated bj an 
ancient pholas." ^ The cavti j,** I continued in mj description, 
^ exactly resembles those cavities of the existing lithodomous 
shells which fretted so manj of the calcareous masses that laj 
scattered on the beach <« every side of the specimen ; but it is 
shut firmly up by the coarse gritty sandstone in which the coral 
itself had lain buried ; and a fragment of carbonized wood lies 
embedded in the entrance. The cave is curtained across by a 
wall of masonry immensely more ancient thxm that whicli con- 
verted into a prison the cave of the Seven Sleepers." Several 
years, however, elapsed from this time ere I succeeded in de- 
tecting the shells by which the cavities had been formed ; and 
not until two years ago did I find specimens sufficiently entire 
to admit, and that still but imperfectly, of description. They 
seem to have been slim wedge-shaped bivalves, greatly resem- 
bling modiola, but belonging evidently tb the genus Lithodomus. 
Sir Roderick Murchison, in his great work on the Geology of 
Kussia, figures a Lithodomus of the Oolite of that country un- 
der the specific name Lithodomus Eramanus ; but it is a greatly 
smaller shell than the Scotch one, measuring little more tlian 
a quarter of an inch in length ; whereas the Helmsdale spc- 
cies measures, in my ku^r specimens, two inches and a line in 
length. The Russian species, however, in proportion to its 
general size, seems to have been a massier and broader ehelL 



870 ON THE CORALS OF THE 

An Oolitic bivalve figured in the same work as Mytihts rtV/n* 
aUsj very much resembles, both in size and form, save that it 
also is proportionallj a massier shell, one of mj smaller -speci- 
mens. Some of the larger masses of the Helmsdale Isastrea 
are much fretted by this busy excavator. In one of the 
smaller fragments of coral on the table we find the fossil re- 
mains of three individual shells that had burrowed in it, and 
the cell of a fourth ; and in the massive corallnm beside it 
there arc no fewer than four-and-twenty of these excavations 
now filled with grit, but doubtless once tenanted by a borer 
a-piece. If, as is probable, it was living at the time when the 
excavators were at work within it, and possessed, what is more 
questionable, the sense of feeling, it must have been wofuUy 
subject to stomach complaints and fits of griping in the bowels. 

Though these lithophagi of the Oolite occur chiefly in the 
corals of the period, they are not exclusively restricted to them. 
I have found them, though rarely, in Old Red flagstones of the 
conglomerate, and have ascertained that, had there been nat- 
uralists in those days to differ and dispute, the question might 
as certainly have been raised as now, whether the stone-boring 
shells made their way into the masses which they inhabited by 
mechanical means, or through the agency of some acidulous 
solvent The corals, in their recent state, were of course cal- 
careous, and, in consequence, dissolvable by an acid ; and the 
flagstones which the borers usually selected also contain a good 
deal of calcareous earth; but their prevailing material is so 
largely aluminous and quartzose, that it seems scarce likely 
that a mere solvent could have perforated them. 

I venture in conclusion, two general remarks. First, the 
corals of the Oolitic system in Scotland, massive in size, and 
occurring in some localities in very considerable abundance, 
resemble in these respects no recent corals of the higher lati- 
tudes. The corals of the higher latitudes are, we find, either 



OOLITIC SYSTEM OF SCOTIJUfD. S71 

diminutlYe or few. Groops of large corals are characteristic 
of the intertropical seas, or at least of seas of either hemisphere 
that border on the tropics. I have seen an Isastrea of Helms- 
dale that measured about two feet and a half in length by about 
eighteen inches in breadth, and which, as I have said, a strong 
man could scarce raise from the ground ; and arborescent masses 
of Thecosmila annularis have been found in the Coral Rag of 
England, that measured from a foot and a-half to two feet in 
height. There occur no such corals now in seas which lie be- 
tween the fiflieth and sixtieth, degrees of latitude, whether to 
the south or north of the equator. And though I would not 
founa much on one or two exceptional species, I do think that, 
seeing we would at once pronounce a similar group of re- 
cent corals to be the product of seas greatly warmer than our 
own, we might, I think, be permitted to infer, — reasoning from 
what we know, — that the Oolitic seas of what is now Scotland 
were of a higher temperature than our Scottish sexis of the 
present day ; and that, in short, in the corals of the Scotch 
Oolite we have one of many evidences that in this early period 
these northern regions enjoyed a greatly more genial climate 
than they do now. I may add, however, that in the same beds, 
mingled with fronds of cycas and zamia, and the stems of 
gigantic horsetails, — all now the productions of a warm cli- 
mate, and that seem to give evidence to the same fact as the 
corals, — there occur numerous fragments, and occasionally 
whole trunks, of fossil pines, that apparently testify, by their 
annual rings of small size, indicative of slow growth, to a cli- 
mate as ungenial and severe as that of Sweden or Norway. 
The evidence which they yield can, however, be scarce said to 
be of a conflicting character with that of the corob and the 
cycadites. If the Oolitic land was a lofly one, a very few miles 
might have served to separate a genial from a severe climate ; 
and the pines might have been brought down by rivers from 



372 ON THE CORALS OF TBB 

an elevated and bleak interior, as different in its temperature 
and productions from the sea-coast, as the pine-covered sides 
of the Alps, where they rise towards the snow line, are differ- 
ent in their temperature and productions from the rich vine- 
bearing valleys which they overlook. 

I remark, in the second place, that the occurrence in the 
Oolite of those boring shells of which I have laid specimens 
before the Society is not without interest, as in some measure 
illustrative of that unity of plan on which the Creator has 
wrought in all the geologic periods, and which serves so strik- 
ingly to indicate the identity of the Worker. Those four mas- 
ter ideas embodied in the animal kingdom which furnished 
Cuvier with his principles of classification, each forming the 
centre of a great division, seem to have been equally the master 
ideas of all the geologic creations. So far as we know, animal 
life existed at all times, when it existed at all, in its four master 
types, and no more ; and these in the Oohtic ages, — life radi- 
ating round a centre, as in the Isastrea, — life lodged within a 
series of rings, as in the annelids and the Crustacea, — life 
combined with a duality of corresponding parts, as in the cut- 
tle-fishes and the clams, — and life associated with a bnun xmd 
vertebral column, as in fishes and reptiles, — were not less 
prominently developed than now. Had a Cuvier then existed 
to write the history of animated nature, the various classes 
would have occupied very different proportional spaces in his 
" Animal Kingdom " from that occupied by those of the present 
time ; but the master divisions, — vertebrata, mollusca, articu- 
lata, and radiata, — would have been the same. For of all 
the creations, I repeat, in the leading idea there has been no 
change. Two of these we find exemplified before us in single 
specimens, — those in which the lithodomi lie sepultured in 
ravities hollowed in Isastrea; and we are enabled to traco this 
i'lentity of idea into yet minuter ramifications, when we thus 



OOLITIC SYSTEM OF 8COTLAHD. 



373 



find that, alcmg these old Oolitic shores of Scotland, as along 
the shores of our countrj in the present daj, the rocks were 
inhabited bj their hermit shells, — the EdamiUs of the moUos- 
cons world, as a modem naturalist poeticaD j terms them, — 
that spent silent lives in excavating for themselves cells in the 
stone, in which thej watched in patience for the food broaght 
them bj wavelet and current, and which, like the cells of fo 
manj other anchorites and recluses, were ultimately to prove 
their sepuldues. The idea that stones and rocks should be 
thus inhabited is an idea old as etemitj : it must have had be- 
ing Of an idea ere the existence of rock, or coral, cft molluscous 
life ; for He from whom it emanated saw the end from the 
beginning, and makes no accessions to his fund of thought ; and 
to be permitted thus to trace it towards its source, and to detect 
it embodied in a creation whose last surviving organism perished 
myriads <^ ages ago, enables us in some degree to conceive of 
the fact, and to conceive also of the fixed character, of that 
Master Existence, the Author of all, who said, in a long pos- 
terior age, when revealing Himself to man, ^ I am the Lord ; 
I diangenot.* 



THB 



FOSSILIFEROUS DEPOSITS OF SCOTLAND. 



The following address was read by Mr. Milleb, on his resign- 
ing the President's Chair of the Society : — 

Gentlemen, — It is customary for the retiring President, 
in taking leave of the chair, to address the members on some 
general subject connected with the objects which our Society 
has been instituted to carry out; and in conforming to the 
practice, I shall take the liberty of stating, as briefly as possi- 
ble, the results at which I have arrived, in recently arranging 
the specimens of a collection perhaps more adequately repre- 
sentative of the Geology of Scotland than any other that has 
yet been made. There are other collections which, though 
more partial in their character, excel it in particular depart- 
ments ; but none which I have yet seen sweep so completely 
the entire scale of our Scottish formations ; and as such of its 
divisions as are most defective indicate, negatively at least, by 
the blanks on their partially filled shelves, the deposits on which 
we have still to direct our energies, it may be well that your 
attention should be specially called to these, as fields in which 
work has still to be done, and in which the reward of fresh and 
interesting discovery awaits the patient laborer. I am not sure 



THE FOS8ILIFEEOUS DEPOSITS OF SCOTLAND. 375 

that we need warmly congratulate ourselves on the fact, — but 
certainly a fact it i3, — that the geologic section of our Society 
is in no danger of exhausting its work at home for a very consid- 
erable time to come. "We have still much to do in acquainting 
ourselves with the extinct productions of our country in those 
remote pre-Adamic periods of its history when it existed, now 
as a group of Pleistocene islands, — now as a land covered by 
the Oolitic forests, and washed by seas tenanted by the ammo- 
nite and the nautilus, — nowj ere yet its existing mountains had 
arisen from the abyss, as a series of dark plains and steaming 
morasses, brown with the rank and dusky vegetation of the 
Carboniferous period, — now as an extended sea-bottom, muddy 
or arenaceous, swum over by the strange ganoids of the Old 
Red Sandstone, and with here and there a minute island, green 
with, so far as it is yet known, the earliest ferns and the oldest 
trees, — and now as the bottom of a sea profounder still, — a 
sea without visible shore, inhabited by the minute brachipods 
and unique crustaceans of the earlier Silurian ages. That 
history of Scotland which, omitting the human period as too 
modem, stretches backwards from the recent shells of the old- 
coast line to the olenus and lingula beds of Girvan, and which 
is still unwritten, save in the rocks, will give our younger 
members work enough thoroughly to decipher and transcribe 
for perhaps a quarter of a century to come. 

On first setting myself, about fourteen years ago, to add to 
my collection a set of Silurian fossils, I had to content myself 
with specimens derived chiefly from England and America. 
All the organisms detected at that time in the great Silurian 
deposits of Scotland, — though Sir James Hall had found shells 
in the Wrae Hill limestone nearly half a centuiy previous, and 
Mr. Charles Maclaren in the Silurians of the Pentlands at 
least fix years previous, — would scarce have half-filkd a 
single shelf. Now, however, our old obstinate Grauwackes 



376 THE FOSSILIFEROUS 

are yielding their organisms, — Dumfries, 6aIlowaj,and Peebles- 
shire their graptolites, and Girvan and its neighborhood its tri- 
lobites add its shells. The shores of the Sol way near Elirkcud- 
bright are furnishing, though still inadequately, their fossib of 
the Upper Silurian ; and it seems not improbable that the Gir- 
van locality may be yet found to furnish characteristic speci- 
mens of all the various deposits of the Lower Silurian, from 
those emphatically ancient beds beneath which only a single 
organism has yet been detected, up to those superior deposits 
of the Lower division in which the Dudley Trilobite ( Cdty^ 
mene Elumenbachii) occurs, and which Sir Roderick Murchi- 
6on regards as occupying the same, or nearly the same, horizon 
as the Upper Caradoc. I am informed by our accomplished 
brother member, Professor Wyville Thomson, that in a recent 
visit to Girvan, he found, in an ancient Conglomerate to the 
south of the town, specimens of a small lingula and olenus, 
identical, so far as he could judge from their state of keeping, 
with the fossils of unquestionably the same genera which mark, 
in the sister kingdom, the primeval zone of life. It would be 
interesting to find in our own country, as has already been 
found in North America, England, and Scandinavia, a base 
line, — representative, apparently, of the earliest age of organ- 
ized being, — from whence to commence the geologic history of 
what our fathers used to term, without quite knowing all that 
was implied in the epithet, old Scotland. But whether this 
ba.se line of the oldest fossiliferous system be found in our 
country or no, the system itself, especially as developed within 
the southern and western districts, must be held to possess a 
peculiar interest, from the circumstance that, though some of 
its more curious fossils have not yet been found in the amply 
developed and well-sought Silurians of England, they occur in 
those of Bohemia on the one hand, and of Canada West and 
the United States on the other. They thus form in the gen- 



S77 



cral liisttBX of ^e ^"^ ^ UMiwjcuug fink li e m w iix df^pmis 
coQaidenbiT nxn^ tiUD mir ibciQsaid InIie^ span. Isiayadd 
thau dming the Iss: iew jear^ I iiave been aiiie ic> ijiar^ in ixrr 
little mngfiim, b^de iI^ Sumisn ibssik cf Amehsk smC Emg- 
land, a not leae^ ampie eolifscxBj of ibe Slioxian ib«ak <xf onr 
own caamry. wmoi, ibou^ sdll inadeqnace. caaxainf eirrcial 
rare oT;>snuan=w with wbi{:L. «o far a^^ i^ j€i kmivn. tbe KngiiiAi 
deposte cxxiid ncK iiave fiopuikfC me. iyJL. bowprer. idikL 
remams to be dooe in ibk cizrioDf &iid. I wa^ giKFim och- a 
few weeks a^ Irr & ^ernkman &vaii ibe sei^iiibafiiood of I^es- 
mabagow. a iosal cmsaieeain. dexTred. be and. frooi tbe Gras- 
wacikie of tbax iieigbbcBiiood. w jiicb. bd £c ^ I oonid jnd*"^ in 
its ratber iBdifferen: state of prserraikKL k new to Soodand. 
and wbidi ipcry coDsadnabHr recembtteE tbai H jmaMicarb of 
Nortb Wales wbieb Bir Roderick descnbes in bk ^ Slbnist'^ mb 
a tme psimoidial ibseiL Asc wbere tbe erusxareac accar^ k 
k more tban probable tba: otber ox^^anlsDaf wiB je: be foond. 

Tbe Lower Old Bed Bandstooe of ScxMjaad ba^ been more 
tboftn^dr wroo^n out tban pexiiaq*^ anr of tbe oiber forma- 
tkms of ibe ecHmtrr. and ii ueenpiefi. in eonveqaenf^e. & bo-^^r 
^aee in sit coHecuob. I iisrre no: j^ ibinid fo^dk in tbe 
Great Con^omenoe. wbi^ fuimt hi bsK- ; nor. yerhap^ eoold 
or^amsnasu save of ibe mcisi rdbmi stmetnre. be expoaed in a 
rock Sarmed of great watCT-Tolk^ |#ebbk:«y wludi. ere tber eonld 
bare afisomed liiedr pre»€an TcifUided forsK, miKt bare b<«n 
tossed br tbe BiamK of agee- In ibe yA^^ IbanseKts. bow- 
erer, we bare enriuiK ^impfce^ afiord^^d itt of tbe old mf^tamor- 
pbk nxks of Seacbaid ; wbkdt were;, we find, ocnuddenUT 
differest in tbe group irum tbe rudu> uf liinilbir ongin tbat in 
tbe present age of tbe world euuiji^e urn- tptat Hi^Lbind nu- 
cleus. Tbe fildBistoM: gmofiMX. now tbe jireralling xnetaniovpbk 
rocks of tbe lungdaai^ — iur ikter inccapr SMoahr uaii tbocuaBMl 
square wule^ mi ks area^ — wve daea bat liwUj dereloped. 



378 THE FOSSILIFEROUS 

compared with its many-colored porphyries, its granites, and its 
quartz-rocks. In the Forfarshire Conglomerate, the prevailing 
rocks are hard jwrphyries, of an infinite variety of hue, and 
indistinguishable in their composition from the porphyries of 
Ben Nevis and Glencoe; in the Conglomerate of Cromarty 
and Ross, a decaying granite, red like that of Peterhead, but 
as finely grained as that of Aberdeen, blent with red quartz- 
rock and red granitic gneiss, is the prevailing stone ; in that of 
Orkney, as exhibited in the neighborhood of Stromness, the 
prevailing rock is also a red granite, somewhat larger in its 
grain, and more durable, than the Cromarty one. The stone 
which composes many of these inclosed pebbles can no longer 
be found in situ ; and a good representative collection of at 
least the classes of the rocks which they exemplify would serve 
to show the nature of the framework of that ancient unknown 
land to whose existence the Great Conglomerate bears evi- 
dence ; and which — as over many thousand square miles the 
pebbles present the worn and rolled character — must have 
been exposed, zone af\er zone, during a protracted period of 
gradual depression, to the incessant wear of the ocean. The 
Conglomerate seems to have been exposed in an af\er period 
to intense heat. We find many of its hardest pebbles bent 
and indented, as if they had been reduced to the consistency 
of dough, or distorted by miniature faults, which scored their 
lines of fracture with the ordinary sUclen'sided markings, when 
they were in a state viscid enough to re-unite. The fact 
would have been deemed a great one during the heat of the 
controversy waged in this city between the antagonistic schools 
of Ilutton and Werner; but it is not less interesting now, when 
it ean be looked at more quietly ; and so I h:ivc given to a series 
of the pebbles which illustrate it a place in my collection. 

Above the upper beds of the Great Conglomerate, at distan- 
ces varying from forty to a hundred and sixty feet, the fishes 



DEPOSITS OF SCOTLAND. 379 

of the Lower Old Red Sandstone appear, — curious, as the 
most ancient ganoids known to the geologist, and further, from 
the circumstance that, while the still older placoids of the Up- 
per Silurian system exist merely as detached teeth, spines, and 
shagreen points, these Old Red fishes exhibit in tlie better 
specimens the entire outline of the original animals, with not a 
few of their anatomical peculiarities. It is from this formation 
that our knowledge of the oldest skulls, of the oldest vertebral 
columns, and of the oldest pelvic and thoracic arches, anywhere 
preserved, is to be derived. With the fish we sometimes find 
associated, though not oflen, specimens illustrative of wliat 
seems to be our most ancient terrestrial Flora, — club-mosses, 
— reed-like casts and impressions, streaked longitudinally, like 
the interior of the calamite, but apparently without joints, — 
what appear to be ferns, — and, in at least one unique specimen, 
a true wood of tbe araucarian family, — the oldest which has 
yet presented its structure to the microscope. In some locali- 
ties, such as Cromarty, Thurso, and perhaps Moray, the 
various ichthyic species of the formation seem to have been 
pretty nearly ascertained and collected: for several years I 
have not succeeded in discovering from the several Cromarty 
deposits a single new species ; and my friend Mr. Dick, though 
permanently resident on the spot, has had a similar experience 
at Thurso. Species of the rarer kinds may, however, long 
elude very assiduous search, and yet turn up at last ; and in 
the course of the present twelvemonth I have received from a 
tract of shore near Cromarty, which I have walked over many 
hundred times, an ichthyic species, — the Diplacanthus crassis" 
pinus, — of which my collection had possessed no previous 
specimen. I owe it to the kindness of Miss Catherine Allar- 
dyce, — a lady who, to a minute knowledge of not a few otl^er 
branches of natural science, adds an intimate acquaintance 
with the fossils of our northern formations, and whose skill in 



380 THE FOSSILIFEROUS 

Eoophytology the late lamented Dr. Landsborongh has ac- 
knowledged in his interesting " History of British Zoophytes." 
Further, it is worthy of remark that, just as the naturalist can- 
not now acquaint himself with all the animals or plants of 
Scotland in any single locality, so all the fossil species of any 
one formation cannot be exhausted in any one limited field or 
district, but must be sought for in various districts ere the list 
can be regarded as tolerably complete. The old Devonian spe- 
cies of fishes, like those of the present day, seem to have had 
their favorite haunts and feeding or spawning grounds, and 
must now be sought for where they congregated of old. The 
ZHplacanthus stricUits, for instance, is one of the commonest of 
the Cromarty Old Red fishes, and the Dipterus and Asterolepts 
very rare ; whereas at Thurso, Mr. Dick, after years of explo- 
ration, never found a single spine of Diplacanthus, but not a 
few noble specimens of Asterolepis, and finely preserved skulls 
and jaws of Dipterus, And in a neigboring locality, Bannis- 
kirk, Diptertis is the prevailing fish, and may be found by 
scores. Again, the Old Red of Caithness generally is poor in 
specimens of Pterichthys, — the rocks of Thurso have not yet 
furnished a single specimen; whereas in those of Moray the 
genus is not rare ; and in a quarry a few miles to the north- 
east of Stromness it is more abundant than any of its contem- 
poraries. I mention these facts to show how necessary it is to 
the Palneontologist who sets himself to exhaust the organisms 
of a formation within even a single country, that he should 
either be a sedulous traveller, or have a widely-located circle 
of friends engaged with him as fellow-laborers in the work. 

No ichthyic species of this Lower formation of the old Red 

Sandstone has yet been detected in Scotland to the south of the 

Grampians. In the great belt of Old Red which traverses the 

island diagonally, from the coasts of Kincardine and Forfar- 

^ shire on the east, to those of Renfrew and Ayr on the west. 



DEPOSITS OF SCOTLAND. 381 

the fossils, — restricted very much to the gray sandstones of 
the deposit, — are of an entirely different group. Here, as 
in the immensely developed Comstones of England, the pre- 
vailing and most characteristic organism is the Cephalaspts ; 
which has now been found in Forfar and Kincardineshires by 
Sir Charles Lyell, Mr. Webster, and others; in Sterlingshire by 
our ingenious brother member Mr. Alexander Bryson ; and in 
Ayr by the late Dr. Brown of Longfine ; — all the specimens, 
however, in the same gray beds of micaceous sandstone, repre- 
sented by what is known as the Arbroath pavement, which, 
like the red deposits that lie over and under them, run from 
side to side of the kingdom. While the fossils of the Lower 
Old Red Sandstone are more adequately represented in my 
collection than those of any other Scottish formation, the fos- 
sils of this Middle Old Red are almost the lecut adequately 
represented. And in this respect it resembles every other col- 
lection yet made, except that of Mr. Webster, now, I under- 
stand, in the possession of Lord Kinnaird. There is perhaps 
no Scottish formation in which the Palaeontologist has still so 
much to do as in this Middle Old Red Sandstone. Our respec- 
ted President Dr. Fleming called attention, a full quarter of a 
century ago, to some of its plants, and again took up the sub- 
ject no further back than last year, in an interesting paper read 
before our Society.; and Agassiz has figured and described 
some of its fishes, and more partially and incidentally, at leart 
one of its crustaceans. But much still remains to be done. 
From what I have seen of Mr. Webster's collection, I should 
infer tliat materials have been already accumulated sufficient 
for the restoration of its great crustacean, — one of the most 
gigantic of its family, whether recent or extinct ; and, as the 
Den of Balruddery has furnished of itself nearly a hundred 
specimens of CephalaspU (still a comparatively rare ichthyo- 
lite elsewhere), most of which are now in the hands of Lord 



862 THE FOS8ILI7EKOV8 

Kinnaird, it would be well that some ichthjologist had access 
to the collection, in order to determine whether in Scotland, as 
in England, we have more than one species of this singular 
genus. Dr. Fleming found in this Middle Old Red formation 
an apparent fern, with kidnej-shaped leaflets ; and it yielded 
several years ago, near Clockbriggs, in Forfarshire, a lai^ spe- 
cimen of Lepidodendron, which exhibits the internal structure. 
I owe a fragment of this fossil to an intelligent geologist, Mr. 
William Miller, banker, Dundee ; but so imperfect is its state 
of preservation, that, though it presents to the microscope the 
large irregularly-polygonal cells of its genus, it bears none of 
the nicer specific marks which might serve to distinguish it 
from the several greatly more modem species which occur in 
the Coal Measures. 

Above this Middle formation lies the Upper Old Red Sand- 
stone, with its peculiar group of organisms, chiefly fishes. And 
of it, too, much remains to be known. Save that it has not 
yet produced a Coccostetis, — a genus which seems restricted 
to the oldest ichthyic group of the system, — its fishes more 
resemble those of the Lower than of the Middle Old Red. It 
has its three species of Pterichthys, its ZHplopterus, and appar- 
ently its Dipterus ; and its Celacanths, chiefly of the Holopty- 
chian genus, represent not inadequately the Celacanths of the 
genera Asterolepis and Glyptolepis, which occur chiefly, though 
not exclusively, in the Lower formation. The two formations 
appear, however, to have no species in common. In looking 
over the fine collection of Mr. Patrick Dufi^, derived chiefly 
from the Scat Craig, in the neighborhood! of Elgin, I found 
only a single ill-preserved gill-cover, — seemingly that of a 
Dipterus, — which I could not at once determine to be specifi- 
cally different fix>m aught produced by the inferior doposiL 
Rocks of tills Upper formation have not yet been detected in 
Scotland to the north of the Moray Frith ; and its richest Brit- 



DEPOSITS OP SCOTLAND. 383 

ish deposits are to be found in Moray, Perthshire, Fife, Ber- 
wickshire, and Ayr. In the collection of fishes from Dura 
Den, exhibited four years ago before the British Association, 
then assembled at Edinburgh, I saw several Celacanths that 
have not yet been described ; and a good deal has still to be 
done in fixing and restricting some of the genera of the forma- 
tion already named and figured. It will be found, for instance, 
that Agassiz's genus PlacotJioraXy and his two species Coccos- 
teus mizximus and Pterlchthys majors will ultimately all resolve 
themselves into the latter species alone, — Pterichthys major ; 
of which, by the way, vast numbers have recently been found, 
though in a broken state, in the Upper Old Red Sandstone of the 
" Heads of Ayr." "We may of course expect, however, to see 
more species and genera added to the group than subtracted 
from it, I must mention, ere concluding this part of my sub- 
ject, a curious fact connected with the flora of the formation. 
When visiting last spring the Museum of Economic Geology 
in Jermyn-street, under the friendly guidance of the late Pro- 
fessor Edward Forbes, he pointed out to me an interesting 
group of plants, in a fine state of keeping, which had been 
derived from the Old Red Sandstone of Ireland. The genera 
seemed identical with those of the Coal Measures, but all the 
species were different. I marked, among the others, an ele- 
gant Cyclopterus, -r- CychpieruA Hibemicus^ — of which Sir 
Roderick Murchison figures a single pinna in his recently pub- 
lished " Siluria." The Professor also introduced me to the only 
ichthyic organism that had been found in the Irish deposit, with 
the plants, a ganoidal fish, apparently a Celacanth, and very 
much of the type of those of the Upper formation, though I 
failed to identify the species with any of those already known. 
Professor Forbes, in return, visited my collection here only a 
few weeks ago ; and, in a fern of this Upper deposit, laid open 
by our ingenious member, Mr. John Stewart, in Prestonhaugh 



384 THE FOSSILIFEEOUS 

quarry near Dunse, he recognized his Irish Cyclopterus. As 
Mr. Stewart found the Scotch specimen associated with phites 
of Pterichthys major and scales of Holoptychius Nohilisstmus, — 
two of the most characteristic ichthyolites of the Upper forma- 
tion, — there can be no hesitaUon in assigning to it its place in 
the scale ; and, of course, its position as an Upper Old Red 
fossil in Scotland may be held to determine that of the inters 
esting group to which it is found to belong on the Irish side of 
the channel. 

With respect to the true place of that deposit of pale quart- 
zose sandstone which overlies the Upper Old Red in Moray, and 
has become famous in geology for its reptilian foot-tracks, its 
unique Stagonolepis, and its well-marked curious little reptile 
the Telerpeton Elginense, we are not yet provided with any 
determining evidence. No species common to the Upper Old 
Red and this rock has yet been discovered in either deposit. 
Mr. Patrick Duff, to whose labors we owe both the Slagono- 
lepis and the Telerpeton^ is in possession (with the exception of 
the reptilian foot-prints detected by Captain Brickendon) of all 
the few fossils found in the superior rock, and of a very ample 
collection of those of the underlying one ; but I have seen 
nothing in the two sets in the least resembling each other. 
The late Dr. Mantell supposed, indeed, he had traced a con- 
siderable resemblance between the scales of Stagonolepis and 
those of a ganoid of Dura Den, — the Glyptopomiis. They bear, 
however, a much closer resemblance to the scales of the Mys- 
irtosaurns Muenstere, a reptile of the Lias of Munich, of which 
I exhibited a good print to this Society about three years 
ago, the use of which I owed to the kindness of Sir Charles 
Lyell. When visiting a quarry in this northern deposit sev- 
eral years since, I was informed by the workmen that they 
frequently came upon foot-tracks like those found by Captain 
Brickendon. The only other remains of the deposit is that of 



DEPOSITS OF SCOTLAND. 385 

the reptile Telerpetan ; and, when we take into account the 
fact that in this northern locality outliers of the Lias and Oolite 
are not unfrequently found resting conformably on the Old Red 
Sandstone, and that the vertebrate organisms of these deposits 
are preponderatingly reptilian, it seems at least as probable 
that it belongs to that Secondary period of the wprld's history 
during which reptiles were abundant, as to that middle Palaeo- 
zoic period during which, though fishes were largely developed, 
reptiles were exceedingly rare. But the final determination of 
the point must be regarded as awaiting the researches of the 
future. 

The Carboniferous deposits in Scotland have, from their 
economic importance, been longer wrought than those of any 
of its other systems, and yet all their fossils, animal and vege- 
table, are still far from being adequately known. During the 
last few years I have found the remains of both plants and ani- 
mals in Carboniferous deposits, not many miles removed from 
our Scottish capital, that have still to be figured and named ; 
and much remains to be done in the work of restoring from 
suites of specimens organisms of the system, both vegetable 
and animal, already known in part. It is only within the last 
two or three years that trace of reptiles has been detected in 
our Scotch Coal Measures. The Prabairachus colei of Owen 
has been found in the coal-field near Carluke ; and the foot- 
prints of a much larger reptile detected in our Dalkeith coal- 
field by Mr. Henry Cadell, the experienced and intelligent 
mineral surveyor of his Grace the Duke of Buccleuch. I refer 
to these interesting facts to indicate the direction in which there 
is encouragement to press our researches. We have hitherto 
liad little experience in Scotland of that style of exhaustive 
research of which the Palaeontographical Society of England 
is presenting us with so admirable an example. Curiously 
enough, however, old David Urc, one of our earliest collectors 

S3 



386 THE FOSSILIFEROUS 

of the carboniferous fossils, gave, in his " Natural History of 
Rutherglen," published more than sixty years ago, an example 
of this exhaustive style, perhaps as complete as was possible 
at the time. He seems to have figured, and, after a sort, des- 
cribed, every fossil of both the Coal and the Mountain Lime- 
stone, which .he succeeded in disinterring during what, in an 
age in which there were few to sympathize in his labors, must 
have been a very sedulous course of research. The magnifi- 
cent sections of our neighborhood give peculiar facilities in ex- 
ploring the Coal Measures and tlieir contents, — facilities w^hich 
geologists who have resided for a season amid the soil-covered 
flats of central England would well know how to appreciate. 
There are few finer sections of the Coal deposits anywhere in 
Britain than those laid open along the shores of Granton, Mus- 
selburgh, and Prestonparis ; and the section of the Mountain 
Limestone exposed in the nwine at Dry den is, so far as I have 
yet seen, the most extensive in Scotland. By those who hold, 
as is done by some of the geologists of our western capital, that 
this formation is wanting as a base to the Scottish Coal-field, a 
visit to this section might be found very instructive. It does 
not exhibit that great thickness of limestone for which the cor- 
responding formation in England is so remarkable, but presents, 
for several hundred feet together, in its encrinal bands, inter- 
calat(Hl amid shales and sandstone, evidence of a marine origin ; 
and its upper calcareous beds, laden with spirifers and producta, 
and of very considerable thickness, show that a tolerably pro- 
found sea must have covered the field shortly ere the formation 
of our older beds of workable coal. 

My collection contains no specimens of the New Red Sand- 
stone of Scotland, — the scene of those discoveries of the late 
Dr. Duncan of Ruth well from which that division of geoloc^ic 
science known as Ichuology took its rise. Nor are at lea.>t 
sets of ita specimens to be found in any of the Scotch museums 



DEPOSITS OF SCOTLAND. 367 

I have yet seen ; but as Sir William Jardine is understood to 
be still engaged in figuring and describing its various footprints, 
— the only traces of former existence which it has been found 
to contain, — we bid fair to be acquainted, at no distant date, 
with all that it produces. It could be wished, however, that we 
had the result of Sir William's labors conveyed to us in that 
cheap but yet adequate form of outline engraving in which Pro- 
fessor Hitchcock has figured the foot-tracks, reptilian or omi- 
thologic, of the New Red Sandstones of the Connecticut. 

In the Lias and Oolite of Scotland a good deal still remains 
to be accomplished. Some of their richest deposits lie scat- 
tered among the inner Hebrides, and along lochs and creeks of 
the Western Highlands, rarely visited by the tourist, and far 
from inns ; and this difficulty of access has served to lock up 
in these solitudes many a curious fossil, that may be regarded 
as held in safe keeping, to reward the enterprise of our younger 
geologists. My collection contains not a few curious specimens, 
derived from these Hebridean recesses during a desultory voy- 
age in the Free Church yacht Betsey, made about ten years 
ago, — reptilian remains, fossil wood, and the teeth of placoidal 
fishes from the Oolite of Eigg, and pinna;, ammonites, and 
massive corals from the Lias of Pabba and Skye. It may 
serve to show that we are no more to argue an entire identity 
of the Oolitic deposits of Scotland with those of England, tlian 
of its Silurian with the Silurians of that country, — that corals, 
which are of exceeding rarity and minute size in the English 
Lias, form entire beds of great extent and several feet in thick- 
ness in the Lias of Skye. I can, however, only indicate the 
locale of some of the deposits in which these rarities may be 
found, — simply referring, in the passing, to the localities already 
indicated by Sir Roderick Murchison in his earlier papers, — 
such as the Oolites in the neighborhood of Portree, the Oolitic 
beds of Raza, and the Liassic strata of Applecross ; as also to 



3d8 THC FOSSILIFEROirS 

tlie earioiis fresh-water or estaaij deposit of Loch Staffin, des- 
cribed in the ** Geological Journal " for 1851, bj the late Pro- 
fessor Edward Forbes. There is a patch of Lias on the shores 
of Lodi Aline, exceedin^jr rich in some of the diaracteristic 
organsms of the formatioo, which I would fain haye examined 
with some care, baC wanted the necessary opportunity. From 
deposits partially OTcrflown by the Trap of MoU, and which 
crop oat along the ea^^tem 5lK)res of that Island, I have exhumed 
specimens thai bear in the group an Oolitic aspect; and in 
spending a few hours in the Island of Pabba, when the yacht, 
my home for the time, was cruising in the offing, I found in it 
such prcMnise of a rich fossil harvest, that when a young friend, 
— Mr. Archibald Greikie, — requested me last year to point 
out to him some one or two centres from which I thought he 
might best acquaint himself with our Scottish Lias of the west- 
em coast, I ventured to recommend the latter island, and the 
southern portion of the neighboring Bay of Broadford, as two 
of the most promising. Mr. Gk?ikie, — in whom our Society 
may, I trust, recognize a future member, — found his way to 
Pabba, — introduced himself- to the sole family resident on the 
island, — slept, I believe, in a bam, — lived on potatoes and 
milk, — and brought away with him an interesting suite of fos- 
sils. And after this manner must the Hebrides, and the Western 
Highlands be explored. The Oolitic beds of the eastern coast 
are considerably more accessible than those of the west. The 
Lias of Eathie, near Cromarty, b one of the richest de|x>sit5 
in animal remains which I have anywhere seen ; and it has 
yielded several unique fossils, — such as the broad-spiked leaf- 
lets of some ancient tree attached to a stem of a twelvemonth's 
growth, that yields to the microscope, in a prepared section, the 
coniferous tissue, — cones of unique structure, — a well-marked 
frond of Zamia of an undescribed species, — numerous am- 
monites in a fine state of preservation, — and one of the com- 



DEPOSITS OF SCOTLAND. 389 

pletest sets of Liassic belemnites yet collected. What have been 
deemed corresponding deposits, which, however, I am disposed 
to refer to a higher horizon, occur in the neighborhood of the 
northern Sutor ; and near the base of one of these, at Caanrie, 
there is a seam of coal or lignite very much resembling that of 
Brora, and flanked by a bed of fresh water shells and Pema, 
the last identical in species, so far as I have been able to deter- 
mine the point, with that of the Pema bed described by the 
late Mr. Robertson of Woodside as flanking the Brora seam. 
Above the coal there occurs a rubbly stratum, also like one at 
Brora, charged with vast numbers of the Belemniie svlcatus ; 
and in an upper stratum I found a well-marked specimen of 
Ammonites perarmatus ; likewise a species of the Brora coal- 
field. In short, I am disposed to hold, — both from the identity 
of many of its fossils, and its general appearance, — that this 
supposed Liassic deposit is in reality an Oolitic one, and that 
its coal occupies a horizon not much removed from that of the 
coal at Brora. I may here mention, that the Lias of Eathie 
was the scene, only two years ago, of a disastrous coal-boring 
speculation, on which much good money was expended. The 
unlucky speculator, — an industrious and respectable man, whom 
I would fain have dissuaded from an undertaking so hopeless, 
but who, as he had no faith in geology, simply thanked me for 
my advice, and wrought on, — dug a wide pit in the Liassic 
shales, to the depth of more than a hundred feet, and found in 
abundance ammonites and belemnites, with a few well-preserved 
vertebral joints of Ichthyosaurus, and unfortunately here and 
there fragments of cone-bearing trees, with their trunks con- 
verted into jet, but, of course, no coal. The hole was made 
large and deep enough to prove the sepulchre of several hun- 
dred pounds ; but I console myself by reflecting that the inev- 
itable expense of the excavating operations was incurred in 
defiance of all that I could say ; and I would now urge on my 



390 THE FOSS1LIFEROU8 

friends the anti-geologists, tbat they should much rather attempt 
making shillings by lecturing against the science, than run the 
risk of losing the shillings already made by becoming miners 
in its despite. 

The Oolite of Sutherland, — famous for containing the only 
seam of coal in this formation, at least in Britain, which could 
have been wrought for years without much positive loss, — was 
elaborately described many years ago by Sir Roderick Murchi- 
son, in a memoir that gave rich earnest of his after contribu- 
tions to geologic science. It is impossible, however, to exhaust 
a great formation otherwise than slowly ; and not a few fossils 
have been added of late years to the list appended to Sir Rod- 
erick's memoir. It is from the vegetable organisms of this 
deposit that we can now form our most adequate conceptions of 
the Oolitic Flora of Scotland. As in England and America, 
it had its numerous cycadaceoe, — its ferns of simple undivided 
frond, unique in their venation, but resembling in their forms 
the hart's-tongue genus (Scolopendra), its thuyitcs,its pines; and 
though they occupied a scarce appreciable space in the group, 
its dicotyledonous plants. When, after glancing over some 
of the vegetable productions of the system, such as its cyca- 
daceai, now restricted to the warmer climates, or over its mas- 
sive corals, which attained to a size seldom rivalled in the pres- 
ent state of things, save in the intertropical seas, I have then 
examined some of its woods externally gnarled, and stunted, 
and marked internally by minute annual rings, as small as those 
of a Scotch fir or Norwegian pine that had grown on some 
exposed hill-side, it has occuri*ed to me that some of the Oolitic 
districts in what is now Scotland must have had their lofty 
mountain ranges, which, while a genial climate prevailed at 
their bases, rose, mayhap, to nearly the snow-line, and bore on 
(iH'ir bleak ridges the stunted slow-growing trees. The frame- 
work of this ancient land was composed — as we learn from 



DEPOSITS OF SCOTLAND. 391 

its conglomerates, and in some instances from the fragments of 
rock still locked fast amid the roots of its trees — of Old Red 
flagstones, identical with those of Caithness, and evidently bear- 
ing at the time marks of as high an antiquity as they do now. 
Many of these flagstone masses, sorely water-rolled, occur in an 
Oolitic paste ; and we find in strange neighborhoods shells of 
the Oolite inclosed in the paste, and fishes of the Old Red in 
the pebbles which it envelops. I have found a pebble which 
bore inside an Old Red Osieolepis encrusted with an Oolitic 
Thamnastrea ; and another pebble occupied by an Old Red 
fucoid that was partially perforated by an Oolitic lithodomus 
shell. It is surely not uninteresting thus to catch, as it were, 
glimpses, through the high antiquity of a Secondary age, of a 
Palaeozoic age vastly more ancient still, — to see long with- 
drawing vistas opening, through the remote times of the Oolite, 
into the incalculably more remote times of the Lower Old Red 
Sandstone. 

Those outliers of the Weald, or rather of a fresh-water or 
estuary Oolite, which occur in Morayshire, are adequately rep- 
resented in only a few local collections, — the completest set of 
these fossils which I have yet seen being that in the possession 
of Mr. Patrick Duff of Elgin, who, living in the immediate 
neighborhood of the rich deposits at Linksfield, and animated 
by an ever fresh zeal for the interests of natural science, has 
been concentrating his exertions for years on these detached 
deposits, and on the not less rich formations of the Old Red 
Sandstone on which they rest. Thei» organisms, — constitut- 
ing a link in the geologic history of Scotland which no other 
locality has yet supplied, — consist of the dorsal spines of a 
new species of HyhoduSj — the teeth of an Acrodus and Spen- 
onchus, — the scales, ^d, at least in one instance, an entire 
specimen, of a Lepidoitu, which Agassiz has identified as the 
Lepidoius minor of the English Weald, — bones and teeth of 



392 TUB F088ILIF£EOU8 

Pieno$auru$j a well-inarked cbeloiuiin femnr, — sheDs, both 
marine and fresh-water, such as Unto PlanorbU Paludina, — 
what seem to be an Astarte and a small Ostrea, — and whole 
strata formed of a minute Cyprus. There are appearances 
connected with the Linksfield deposit that date from a compar- 
atively recent period, which are at least as extraordinary as 
aught that the beds themselves contain. Thej form there a 
small hill, about from forty to fifty feet in height, and several 
hundred feet in extent either way ; while beneath lies a thick 
deposit of the Old Red comstones, wrought in this locally for 
lime. Interposed, however, between this hill of the Weald and 
the calcareous comstones, there is a bed of the ordinaiy boul- 
der clay of the district, charged not only with the fragments of 
the rock on which is lies, but also of the well-marked Wealdcn 
strata which overlie it ; and, more curious still, the comstone 
bears on its surface, so far as the quarriers have yet penetrated, 
the ordinary glacial markings characteristic of the boulder clay. 
It would seem as if during the glacial period this hill had been 
so shifted or raised from its foundations, that the agent, what- 
ever its nature, which during the icebergal period dressed and 
grooved the rock-surfaces of the country, was enabled to dress 
and groove the comstone on which the hill now rests. Tlie 
appearances, — suggestive of the operations of some incalcula- 
bly enormous force, — are suited to remind one of that sublime 
simile employed by Milton, in describing the effect of the stroke 
under which the rebel angel reeled and fell : — 

" As if on earth 
Winds nndei^gronnd, or waters forcing way 
Sidelong, had pushed a mountain from his seat, 
Half-sunlc, with all its pines." 

««^ ^ 

With these detached outliers we take leave in Scotland of the 

Secondary formations, in their character as original deposits. 



DEPOSITS OF SCOTLAND. 393 

whose strata still occur in tbe order in which they were first 
laid down. We find, however, in Banff and Aberdeenshires, 
and more partially in Caithness, remains of the Cretaceous 
system, occurring in some localities in the character of re-foi> 
mations. A deposit at Moreseat, near Cruden, elaborately des- 
cribed by Mr. William Ferguson, late of Glasgow, seems to be 
almost exclusively a re-formation of the Greensand ; and on 
the Hill of Dudwick, near Ellon, there are vast accumulations 
of flints, in which the Rev. Mr. Longmuir of Aberdeen, who 
has carefully explored the locality, detected many of the char- 
acteristic Cretaceous fossils funiished by the chalk of England. 
I have examined beds of gravel a few miles to the south of 
Peterhead, in which there occurs merely a per centage, though a 
not inconsiderable one, of these chalk flints; but I have been in- 
formed by our ingenious corresponding member, Mr. Peach, 
with whom I saw several of the Cretaceous organisms of the 
locality, that, had I set myself to examine in a difierent direc- 
tion, more to the north and west, I would have found thick 
gravel beds composed of chalk flints almost exclusively. The 
best collections yet made of the organisms of this denuded sys- 
tem, of which only the broken fragments survive, are those of 
Mr. Longmuir, representative of the Scottish Chalk, and of 
Mr. Ferguson, representative of the Scottish Greensand. Both 
are inadequately represented in my collection ; and what it 
possesses I owe chiefly to the kindness of Mr. Longmuir, and 
to that of Mr. Dick, the original discoverer of the Chalk in 
Caithness, where it oocurs, however, merely in detached frag- 
ments in the boulder clay. Much need not be expected from 
the organic remains of a deposit so broken and scattered. I 
have seen in its flints, however, finer and more delicately pre- 
served specimens of a Flustra, that not a little resembles our 
existing Flustra foUacea, than any I have yet succeeded in 
detecting in those of England ; and the group, however frag- 



394 I^E FOSSILIFEROUS 

mentary and incomplete, must be regarded as possessing a cer- 
tain interest of its own, in its character as a portion of the fos- 
sil records of a country whose IcUer geologic history, like her 
civil one both late and early, is meagre in its authentic materi- 
als, and, in consequence, unsatisfactory in its details. 

With but one baiting place, — that furnished by his Grace 
the Duke of Argyle's discovery of Miocene leaf-beds in the 
Island of Mull, — we have to stride, in Scotland, wholly across 
the Tertiary divisions, and find our first footing on the deposits 
of the Pleistocene. I have not yet seen the leaf-beds repre- 
sented in any collection, save the great British one in Jermyn 
Street They must, however, be regarded as possessing pecu- 
liarly a Scotch interest, not merely from the glimpse wliich 
they yield us of those old dicotyledonous forests of our country 
which succeeded, after the lapse of unreckoned ages, the conif- 
erous forests of the Oolite, but also from the circumstance of 
their irrefragably demonstrating that, up till a comparatively 
late period, Scotland had its great outbursts of Trap. A thick 
bed of rudely columnar basalt overlies the most modem of 
these beds; and deposits of trap tuff, in which his Grace 
detected rolled chalk flints, overlie the older ones ; tlius show- 
ing, that long af\er the times of the Chalk, and when trees 
allied to the yew, the plane, and the buckthorn, grew in our 
forests, those deluges of molten matter from the abyss which 
had obtained throughout the earlier geologic ages, had not yet 
ceased, but were, on the contrary, potent enough to overspread 
wide areas to the depth of from twenty to forty feet Fi*oin 
these times of fire we at once pass, in this northern part of the 
island, to a period of ice, — to the ages represented by grooved 
and polished surfaces, travelled rocks, boreal shells, and the 
boulder clay. Though geologically the period was onv, it 
yields, I am disposed to think, evidence of three distinct buc- 
cessive stages. 



DEPOSITS OF SCOTLAND. 395 

The Boreal shells of Banffshire (which occur at Gamrie in 
a finely stratified sand, two hundred and thirty feet over the 
sea, and at Castlcton King-Edward in a similar deposit of very 
considerable elevation, and at least six miles inland), lie deep, 

— though exposed laterally in sections, — in the Pleistocene 
deposit. At Castleton I found the shells within a few feet of 
the underlying Grauwacke rock, and an immense deposit of 
beds of sand and clay, and over all a thick bed of partially 
consolidated ferruginous gravel lying above them. At Gamrie, 
though, from the great slope of the ground, the fact is less cer- 
tain, they also seem to lie low ; and further, both from their 
littoral aspect, and the circumstance that we find no trace of a 
littoral terrace where they occur, I cannot avoid the conclusion 
that they mark the line where a shore of the country existed 
for a time, when the country was in a state of subsidence, and 
ere yet the higher lying boulder clay was formed. The only 
peculiarity of the shells themselves, viewed in the group, is 
their intensely boreal character. The sole species of Astarte 
wliich I have yet found at either Gjimrie or Castleton King- 
Edward, — and I have now visited these deposits ^\q several 
times, — is the Greenland shell, Astarte Arctica ; Naiica clausa, 

— a shell of Spitzbergen and the North Cape, — is the pre- 
vailing Natica ; and the most abundant shell, of at least the 
Giunrie deposit, is a bivalve not yet found living in our seas, 
but common ten degrees further to the north, TelHna proximo. 
Even the great size to which the latter shell attained in this 
locality is not without its bearing on the question. ** The few 
specimens which have been dredged [dead] in Britain," says 
the late Professor Forbes, in his admirable history of the Brit- 
ish Mollusca, " are much smaller than the exotic ones, none 
which we have seen exceeding three-quarters of an inch in 
length, and about half an inch in breadth." The mollusc is one 
of those which attain to their fullest development amid the 



396 TBS FOSSUOrSBOUS 

frosts and snows of the higher latitudes ; and it is s corions 
fact, that in the Gramrie and Castleton deposits we find it <^ a 
considerablj greater size than anjwhere else in Scotland. M j 
largest specimens from the Clyde beds hardl j exceed an inch 
in length; whereas my largest Gamrie specimens are nearly 
two inches long, and their hreadth Terj considerably exceeds 
the length given as British by Professor Forbes. 

Most of the boolder days, — especially the higher lying 
deposits, — I regard as more modem than these Banffshire 
beds. They mark a period when the land sat low in the 
water, and existed as but a group of wintry islands. To the 
south of the Grampians, their organisms are but few; they 
have yielded at wide intervals horns of the rein-deer, and tusks 
of the northern elephant; but, save in an insulated patch in 
AVigtonshire, no shells. The boulder clay in Caithness is, on 
the other hand, rich in shells. They excited the attention of a 
mineral surveyor,- who flourished about the beginning of the 
present century, — old John Busby, — more than fifty years 
ago ; they also attracted the notice of the late Sir John Sin- 
clair ; and in one of my Caithness journeys, I was told by my 
friend Mr. Dick, that one of the hills on which they occur has 
home from a still more early period the name of " Buckie s 
Hill;" but to Mr. Dick himself, and to Mr. Cleghom of AVick, 
has the working out of the deposit been mainly left. And so 
cfTectivcly has it been done, that Mr. Dick, as he intbrms me, 
has not for a considerable time past succeeded in finding in it a 
single new shell. The prevailing molluscs of the deposit are 
Cyprina, Jsiandica, and TurnteUa communis^ especially the 
former ; the prevailing iVstarte, though the Arctica also occurs, 
is Asiarte elliptica; the prevailing Tellina, Tellxna Solidula, 
Tellina proxima is of smaller size than in the Gamrie beds ; 
and Natica clausa less common. Still the deposit is very 
decidedly a boreal one in its shells, and in its mechanical phe- 



DEPOSITS OF SCOTLAND. 397 

nomena the most decidedly boreal of the group. Every rock- 
surface on which it rests is grooved and striated ; almost 
every softer pebble which it encloses is scratched and furrowed, 
usually in the line of its longer axis ; all its larger shells exist 
as broken fragments, oft«n rounded as if by attrition, and bear- 
ing in their lines and scratches marks of the same agents that 
dj-essed the rocks and scored' the pebbles ; nay, the very sub- 
stance and color of its prevailing clays show that it is mainly 
composed of the dressings of the rocks on which it rests, — all 
giving evidence, apparently, of a time when our half-foundered 
country sat from eight hundred to a thousand feet lower ii\ the 
water than it does now, and vast packs of grinding icebergs 
went careering over what are now its lower hills and its higher 
table-lands. 

The Clyde beds and their contents belong apparently to a 
still later time. Their largest shells are usually in a state of 
great entireness and fine keeping. I had the pleasure of laying 
open, two years ago, at Fairlie, on the Ayrshire coast, a virgin 
deposit unknown before, in which I found continuous scalps of 
Pecten Islandicus still occupying the place in which they had 
lived and died, and with their upper valves covered with largo 
balanse, such as we now dredge up from the outer limits of the 
laminarian zone, and all fresh and unbroken. Huge Panopata 
were there sticking fast in an unctuous clay, with their open 
siphuncular ends turned upwards; and entire specimens of 
Cyprina Islandicus and Modiola Modiolus, with their valves 
still conn^ected by the sorely decayed ligament TeUina prox- 
%ma was abundant, but reduced in size to little more than half 
the Gamrie dimensions. I found Astarte eUiptica the prevail- 
ing Astarte ; and groups of younger Cyprina huddled together 
in the character — which they do not now assume on our coasts 
— of gregarious shells. No crushing iceberg had passed over 
this deposit: a grooved and polished rock of Old Red Sandstone 

34 



398 THH FOSSaiFKEOVS 

lies beneatliy OTerlaid bj a thin stratom of red day, apparentlj 
derived from it ; bat the higfaer-ljing gray stratum in which 
the shells occur had a different origin : it is simplj the partiallj 
consolidated mud of a quiet sea-bottom ; and though its group 
of organisms manifest decidedlj the boreal character, I cannot 
doubt that they lived at a time when, either from some change 
in the currents of the coast, or from the elevation of the pro- 
tecting ishmds outside, — an effect of a general rising of the 
land, — the sea was no longer an exposed one. Thejr in all 
probability mark that later stage of the wintr}' period to which 
the last-formed group of our local glaciers belonged, and in 
which our gradually-emerging country presented, age after age, 
a broader and yet broader area, won from the deep. 

One period more, and I shall have completed my survey. 
All the shells which have hitherto been found beneath our lat- 
est terraces of upheaval still exist on our coasts. They repre- 
sent a time, perhaps not greatly in advance of the earlier 
historic ages, when the country had begun to exist under its 
present climatal conditions. Some of these modem shells are, 
however, found to occur in very different proportions, in cer- 
tain localities, from what thoy do now. The only specimens of 
Pholas candidits which I have been able to procure from the 
Lower reaches of the Cromarty Frith occur in a clay-bcnl of 
the old coast period which underlies an arable field in the 
Lonez of Fern, a full mile from the sea. My only specimens 
of Scrohicidaria piperata from the Frith of Forth have Ikhju 
derived from the brick clays behind Portobello, more than a 
quarter of a mile beyond the reach of the tide. My first 
found Scotch specimens of Thracia convexa I collected last 
year from a raised sea-bottom near North Queensferry. Tlie 
upheaval of the land seems to have altered the conditions, in 
certain loailities, favoniblc to the production of shells surh as 
Scrobicularia and Pholas; and Thracia canvexoj tliough it 



DEPOSITS OP SCOTLAND. S99 

Still lives in the Fritli of Forth, — which furnished me in the 
course of last summer with two specimens, that, from their 
appearance, must have died within the twelvemonth, — seems 
to be a greatly less abundant shell in the locality now than dur- 
ing the ages of the old-coast line, and appears, unless, indeed, 
it has been hitherto strangely missed by our dredgers, to be 
dying out The old sea-bottom at Queensferry, little more 
than half an acre in extent, furnished me with full three dozen 
specimens, though in a state more or less broken, — an extra- 
ordinary number for what has been well described in the histoiy 
of the Mollusca as one of our rarest Britbh shells. Of these 
recent shells of the ancient coast line we find older and newer 
beds. The Scrohicvlaria of Portobello, for instance, were the 
inhabitants of a muddy estuary, which mn along what is now 
the flat, winding, willow-skirted valley that runs inland towards 
the village of Easter Duddingstone ; but ere the last upheaval 
of the Ixmd they must have been dead for ages ; for how can 
we otherwise interpret their position in the brick-clay, with from 
six to eight feet of an argillaceous deposit, of apparently slow 
formation, resting over them. The Pholas bed of the Lanes 
of Fern exists in similar conditions. It, too, was deeply silted 
over ere the last rise of the land ; whereas the shells of Gran- 
ton, and of many other localities on the coast, must have been 
beach-shells at the time of the upheaval ; and not a few of them 
were, mayhap, living scarce half a year before. In some of 
these old estuary deposits, — such as that of Portobello, — we 
find interesting remains of the aboriginal trees of the country, 
— boles of oak, birch, alder, the Scotch fir, and the yew, — with 
handfuls of sorely blackened hazel-nuts, and the trunks and 
branches of a dwarfish hawthorn, converted into a glossy sub- 
stance, nearly resembling jet They yield us curious glimpses 
of those mighty woods which covered the country ere it had 
become a home of man, or during those earlier ages of his in- 



400 THE FOSSILIFEROT7S 

habitancj, when he was yet too unskilful to commence its his- 
tory. 

Such is a view, all too inadequate, and yet, I fear, not a little 
tedious, both of the several fields in which our geologic mem- 
bers have still much labor before them, and of what a Scottish 
museum, truly national, should represent. Though the breaks 
and hiatuses are many, there are still noble materials within 
the limits of our country for the composition of its pre-Adamic 
history, — that history of which the record is in the rocks, and 
of which organisms are the significant and impressive charac- 
ters. The very gaps which occur in the long chronicle serve 
all the more strongly to divide it into periods, each furnished 
with its own independent group of being, specifically unlike 
that which went before, or that which followed after, and suited 
to remind us all the more emphatically in consequence, that to 
every species that ever lived in the old geologic ages there 
came a " last day." We have been long accustomed to recog- 
nize the inexorable reign of death in its relation to individuals, 
and to regard it as one of the most assured and certain of all 
things, that as all who have lived upon our earth during the 
ages of the past have died, so it is " appointed for all " who 
now hve upon it " once to die." The same experience which 
leads us to anticipate that the sun will rise and set to-morrow, 
just because the sun has risen and set during all the many days 
of the past, leads us also to anticipate that all the individual 
creatures which now inhabit the earth will die, just because all 
the individual creatures which inhabited the earth in the bygone 
ages have died. And now we find geology extending this uni- 
form experience of death from individuals to species, and com- 
pelling us to believe, on the strength of the argument to which 
we so unhesitatingly yield in the other cases, that as all the 
species of the past have died, so it is destined for all the species 
of the present also to die. The theologian had to contend in 



DEPOSITS OP SCOTUIND. 401 

the last age with a class of skeptics who, — then: skepticism assum- 
ing, as is not very uncommon, the form of credulous belief, — . 
used to argue that there had been an infinite series of men upon 
earth ; and, of course, if the race had no beginning, could it be 
held in consistency that it was to have an end? We now 
absolutely know, as geologists, not only that a beginning there 
was, but that the beginning was a comparatively recent event ; 
and further, founding on the unvarying experience of the past, 
we also know that the race, in at least its existing character and 
condition, is to have an end. There are peculiarities, too, in 
the visitations of the present time, suited to suggest many a 
pregnant thought in connection with this curious and surely 
not unimportant subject I travelled by railway, in middle 
autumn, two years ago, for about a hundred miles, through a 
series of well-cultivated fields ; and found almost all their pota- 
toes, constituting about one-fifth of the entire produce of the 
district, killed by a mysterious disease, and exhaling a heavy 
odor of death and decay, that infected the air mile after mile. 
There were perhaps as many individual plants of this useful 
vegetable lying brown and dead in the extensive area through 
which I passed as the entire species would have consisted of 
had it not been so sedulously and extensively cultivated by man; 
and the appearance of the blackened and fetid fields suggested 
to me how, in at least some of the instances, species may have 
died. A disease similarly extensive is devastating at the pres- 
ent time the vineyards of the south ; and it is said that, should 
it continue its ravages for a year or two longer, the generous 
Madeira of the wine-drinker will become as much a mere tra- 
dition in consequence as the extinct wines of the ancients. Nay, 
during the present age have we not seen a new and terrible 
disease, quite as mysterious in its character and origin as any 
of those which have fallen on the vegetable kingdom, sweeping 
away greatly more than a hundred millions of our own species? 

84* 



402 THE F08SI LIFE ROUS 

Bead in the light of geologic history, with its irre&agable evi- 
dence of the oflen-repeated extinction of entire creations, these 
visitations of the age assume a peculiar significancy. But the 
subject is one which I must not pursue. The same time which, 
in its sure course, conducts both individuals and species to their 
last day, has brought round the last day of my occupancy of 
this chair. Accept, gentlemen, ere I leave it, my best thanks 
for the marked kindness and courtesy which I have on every 
occasion received at your hands, — for the tolerance which has 
overlooked my many shortcomings, — and for the attention and 
respect with which my various communications have been re- 
ceived. I trusted to have had the honor of resigning it to a gentle- 
man who, fifteen years ago, was one of the most active and zealous 
members of the Royal Physical Society ; and who had, since 
that time, achieved for himself in natural science in general, 
and in geology in especial, a reputation co-extensive with the 
civilized world.* But, alas ! Death reigns. This distinguished 
man, in the full blow of his fame, and in the mature prime of 
vigorous manhood, has passed suddenly away ; and wherever 
in either hemisphere physical science is cultivated, or the bypast 
history of our globe excites the legitimate interest, his early 
death will be felt and deplored as a heavy loss. The spoiler 
has broken abruptly ofi* many a train of ingenious thought, — 
cut short many a course of sedulous inquiry, — arrested, just ere 
its formation, many a profound induction, — and scattered hoards 
of unrecorded knowledge, the adequate re-gathering of which 
many years to come may fail to witness. But our idle regrets 
can neither restore the dead nor benefit the living. Let us 
rather manifest our regard for the memory of our illustrious 
brother, — taken so unexpectedly from among us, — by making 
his disinterested devotion to science our example, and by striv- 

* It had been proposed, at the previous meeting of the Society, to call 
to the vacant Presidential Chair the late Professor Edward Forbes. 



DEPOSITS OF SCOTLAND. 



427 



ing to catch the tone of his frank and generous spirit. And 
seeing how very much he succeeded in accomplishing within 
the limits of a life that has, alas I fallen short bj more than 
thirty years of the old allotted term, let us diligently carry on, 
in the love of truth, our not unimportant labors, remembering 
that much may be accomplished in comparatively brief space 
if no time be lost, and that to each and all that *^ night cometh" 
at an uncertain hour, under whose dense and unbroken shadow 
^ no man can work." 



Q^eSnlu 



GOULD & LINCOLN, 

PUBLISHERS AND BOOKSELLEKS, 

59 WASHINGTON STREET, BOSTON. 



CHARLES D. GOULD. 



JOSnUA LINCOLN. 



mr O. ft L. voatd call attention to their extensive list of publieationi, embrmcing ralnablg 
works in Thkoloot, Scibnck, Litrratuub axd Akt, Text Books fob Scuuols .':r.t 
CoLLKOBS and Miscbllaskovs, etc., in large Taricty, the productiona of some of the aDlcsl 
writers, and most sdentittc men or the age, among which will be found those of Cliainbers, 
Hugh Miller, Agossiz, Qoald. Guyot, Marcou, Bayne. Rogers, Dr. Harris, Dr. Way land. Dr. 
Williams, Dr. Ripley, Dr. Kitti^ Dr. Krummacher, Dr. Twecdie, Dr. Choules, Dr. Sprague. 
Newcomb. Banvanf, '* Walter Aimwcll,'* Bungener, Miall, Archdeacon Hare, and others of 
like standing and popularity \ and to this list they are constantly adding. Among their late 
publications are the roUowiag, vix. :— 

Knowleilice li Poircr. The rroductirojUf^ of Janies Montgomery. Abnd^red 

M <>n-ic# 'ii Mi.>d«m ifldttj, and ihc Romlts iwxn the rtocnt London seven toI. cd. By 

of J^a1>nr, Capital^ and Skill. By Kn liiU i. Mri. 11. C. Kkioiit, author of" Lady llun- 

jUuitvated. ASFU £dt. Iloviiv^ir vitb ailiJl- UngHin AiMl her Friends." Illustrated. Limo. 

tfons. Dy £}, A. Wkio-i. l;2mo. CloUi, CI0U3, %\J2^. 

ESSiyB \ hi Biography and Criticism. By 
pETEit Baynk. author of the "ChristloA 
LUk" 1^10. Cloth, $1.25. 

Text Books: 

WaI-lAItd"* Moral Science and Politietd 

Mentmrnft. The same, abridoeth 
BlaMM'S i'hilonopfiy (md jistrmiomv. 
BAiLSf *i Vouiig Lttdiet' CIom-Hook. 
DiUiAWAfs Tioman Antiquities. 
pALltV Tftcoloffif. 
AuAE^tt* and Gould's Zoologjf. 
Looms' Ofologu. 
IIaVe^'^ Mental Philowphtf. 
G t? tot's Earth and Man. nnd Mural Maps. 
tS^kKtn1l^i^ Gmmuutr, and Exercises in €'•»•> 

ThCiUOrilS or EKOLisn Wobds ako 
FnRAaEa. 80 classified as to fhcilitato th« 
cxpreMJoiL of ideas, and to aHist in literary 
mmpoiiUciti. By Peter Make Ruoet. 
Ittrvfitd ft!id Edited, with a List of Foreign 
Wt^rdi d4>llned in English, by Barwas 
Br AH I, I), D., Prcs. of Brown Univ. iSxao. 
ClJJtli, tlr'-O. 
Fdc(]ttAr«ii 4 writer In seizing upon just th« 

light word Tor his purpose. 

Visits to Cwropean Celobritle?. By 

W,B. 6fsaocb,D. D. 12mo. Q\.,%\S». 

A anki of graphic and lifo-Vike Personal 
SkvtelKs flf ihe most Distinguished Mcu and 
Wonivn of flurop^. 

tnA&t of the North Star. The Ex- 
cursion mude to England. Russin, Denmark, 
France, Spain, Italy, Alaito, Turkey, Ma- 
dciim e4cv By Rev. J. O. Ciioi'les, D. D. 
I1Liuti%aans, etc 12mo. Ck)th, gilt, $IJX). 

Tbi Afitoral History or tub himax 

Bncimi I Its Tyi^cal Forms and Primeval 
Diatritolj^ti. By Chas. Hamilton Smith. 
Wlt^Bfl Introduction containing an abstract 



Smphfltipnllj a book (brth* pcopt**, contain- 
loff an iiTicn^TtH pjiinunc of Inipfirlant InfuP' 
mitlijn, whjch every b<Mly riught to [KiM«ii« 

ATiiiiift] of Sci«DtlGc Dk^corerj En s^ 

cniTD hnci Art, I'xhibkin^ Llti? trciit imcMirtant 
UijrijVcrJ{>fl and Impnovricn'T^Cft In Altctturv-' 
LCi, Uii-ful Art*. Nature I rhikHirplitr', Clicm^ 
lltry^ AmXTntnijAV^ M i" too n* [riff y, 'ZcxtUwy^ 
&itaiiVi Mlljc^ralcw^', tl(^otn4C!'» ('4MiDmprtyi, 
AntlriuEtirc, tc. EflHfd bt'l). A- WtLl-R^ 
A. af. WiUi a Portreit ^ Pwt WyBmn. 
J^im& Cloth, il-S^ 
TotuMr* or Trtu aiakk Wojik ftrr IftTO. IflSl, 
3H3_'. I<;\ ifcrj. IHM, JsatS, -With PortnJu, 

€baiiib«rft^ CfClOltiedIa dr ExntrMt 
Lite RAT ritK, The choicwt produpHncis nf 
EiiglJjh Aiitb'^rs Oom the farHcst to l]ic 

Iir«sehL time. (['ikTinGi'tcd hy a BingrattluinJ 
n*tnT*. tf nctavo ttili. cif PTO wkmns each- 
3M elegant lUuttratk^ai. Cloth, |il 



OpfTi whcM you wil!, ynti will find maltcr 
for pmAt and di^Utfbt. The srlnjtiont ajr« 



CbaBib«n^ MIftcelTaBTi with 

tiaiu. T*D voli. Ctcith, M^M^ 

Chambfi^^ Uone Book, a nutiw a«> 

Irrlitjti tif Int^rf^flnr end Inrtructiv« ReAi^ 
Inq, fur Uie Uid aua Yoimg. H vgU. likpiiL 
Clotlip IX 

Cyrr^^p^dlA of .4nf(dot«s. a choin 

Rr'U-eHrin of Anerdmteji i-f the vtiHi^tii jVitmi 

ci^k)krtit^ Litvrary ChmntMrs sad Arflits 
Dy Kaelitt Aitvi!tE, A. M, With BluMtra^ 
tiyni. 7:;2 pages, Dctiivo^ Cloth, |:L 

Th* ebolifeit cotlMrtlnit of stifrdcFfc>R errr 
pijli\l*hG<d. It cntitid 119 ^W^ an red > %ii.w, :v/> Hut 
[MtittfOlions, und lueli. is the vroiKki-TuI vari- 
Qtv, ttint il will b« fijUtid an nlmrvt Erkcirhaqit- 
iLilc ruuil uf Inters t fur e^vt-ry chiaa of leaden. 

Worts by nti?h MUleri 

Tootimony of tho Rraka, 

FEnotj>rlut* oftho Creator* 

Old Bcjd B^i-d torso. 

11 y First Iinpreasipnji of XBclaad 

nnd iiii Poopla. 
Uj jQol^ooU an4 EhflMolmittBi* 



of the views of writers of repute. By 8am- 
vr.h Kxkici.AXD, Jr.. M. D. With lUui 
\Mi\t** l;.'tuo. Ckrth, •1.2S. 



Tb« CHinel t ms OrganizaUon, Habits and 

Tr«!*» eon^bdered with reference to his Intns 

c1n4.iNHn hi'.) the United SUtes. By Gbobob 

r, V m.sir Jatc U. S. Minister at Constantl- 

ijciT^L, 1_l:io. Cloth, (Tlcts. 

Tlili bot>k treats of a subject of great Intar- 

cpt^ tijweially at the present time. Itfumishct 

r the vnly eompleta and reliabla accotint of tJM 

I Cam4>) in the langiuge. 

(») 



•V-A. aL.TT-A.B I- B 'y^OTt^.S. 



BUry Md CorresiiODdeiM or mm 

latb Amos Lawrhxck. Edited by hit 
Mil, Wm. It. LA%%UE.\t K, M. IX Octavo, 
cloth. Qi"i^ : ttku, royal laao. cd., cl., 91.00. 

KitU's Popular CyclopsMlia op dib- 

LlCAL LiTKnATl'RB. 500 iUustnitiont. One 
vol., octavo. 612 page*. Cloth, $ii. 
Intended for minUtcra, theological atudcnta, 

nanintii, Sabbatlt-achool trachers,and the great 

bod/ of the reli^oua i&ublic. 

Aitljrtleal CooeordiiiM of the Hoi j 

ScBiPTirKKS » or. The Bible prewnted 
under CluMitied llcada or Topics. By Jons 
CUoiK, D. D. OvUTo, «0B pp. 93. 

Dr. Williams' Works. 

X«ooturca on th« ZiOrd's Prayer — He 
liffious Progress— Hlsoellunies. 
C^ Dr. Wnilanu U a profound acholnr and 

a briUiaut writer. — Aeio York Evattgelut. 

Modem Atheism. Comldcrcd under lU 
forms of Panthdfm, Materlallnn, Secular- 
ism, Development and Natural Lnwi. By 
James UiciiaxaX, D. D., LL. D. L^mo. 
Cloth, 91.2$. 

The Halllg t or the Sheepfold In the 
Waten. A Tale of Humble Life on the 
Coast of Schleswig. From the German, by 
Mrs. Ukobok F. 5Iarsii. 12mo. Cl., fl. 

The Saflerln^ Saylonr. By Dr. kbi m- 

MACii£U. li'nio. Cloth, fl.'Ji. 
IleaTeil. ByJAMKsWM. Kimball. 12mo. 

Christian's Daily Treasury. Rciigiou* 

Exercise for every Dny In tlie Yoar. By 
Rev. E. TLMTLt. ' iJiuo. Cloth, ♦!. 

Wayland's Sermons. Delivered in the 

Chapel of Brown Univ. L^'nio. Cl., $1.01). 

Entertaining and Instmctiye WorlLS 

roR THE Yolvo. Elegantly illustrated. 
IGmo. Clotli. gilt backs. 

The American Stafc^itian. Life and Char- 
acter of Duniel Webster. — loio»7 ^tintrinniji 
Ahrond ; or Vacation in Etiroiv. — Tlt< 
].*lmnl Ifome ; or tlio Voting Cnst-aways. — 
J'kwvtnt J'nrjci /'>r Y<tiinfj IVnplr. — Thr 
Guilt inn Star, -~ T/te 2'oor Loy and Jlei- 
chant I'hncc. 

TiiK AiMWET.L SroniKS. Resembling 
and quite etiuul to tlic " lli.llo Stories." — 
Ciiristian liffjiftn: By WAi.TKn AiMWKLL. 
Ofcar; or the Boy who had his own wav. — 
ClhitoH .or Boy-Life in the Country.— 7^«a; 
or Turning over n New E<>af. — Whistfer; 
or The Munly Boy.— Marcus; or tlie Boy 
Tamer. 
f Works nr Rev. llAnvET Newcomd. 
IIoic to tiC a L(i(lt/- — JJ'tir to l^ « Mmi. — 
Aiuct/utK*/or lloija. — Aitceifotcn/ur GirU, 

Baxvakd's Series of American IIis- 
TOUIES. J'liniK'iifh anil the J'thiri<u.<.— 
Jioiiiain'r of . I iicrican JIi.<tnr>i. — yorr/tii.< of' 
the .\i'W fi'ort /.(till TrtKiic Scrn'\* in the Jlii- 
tory of MarylanU anil the old I-'icnch War. 



Cod EoToalod hi Natvo and \n 

Cbsist. Br RcT. Jamks B. WAi.xkP 
Author of" The Philtxiuphy ol the Plau ui 
Solvation." l^mo. Cloth, 91. 

Philosophy of the Plan of Salration. 

New enlar^id edition. 12mo. Cloth, 7Jt r. 

Ciiristian Life. SocivLAirDlKDiTinrAL. 

By Tetkb Baykk. l.mo. Cloth, •!. j. 

All acrce In pronouncing it one of the most 
admirable works of the age. 

YahTeh Christ; ortheUemorUIName. 
By Alxx. MAcWnottTEa. "With an Intro, 
ductory letter, by Natm'i. W. Tat lor. D. 
D., in Vale TbeoL Scm. ICmo. Cloth, Wc 

The Sipiet Eing, axd its hratrnlt 

Motto. From the German. IGmo. CL, Cl c 

The Marriage Ring; orHowtoUak. 

Home nappy. IBmo. Cloth, gilt, 75 c 

llothers of the Wise and Good. By 

Jabez BvBXs, D. D. IGmo, Cloth, 7ft e. 
nor* A sVetrh of the mothers of many of tha 
most eminent men of the world. 

My Mother; or Recollections of MatcMal 
InHocnca. LImo. Cloth, 7Jc 

The Exeelieit Woman, with an intro- 
duction, by Rer. W. B. BrRAOUK, D. D. 
Splendid Illustrations. 12mo. Cloth, $L 

The Profn*ess of Baptist Principles 

IX TUB Last IIcxprfd Years. By T. F. 
Cl RTis, Prof, of Theolopy in the Lcwisbuxg 
Uuivenuty. L.'nio. Cloth, $1.25. 

Dr. UarrisMVorks. 

The Great Teacher. — The G-raat 
I Conimi8.>ion. — Iho Prc-Adrjnilo 
EcTth. — Man Primeval. — Patri- 
archy. — PoBthuinoua Worka, 4 
volumes. 

Tlie Better Land; or thk believkk's 

JOJRNKY AXD Fl'TlRK llOMK. By licv. A- 

C. TiiOMPSox. Uno. ClotJi, 83 0. 

Kitlo's History of Palestine, from th« 

I rstriarehal Age to the Present Time. With 
I 'JtXi lUustrutiuns. L^mo. Cloth, llJJS. 
! An ndniirnble work fbr the Family, the Sab- 
batli ond week-day School Library'. 

I The Priest and the Ilnimenot; or, 

I PkRSECCTIOX tX THE AOE OF LOVIS XV. 

I From the French of L. F. Blxgexeb. 
I Two vols., Lano. Cloth, filiS. 

Thi« is not only a work of thrilling interest, 
but ii a masterly Protestant production. 

I The Psalmist, a collection of llymns for 
' the I'sc of Bantii^t Chunrhes. By Baeux 
I Stow and S. h. Smith. With a Siitle 
MCXT, contjiining nn Additional Selection 
I ol llyninjt. by Kichard Filler. I). 1)., 
and J. B. Jkter. 1). D. Published in vari- 
ous sized, and styles of binding. 
{ This is unquestionably the lK>;t collsctloa 
'of llymns in the Enghsh' language. 



tyy' In addition to works published by thcmsclve!*, they keep an extensive ossortment of 
Work.i in nil tlopartnients of tmde, widen thev fcupply at "publishers' prices. OJ" They par- 
ticularly Invite the attention of B<K)k8eHcrs. rravellmg Airents, Teaehen*. Sch«»ol Commit- 
toc«, Librariiins, ClerirvnieTi. and professional men peneniUy ^lo wliom a libenil discount is 
vnifonnly mad. ), to their exten»ivc' stock. CJ"To ivrsotis wishinf; copies i»t Text-lKWiks, tor 
sxaminati<iu, tlicy will I)e forwarded, per mail or otherwise, on the reception ot one. haO the 

Sriea of the work desired. OS" Orders from any port of the couatry attended to with fiiith- 
ilneas and dispatch. (10) 



VALUABLE WORKS. 

THIB PUTUTANB ; or the Court, Church, and ParlUment of England, daring th« 
reigns of Edward VL and Elisabeth. By Samtkl Hopkins, author of " Lessons at the 
Cross," etc. In 3 vols. Vol. I. now rtady. Octavo, cloth, per vol., $2.50. 
Vol. II. BBADT IN Februabt, « " " " $2.60. 

It will be found the most interesting and reliable Historj of the Puritans yet published, narrating 
In a dramatic style many fhcts hitherto unknown. 

T.TMTTS OF BBUOIOUS THOUOHT EX A MUTED, In Eight Lec- 
tures delivered in the Oxford University Pulpit, in the year 1858, ou the " Banipton 
Foundation." By Rev. II. Longucvillb Mansbl, B. D., Reader in Moral and Alcta- 
physical Philosophy at Magdalen College, Oxford, and Editor of Sir William Ilumiltou's 
Lectures. With the Copious Notes translated for the American £U. 12mo, clulh, $1.00. 

This volume is destined to create a profounder sensation in this country than any philosopliical 
or religious work of this century. It is a defence of revealed religion, equal in ability to ths 
" Analogy " of Bishop Butler, and meets the scepticism of our age as effectually ai that great work 
In an earlier day. The Pantheism and Farkeriiro infused into our popular literature will here find 
an antidote. The Lectures excited the highest enthusiosm at Oxford, and the Volume has already 
reached a third edition in England. The copious "Notes" of the author having l>een tranalated 
for the American edition by an accomplished scholar, adds greatly to its value. 

THE HI STO RIOAIi EVIDENCES OF THE TBTJTH OF THE 
SCRIPTUBE BECOBDS, STATED ANEW, with Si)ecial Reference 
to the Doubts and Discoveries of Modem Times. In Eight Lectures, delivered in the 
Oxford University pulpit, at the Bampton Lecture for 1850. By Geo. Rawli.nson, M.A., 
Editor of the Histories of Herodotus. With the Copious Notes translated for th« 
American Edition by an accomplished scholar. 12mo, cloth, $1.00. 

SIB "WIIililAM HAMHiTOITS LEOTUBES ON liOGIO. With 
Notes from Original Materials, and an Appendix containing the Latest Development of 
his New Logical Theory. Edited by Prof. H. Lonoukvills Mansbl, Oxford, and 
John Veitch, M. A., Edinburgh. Royal octavo, cloth, $3.00. (/n press.) 

MOBAIi FHUjOSOFHT, including Theoretical and Practical Ethics. By Jo- 
seph Haven, D. D., late Professor of Moral and Intellectual Philosophy in Amherst 
College *, author of " Mental Philoeophy.** Royal 12mo, cloth, embossed, $1.25. 

It is eminently sdentiflc in method, and thorough in discuMion, and its viewi on unsettled ques- 
tions in morals are diacriminating and sound. It treats largely of Political Ethics— a department 
of morals of great importance to American youth, but generally overlooked in tcxt-booka. In ths 
history of ethical opinions it is unusually rich and elaborate. 

FOFTJIjAB GEOLOGT; With Descriptive Sketches firom a Geologist's Portfolio. 
By Hugh Miller. With a Resume of the Progress of €kological Science during the 
last two years. By Mrs. Miller. I2mo, cloth, $1.25. 

Thit work is likely to prove thc'most popular of Hugh Miller's writings, and to attain the widest 
circulation. It is written in his best style, and makes the myiterics of Geology intelligible to the 
common mind. Aa an architect explains the structure of a house fH>m cellar to attic, so this ae- 
eomplished geologist talcea the globe to pieces, and explains the manner in which all Its strata have 
l)een formed, fh>m the granite foundation to the alluvial surfhce. It supplies just the informstioa 
which many readers have been longing for, but unable to find. Also, 

HUGH MHjIiEB'S "WOBRS. Seven volumes, uniform style, in an el jrant 
tx>x, embossed cloth, $8.25 ) library sheep, $10.00 ; half calf, $14.00 ; antique, $14.00. 

HANSEL'S MISCELLANIES; including "Prolegomina Logica,"" "Meta. 
physics," »» Limits of Demonstrative Evidence," " Philosophy of Kant," etc. 12roo, cloth, 
(In press.) C38> 



IMPORTANT WORKS. 

Un AND OOBBBSFONDIOrOB OV BXV. DANIBZi 'WTI>- 
80N, D. I>.» late Blahop ef Caloatta. By Ber. Josiah Bathiax, M. A., Bector oT 
North Cnjt KenL With Pwtntta, Uap, and munenNU lUiutntloM. One Tolame, 
Bq7«1 oetaTo, doth, $8.00. 

BBITIBH VOVXUBTS AND THBIB STTIiES. Being a Critical 
Sketeh of the Hiiiory ef BriUah Proee FicUon. By Datid Ma»o>, M. A^ Author of 
**TheLlieand TImeaof JohnMUtoa,"ctcete. lOmo, eloth, 76 eta. 

Thla eheimliif Tolome will find lli wey to muiy Anerlctii bonwa, and win Ibr lla anther a pheo 
hj tha M» of the maalata of Xn^ah Fletloa, of whom ha diaeouiaaa ao pleaaantly. 

THB IilBADUBS OF THS BBFOBMATION. Lcnin, CALmr, Lati- 
uwm and Kvoz, the BepreaentatiTe Men of Oermanjr, Franee, England, and Scotland. 
By J. TuLLOca, D. D., Anther ef *« Theiam," etc ISmo, cloth, $1.00. 

A portialt fallaiy of atofdjr letumafa, drawn by a ktan eye and a atroi^ hand. Or. Tntloeh 
diaerimlnatea claariiy the paaonalqveUtiea ef each Beft»nMr, and commcnda and criHriaai with 



ZJSSSOIiB AT THB OBOSS; or, Spiritual TnithaFamiUarly Exhibited in their 
Bei a t loM to Christ. By Sahckl Hopuxs, anther of **The Poritans.** With an Intro- 
dootlon by Ber. OmBoa W. Blaodu, D. D. Mew Edition. lOmo, doth, 76 cte. 

THB CBXTOTBIfB ; or T^sti of a Begenerate Sute j dceigned to bring to light enp- 
presaed hopeSf expoee false onea, and confirm the true. By Rev. J. A. Goodhuk, A. M. 
With an Introduction by Rev. £. N. Kirk, D. D. 12mo, cloth, $1.00. 

A Tolume of peculiar origfnalitj and power. It prewnti novel, original and ttartling viewo. It 
places within the Christian fold many who claim no place there ; cuts off fh>m it many who con- 
sider themselves enUtled to all its privileges, and applies tests of spiritual character, which ar« 
Titaily distinct fh>m those which are current in the popular religion of the day. It is one of the 
books to be road, marked and inwardly digested. 

OOTTHOLD'B EMBIiBMS ; or. Invisible Things Understood by Things thut 
arc Made. By Christian Scriver, Ministir of Magdeburg in 1671. Translated from 
the Twenty.eighth German J&lition by the' Rev. Robert Mexziks. 8vo, doth, $1.00 *, 
cloth, bevelled boards, $1.25 *, cloth, bevelled boards, red edges, $1.25. Visit Editidx, 
Tinted Paper, royal 8vo, cloth, $1.50 ; cloth gilt, $2.00 ; half Turkey morocoo, $4.00 ; 
Turkey morocco, $5.00. 

Its singular merits will soon moke it a (krorite in American households t for all readers win 
pronounce It the most fascinating of devotional books. It teaches how to find God ereryirAere. 
and to carry devotion Into the humblest duties of dally lifir. Its juicy thoughts and rich sugges- 
tions have an equal charm for the scholar and the unlearned. 

% 
THB QBE AT OONCBRN ; or, Man^s Relation to God and a Future State. By 
Nkukxiah Adams, D. D. 12mo, cloth, 85 cts. 

Pungent and aflfectionate, reaching the inteHcct, conscience, and filings { admirably fitted to 
awaken, guide, and instruct The book is just the thing for wide distribution in our congregi^ 
tions. — y. Y. Ot$erver. 

BVEBTTfrGS "WITH THB DOCTBINBB. By Rev. NnuxiAB Adams, B.D. 

12mo, cloth, (/n preparation.) 

THB STIIjL hour ; or. Communion with God. By Prof. Acsmr Phelps, D.D., 
of Aiidover Tlieological Seminary. lOmo, cloth, 50 cts. 

CHRIST TN HISTORY. By Robert TmNBrtL, D. D. A New and EnUrged 
SdiUon. 12mo, cloth, $1.36. (89) 



STAMFOBD UNlVERSnT LIBRARY 
Stanford, Calif omia 



N28 



i
