Principles of Political Economy, Vol. 2 (John Stuart Mill, 1848)
==========================================================
Completes Mill's Principles: distribution, exchange, and the stationary state. Public domain. Internet Archive full text (in.ernet.dli.2015.217945).


PRINCIPLES


OF


POLITICAL ECONOMY


WITH


SOME OF THEIR APPLICATIONS TO SOCIAL PHILOSOPHY.


BY

JOHN STUART MILL.


IN TWO VOLUMES.

VOL. II.

FOURTH EDITION.

LONDON:

JOHN W. PAEKEB AND SON, WEST STBAND.


M.DCCC.LVII.



LONDON 5

SAVILL AND KD WARDS, PRINTERS, CHANDOS STREET,
COVENT GARDEN.



CONTENTS


or

THE SECOND VOLUME.


BOOK III.

EXCHANGE. — {Continued.)

Chapteb VII. Of Money.

Page


§ 1. Pueposes of a Circulating Medium 3

2. Gold and Silver, why fitted for those purposes .... 5

3. Money a mere contrivance for facilitating exchanges, which

does not affect the laws of Value 8


Chapter VIII. Of the Value of Money , as dependent on
Demand and Supply .


§ 1. Value of Money, an ambiguous expression 11

2. The value of money depends, ceeteris paribus, on its quantity 12

3 . — together with the rapidity of circulation 17

4. Explanations and limitations of this principle 19


Chapter IX. Of the Value of Money 9 as dependent on
Cost of Production .

§ 1. The value of money, in a state of freedom, conforms to the

value of the bullion contained in it 23

2. — which is determined by the cost of production .... 26

3. This law, how related to the principle laid down in the pre-

ceding chapter 28



Vlll


CONTENTS.


Pag#

4. The law of values which holds between two countries, and

two commodities, holds of any greater number . . . 132

6. Effect of improvements in production, on international

values 136

6. The preceding theory not complete 140

7. International values depend not solely on the quantities

demanded, but also on the means of production avail-
able in each country for the supply of foreign markets 142

8. The practical result little affected by this additional ele-

ment 147

9. The cost to a country of its imports, on what circum-

stances dependent 160

Chapter XIX. Of Money , considered as an
Imported Commodity.

§ 1. Money imported in two modes ; as a commodity, and as a

medium of exchange 164

2. As a commodity, it obeys the same laws of value as other

imported commodities 166

3. Its value does not depend exclusively on its cost of produc-

tion at the mines 168

Chapter XX. Of the Foreign Exchanges.

§ 1, Purposes for which money passes from country to country

as a medium of exchange 160

2. Mode of adjusting international payments through the

exchanges 160

3. Distinction between variations in the exchanges which are

self-adjusting, and those which can only be rectified
through prices 166

Chapter XXI. Of the Distribution of the Precious Metals
through the Commercial World .

§ 1. The substitution of money for barter makes no difference
in exports and imports, nor in the law of international
values 169

2. The preceding theorem further illustrated 173

3. The precious metals as money, are of the same value, and

distribute themselves according to the same law, with

the precious metals as a commodity 177

4* International payments of a non-commercial character . 179



CONTENTS.


IX


Chapter XXII. Influence of Currency on the Exchanges
and on Foreign Trade .

Page

§ 1. Variations in the exchange, winch originate in the currency 181

2. Effect of a sudden increase of a metallic currency, or of

the sudden creation of bank notes or other substitutes
for money 182

3. Effect of the increase of an inconvertible paper currency.

Real and nominal exchange 187

Chapter XXIII. Of the Rate of Interest.

§ 1. The rate of interest depends on the demand and supply of

loans 191

2. Circumstances which determine the permanent demand

and supply of loans 192

3. Circumstances which determine the fluctuations .... 195

4. The rate of interest not really connected with the value

of money, but often confounded with it 198

5. The rate of interest determines the price of land and of

securities 201

Chapter XXIV. Of the Regulation of a Convertible
Paper Currency.

§ 1. Two contrary theories respecting the influence of bank

issues 203

2. Examination of each 200

3. Reasons for thinking that the Currency Act of 1844 pro-

duces a part of the beneficial effect intended by it . . 210

4. — but produces mischiefs more than equivalent .... 216

5. Should the issue of bank notes be confined to a single

establishment P 230

6. Should the holders of notes be protected in any peculiar

manner against failure of payment P 232

Chapter XXV. Of the Competition of different Countries
in the same Market .

§ 1. Causes which enable one country to undersell another . 234
2* Low wages one of those causes 237



CONTENTS.


Page

3. — when peculiar to certain branches of industry . . . 239

4. — but not when common to all 241


5. Some anomalous cases of trading communities examined . 243

Chapter XXYI. Of Distribution, as affected by
Exchange .

§ 1. Exchange and Money make no difference in the law of


wages 246

2. — in the law of rent 249

3. — nor in the law of profits 250


BOOK IV.

INFLUENCE OF THE PROGRESS OF SOCIETY ON
PRODUCTION AND DISTRIBUTION.


Chapter I. General Characteristics of a Progressive
State of Wealth.

§ 1. Introductory Remarks 257

2. Tendency of the progress of society towards increased
command over the powers of nature ; increased secu-
rity; and increased capacity of co-operation .... 258


Chapter II. Influence of the Progress of Industry and
Population on Values and Prices.

§ 1. Tendency to a decline of the value and cost of production

of all commodities 264

2. — except the products of agriculture and mining, w r hich

have a tendency to rise 266

3. — that tendency from time to time counteracted by im-

provements in production 268

4. Effect of the progress of society in moderating fluctuations

of value 270

5. Examination of the influence of speculators, and in parti-

cular of com dealers 271



CONTENTS.


XI


Chapter III. Influence of the Progress of Industry and
Population on Rents , Profits , and Wages.

Page

§ 1. First case; population increasing, capital stationary . . 276

2. Second case ; capital increasing, population stationary . 280

3. Third case ; population and capital increasing equally, the

arts of production stationary 281

4. Fourth case ; the arts of production progressive, capital

and population stationary 282

6. Fifth case ; all the three elements progressive .... 289

Chapter IY. Of the Tendency of Profits to a Minimum.

§ 1. Doctrine of Adam Smith on the competition of capital . 294

2. Doctrine of Mr. Wakefield respecting the field of employ-

ment 296

3. What determines the minimum rate of profit 298

4. In opulent countries, profits habitually near to the mini-

mum 301

6. — prevented from reaching it by commercial revulsions . 304

6. — by improvements in production 306

7. — by the importation of cheap necessaries and instruments 308

8. — by the emigration of capital 310

Chapter Y. Consequences of the tendency of Profits to a
Minimum.

§ 1. Abstraction of capital not necessarily a national loss . . 313
2. In opulent countries, the extension of machinery not detri-
mental but beneficial to labourers 316

Chapter YI. Of the Stationary State .

§ 1. Stationary state of wealth and population, dreaded and

deprecated by writers 320

2. — but not in itself undesirable 322



xii


CONTENTS.


Chapter YII. On the Probable Futurity of the Labouring

Cla8868 .

Page

§ 1. The theory of dependence and protection no longer appli-
cable to the condition of modern society 327

2. The future well-being of the labouring classes principally

dependent on their own mental cultivation .... 332

3. Probable effects of improved intelligence in causing a

better adjustment of population — Would be promoted
by the social independence of women 334

4. Tendency of society towards the disuse of the relation of

hiring and service 336

6. Examples of the association of labourers with capitalists . 339

6. — of the association of labourers among themselves . . 344

7. Competition not pernicious, but useful and indispensable . 354

BOOK Y.

OF THE INFLUENCE OF GOVERNMENT.
Chapter I. Of the Functions of Government in general .

§ 1. Necessary and optional functions of government distin-
guished 359

2. Multifarious character of the necessary functions of

government 360

3. Division of the subject 366

Chapter II. Of the General Principles of Taxation.

§ 1. Four fundamental rules of taxation 368

2. Grounds of the principle of Equality of Taxation . . . 370

3. Should the same percentage be levied on all amounts of

income P r . . . . 372

4. Should the same percentage be levied on perpetual and on

terminable incomes P 378

5. The increase of the rent of land from natural causes a fit

subject of peculiar taxation ? . . . 384

6. A land tax, in some cases, not taxation, but a rent-charge

in favour of the public 387

7. Taxes falling on capital, not necessarily objectionable . . 389



CONTENTS.


Xlll


Chapter III. Of Direct Taxes .

Page

§ 1. Direct taxes either on income or on expenditure . . . 391


2. Taxes on rent 391

3. — on profits 393

4. — on wages ' 390

6. An Income Tax 398

6. A House Tax 402


Chapter IV. Of Taxes on Commodities ,


§ 1. A Tax on all Commodities would fall on profits .... 408

2. Taxes on particular -commodities fall on the consumer . . 409

3. Peculiar effects of taxes on necessaries 411

4. — how modified by the tendency of profits to a minimum 414

6. Effects of discriminating duties 420

6. Effects produced on international exchange by duties on

exports and on imports 424


Chapter V. Of some other Taxes.


§ 1. Taxes on contracts . 433

2. Taxes on communication 436

3. Law Taxes 438

4. Modes of taxation for local purposes 439


Chapter VI. Comparison between Direct and Indirect

Taxation.

§ 1, Arguments for and against direct taxation 441

2. What forms of indirect taxation most eligible .... 446

3. Practical rules for indirect taxation 448

Chapter VII. Of a National Debt

§ 1. Is it desirable to defray extraordinary public expenses by

loans P 452

2. Hot desirable to redeem a national debt by a general con-

tribution 456

3. In what cases desirable to maintain a surplus revenue for

the redemption of debt 458



XIV


CONTENTS.


Chapter VIII. Of the Ordinary Functions of Govern -
ment considered as to their Economical Effects .

Page


§ 1. Effects of imperfect security of person and property . . 462

2. Effects of over-taxation 464

3. Effects of imperfection in the system of the laws, and in

the administration of justice 466


Chapter IX. The same subject continued .


§ 1. Laws of Inheritance 472

2. Law and Custom of Primogeniture 474

3. Entails 479

4. Law of compulsory equal division of inheritances . . . 481

6. Laws of Partnership 483

6. Partnerships with limited liability. Chartered Companies 486

7. Partnerships en commandite 490

8. Laws relating to Insolvency 496


Chapter X. Of Interferences of Government grounded on
Erroneous Theories .


§ 1. Doctrine of Production to Native Industry 605

2. Usury Laws 514

3. Attempts to regulate the prices of commodities .... 519

4. Monopolies 621

5. Laws against Combination of Workmen 523

6. Restraints on opinion or on its publication 527


Chapter XI. Of the Grounds and Limits of the Laisser-
faire or Non-Interference Principle .

§ 1. Governmental intervention distinguished into authorita-
tive and unauthoritative 630

2. Objections to government intervention — the compulsory

character of the intervention itself, or of the levy of
funds to support it 632

3. — increase of the power and influence of government . . 634



CONTENTS.


XV


Pag®

4. — increase of the occupations and responsibilities of

government 635

6. — superior efficiency of private agency, owing to stronger

interest in the work 537

6. — importance of cultivating habits of collective action in

the people 639

7. Laisser-faire the general rule 541

8. — but liable to large exceptions. Cases in which the

consumer is an incompetent judge of the commodity.

E ducat ion * 545

9. Case of persons exercising power over others. Protec-

tion of children and young persons ; of the lower ani-
mals. Case of w omen not analogous 549

10. Case of contracts in perpetuity 653

11. Cases of delegated management 554

12. Cases in which public intervention may be necessary to

give effect to the wishes of the persons interested.
Examples: hours of labour ; disposal of colonial lands . 567

13. Case of acts done for the benefit of others than the per-

sons concerned. Poor Laws . 662

14. — Colonization 565

15. — other miscellaneous examples 572

16. Government intervention may be necessary in default of

private agency, in cases where private agency would be
more suitable 574

APPENDIX.

Latest Information on the French Industrial Associations . . 577


BOOK III.


EXCHANGE.


B


VOL. II.


BOOK III.


EXCHANGE

(CONTINUED.)


CHAPTER VII.

OF MONEY.

§ 1. Having proceeded thus far in ascertaining the
general laws of Value, without introducing the idea of Money
(except occasionally for illustration,) it is time that we should
now superadd that idea, and consider in what manner the
principles of the mutual interchange of commodities are
affected by the use of what is termed a Medium of Ex-
change.

In order to understand the manifold functions of a Cir-
culating Medium, there is no better way than to consider
what are the principal inconveniences which we should expe-
rience if we had not such a medium. The first and most
obvious would be the want of a common measure for values of
different sorts. If a tailor had only coats, and wanted to buy
bread or a horse, it would be very troublesome to ascertain
how much bread he ought to obtain for a coat, or how many
coats he should give for a horse. The calculation must be
recommenced on different data, every time he bartered his



4


BOOK III . CHAPTER VII. § 1.

coats for a different kind of article ; and there could be no
current price, or regular quotations of value. Whereas now
each thing has a current price in money, and he gets over all
difficulties by reckoning his coat at 41. or 51., and a four-pound
loaf at 6 cl. or 7 d. As it is much easier to compare different
lengths by expressing them in a common language of feet
and inches, so it is much easier to compare values by means
of a common language of pounds, shillings, and pence.
In no other way can values be arranged one above another
in a scale ; in no other can a person conveniently calculate
the sum of his possessions ; and it is easier to ascertain and
remember the relations of many things to one thing, than
their innumerable cross relations with one another. This
advantage of having a common language in which values may
be expressed, is, even by itself, so important, that some such
mode of expressing and computing them would probably be
used even if a pound or a shilling did not express any real
thing, but a mere unit of calculation. It is said that there are
African tribes in which this somewhat artificial contrivance
actually prevails. They calculate the value of things in a sort
of money of account, called macutes. They say, one thing is
worth ten macutes, another fifteen, another twenty.* There
is no real thing called a macute : it is a conventional unit, for
the more convenient comparison of things with one another.

This advantage, however, forms but an inconsiderable part
of the economical benefits derived from the use of money.
The inconveniences of barter are so great, that without some
more commodious means of effecting exchanges, the division
of employments could hardly have been carried to any con-
siderable extent. A tailor, who had nothing but coats, might
starve before he could find any person having bread to sell
who wanted a coat : besides, he would not want as much
bread at a time as would be worth a coat, and the coat could
not be divided. Every person, therefore, would at all times


Montesquieu, Esprit des Lois , liv. xxii. ch. 8.



MONEY.


5


hasten to dispose of his commodity in exchange for anything
which, though it might not be fitted to his own immediate
wants, was in great and general demand, and easily divisible,
so that he might be sure of being able to purchase with it
whatever was offered for sale. The primary necessaries of
life possess these properties in a high degree. Bread is
extremely divisible, and an object of universal desire. Still,
this is not the sort of thing required : for, of food, unless in
expectation of a scarcity, no one wishes to possess more at
once, than is wanted for immediate consumption ; so that a
person is never sure of finding an immediate purchaser for
articles of food ; and unless soon disposed of, most of them
perish. The thing which people would select to keep by
them for making purchases, must be one which, besides being
divisible, and generally desired, does not deteriorate by
keeping. This reduces the choice to a small number of
articles.


§2. By a tacit concurrence, almost all nations, at a very
early period, fixed upon certain metals, and especially gold
and silver, to serve this purpose. No other substances unite
the necessary qualities in so great a degree, with so many
subordinate advantages. Next to food and clothing, and in
some climates even before clothing, the strongest inclination
in a rude state of society is for personal ornament, and for the
kind of distinction which is obtained by rarity or costliness in
such ornaments. After the immediate necessities of life were
satisfied, every one was eager to accumulate as great a store
as possible of things at once costly and ornamental; which
were chiefly gold, silver, and jewels. These were the things
which it most pleased every one to possess, and which there
was most certainty of finding others willing to receive in
exchange for any kind of produce. They were among the
most imperishable of all substances. They were also portable,
and containing great value in small bulk, were easily hid ; a
consideration of much importance in an age of insecurity.



6


BOOK III. CHAPTER VII. § 2 .

Jewels are inferior to gold and silver in the quality of divisi
bility ; and are of very various qualities, not to be accurately
discriminated without great trouble. Gold and silver are
eminently divisible, and when pure, always of the same
quality ; and their purity may be ascertained and certified by
a public authority.

Accordingly, though furs have been employed as money
in some countries, cattle in others, in Chinese Tartary cubes
of tea closely pressed together, the shells called cowries on
the coast of Western Africa, and in Abyssinia at this day
blocks of rock salt ; though even of metals, the less costly have
sometimes been chosen, as iron in Lacedaemon from an ascetic
policy, copper in the early Homan republic from the poverty
of the people ; gold and silver have been generally preferred
by nations which were able to obtain them, either by industry,
commerce, or conquest. To the qualities which originally
recommended them, another came to be added, the importance
of which only unfolded itself by degrees. Of all commodities,
they are among the least influenced by any of the causes
which produce fluctuations of value. No commodity is quite
free from such fluctuations. Gold and silver have sustained,
since the beginning of history, one great permanent alteration
of Value, from the discovery of the American mines ; and
some temporary variations, such as that which, in the last
great war, was produced by the absorption of the metals in
hoards, and in the military chests of the immense armies
constantly in the field. In the present age the opening of new
sources of supply, so abundant as the Ural mountains, Cali-
fornia, and Australia, may be the commencement of another
period of decline, on the limits of which it would be useless at
present to speculate. But on the whole, no commodities are
so little exposed to causes of variation. They fluctuate less
than almost any other things in their cost of production. And
from their durability, the total quantity in existence is at all
times so great in proportion to the annual supply, that the effect
on value even of a change in the cost of production is not



MONEY.


7


sudden : a very long time being required to diminish mate-
rially the quantity in existence, and even to increase it very
greatly being no rapid process. Gold and silver, therefore,
are more fit than any other commodity to be the subject of
engagements for receiving or paying a given quantity at some
distant period. If the engagement were made in corn, a
failure of crops might increase the burthen of the payment
in one year to fourfold what was intended, or an exuberant
harvest sink it in another to one-fourth. If stipulated in cloth,
some manufacturing invention might permanently reduce the
payment to a tenth of its original value. Such things have
occurred even in the case of payments stipulated in gold and
silver ; but the great fall of their value after the discovery of
America, is, as yet, the only authenticated instance ; and in
this case the change was extremely gradual, being spread over
a period of many years.

When gold and silver had become virtually a medium of
exchange, by becoming the things for which people generally
sold, and with which they generally bought, whatever they
had to sell or to buy; the contrivance of coining obviously
suggested itself. By this process the metal was divided into
convenient portions, of any degree of smallness, and bearing
a recognised proportion to one another ; and the trouble was
saved of weighing and assaying at every change of possessors,
an inconvenience which on the occasion of small purchases
would soon have become insupportable. Governments found
it their interest to take the operation into their own hands,
and to interdict all coining by private persons ; indeed, their
guarantee was often the only one which would have been
relied on, a reliance however which very often it ill deserved ;
profligate governments having until a very modern period
seldom scrupled, for the sake of robbing their creditors, to
confer on all other debtors a licence to rob theirs, by the
shallow and impudent artifice of lowering the standard ; that
least covert of all modes of knavery, which consists in calling
a shilling a pound, that a debt of a hundred pounds may be



8


BOOK III. CHAPTER VII. § 3.

cancelled by the payment of a hundred shillings. It would
have been as simple a plan, and would have answered the
purpose as well, to have enacted that “a hundred” should
always be interpreted to mean five, which would have effected
the same reduction in all pecuniary contracts, and would not
have been at all more shameless. Such strokes of policy
have not wholly ceased to be recommended, but they have
ceased to be practised; except occasionally through the
medium of paper money, in which case the character of the
transaction, from the greater obscurity of the subject, is a
little less barefaced.

§ 3. Money, when its use has grown habitual, is the
medium through which the incomes of the different members
of the community are distributed to them, and the measure
by which they estimate their possessions. As it is always by
means of money that people provide for their different neces-
sities, there grows up in their minds a powerful association
leading them to regard money as wealth in a more peculiar
sense than any other article ; and even those who pass their
lives in the production of the most useful objects, acquire the
habit of regarding those objects as chiefly important by their
capacity of being exchanged for money. A person who
parts with money to obtain commodities, unless he intends
to sell them, appears to the imagination to be making a
worse bargain than a person who parts with commodities to
get money; the one seems to be spending his means, the
other adding to them. Illusions which, though now in some
measure dispelled, were long powerful enough to overmaster
the mind of every politician, both speculative and practical,
in Europe.

It must be evident, however, that the mere introduction
of a particular mode of exchanging things for one another, by
first exchanging a thing for money, and then exchanging the
money for something else, makes no difference in the essential
character of transactions. It is not with money that things



MONEY.


9


are really purchased. Nobody's income (except that of the
gold or silver miner) is derived from the precious metals. The
pounds or shillings which a person receives weekly or yearly,
are not what constitutes his income; they are a sort of
tickets or orders which he can present for payment at any
shop he pleases, and which entitle him to receive a certain
value of any commodity that he makes choice of. The
farmer pays his labourers and his landlord in these tickets,
as the most convenient plan for himself and them ; but their
real income is their share of his corn, cattle, and hay, and it
makes no essential difference whether he distributes it to them
direct, or sells it for them and gives them the price ; but as
they would have to sell it for money if he did not, and as he
is a seller at any rate, it best suits the purposes of all, that
he should sell their share along with his own, and leave the
labourers more leisure for work and the landlord for being
idle. The capitalists, except those who are producers of the
precious metals, derive no part of their income from those
metals, since they only get them by buying them with their
own produce : while all other persons have their incomes paid
to them by the capitalists, or by those who have received
payment from the capitalists, and as the capitalists have
nothing, from the first, except their produce, it is that and
nothing else which supplies all incomes furnished by them.
There cannot, in short, be intrinsically a more insignificant
thing, in the economy of society, than money; except in the
character of a contrivance for sparing time and labour. It
is a machine for doing quickly and commodiously, what
would be done, though less quickly and commodiously,
without it : and like many other kinds of machinery, it only
exerts a distinct and independent influence of its own when
it gets out of order.

The introduction of money does not interfere with the
operation of any of the Laws of Value laid down in the pre-
ceding chapters. The reasons which make the temporary or
market value of things depend on the demand and supply,



10 BOOK III. CHAPTER VII. § 3 .

and their average and permanent values upon their cost of
production, are as applicable to a money system as to a
system of barter. Things which by barter would exchange
for one another, will, if sold for money, sell for an equal
amount of it, and so will exchange for one another still, though
the process of exchanging them will consist of two operations
instead of only one. The relations of commodities to one
another remain unaltered by money : the only new relation
introduced, is their relation to money itself ; how much or
how little money they will exchange for; in other words,
how the Exchange Value of money itself is determined.
And this is not a question of any difficulty, when the illusion
is dispelled, which caused money to be looked upon as a
peculiar something, not governed by the same laws as other
things. Money is a commodity, and its value is determined
like that of other commodities, temporarily by demand and
supply, permanently and on the average by cost of production.
The illustration of these principles, considered in their appli-
cation to money, must be given in some detail, on account of
the confusion which, in minds not scientifically instructed on
the subject, envelopes the whole matter; partly from a lin-
gering remnant of the old misleading associations, and partly
from the mass of vapoury and baseless speculation with which
this, more than any other topic of political economy, has in
latter times become surrounded. I shall therefore treat of the
Value of Money in a chapter apart.



CHAPTER VIII.


OF THE VALUE OF MONET, AS DEPENDENT ON DEMAND
AND SUPPLY.

§ 1. It is unfortunate that in the very outset of the
subject we have to clear from our path a formidable ambiguity
of language. The Value of Money is to appearance an ex-
pression as precise, as free from possibility of misunderstand-
ing, as any in science. The value of a thing, is what it will
exchange for : the value of money, is what money will ex-
change for ; the purchasing power of money. If prices are
low, money will buy much of other things, and is of high
value ; if prices are high, it will buy little of other things, and
is of low value. The value of money is inversely as general
prices : falling as they rise, and rising as they fall.

But unhappily the same phrase is also employed, in the
current language of commerce, in a very different sense.
Money, which is so commonly understood as the synonyme of
wealth, is more especially the term in use to denote it when
borrowing is spoken of. When one person lends to another,
as well as when he pays wages or rent to another, what he
transfers is not the mere money, but a right to a certain
value of the produce of the country, to be selected at pleasure ;
the lender having first bought this right, by giving for it a por-
tion of his capital. What he really lends is so much capital ;
the money is the mere instrument of transfer. But the
capital usually passes from the lender to the receiver through
the means either of money, or of an order to receive money,
and at any rate it is in money that the capital is computed
and estimated. Hence, borrowing capital is universally
called borrowing money ; the loan market is called the
money market : those who have their capital disposable for



12


BOOK III. CHAPTER VIIT. § 2 .

investment on loan are called the monied class: and the
equivalent given for the use of capital, or in other words,
interest, is not only called the interest of money, but, by a
grosser perversion of terms, the value of money. This mis-
application of language, assisted by some fallacious appear-
ances which we shall notice and clear up hereafter,* has
created a general notion among persons in business, that the
Value of Money, meaning the rate of interest, has an intimate
connexion with the Value of Money in its proper sense, the
value or purchasing power of the circulating medium. We
shall come to this subject before long : at present it is enough
to say, that by Value I shall always mean Exchange Value,
and by money the medium of exchange, not the capital which
is passed from hand to hand through that medium.

§ 2. The value or purchasing power of money depends,
in the first instance, on demand and supply. But demand
and supply, in relation to money, present themselves in a
somewhat different shape from the demand and supply of
other things.

The supply of a commodity means the quantity offered
for sale. But it is not usual to speak of offering money for
sale. People are not usually said to buy or sell money.
This, however, is merely an accident of language. In point
of fact, money is bought and sold like other things, whenever
other things are bought and sold for money. Whoever sells
corn, or tallow, or cotton, buys money. Whoever buys bread,
or wine, or clothes, sells money to the dealer in those articles.
The money with which people are offering to buy, is money
offered for sale. The supply of money, then, is the quantity
of it which people are wanting to lay out ; that is, all the money
they have in their possession, except what they are hoarding,
or at least keeping by them as a reserve for future contin-


* Infra, ch. xxiii.



VALUE OP MONEY.


13


gencies. The supply of money, in short, is all the money in
circulation at the time.

The demand for money, again, consists of all the goods
offered for sale. Every seller of goods is a buyer of money,
and the goods he brings with him constitute his demand.
The demand for money differs from the demand for other
things in this, that it is limited only by the means of the
purchaser. The demand for other things is for so much and
no more ; but there is always a demand for as much money
as can be got. Persons may indeed refuse to sell, and with-
draw their goods from the market, if they cannot get for
them what they consider a sufficient price. But this is only
when they think that the price will rise, and that they shall
get more money by waiting. If they thought the low price
likely to be permanent, they would take what they could get.
It is always a sine qua non with a dealer to dispose of his
goods.

As the whole of the goods in the market compose the
demand for money, so the whole of the money constitutes
the demand for goods. The money and the goods are seek-
ing each other for the purpose of being exchanged. They
are reciprocally supply and demand to one another. It is
indifferent whether, in characterizing the phenomena, we
speak of the demand and the supply of goods, or the supply
and the demand of money. They are equivalent expres-
sions.

We shall proceed to illustrate this proposition more fully.
And in doing this, the reader will remark a great difference
between the class of questions which now occupy us, and
those which we previously had under discussion respecting
Values. In considering Value, we were only concerned with
causes which acted upon particular commodities apart from
the rest. Causes which affect all commodities alike, do not
act upon values. But in considering the relation between
goods and money, it is with the causes that operate upon all
goods whatever, that we are especially concerned. We are



14


BOOK III. CHAPTER VIII. § 2.

comparing goods of all sorts on one side, with money on the
other side, as things to be exchanged against each other.

Suppose, everything else being the same, that there is an
increase in the quantity of money, say by the arrival of a
foreigner in a place, with a treasure of gold and silver.
When he commences expending it (for this question it mat-
ters not whether productively or unproductively), he adds to
the supply of money, and by the same act, to the demand
for goods. Doubtless he adds, in the first instance, to the
demand only for certain kinds of goods, namely those which
he selects for purchase ; he will immediately raise the price
of those, and so far as he is individually concerned, of those
only. If he spends his funds in giving entertainments, he
will raise the prices of food and wine. If he expends them
in establishing a' manufactory, he will raise the prices of
labour and materials. But at the higher prices, more money
will pass into the hands of the sellers of these different
articles; and they, whether labourers or dealers, having more
money to lay out, will create an increased demand for all the
things which they are accustomed to purchase : these accord-
ingly will rise in price, and so on until the rise has reached
everything. I say everything, although it is of course pos-
sible that the influx of money might take place through the
medium of some new class of consumers, or in such a manner
as to alter the proportions of different classes of consumers
to one another, so that a greater share of the national income
than before would thenceforth be expended in some articles,
and a smaller in others ; exactly as if a change had taken
place in the tastes and wants of the community. If this
were the case, then until production had accommodated itself
to this change in the comparative demand for different things,
there would be a real alteration in values, and some things
would rise in price more than others, while some perhaps
would not rise at all. These effects, however, would evi-
dently proceed, not from the mere increase of money, but
from accessory circumstances attending it. We are now



VALUE OP MONEY.


15


only called upon to consider what would be the effect of an
increase of money, considered by itself. Supposing the
money in the hands of individuals to be increased, the wants
and inclinations of the community collectively in respect to
consumption remaining exactly the same; the increase of
demand would reach all things equally, and there would be
an universal rise of prices. We might suppose, with Hume,
that some morning, every person in the nation should wake
and find a gold coin in his pocket : this example, however,
would involve an alteration of the proportions in the demand
for different commodities ; the luxuries of the poor would, in
the first instance, be raised in price, in a much greater degree
than other things. Let us rather suppose, therefore, that to
every pound, or shilling, or penny, in the possession of any
one, another pound, shilling, or penny, were suddenly added.
There would be an increased money demand, and conse-
quently an increased money value, or price, for things of all
sorts. This increased value would do no good to any one;
would make no difference, except that of having to reckon
pounds, shillings, and pence, in higher numbers. It would
be an increase of values only as estimated in money, a thing
only wanted to buy other things with ; and would not enable
any one to buy more of them than before. Prices would
have risen in a certain ratio, and the value of money would
have fallen in the same ratio.

It is to be remarked that this ratio would be precisely
that in which the quantity of money bad been increased.
If the whole money in circulation was doubled, prices would
be doubled. If it was only increased one-fourth, prices
would rise one-fourth. There would be one-fourth more
money, all of which would be used to purchase goods of
some description. When there had been time for the in-
creased supply of money to reach all markets, or (according
to the conventional metaphor) to permeate all the channels
of circulation, all prices would have risen one-fourth. But
the general rise of price is independent of this diffusing and



16


BOOK III. CHAPTER VIII. § 2.

equalizing process. Even if some prices were raised more,
and others less, the average rise would be one-fourth. This
is a necessary consequence of the fact, that a fourth more
money would have been given for only the same quantity of
goods. General prices, therefore, would in any case be a
fourth higher.

The very same effect would be produced on prices if we
suppose the goods diminished, instead of the money increased :
and the contrary effect if the goods were increased, or the
money diminished. If there were less money in the hands
of the community, and the same amount of goods to be sold,
less money altogether would be given for them, and they
would be sold at lower prices ; lower, too, in the precise ratio
in which the money was diminished. So that the value of
money, other things being the same, varies inversely as its
quantity; every increase of quantity lowering the value, and
every diminution raising it, in a ratio exactly equivalent.

This, it must be observed, is a property peculiar to money.
We did not find it to be true of commodities generally, that
every diminution of supply raised the value exactly in pro-
portion to the deficiency, or that every increase lowered it in
the precise ratio of the excess. Some things are usually
affected in a greater ratio than that of the excess or deficiency,
others usually in a less : because, in ordinary cases of demand,
the desire, being for the thing itself, may be stronger or
weaker; and the amount of what people are willing to expend
on it, being in any case a limited quantity, may be affected
in very unequal degrees by difficulty or facility of attainment.
But in the case of money, which is desired as the means of
universal purchase, the demand consists of everything which
people have to sell ; and the only limit to what they are
willing to give, is the limit set by their having nothing more
to offer. The whole of the goods being in any case exchanged
for the whole of the money which comes into the market to
be laid out, they will sell for less or more of it exactly accord-
ing as less or more is brought.



VALUE OF MONEY.


17


§ 3. From what precedes, it might for a moment be sup-
posed, that all the goods on sale in a country at any one
time, are exchanged for all the money existing and in circula-
tion at that same time : or, in other words, that there is always
in circulation in a country, a quantity of money equal in
value to the whole of the goods then and there on sale. But
this would be a complete misapprehension. The money laid
out is equal in value to the goods it purchases; but the quan-
tity of money laid out is not the same thing with the quantity
in circulation. As the money passes from hand to hand, the
same piece of money is laid out many times, before all the
things on sale at one time are purchased and finally removed
from the market : and each pound or dollar must be counted
for as many pounds or dollars, as the number of times it
changes hands in order to effect this object. The greater
part of the goods must also be counted more than once, not
only because most things pass through the hands of several
sets of manufacturers and dealers before they assume the
form in which they are finally consumed, but because in
times of speculation (and all times are so, more or less) the
same goods are often bought repeatedly, to be resold for a
profit, before they are bought for the purpose of consumption
at all.

If we assume the quantity of goods on sale, and the
number of times those goods are resold, to be fixed quan-
tities, the value of money will depend upon its quantity,
together with the average number of times that each piece
changes hands in the process. The whole of the goods sold
(counting each resale of the same goods as so much added to
the goods) have been exchanged for the whole of the money,
multiplied by the number of purchases made on the average
by each piece. Consequently, the amount of goods and of
transactions being the same, the value of money is inversely
as its quantity multiplied by what is called the rapidity of
circulation. And the quantity of money in circulation, is
equal to the money value of all the goods sold, divided

VOL. II. C



18 BOOK III. CHAPTER VIII. § 3 .

by the number which expresses the rapidity of circula-
tion.

The phrase, rapidity of circulation, requires some com-
ment. It must not be understood to mean, the number of
purchases made by each piece of money in a given time.
Time is not the thing to be considered. The state of society
may be such, that each piece of money hardly performs more
than one purchase in a year ; but if this arises from the small
number of transactions — from the small amount of business
done, the want of activity in traffic, or because what traffic
there is, mostly takes place by barter — it constitutes no reason
why prices should be lower, or the value of money higher.
The essential point is, not how often the same money changes
hands in a given time, but how often it changes hands in
order to perform a given amount of traffic. We must com-
pare the number of purchases made by the money in a given
time, not with the time itself, but with the goods sold in that
same time. If each piece of money changes hands on an
average ten times while goods are sold to the value of a million
sterling, it is evident that the money required to circulate
those goods is 100,000£. And conversely, if the money in
circulation is 100,000J., and each piece changes hands by the
purchase of goods ten times in a month, the sales of goods for
money which take place every month must amount on the
average to 1,000,000J.

Rapidity of circulation being a phrase so ill adapted to
express the only thing which it is of any importance to
express by it, and having a tendency to confuse the subject
by suggesting a meaning extremely different from the one
intended, it would be a good thing if the phrase could be got
rid of, and another substituted, more directly significant of
the idea meant to be conveyed. Some such expression as
“ the efficiency of money,” though not unexceptionable, would
do better ; as it would point attention to the quantity of work
done, without suggesting the idea of estimating it by time.
Until an appropriate term can be devised, we must be content



VALUE OF MONEY.


19


when ambiguity is to be apprehended, to express the idea by
the circumlocution which alone conveys it adequately,
namely, the average number of purchases made by each
piece in order to effect a given pecuniary amount of trans-
actions.

§ 4. The proposition which we have laid down respecting
the dependence of general prices upon the quantity of
money in circulation, must be understood as applying only to
a state of things in which money, that is, gold or silver, is the
exclusive instrument of exchange, and actually passes from
hand to hand at every purchase, credit in any of its shapes
being unknown. When credit comes into play as a means of
purchasing, distinct from money in hand, we shall hereafter
find that the connexion between prices and the amount of the
circulating medium is much less direct and intimate, and that
such connexion as does exist, no longer admits of so simple a
mode of expression. But on a subject so full of complexity
as that of currency and prices, it is necessary to lay the
foundation of our theory in a thorough understanding of the
most simple cases, which we shall always find lying as a
groundwork or substratum under those which arise in prac-
tice. That an increase of the quantity of money raises
prices, and a diminution lowers them, is the most elementary
proposition in the theory of currency, and without it we
should have no key to any of the others. In any state of
things, however, except the simple and primitive one which
we have supposed, the proposition is only true other things
being the same : and what those other things are, which
must be the same, we are not yet ready to pronounce. We
can, however, point out, even now, one or two of the cautions
with which the principle must be guarded in attempting to
make use of it for the practical explanation of phenomena ;
cautions the more indispensable, as the doctrine, though a
scientific truth, has of late years been the foundation of a
greater mass of false theory, and erroneous interpretation of

c 2



20


BOOK III. CHAPTER VIII. § 4.

facts, than any other proposition relating to interchange.
From the time of the resumption of cash payments by the
Act of 1819, and especially since the commercial crisis of
1825, the favourite explanation of every rise or fall of prices
has been “the currency;” and like most popular theories, the
doctrine has been applied with little regard to the conditions
necessary for making it correct.

For example, it is habitually assumed that whenever there
is a greater amount of money in the country, or in existence,
a rise of prices must necessarily follow. But this is by no
means an inevitable consequence. In no commodity is it the
quantity in existence, but the quantity offered for sale, that
determines the value. Whatever may be the quantity of
money in the country, only that part of it will affect prices,
which goes into the market of commodities, and is there
actually exchanged against goods. Whatever increases the
amount of this portion of the money in the country, tends to
raise prices. But money hoarded does not act on prices.
Money kept in reserve by individuals to meet contingencies
which do not occur, does not act on prices. The money in
the coffers of the Bank, or retained as a reserve by private
bankers, does not act on prices until drawn out, nor even then
unless drawn out to be expended in commodities.

It frequently happens that money, to a considerable
amount, is brought into the country, is there actually invested
as capital, and again flows out, without having ever once
acted upon the markets of commodities, but only upon the
market of securities, or, as it is commonly though improperly
called, the money market. Let us return to the case already
put for illustration, that of a foreigner landing in the country
with a treasure. We supposed him to employ his treasure in
the purchase of goods for his own use, or in setting up a
manufactory and employing labourers; and in either case he
would, cc/eteris paribus , raise prices. But instead of doing
either of these things, he might very probably prefer to invest
bis fortune at interest; which we shall suppose him to do in



VALUE OF MONEY.


21


the most obvious way, by becoming a competitor for a portion
of the stock, exchequer bills, railway debentures, mercantile
bills, mortgages, &c., which are at all times in the hands of
the public. By doing this he would raise the prices of those
different securities, or in other words would lower the rate
of interest ; and since this would disturb the relation previ-
ously existing between the rate of interest on capital in the
country itself, and that in foreign countries, it would probably
induce some of those who had floating capital seeking
employment, to send it abroad for foreign investment, rather
than buy securities at home at the advance of price. As
much money might thus go out as had previously come in,
while the prices of commodities would have shown no trace
of its temporary presence. This is a case highly deserving of
attention: and it is a fact now beginning to be recognised,
that the passage of the precious metals from country to coun-
try is determined much more than was formerly supposed, by
the state of the loan market in different countries, and much
less by the state of prices.

Another point must be adverted to, in order to avoid
serious error in the interpretation of mercantile phenomena.
If there be, at any time, an increase in the number of money
transactions, a thing continually liable to happen from dif-
ferences in the activity of speculation, and even in the time
of year (since certain kinds of business are transacted only at
particular seasons) ; an increase of the currency which is only
proportional to this increase of transactions, and is of no
longer duration, has no tendency to raise prices. At the
quarterly periods when the public dividends are paid at the
Bank, a sudden increase takes place of the money in the
hands of the public ; an increase estimated at from a fifth to
two-fifths of the whole issues of the Bank of England. Yet
this never has any effect on prices ; and in a very few weeks,
the currency has again shrunk into its usual dimensions, by a
mere reduction in the demands of the public (after so copious
a supply of ready money) for accommodation from the Bank



22 BOOK III. CHAPTER VIII. § 4 .

in the way of discount or loan. In like manner the currency
of the agricultural districts fluctuates in amount at different
seasons of the year. It is always lowest in August: “it
rises generally towards Christmas, and obtains its greatest
elevation about Lady-day, when the farmer commonly lays in
his stock, and has to pay his rent and summer taxes/' and
when he therefore makes his principal applications to country
bankers for loans. “ Those variations occur with the same
regularity as the season, and with just as little disturbance of
the markets as the quarterly fluctuations of the notes of the
Bank of England. As soon as the extra payments have been
completed, the superfluous" currency, which is estimated at
half a million, “ as certainly and immediately is reabsorbed
and disappears."*

If extra currency were not forthcoming to make these
extra payments, one of three things must happen. Either
the payments must be made without money, by a resort to
some of those contrivances by which its use is dispensed
with ; or there must be an increase in the rapidity of circula-
tion, the same sum of money being made to perform more
payments; or if neither of these things took place, money to
make the extra payments must be withdrawn from the
market for commodities, and prices, consequently, must fall.
An increase of the circulating medium, conformable in extent
and duration to the temporary stress of business, does not
raise prices, but merely prevents this fall.

The sequel of our investigation will point out many other
qualifications with which the proposition must be received,
that the value of the circulating medium depends on the
demand and supply, and is in the inverse ratio of the quantity:
qualifications which, under a complex system of credit like
that existing in England, render the proposition a totally
incorrect expression of the fact.


* Fullarton on the Regulation of Currencies, 2nd edit. pp. 87—9.



CHAPTER IX.


OF THE VALUE OF MONEY, AS DEPENDENT ON COST OF
PRODUCTION.

§ 1. But money, no more than commodities in general,
has its value definitively determined by demand and supply.
The ultimate regulator of its value is Cost of Production.

We are supposing, of course, that things are left to them-
selves. Governments have not always left things to them-
selves. They have undertaken to prevent the quantity of
money from adjusting itself according to spontaneous laws,
and have endeavoured to regulate it at their pleasure ; gene-
rally with a view of keeping a greater quantity of money in
the country, than would otherwise have remained there. It
was, until lately, the policy of all governments to interdict
the exportation and the melting of money; while, by en-
couraging the exportation and impeding the importation of
other things, they endeavoured to have a stream of money
constantly flowing in. By this course they gratified two
prejudices : they drew, or thought that they drew, more money
into the country, which they believed to be tantamount to
more wealth ; and they gave, or thought that they gave, to
all producers and dealers, high prices, which, though no real
advantage, people are always inclined to suppose to be one.

In this attempt to regulate the value of money artificially
by means of the supply, governments have never succeeded
in the degree, or even in the manner, which they intended.
Their prohibitions against exporting or melting the coin have
never been effectual. A commodity of such small bulk in
proportion to its value is so easily smuggled, and still more
easily melted, that it has been impossible by the most
stringent measures to prevent these operations. All the risk



24 BOOK III. CHAPTER IX. § 1.

which it was in the power of governments to attach to them,
was outweighed by a very moderate profit.* In the more
indirect mode of aiming at the same purpose, by throwing
difficulties in the way of making the returns for exported
goods in any other commodity than money, they have not
been quite so unsuccessful. They have not, indeed, succeeded
in making money flow continuously into the country; but
they have to a certain extent been able to keep it at a higher
than its natural level ; and have, thus far, removed the value
of money from exclusive dependence on the causes which fix
the values of things not artificially interfered with.

We are however to suppose a state, not of artificial regu-
lation, but of freedom. In that state, and assuming no
charge to be made for coinage, the value of money will con-
form to the value of the bullion of which it is made. A
pound weight of gold or silver in coin, and the same weight
in an ingot, will precisely exchange for one another. On
the supposition of freedom, the metal cannot be worth more
in the state of bullion than of coin ; for as it can be melted
without any loss of time, and with hardly any expense, this
would of course be done until the quantity in circulation
was so much diminished as to equalize its value with that
of the same weight in bullion. It may be thought however
that the coin, though it cannot be of less, may be, and being
a manufactured article will naturally be, of greater value
than the bullion contained in it, on the same principle on
which linen cloth is of more value than an equal weight of
linen yarn. This would be true, were it not that Govern-
ment, in this country and in some others, coins money gratis
for any one who furnishes the metal. The labour and ex-


* The effect of the prohibition cannot, however, have been go entirely
insignificant as it has been supposed to be by writers on the subject. The
facts adduced by Mr. Fullarton, in the note to page 7 of his work on the Regu-
lation of Currencies, show that it required a greater percentage of difference in
value between coin and bullion than has commonly been imagined, to bring the
coin to the melting-pot.



VALUE OP MONEY.


25


pense of coinage, when not charged to the possessor, do not
raise the value of the article. If Government opened an
office where, on delivery of a given weight of yarn, it returned
the same weight of cloth to any one who asked for it, cloth
would be worth no more in the market than the yarn it con-
tained. As soon as coin is worth a fraction more than the
value of the bullion, it becomes the interest of the holders of
bullion to send it to be coined. If Government, however,
throws the expense of coinage, as is reasonable, upon the
holder, by making a charge to cover the expense, (which is
done by giving back rather less in coin than has been
received in bullion, and is called levying a seignorage), the
coin will rise, to the extent of the seignorage, above the value
of the bullion. If the mint kept back one per cent, to pay
the expense of coinage, it would be against the interest of the
holders of bullion to have it coined, until the coin was more
valuable than the bullion by at least that fraction. The coin,
therefore, would be kept one per cent higher in value, which
could only be by keeping it one per cent less in quantity,
than if its coinage were gratuitous.

The Government might attempt to obtain a profit by the
transaction, and might lay on a seignorage calculated for
that purpose; but whatever they took for coinage beyond
its expenses, would be so much profit on private coining.
Coining, though not so easy an operation as melting, is far
from a difficult one, and, when the coin produced is of full
weight and standard fineness, is very difficult to detect. If,
therefore, a profit could be made by coining good money, it
would certainly be done : and the attempt to make seignorage
a source of revenue would be defeated. Any attempt to keep
the value of the coin at an artificial elevation, not by a seig-
norage, but by refusing to coin, would be frustrated in the
same manner. *


* In England, though there is no seignorage on gold coin, (the Mint re-
turning in coin the same weight of pure metal which it receives in bullion)



26 BOOK III. CHAPTER IX. § 2 .

§ 2. The value of money, then, conforms, permanently,
and, in a state of freedom, almost immediately, to the value
of the metal of which it is made ; with the addition, or not,
of the expenses of coinage, according as those expenses are
borne by the individual or by the state. This simplifies
extremely the question which we have here to consider : since
gold and silver bullion are commodities like any others, and
their value depends, like that of other things, on their cost of
production.

To the majority of civilized countries, gold and silver are
foreign products: and the circumstances which govern the
values of foreign products, present some questions which we
are not yet ready to examine. For the present, therefore, we
must suppose the country which is the subject of our inquiries,
to be supplied with gold and silver by its own mines, reserv-
ing for future consideration how far our conclusions require
modification, to adapt them to the more usual case.

Of the three classes into which commodities are divided —
those absolutely limited in supply, those which may be had
in unlimited quantity at a given cost of production, and those
which may be had in unlimited quantity, but at an increasing
cost of production — the precious metals, being the produce of
mines, belong to the third class. Their natural value, there-
fore, is in the long run proportional to their cost of produc-
tion in the most unfavourable existing circumstances, that is,
at the worst mine which it is necessary to work in order to
obtain the required supply. A pound weight of gold will,
in the gold-producing countries, ultimately tend to exchange


there is a delay of a few weeks after the bullion is deposited, before the coin
can be obtained, occasioning a loss of interest, which, to the holder, is equiva-
lent to a trifling seignorage. From this cause, the value of coin is in general
slightly above that of the bullion it contains. An ounce of gold, according
to the quantity of metal in a sovereign, should be worth 3 1. 17*. lOJd. ; but it
was usually quoted at 3 1. 17*. 6d. t until the Bank Charter Act of 1844 made it
imperative on the Bank to give its notes for all bullion offered to it at the rate
of 31 17*. 9 d.



VALUE OP MONEY.


27


for as much of every other commodity, as is produced at a
cost equal to its own ; meaning by its own cost the cost in
labour and expense, at the least productive sources of supply
which the then existing demand makes it necessary to work.
The average value of gold is made to conform to its natural
value in the same manner as the values of other things are
made to conform to their natural value. Suppose that it were
selling above its natural value ; that is, above the value which
is an equivalent for the labour and expense of mining, and for
the risks attending a branch of industry in which nine out of
ten experiments have usually been failures. A part of the
mass of floating capital which is on the look-out for investment,
would take the direction of mining enterprise; the supply
would thus be increased, and the value would fall. If, on the
contrary, it were selling below its natural value, miners would
not be obtaining the ordinary profit ; they would slacken their
works; if the depreciation was great, some of the inferior
mines would perhaps stop working altogether : and a falling
off in the annual supply, preventing the annual wear and tear
from being completely compensated, would by degrees reduce
the quantity, and restore the value.

When examined more closely, the following are the
details of the process. If gold is above its natural or cost
value — the coin, as we have seen, conforming in its value to
the bullion — money will be of high value, and the prices of
all things, labour included, will be low. These low prices will
lower the expenses of all producers ; but as their returns will
also be lowered, no advantage will be obtained by any pro-
ducer, except the producer of gold : whose returns from his
mine, not depending on price, will be the same as before, and
his expenses being less, he will obtain extra profits, and will
be stimulated to increase his production. E converse* if the
metal is below its natural value : since this is as much as to
say that prices are high, and the money expenses of all pro-
ducers unusually great : for this, however, all other producers
will be compensated by,mcreased money returns : the miner



28


BOOK III. CHAPTER IX. § 3.

alone will extract from his mine no more metal than before,
while his expenses will be greater : his profits therefore being
diminished or annihilated, he will diminish his production, if
not abandon his employment.

In this manner it is that the value of money is made to
conform to the cost of production of the metal of which it is
made. It may be well, however, to repeat (what has been
said before) that the adjustment takes a long time to effect,
in the case of a commodity so generally desired and at the
same time so durable as the precious metals. Being so
largely used not only as money but for plate and ornament,
there is at all times a very large quantity of these metals in
existence : while they are so slowly worn out, that a com-
paratively small annual production is sufficient to keep up the
supply, and to make any addition to it which may be required
by the increase of goods to be circulated, or by the increased
demand for gold and silver articles by wealthy consumers.
Even if this small annual supply were stopt entirely, it would
require many years to reduce the quantity so much as to
make any very material difference in prices. The quantity
may be increased, much more rapidly than it can be dimi-
nished ; but the increase must be very great before it can
make itself much felt over such a mass of the precious metals
as exists in the whole commercial world. And hence the
effects of all changes in the conditions of production of the
precious metals are at first, and continue to be for many
years, questions of quantity only, with little reference to cost
of production. More especially is this the case when, as at
the present time, many new sources of supply have been
simultaneously opened, most of them practicable by labour
alone, without any capital in advance beyond a pickaxe and
a week's food, and when the operations are as yet wholly
experimental, the comparative permanent productiveness of
the different sources being entirely unascertained.

§ 3. Since, however, the value of money really conforms,



VALUE OF HONEY.


29


like that of other things, though more slowly, to its cost of
production, some political economists have objected alto-
gether to the statement that the value of money depends on
its quantity combined with the rapidity of circulation ; which,
they think, is assuming a law for money that does not exist
for any other commodity, when the truth is that it is
governed by the very same laws. To this we may answer,
in the first place, that the statement in question assumes no
peculiar law. It is simply the law of demand and supply,
which is acknowledged to be applicable to all commodities,
and which, in the case of money as of most other things, is
controlled, but not set aside, by the law of cost of produc-
tion, since cost of production would have no effect on value
if it could have none on supply. But, secondly, there really
is, in one respect, a closer connexion between the value of
money and its quantity, than between the values of other
things and their quantity. The value of other things conforms
to the changes in the cost of production, without requiring,
as a condition, that there should be any actual alteration of
the supply : the potential alteration is sufficient ; and if
there even be an actual alteration, it is but a temporary one,
except in so far as the altered value may make a difference
in the demand, and so require an increase or diminution of
supply, as a consequence, not a cause, of the alteration in
value. Now this is also true of gold and silver, considered
as articles of expenditure for ornament and luxury; but
it is not true of money. If the permanent cost of pro-
duction of gold were reduced one-fourth, it might happen
that there would not be more of it bought for plate, gild-
ing, or jewellery, than before ; and if so, though the value
would fall, the quantity extracted from the mines for these
purposes, would be no greater than previously. Not so
with the portion used as money : that portion could not
fall in value one-fourth, unless actually increased one-fourth ;
for, at prices one-fourth higher, one-fourtli more money
would be required to make the accustomed purchases ; and if



80 BOOK III. CHAPTER IX. § 8.

this were not forthcoming, some of the commodities would be
without purchasers, and prices could not be kept up. Altera-
tions, therefore, in the cost of production of the precious
metals, do not act upon the value of money except just in
proportion as they increase or diminish its quantity; which
cannot be said of any other commodity. It would therefore,
I conceive, be an error, both scientifically and practically, to
discard the proposition which asserts a connexion between the
value of money and its quantity.

It is evident, however, that the cost of production, in the
long run, regulates the quantity; and that every country
(temporary fluctuations excepted) will possess, and have in
circulation, just that quantity of money, which will perform
all the exchanges required of it, consistently with maintaining
a value conformable to its cost of production. The prices of
things will, on the average, be such that money will exchange
for its own cost in all other goods : and, precisely because the
quantity cannot be prevented from affecting the value, the
quantity itself will (by a sort of self-acting machinery) be kept
at the amount consistent with that standard of prices — at the
amount necessary for performing, at those prices, all the
business required of it.

“ The quantity wanted will depend partly on the cost o
producing gold, and partly on the rapidity of its circulation.
The rapidity of circulation being given, it would depend on
the cost of production : and the cost of production being
given, the quantity of money would depend on the rapidity of
its circulation/'* After what has been already said, I hope
that neither of these propositions stands in need of any further
illustration.

Money, then, like commodities in general, having a value
dependent on, and proportional to, its cost of production ; the


* From some printed, but not published, Lectures of Mr. Senior : in which
the great differences in the business done by money, as well as in the rapidity
of its circulation, in different states of society and civilization, are interestingly
illustrated.



VALUE OF MONEY.


31


theory of money is, by the admission of this principle, stript
of a great part of the mystery which apparently surrounded
it. We must not forget, however, that this doctrine only
applies to the places in which the precious metals are actually
produced; and that we have yet to enquire whether the law
of the dependence of value on cost of production applies to
the exchange of things produced at distant places. But
however this may be, our propositions with respect to value
will require no other alteration, where money is an imported
commodity, than that of substituting for the cost of its pro-
duction, the cost of obtaining it in the country. Every foreign
commodity is bought by giving for it some domestic produc-
tion ; and the labour and capital which a foreign commodity
costs to us, is the labour and capital expended in producing
the quantity of our own goods which we give in exchange for
it. What this quantity depends upon, — what determines the
proportions of interchange between the productions of one
country and those of another, — is indeed a question of some-
what greater complexity than those we have hitherto con-
sidered. But this at least is indisputable, that within the
country itself the value of imported commodities is determined
by the value, and consequently by the cost of production, of
the equivalent given for them ; and money, where it is an
imported commodity, is subject to the same law.



CHAPTER X.


OF A DOUBLE STANDARD, AND SUBSIDIARY COINS.

§ 1. Though the qualities necessary to fit any commo-
dity for being used as money are rarely united in any con-
siderable perfection, there are two commodities which possess
them in an eminent, and nearly an equal degree; the two
precious metals, as they are called ; gold and silver. Some
nations have accordingly attempted to compose their circu-
lating medium of these two metals indiscriminately.

There is an obvious convenience in making use of the
more costly metal for larger payments, and the cheaper one
for smaller ; and the only question relates to the mode in
which this can best be done. The mode most frequently
adopted has been to establish between the two metals a fixed
proportion ; to decide, for example, that a gold coin called a
sovereign should be equivalent to twenty of the silver coins
called shillings : both the one and the other being called, in
the ordinary money of account of the country, by the same
denomination, a pound : and it being left free to every one
who has a pound to pay, either to pay it in the one metal or
in the other.

At the time when the valuation of the two metals rela-
tively to each other, say twenty shillings to the sovereign, or
twenty-one shillings to the guinea, was first made, the propor-
tion probably corresponded, as nearly as it could be made to
do, with the ordinary relative values of the two metals,
grounded on their cost of production; and if those natural or
cost values always continued to bear the same ratio to one
another, the arrangement would be unobjectionable. This,
however, is far from being the fact. Gold and silver, though
the least variable in value of all commodities, are not invariable,



DOUBLE STANDARD, AND SUBSIDIARY COINS. 33

and do not always vary simultaneously. Silver, for example,
was lowered in permanent value more than gold, by the
discovery of the American mines ; and those small variations
of value which take place occasionally, do not affect both
metals alike. Suppose such a variation to take place : the
value of the two metals relatively to one another no longer
agreeing with their rated proportion, one or other of them will
now be rated below its bullion value, and there will be a
profit to be made by melting it.

Suppose, for example, that gold rises in value relatively
to silver, so that the quantity of gold in a sovereign is now
worth more than the quantity of silver in twenty shillings.
Two consequences will ensue. No debtor will any longer
find it his interest to pay in gold. He will always pay in
silver, because twenty shillings are a legal tender for a debt of
one pound, and he can procure silver convertible into twenty
shillings for less gold than that contained in a sovereign.
The other consequence will be, that unless a sovereign can be
sold for more than twenty shillings, all the sovereigns will be
melted, since as bullion they will purchase a greater number
of shillings than they exchange for as coin. The converse
of all this would happen if silver, instead of gold, were the
metal which had risen in comparative value. A sovereign
would not now be worth so much as twenty shillings, and
whoever had a pound to pay would prefer paying it by a
sovereign ; while the silver coins would be collected for the
purpose of being melted, and sold as bullion for gold at their
real value, that is, above the legal valuation. The money of
the community, therefore, would never really consist of both
metals, but of the one only which, at the particular time, best
suited the interest of debtors ; and the standard of the currency
would be constantly liable to change from the one metal to the
other, at a loss, on each change, of the expense of coinage
on the metal which fell out of use.

It appears, therefore, that the value of money is liable
to more frequent fluctuations when both metals are a legal

VOL. II. D



34


BOOK 111. CHAPTER X. § 2.


tender at a fixed valuation, than when the exclusive standard
of the currency is either gold or silver. Instead of being
only affected by variations in the cost of production of one
metal, it is subject to derangement from those of two. The
particular kind of variation to which a currency is rendered
more liable by having two legal standards, is a fall of value,
or what is commonly called a depreciation ; since practically
that one of the two metals will always be the standard, of
which the real has fallen below the rated value. If the ten-
dency of the metals be to rise in value, all payments will be
made in the one which has risen least ; and if to fall, then in
that which has fallen most.

§ 2. The plan of a double standard is still occasionally
brought forward by here and there a writer or orator as a
great improvement in currency. It is probable that, with
most of its adherents, its chief merit is its tendency to a sort
of depreciation, there being at all times abundance of sup-
porters for any mode, either open or covert, of lowering the
standard. Some, however, are influenced by an exaggerated
estimate of an advantage which to a certain extent is real,
that of being able to have recourse, for replenishing the
circulation, to the united stock of gold and silver in the
commercial world, instead of being confined to one of them,
which, from accidental absorption, may not be obtainable
with sufficient rapidity. The advantage without the dis-
advantages of a double standard, seems to be best obtained
by those nations, with whom one only of the two metals is a
legal tender, but the other also is coined, and allowed to pass
for whatever value the market assigns to it.

When this plan is adopted, it is naturally the more costly
metal which is left to be bought and sold as an article of
commerce. But nations which, like England, adopt the
more costly of the two as their standard, resort to a different
expedient for retaining them both in circulation, namely, to
make silver a legal tender, but only for small payments. In



DOUBLE STANDARD; AND SUBSIDIARY COINS. 85

England, no one can be compelled to receive silver in pay-
ment for a larger amount than forty shillings. With this
regulation there is necessarily combined another, namely,
that silver coin should be rated, in comparison with gold,
somewhat above its intrinsic value ; that there should not be,
in twenty shillings, as much silver as is worth a sovereign :
for if there were, a very slight turn of the market in its
favour would make it worth more than a sovereign, and it
would be profitable to melt the silver coin. The over-valua-
tion of the silver coin creates an inducement to buy silver
and send it to the mint to be coined, since it is given back
at a higher value than properly belongs to it : this, however,
has been guarded against, by limiting the quantity of the
silver coinage, which is not left, like that of gold, to the
discretion of individuals, but is determined by the govern-
ment, and restricted to. the amount supposed to be required
for small payments. The only precaution necessary is, not
to put so high a valuation upon the silver, as to hold out a
strong temptation to private coining.



CHAPTER XI.


OF CREDIT, AS A SUBSTITUTE FOR MONEY.

§ 1. The functions of credit have been a subject of as
much misunderstanding and as much confusion of ideas, as
any single topic in Political Economy. This is not owing to
any peculiar difficulty in the theory of the subject, but to the
complex nature of some of the mercantile phenomena arising
from the forms in which credit clothes itself ; by which atten-
tion is diverted from the properties of credit in general, to
the peculiarities of its particular forms.

As a specimen of the confused notions entertained re-
specting the nature of credit, we may advert to the exaggerated
language so often used respecting its national importance.
Credit has a great, but not, as many people seem to suppose,
a magical power ; it cannot make something out of nothing.
How often is an extension of credit talked of as equivalent to
a creation of capital, or as if credit actually were capital. It
seems strange that there should be any need to point out,
that credit being only permission to use the capital of another
person, the means of production cannot be increased by it,
but only transferred. If the borrower's means of production
and of employing labour are increased by the credit given him,
the lender's are as much diminished. The same sum cannot
be used as capital both by the owner and also by the person
to whom it is lent : it cannot supply its full value in wages,
tools, and materials, to two sets of labourers at once. It is
true that the capital which A has borrowed from B, and
makes use of in his business, still forms part of the wealth of
B for other purposes : he can enter into engagements in
reliance on it, and can borrow, when needful, an equivalent
sum on the security of it; so that to a superficial eye it



CREDIT AS A SUBSTITUTE FOR MONEY.


37


might seem as if both B and A had the use of it at once.
But the smallest consideration will show that when B has
parted with his capital to A, the use of it as capital rests
with A alone, and that B has no other service from it than in
so far as his ultimate claim upon it serves him to obtain the
use of another capital from a third person, C. All capital
(not his own) of which any person has really the use, is,
and must be, so much subtracted from the capital of some
one else.


§ 2. But though credit is never anything more than a
transfer of capital from hand to hand, it is generally, and
naturally, a transfer to hands more competent to employ the
capital efficiently in production. If there were no such thing
as credit, or if, from general insecurity and want of confi-
dence, it were scantily practised, many persons who possess
more or less of capital, but who from their occupations, or for
want of the necessary skill and knowledge, cannot personally
superintend its employment, would derive no benefit from it :
their funds would either lie idle, or would be, perhaps, wasted
and annihilated in unskilful attempts to make them yield
a profit. All this capital is now lent at interest, and made
available for production. Capital thus circumstanced forms
a large portion of the productive resources of any commercial
country; and is naturally attracted to those producers or
traders who, being in the greatest business, have the means
of employing it to most advantage; because such are both
the most desirous to obtain it, and able to give the best
security. Although, therefore, the productive funds of the
country are not increased by credit, they are called into a
more complete state of productive activity. As the confidence
on which credit is grounded extends itself, means are deve-
loped by which even the smallest portions of capital, the sums
which each person keeps by him to meet contingencies, are
made available for productive uses. The principal instru-
ments for this purpose are banks of deposit. Where these



88 BOOK III, CHAPTER XI. § 2 ,

do not exist, a prudent person must keep a sufficient sura
unemployed in his own possession, to meet every demand
which he has even a slight reason for thinking himself liable
to. When the practice, however, has grown up of keeping
this reserve not in his own custody but with a banker, many
small sums, previously lying idle, become aggregated in the
banker's hands ; and the banker, being taught by experience
what proportion of the amount is likely to be wanted in a
given time, and knowing that if one depositor happens to
require more than the average, another will require less, is
able to lend the remainder, that is, the far greater part, to
producers and dealers : thereby adding the amount, not indeed
to the capital in existence, but to that in employment, and
making a corresponding addition to the aggregate production
of the community.

While credit is thus indispensable for rendering the
whole capital of the country productive, it is also a means by
which the industrial talent of the country is turned to better
account for purposes of production. Many a person who has
either no capital of his own, or very little, but who has quali-
fications for business which are known and appreciated by some
possessors of capital, is enabled to obtain either advances in
money, or more frequently goods on credit, by which his
industrial capacities are made instrumental to the increase of
the public wealth : and this benefit will be reaped far more
largely, whenever, through better laws and better education,
the community shall have made such progress in integrity, that
personal character can be accepted as a sufficient guarantee
not only against dishonestly appropriating, but against dis-
honestly risking, what belongs to another.

Such are, in the most general point of view, the uses of
credit to the productive resources of the world. But these
considerations only apply to the credit given to the indus-
trious classes — to producers and dealers. Credit given by
dealers to unproductive consumers is never an addition, but
always a detriment, to the sources of public wealth. It makes



CREDIT AS A SUBSTITUTE FOR MONEY.


39


over in temporary use, not the capital of the unproductive
classes to the productive, but that of the productive to the
unproductive. If A, a dealer, supplies goods to B, a land-
owner or annuitant, to be paid for at the end of five years, as
much of the capital of A as is equal to the value of these
goods, remains for five years unproductive. During such a
period, if payment had been made at once, the sum might
have been several times expended and replaced, and goods
to the amount might have been several times produced, con-
sumed, and reproduced : consequently B's withholding 100£.
for five years, even if he pays at last, has cost to the labouring
classes of the community during that period an absolute loss
of probably several times that amount. A, individually, is
compensated, by putting a higher price upon his goods, which
is ultimately paid by B : but there is no compensation made
to the labouring classes, the chief sufferers by every diversion
of capital, whether permanently or temporarily, to unpro-
ductive uses. The country has had 100£. less of capital
during those five years, B having taken that amount from
A's capital, and spent it unproductively, in anticipation of
his own means, and having only after five years set apart
a sum from his income and converted it into capital for the
purpose of indemnifying A.

§ 3. Thus far of the general function of Credit in pro-
duction. It is not a productive power in itself, though,
without it, the productive powers already existing could not
be brought into complete employment. But a more intricate
portion of the theory of Credit is its influence on prices ; the
chief cause of most of the mercantile phenomena which
perplex observers. In a state of commerce in which much
credit is habitually given, general prices at any moment
depend much more upon the state of credit than upon the
quantity of money. For credit, though it is not productive
power, is purchasing power ; and a person who, having credit,
avails himself of it in the purchase of goods, creates just as



40


BOOK III. CHAPTER XI. § 3.

much demand for the goods, and tends quite as much to raise
their price, as if he made an equal amount of purchases with
ready money.

The credit which we are now called upon to consider, as
a distinct purchasing power, independent of money, is of
course not credit in its simplest form, that of money lent by
one person to another, and paid directly into his hands ; for
when the borrower expends this in purchases, he makes the
purchases with money, not credit, and exerts no purchasing
power over and above that conferred by the money. The
forms of credit which create purchasing power, are those in
which no money passes at the time, and very often does not
pass at all, the transaction being included with a mass of
other transactions in an account, and nothing paid but a
balance. This takes place in a variety of ways, which we
shall proceed to examine, beginning, as is our custom, with
the simplest.

First: Suppose A and B to be two dealers, who have
transactions with each other both as buyers and as sellers.
A buys from B on credit. B does the like with respect to A.
At the end of the year, the sum of A's debts to B is set
against the sum of Bs debts to A, and it is ascertained to
which side a balance is due. This balance, which may be
less than the amount of many of the transactions singly, and
is necessarily less than the sum of the transactions, is all
that is paid in money; and perhaps even this is not paid, but
carried over in an account current to the next year. A single
payment of a hundred pounds may in this manner suffice to
liquidate a long series of transactions, some of them to the
value of thousands.

But secondly : The debts of A to B may be paid without
the intervention of money, even though there be no reciprocal
debts of B to A. A may satisfy B by making over to him
a debt due to himself from a third person, C. This is con-
veniently done by means of a written instrument, called a
bill of exchange, which is, in fact, a transferable order by a



CREDIT AS A SUBSTITUTE FOR MONEY.


41


creditor upon his debtor, and when accepted by the debtor,
that is, authenticated by his signature, becomes an acknow-
ledgment of debt.

§ 4. Bills of exchange were first introduced to save
the expense and risk of transporting the precious metals
from place to place. “ Let it be supposed/' says Mr. Henry
Thornton,* “that there are in London ten manufacturers
who sell their article to ten shopkeepers in York, by whom it
is retailed ; and that there are in York ten manufacturers
of another commodity, who sell it to ten shopkeepers in
London. There would be no occasion for the ten shop-
keepers in London to send yearly to York guineas for the
payment of the York manufacturers, and for the ten York
shopkeepers to send yearly as many guineas to London. It
would only be necessary for the York manufacturers to
receive from each of the shopkeepers at their own door the
money in question, giving in return letters which should
acknowledge the receipt of it ; and which should also direct
the money, lying ready in the hands of their debtors in
London, to be paid to the London manufacturers, so as to
cancel the debt in London in the same manner as that at
York. The expense and the risk of all transmission of
money would thus be saved. Letters ordering the transfer
of the debt are termed, in the language of the present day,
bills of exchange. They are bills by which the debt of one
person is exchanged for the debt of another; and the debt,
perhaps, which is due in one place for the debt due in
another/'

Bills of exchange having been found convenient as means
of paying debts at distant places without the expense of


* Enquiry into the Nature and Effects of the Paper Credit of Great
Britain, p. 24. This work, published in 1802, is even now the clearest expo-
sition that I am acquainted with, in the English language, of the modes in
which credit is given and taken in a mercantile community.



42 BOOK III. CHAPTER XI. § 4 .

transporting the precious metals, their use was afterwards
greatly extended from another motive. It is usual in every
trade to give a certain length of credit for goods bought:
three months, six months, a year, even two years, according
to the convenience or custom of the particular trade. A
dealer who has sold goods, for which he is to be paid in six
months, but who desires to receive payment sooner, draws
a bill on his debtor payable in six months, and gets the bill
discounted by a banker or other money-lender, that is, trans-
fers the bill to him, receiving the amount, minus interest
for the time it has still to run. It has become one of the
chief functions of bills of exchange to serve as a means by
which a debt due from one person can thus be made available
for obtaining credit from another. The convenience of the
expedient has led to the frequent creation of bills of
exchange not grounded on any debt previously due to the
drawer of the bill by the person on whom it is drawn.
These are called accommodation bills ; and sometimes, with
a tinge of disapprobation, fictitious bills. Their nature is so
clearly stated, and with such judicious remarks, by the author
whom I have just quoted, that I shall transcribe the entire
passage.*

“ A, being in want of 100Z., requests B to accept a note or
bill drawn at two months, which B, therefore, on the face
of it, is bound to pay; it is understood, however, that A will
take care either to discharge the bill himself, or to furnish B
with the means of paying it. A obtains ready money for the
bill on the joint credit of the two parties. A fulfils his pro-
mise of paying it when due, and thus concludes the transac-
tion. This service rendered by B to A is, however, not
unlikely to be requited, at a more or less distant period, by a
similar acceptance of a bill on A, drawn and discounted for
B’s convenience.

“ Let us now compare such a bill with a real bill. Let us


Pp. 29—33.



CREDIT AS A SUBSTITUTE FOR MONEY.


43


consider in what points they differ, or seem to differ; and in
what they agree.

“They agree, inasmuch as each is a discountable article;
each has also been created for the purpose of being dis-
counted; and each is, perhaps, discounted in fact. Each,
therefore, serves equally to supply means of speculation to the
merchant. So far, moreover, as bills and notes constitute
what is called the circulating medium, or paper currency of
the country, and prevent the use of guineas, the fictitious and
the real bill are upon an equality ; and if the price of com-
modities be raised in proportion to the quantity of paper cur-
rency, the one contributes to that rise exactly in the same
manner as the other.

“ Before we come to the points in which they differ, let
us advert to one point in which they are commonly supposed
to be unlike ; but in which they cannot be said always or
necessarily to differ.

“ Real notes (it is sometimes said) represent actual pro-
perty. There are actual goods in existence, which are the
counterpart to every real note. Notes which are not drawn
in consequence of a sale of goods, are a species of false
wealth, by which a nation is deceived. These supply only an
imaginary capital ; the others indicate one that is real.

“ In answer to this statement it may be observed, first,
that the notes given in consequence of a real sale of goods
cannot be considered as on that account certainly representing
any actual property. Suppose that A sells 100i. worth of
goods to B at six months credit, and takes a bill at six months
for it; and that B, within a month after, sells the same
goods, at a like credit, to C, taking a like bill ; and again,
that C, after another month, sells them to D, taking a like
bill, and so on. There may then, at the end of six months,
be six bills of 1001. each, existing at the same time; and
every one of these may possibly have been discounted. Of
all these bills, then, only one represents any actual pro-
perty



44


BOOK III. CHAPTER XI. § 4.


“In order to justify the supposition that a real bill (as it
is called) represents actual property, there ought to be some
power in the bill-holder to prevent the property which the
bill represents, from being turned to other purposes than that
of paying the bill in question. No such power exists;
neither the man who holds the real bill, nor the man who
discounts it, has any property in the specific goods for which
it was given : he as much trusts to the general ability to pay
of the giver of the bill, as the holder of any fictitious bill
does. The fictitious bill may, in many cases, be a bill given
by a person having a large and known capital, a part of
which the fictitious bill may be said in that case to represent.
The supposition that real bills represent property, and that
fictitious bills do not, seems, therefore, to be one by which
more than justice is done to one of these species of bills, and
something less than justice to the other.

“We come next to some points in which they differ.

“ First, the fictitious note, or note of accommodation, is
liable to the objection that it professes to be what it is not.
This objection, however, lies only against those fictitious bills
which are passed as real. In many cases, it is sufficiently
obvious what they are. Secondly, the fictitious bill is, in
general, less likely to be punctually paid than the real one.
There is a general presumption, that the dealer in fictitious
bills is a man who is a more adventurous speculator than he
who carefully abstains from them. It follows, thirdly, that
fictitious bills, besides being less safe, are less subject to
limitation as to their quantity. The extent of a man's actual
sales forms some limit to the amount of his real notes ; and
as it is highly desirable in commerce that credit should be
dealt out to all persons in some sort of regular and due pro-
portion, the measure of a man's actual sales, certified by the
appearance of his bills drawn in virtue of those sales, is
some rule in the case, though a very imperfect one in many
respects.

(( A fictitious bill, or bill of accommodation, is evidently,



CREDIT AS A SUBSTITUTE FOR MONEY.


45


in substance, the same as any common promissory note ; and
even better in this respect, that there is but one security to
the promissory note, whereas in the case of the bill of
accommodation, there are two. So much jealousy subsists
lest traders should push their means of raising money too
far, that paper, the same in its general nature with that
which is given, being the only paper which can be given, by
men out of business, is deemed somewhat discreditable when
coming from a merchant. And because such paper, when in
the merchant's hand, necessarily imitates the paper which
passes on the occasion of a sale of goods, the epithet fictitious
has been cast upon it ; an epithet which has seemed to coun-
tenance the confused and mistaken notion, that there is
something altogether false and delusive in the nature of a
certain part both of the paper and of the apparent wealth of
the country/'

A bill of exchange, when merely discounted, and kept in
the portfolio of the discounter until it falls due, does not
perform the functions or supply the place of money, but is
itself bought and sold for money. It is no more currency
than the public funds, or any other securities. But when a
bill drawn upon one person is paid to another (or even to the
same person) in discharge of a debt or a pecuniary claim, it
does something for which, if the bill did not exist, money
would be required : it performs the functions of currency.
This is a use to which bills of exchange are often applied.
“ They not only," continues Mr. Thornton,* “ spare the use
of ready money ; they also occupy its place in many cases.
Let us imagine a farmer in the country to discharge a debt of
1 0£. to his neighbouring grocer, by giving him a bill for that
sum, drawn on his cornfactor in London for grain sold in the
metropolis; and the grocer to transmit the bill, he having
previously indorsed it, to a neighbouring sugar-baker, in dis-
charge of a like debt ; and the sugar-baker to send it, when


* P. 40.



46


BOOK III. CHAPTER XI. § 5.

again indorsed, to a West India merchant in an outport, and
the West India merchant to deliver it to his country banker,
who also indorses it, and sends it into further circulation.
The bill in this case will have effected five payments, exactly
as if it were a lOi. note payable to bearer on demand. A
multitude of bills pass between trader and trader in the
country, in the manner which has been described ; and they
evidently form, in the strictest sense, a part of the circulating
medium of the kingdom ”

Many bills, both domestic and foreign, are at last pre-
sented for payment quite covered with indorsements, each
of which represents either a fresh discounting, or a pecuniary
transaction in which the bill has performed the functions
of money. Within the present generation, the circulating
medium of Lancashire for sums above five pounds, was almost
entirely composed of such bills.

§ 5. A third form in which credit is employed as a
substitute for currency, is that of promissory notes. A bill
drawn upon any one and accepted by him, and a note of
hand by him promising to pay the same sum, are, as far as
he is concerned, exactly equivalent, except that the former
commonly bears interest and the latter generally does not ;
and that the former is commonly payable only after a certain
lapse of time, and the latter payable at sight. But it is chiefly
in the latter form that it has become, in commercial coun-
tries, an express occupation to issue such substitutes for money.
Dealers in money (as lenders by profession are improperly
called) desire, like other dealers, to stretch their operations
beyond what can be carried on by their own means: they
wish to lend, not their capital merely, but their credit, and
not only such portion of their credit as consists of funds
actually deposited with them, but their power of obtaining
credit from the public generally, so far as they think they
can safely employ it. This is done in a very convenient
manner by lending their own promissory notes payable to



CREDIT AS A SUBSTITUTE FOR MONEY.


47


bearer on demand : the borrower being willing to accept
these as so much money, because the credit of the lender
makes other people willingly receive them on the same foot-
ing, in purchases or other payments. These notes, therefore,
perform all the functions of currency, and render an equiva-
lent amount of money which was previously in circulation,
unnecessary. As, however, being payable on demand, they
may be at any time returned on the issuer, and money
demanded for them, he must, on pain of bankruptcy, keep
by him as much money as will enable him to meet any
claims of that sort which can be expected to occur within
the time necessary for providing himself with more : and
prudence also requires that he should not attempt to issue
notes beyond the amount which experience shows can remain
in circulation without being presented for payment.

The convenience of this mode of (as it were) coining
credit, having once been discovered, governments have availed
themselves of the same expedient, and have issued their own
promissory notes in payment of their expenses; a resource
the more useful, because it is the only mode in which they
are able to borrow money without paying interest, their
promises to pay on demand being, in the estimation of the
holders, equivalent to money in hand. The practical differ-
ences between such government notes and the issues of
private bankers, and the further diversities of which this class
of substitutes for money are susceptible, will be considered
presently.

§ 6. A fourth mode of making credit answer the pur-
poses of money, by which, when carried far enough, money
may be very completely superseded, consists in making pay-
ments by cheques. The custom of keeping the spare cash
reserved for immediate use or against contingent demands, in
the hands of a banker, and making all payments, except small
ones, by orders on bankers, is in this country spreading to a
continually larger portion of the public. If the person making



48


BOOK III. CHAPTER XI. § 6.


the payment, and the person receiving it, keep their money
with the same banker, the payment takes place without any
intervention of money, by the mere transfer of its amount
in the bankers books from the credit of the payer to that of
the receiver. If all persons in London kept their cash at the
same banker's, and made all their payments by means of
cheques, no money would be required or used for any trans-
actions beginning and terminating in London. This ideal
limit is almost attained in fact, so far as regards transactions
between * dealers. It is chiefly in the retail transactions
between dealers and consumers, and in the payment of wages,
that money or bank notes now pass, and then only when the
amounts are small. In London, even shopkeepers of any
amount of capital or extent of business have generally an
account with a banker ; which, besides the safety and con-
venience of the practice, is to their advantage in another
respect, by giving them an understood claim to have their
bills discounted in cases when they could not otherwise expect
it. As for the merchants and larger dealers, they habitually
make all payments in the course of their business by cheques.
They do not, however, all deal with the same banker, and
when A gives a cheque to B, B usually pays it not into the
same but into some other bank. But the convenience of
business has given birth to an arrangement which makes all
the banking houses of the City of London, for certain purposes,
virtually one establishment. A banker does not send the
cheques which are paid into his banking house, to the banks
on which they are drawn, and demand money for them.
There is a building called the Clearing-house, to which every
City banker sends, each afternoon, all the cheques on other
bankers which he has received during the day, and they are
there exchanged for the cheques on him which have come
into the hands of other bankers, the balances only being paid
in money; or even these not in money, but in cheques on the
Bank of England. By this contrivance, all the business
transactions of the City of London during that day, amount-



CREDIT AS A SUBSTITUTE FOR MONEY.


49


ing often to millions of pounds, and a vast amount besides of
country transactions, represented by bills which country bankers
have drawn upon their London correspondents, are liquidated
by payments not exceeding on the average 200,000£.*

By means of the various instruments of credit which have
now been explained, the immense business of a country like
Great Britain is transacted with an amount of the precious
metals surprisingly small ; many times smaller, in proportion
to the pecuniary value of the commodities bought and sold,
than is found necessary in France, or any other country in
which, the habit and the disposition to give credit not being
so generally diffused, these “ economizing expedients/' as they
have been called, are not practised to the same extent. What
becomes of the money thus superseded in its functions, and
by what process it is made to disappear from circulation, are
questions the discussion of which must be for a short time
postponed.


* According to Mr. Tooke (Enquii-y into the Currency Principle, p. 27,) the
adjustments at the clearing house “ in the year 1839 amounted to 954,401,6002.,
making an average amount of payments of upwards of 3,000,0002. of bills of
exchange and cheques daily effected through the medium of little more than
200, 0002. of bank notes.”


YOL. II.


E



CHAPTER XII.


INFLUENCE OF CREDIT ON PRICES.

§ 1. Haying now formed a general idea of the modes in
which credit is made available as a substitute for money, we
have to consider in what manner the use of these substitutes
affects the value of money, or, what is equivalent, the prices
of commodities. It is hardly necessary to say that the per-
manent value of money — the natural and average prices of
commodities — are not in question here. These are deter-
mined by the cost of producing or of obtaining the precious
metals. An ounce of gold or silver will in the long run
exchange for as much of every other commodity, as can be
produced or imported at the same cost with itself. And an
order, or note of hand, or bill payable at sight, for an ounce
of gold, while the credit of the giver is unimpaired, is worth
neither more nor less than the gold itself.

It is not, however, with ultimate or average, but with
immediate and temporary prices, that we are now concerned.
These, as we have seen, may deviate very widely from the
standard of cost of production. Among other causes of fluc-
tuation, one we have found to be, the quantity of money
in circulation. Other things being the same, an increase of
the money in circulation raises prices, a diminution lowers
them. If more money is thrown into circulation than the
quantity which can circulate at a value conformable to its
cost of production, the value of money, so long as the excess
lasts, will remain below the standard of cost of production,
and general prices will be sustained above the natural rate.

But we have now found that there are other things, such
as bank notes, bills of exchange, and cheques, which circulate
as money, and perform all the functions of it : and the ques-



INFLUENCE OF CREDIT ON PRICES.


51


tion arises, Do these various substitutes operate on prices in
the same manner as money itself? Does an increase in the
quantity of transferable paper tend to raise prices, in the
same manner and degree as an increase in the quantity of
money ? There has been no small amount of discussion on
this point among writers on currency, without any result so
conclusive as to have yet obtained general assent.

I apprehend that bank notes, bills, or cheques, as such, do
not act on prices at all. What does act on prices is Credit,
in whatever shape given, and whether it gives rise to any
transferable instruments capable of passing into circulation,
or not.

I proceed to explain and substantiate this opinion.

* § 2. Money acts upon prices in no other way than by
being tendered in exchange for commodities. The demand
which influences the prices of commodities consists of the
money offered for them. But the money offered, is not the
same thing with the money possessed. It is sometimes less,
sometimes very much more. In the long run indeed, the
money which people lay out will be neither more nor less
than the money which they have to lay out : but this is far
from being the case at any given time. Sometimes they
keep money by them for fear of an emergency, or in expec-
tation of a more advantageous opportunity for expending it.
In that case the money is said not to be in circulation : in
plainer language, it is not offered, nor about to be offered, for
commodities. Money not in circulation has no effect on
prices. The converse, however, is a much commoner case ;
people make purchases with money not in their possession.
An article, for instance, which is paid for by a cheque on a
banker, is bought with money which not only is not in the
payer's possession, but generally not even in the bankers,
having been lent by him (all but the usual reserve) to other
persons. We just now made the imaginary supposition that
all persons dealt with a bank, and all with the same bank,

E 2



52


BOOK III. CHAPTER XII. § 2 .


payments being universally made by cheques. In this ideal
case, there would be no money anywhere except in the hands
of the banker; who might then safely part with all of it, by
selling it as bullion, or lending it, to be sent out of the
country in exchange for goods or foreign securities. But
though there would then be no money in possession, or ulti-
mately perhaps even in existence, money would be offered,
and commodities bought with it, just as at present. People
would continue to reckon their incomes and their capitals in
money, and to make their usual purchases with orders for
the receipt of a thing which would have literally ceased to
exist. There would be in all this nothing to complain of,
so long as the money, in disappearing, left an equivalent
value in other things, applicable when required to the
reimbursement of those to whom the money originally
belonged.

In the case however of payment by cheques, the purchases
are at any rate made, though not with money in the buyer's
possession, yet with money to which he has a right. But he
may make purchases with money which he only expects to
have, or even only pretends to expect. He may obtain goods
in return for his acceptances payable at a future time ; or on
his note of hand ; or on a simple book credit, that is, on a
mere promise to pay. All these purchases have exactly the
same effect on price, as if they were made with ready money.
The amount of purchasing power which a person can exercise,
is composed of all the money in his possession or due to him,
and of all his credit. For exercising the whole of this power
he finds a sufficient motive only under peculiar circumstances ;
but he always possesses it; and the portion of it which he at
any time does exercise, is the measure of the effect which he
produces on price.

Suppose that, in the expectation that some commodity
will rise in price, he determines, not only to invest in it all
his ready money, but to take up on credit, from the producers
or importers, as much of it as their opinion of his resources



INFLUENCE OF CREDIT ON PRICES.


53


will enable him to obtain. Every one must see that by thus
acting he produces a greater effect on price, than if he limited
his purchases to the money he has actually in hand. He
creates a demand for the article to the full amount of his
money and credit taken together, and raises the price propor-
tionally to both. And this effect is produced, though none
of the written instruments called substitutes for currency
may be called into existence; though the transaction may
give rise to no bill of exchange, nor to the issue of a single
bank note. The buyer, instead of taking a mere book credit,
might have given a bill for the amount ; or might have paid
for the goods with bank notes borrowed for that purpose
from a banker, thus making the purchase not on his own
credit with the seller, but on the banker's credit with the
seller, and his own with the banker. Had he done so, he
would have produced as great an effect on price as by a simple
purchase to the same amount on a book credit, but no greater
effect. The credit itself, not the form and mode in which it
is given, is the operating cause.

§ 3. The inclination of the mercantile public to increase
their demand for commodities by making use of all or much
of their credit as a purchasing power, depends on their
expectation of profit. When there is a general impression
that the price of some commodity is likely to rise, from an
extra demand, a short crop, obstructions to importation, or
any other cause, there is a disposition among dealers to
increase their stocks, in order to profit by the expected rise.
This disposition tends in itself to produce the effect which it
looks forward to, a rise of price ; and if the rise is consider-
able and progressive, other speculators are attracted, who, so
long as the price has not begun to fall, are willing to believe
that it will continue rising. These, by further purchases,
produce a further advance : and thus a rise of price for
which there were originally some rational grounds, is often
heightened by merely speculative purchases, until it greatly



54


BOOK III. CHAPTER XII. § 3.

exceeds what the original grounds will justify. After a time
this begins to be perceived ; the price ceases to rise, and the
holders, thinking it time to realize their gains, are anxious
to sell. Then the price begins to decline : the holders rush
into the market to avoid a still greater loss ; and, few being
willing to buy in a falling market, the price falls much more
suddenly than it rose. Those who have bought at a higher
price than reasonable calculation justified, and who have been
overtaken by the revulsion before they had realized, are losers
in proportion to the greatness of the fall, and to the quantity
of the commodity which they hold, or have bound themselves
to pay for.

Now all these effects might take place in a community to
which credit was unknown : the prices of some commodities
might rise from speculation, to an extravagant height, and
then fall rapidly back. But if there were no such thing as
credit, this could hardly happen with respect to commodities
generally. If all purchases were made with ready money,
the payment of increased prices for some articles would draw
an unusual proportion of the money of the community into
the markets for those articles, and must therefore draw it
away from some other class of commodities, and thus lower
their prices. The vacuum might, it is true, be partly filled
up by increased rapidity of circulation ; and in this manner
the money of the community is virtually increased in a time of
speculative activity, because people keep little of it by them,
but hasten to lay it out in some tempting adventure as soon
as possible after they receive it. This resource, however, is
limited : on the whole, people cannot, while the quantity of
money remains the same, lay out much more of it in some
things, without laying out less in others. But what they
cannot do by ready money, they can do by an extension of
credit. When people go into the market and purchase with
money which they hope to receive hereafter, they are drawing
upon an unlimited, not a limited fund. Speculation, thus
supported, may be going on in any number of commodities,



INFLUENCE OF CREDIT ON PRICES.


55


without disturbing the regular course of business in others.
It might even be going on in all commodities at once. We
could imagine that in an epidemic fit of the passion of gam-
bling, all dealers, instead of giving only their accustomed
orders to the manufacturers or growers of their commodity,
commenced buying up all of it which they could procure,
as far as their capital and credit would go. All prices would
rise enormously, even if there were no increase of money, and
no paper credit, but a mere extension of purchases on book
credits. After a time those who had bought would wish to
sell, and prices would collapse.

This is the ideal extreme case of what is called a com-
mercial crisis. There is said to be a commercial crisis, when
a great number of merchants and traders at once, either have,
or apprehend that they shall have, a difficulty in meeting
their engagements. The most usual cause of this general
embarrassment, is the recoil of prices after they have been
raised by a sjoirit of speculation, intense in degree, and
extending to many commodities. Some accident, which ex-
cites expectations of rising prices, such as the opening of a
new foreign market, or simultaneous indications of a short
supply of several great articles of commerce, sets speculation
at work in several leading departments at once. The prices
rise, and the holders realize, or appear to have the power of
realizing, great gains. In certain states of the public mind,
such examples of rapid increase of fortune call forth numerous
imitators, and speculation not only goes much beyond what
is justified by the original grounds for expecting rise of price,
but extends itself to articles in which there never was any
such ground : these, however, rise like the rest as soon as
speculation sets in. At periods of this kind, a great exten-
sion of credit takes place. Not only do all whom the con-
tagion reaches, employ their credit much more freely than
usual ; but they really have more credit, because they seem
to be making unusual gains, and because a generally reckless
and adventurous feeling prevails, which disposes people to



56


BOOK III. CHAPTER XII. § 3.


give as well as take credit more largely than at other times,
and give it to persons not entitled to it. In this manner, in
the celebrated speculative year 1825, and at various other
periods during the present century, the prices of many of the
principal articles of commerce rose greatly, without any fall
in others, so that general prices might, without incorrectness,
be said to have risen. When, after such a rise, the reaction
comes, and prices begin to fall, though at first perhaps only
through the desire of the holders to realize, speculative pur-
chases cease : but were this all, prices would only fall to the
level from which they rose, or to that which is justified by
the state of the consumption and of the supply. They fall,
however, much lower; for as, when prices were rising, and
everybody apparently making a fortune, it was easy to obtain
almost any amount of credit, so now, when everybody seems
to be losing, and many fail entirely, it is with difficulty that
firms of known solidity can obtain even the credit to which
they are accustomed, and which it is the greatest inconvenience
to them to be without; because all dealers have engage-
ments to fulfil, and nobody feeling sure that the portion of
his means which he has entrusted to others will be available
in time, no one likes to part with ready money, or to post-
pone his claim to it. To these rational considerations there
is superadded, in extreme cases, a panic as unreasoning as the
previous over-confidence ; money is borrowed for short periods
at almost any rate of interest, and sales of goods for imme-
diate payment are made at almost any sacrifice. Thus general
prices, during a commercial revulsion, fall as much below
the usual level, as during the previous period of speculation
they had risen above it: the fall, as well as the rise, originating
not in anything affecting money, but in the state of credit ;
an unusually extended employment of credit during the
earlier period, followed by a great diminution, never amount-
ing however to an entire cessation of it, in the later.

It is not, however, universally true that the contraction
of credit, characteristic of a commercial crisis, must have



INFLUENCE OF CREDIT ON PRICES.


57


been preceded by an extraordinary and irrational extension
of it. There are other causes ; and the most recent crisis,
that of 1847, is an instance, having been preceded by no
particular extension of credit, and by no speculations ; except
those in railway shares, which, though in many cases extra-
vagant enough, yet being carried on mostly with that portion
of means which the speculators could afford to lose, were not
calculated to produce the wide-spread ruin which arises from
vicissitudes of price in the commodities in which men habi-
tually deal, and in which the bulk of their capital is invested.
The crisis of 1847 belonged to another class of mercantile
phenomena. There occasionally happens a concurrence of
circumstances tending to withdraw from the loan market a
considerable portion of the capital which usually supplies it.
These circumstances, in the present case, were great foreign
payments, (occasioned by the high price of cotton and the
unprecedented importation of food,) together with the con-
tinual demands on the circulating capital of the country by
railway calls and the loan transactions of railway companies,
for the purpose of being converted into fixed capital and
made unavailable for future lending. These various demands
fell principally, as such demands always do, on the loan
market. A great, though not the greatest part of the im-
ported food, was actually paid for by the proceeds of a
government loan. The extra payments which purchasers
of corn and cotton, and railway shareholders, found them-
selves obliged to make, were either made with their own
spare cash, or with money raised for the occasion. On the
first supposition, they were made by withdrawing deposits
from bankers, and thus cutting off a part of the streams which
fed the loan market; on the second supposition, they were
made by actual drafts on the loan market, either by the sale of
securities, or by taking up money at interest. This combination
of a fresh demand for loans, with a curtailment of the capital
disposable for them, raised the rate of interest, and made it
impossible to borrow except on the very best security. Some



58


BOOK III. CHAPTER XII. § 4.


firms, therefore, which by an improvident and unmercantile
mode of conducting business had allowed their capital to
become either temporarily or permanently unavailable, be-
came unable to command that perpetual renewal of credit
which had previously enabled them to struggle on. These
firms stopped payment : their failure involved more or less
deeply many other firms which had trusted them ; and, as
usual in such cases, the general distrust, commonly called a
panic, began to set in, and might have produced a destruction
of credit equal to that of 1825, had not circumstances which
may almost be called accidental, given to a very simple mea-
sure of the government (the suspension of the Bank Charter
Act of 1 844) a fortunate power of allaying panic, to which
when considered in itself, it had no sort of claim.

§ 4. The general operation of credit upon prices being
such as we have described, it is evident that if any particular
mode or form of credit is calculated to have a greater opera-
tion on prices than others, it can only be by giving greater
facility, or greater encouragement, to the multiplication of
credit transactions generally. If bank notes, for instance, or
bills, have a greater effect on prices than book credits, it is
not by any difference in the transactions themselves, which
are essentially the same, whether taking place in the one way
or in the other : it must be that there are likely to be more
of them. If credit is likely to be more extensively used as a
purchasing power when bank notes or bills are the instruments
used, than when the credit is given by mere entries in an
account, to that extent and no more there is ground for
ascribing to the former a greater power over the markets
than belongs to the latter.

Now it appears that there is some such distinction. As
far as respects the particular transaction, it makes no differ-
ence in the effect on price whether A buys goods of B on
simple credit, or gives a bill for them, or pays for them with
bank notes lent to him by a banker C. The difference is in



INFLUENCE OF CREDIT ON PRICES.


59


a subsequent stage. If A has bought the goods on a book
credit, there is no obvious or convenient mode by which B can
make A's debt to him a means of extending his own credit.
Whatever credit he has, will be due to the general opinion
entertained of his solvency; he cannot specifically pledge A's
debt to a third person, as a security for money lent or goods
bought. But if A has given him a bill for the amount, he
can get this discounted, which is the same thing as borrowing
money on the joint credit of A and himself: or he may pay
away the bill in exchange for goods, which is obtaining goods
on the same joint credit. In either case, here is a second
credit transaction, grounded on the first, and which would
not have taken place if the first had been transacted without
the intervention of a bill. Nor need the transactions end
here. The bill may be again discounted, or again paid away
for goods, several times before it is itself presented for pay-
ment. Nor would it be correct to say that these successive
holders, if they had not had the bill, might have attained their
purpose by purchasing goods on their own credit with the
dealers. They may not all of them be persons of credit, or
they may already have stretched their credit as far as it will
go. And at all events, either money or goods’ are more readily
obtained on the credit of two persons than of one. Nobody
will pretend that it is as easy a thing for a merchant to borrow
a thousand pounds on his own credit, as to get a bill dis-
counted to the same amount, when the drawee is of known
solvency.

If we now suppose that A, instead of giving a bill, obtains
a loan of bank notes from a banker C, and with them pays
B for his goods, we shall find the difference to be still greater.
B is now independent even of a discounter : A's bill would
have been taken in payment only by those who were ac-
quainted with his reputation for solvency, but a banker is a
person who has credit with the public generally, and whose
notes are taken in payment by every one, at least in his own
neighbourhood : insomuch that, by a custom which has



60


BOOK III. CHAPTER XII. § 4.

grown into law, payment in bank notes is a complete acquit-
tance to the payer, whereas if he has paid by a bill he still
remains liable to the debt, if the person on whom the bill is
drawn fails to pay it when due. B therefore can expend the
whole of the bank notes without at all involving his own
credit : and whatever power he had before of obtaining goods
on book credit, remains to him unimpaired, in addition to
the purchasing power he derives from the possession of the
notes. The same remark applies to every person in succes-
sion, into whose hands the notes may come. It is only A,
the first holder, (who used his credit to obtain the notes as a
loan from the issuer,) who can possibly find the credit he
possesses in other quarters abated by it ; and even in his
case that result is not probable ; for though, in reason, and if
all his circumstances were known, every draft already made
upon his credit ought to diminish by so much his power of
obtaining more, yet in practice the reverse more frequently
happens, and his having been trusted by one person is sup-
posed to be evidence that he may safely be trusted by others
also.

It appears, therefore, that bank notes are a more powerful
instrument for raising prices than bills, and bills than book
credits. It does not, indeed, follow that credit will be more
used because it can be. When the state of trade holds out
no particular temptation to make large purchases on credit,
dealers will use only a small portion of the credit-power,
and it will depend only on convenience whether the portion
which they use will be taken in one form or in another. It
is not until the circumstances of the markets, and the state of
the mercantile mind, render many persons desirous of stretch-
ing their credit to an unusual extent, that the distinctive
properties of the different forms of credit display themselves.
Credit already stretched to the utmost in the form of book
debts, would be susceptible of a great additional extension
by means of bills, and of still greater by means of bank notes.
The first, because each dealer, in addition to his own credit,



INFLUENCE OF CREDIT ON PRICES. Cl

would be enabled to create a further purchasing power out of
the credit which he had himself given to others: the second,
because the banker's credit with the public at large, coined
into notes, as bullion is coined into pieces of money to make
it portable and divisible, is so much purchasing power super-
added, in the hands of every successive holder, to that which
he may derive from his own credit. To state the matter other-
wise ; one single exertion of the credit-power in the form of
book credit, is only the foundation of a single purchase : but
if a bill is drawn, that same portion of credit may serve for as
many purchases as the number of times the bill changes
hands : while every bank note issued, renders the credit of
the banker a purchasing power to that amount in the hands
of all the successive holders, without impairing any power
they may possess of effecting purchases on their own credit.
Credit, in short, has exactly the same purchasing power with
money ; and as money tells upon prices not simply in propor-
tion to its amount, but to its amount multiplied by the
number of times it changes hands, so also does credit;
and credit transferable from hand to hand is in that pro-
portion more potent, than credit which only performs one
purchase.

§ 5. All this purchasing power, however, is operative
upon prices, only according to the proportion of it which is
used : and the effect, therefore, is only felt in a state of cir-
cumstances calculated to lead to an unusually extended use
of credit. In such a state of circumstances, that is, in specu-
lative times, it cannot, I think, be denied, that prices are
likely to rise higher if the speculative purchases are made
with bank notes, than when they are made with bills, and
when made by bills than when made by book credits. This,
however, is of far less practical importance than might at first
be imagined ; because, in point of fact, speculative purchases
are not, in the great majority of cases, made either with bank
notes or with bills, but are made almost exclusively on book



6 & BOOK III. CHAPTER XII. § 5 .

credits. “ Applications to the Bank for extended discount,”
says the highest authority on such subjects,* (and the same
thing must be true of applications to other banks) “ occur
rarely if ever in the origin or progress of extensive specula-
tions in commodities. These are entered into, for the most
part if not entirely, in the first instance, on credit for the
length of term usual in the several trades; thus entailing on
the parties no immediate necessity for borrowing so much as
may be wanted for the purpose beyond their own available
capital. This applies particularly to speculative purchases of
commodities on the spot, with a view to resale. But these
generally form the smaller proportion of engagements on
credit. By far the largest of those entered into on the
prospect of a rise of prices, are such as have in view impor-
tations from abroad. The same remark, too, is applicable to
the export of commodities, when a large proportion is on the
credit of the shippers or their consignees. As long as cir-
cumstances hold out the prospect of a favourable result, the
credit of the parties is generally sustained. If some of them
wish to realize, there are others with capital and credit ready
to replace them; and if the events fully justify the grounds
on which the speculative transactions were entered into
(thus admitting of sales for consumption in time to replace
the capital embarked) there is no unusual demand for
borrowed capital to sustain them. It is only when by the
vicissitudes of political events, or of the seasons, or other
adventitious circumstances, the forthcoming supplies are
found to exceed the computed rate of consumption, and a fall
of prices ensues, that an increased demand for capital takes
place ; the market rate of interest then rises, and increased
applications are made to the Bank of England for dis-
count.” So that the multiplication of bank notes and
other transferable paper does not, for the most part, accom-
pany and facilitate the speculation; but comes into play


Tooke’s History of Prices , vol. iv. pp. 1 25 — 6.



INFLUENCE OF CREDIT ON PRICES.


63


chiefly when the tide is turning, and difficulties begin to be
felt.

Of the extraordinary height to which speculative transac-
tions can be carried upon mere book credits, without the
smallest addition to what is commonly called the currency,
very few persons are at all aware. “The power of pur-
chase, says Mr. Tooke,* “ by persons having capital and
credit, is much beyond anything that those who are unac-
quainted practically with speculative markets have any idea
of. ... A person having the reputation of capital enough
for his regular business, and enjoying good credit in his trade,
if he takes a sanguine view of the prospect of a rise of price
of the article in which he deals, and is favoured by circum-
stances in the outset and progress of his speculation, may
effect purchases to an extent perfectly enormous, compared
with his capital/' Mr. Tooke confirms this statement by
some remarkable instances, exemplifying the immense pur-
chasing power which may be exercised, and rise of price
which may be produced, by credit not represented by either
bank notes or bills of exchange.

“Amongst the earlier speculators for an advance in the
price of tea, in consequence of our dispute with China in
1839, were several retail grocers and tea-dealers. There was
a general disposition among the trade to get into stock : that
is, to lay in at once a quantity which would meet the pro-
bable demand from their customers for several months to
come. Some, however, among them, more sanguine and
adventurous than the rest, availed themselves of their credit
with the importers and wholesale dealers, for purchasing
quantities much beyond the estimated demand in their own
business. As the purchases were made in the first instance
ostensibly, and perhaps really, for the legitimate purposes and
within the limits of their regular business, the parties were
enabled to buy without the condition of any deposit;


Inquiry into the Currency Principle, pp. 79 and 136 — 8.


64j


BOOK III. CHAPTER XII. § 5.

whereas speculators, known to be such, are required to pay
2£. per chest, to cover any probable difference of price which
might arise before the expiration of the prompt, which, for
this article, is three months. Without, therefore, the outlay
of a single farthing of actual capital or currency in any shape,
they made purchases to a considerable extent; and with the
profit realized on the resale of a part of these purchases, they
were enabled to pay the deposit on further quantities when
required, as was the case when the extent of the purchases
attracted attention. In this way, the speculation went on at
advancing prices (100 per cent and upwards) till nearly the
expiration of the prompt, and if at that time circumstances
had been such as to justify the apprehension which at one
time prevailed, that all future supplies would be cut off, the
prices might have still further advanced, and at any rate not
have retrograded. In this case, the speculators might have
realized, if not all the profit they had anticipated, a very
handsome sum, upon which they might have been enabled to
extend their business greatly, or to retire from it altogether,
with a reputation for great sagacity in thus making their for-
tune. But instead of this favourable result, it so happened
that two or three cargoes of tea which had been transhipped
were admitted, contrary to expectation, to entry on their
arrival here, and it was found that further indirect shipments
were in progress. Thus the supply was increased beyond the
calculation of the speculators : and at the same time, the
consumption had been diminished by the high price. There
was, consequently, a violent reaction on the market ; the spe-
culators were unable to sell without such a sacrifice as dis-
abled them from fulfilling their engagements, and several of
them consequently failed. Among these, one was mentioned,
who having a capital not exceeding 1,200£. which was locked
up in his business, had contrived to buy 4,000 chests, value
above 80,000£., the loss upon which was about 16,000Z.

“ The other example which I have to give, is that of the
operation on the corn market between 1838 and 1842. There



INFLUENCE OF CREDIT ON PRICES.


65


was an instance of a person who, when he entered on his
extensive speculations, was, as it appeared by the subsequent
examination of his affairs, possessed of a capital not exceed-
ing 5000?., but being successful in the outset, and favoured
by circumstances in the progress of his operations, he con-
trived to make purchases to such an extent, that when he
stopped payment his engagements were found to amount to
between 500,000?. and 600,000?. Other instances might be
cited of parties without any capital at all, who, by dint of
mere credit, were enabled, while the aspect of the market
favoured their views, to make purchases to a very great
extent.

“ And be it observed, that these speculations, involving
enormous purchases on little or no capital, were carried on
in 1839 and 1840, when the money market was in its most
contracted state ; or when, according to modem phraseology,
there was the greatest scarcity of money/'

But though the great instrument of speculative pur-
chases is book credits, it cannot be contested that in specu-
lative periods an increase does take place in the quantity
both of bills of exchange and of bank notes. This increase,
indeed, so far as bank notes are concerned, hardly ever takes
place in the earliest stage of the speculations ; advances from
bankers (as Mr. Tooke observes) not being applied for in
order to purchase, but in order to hold on without selling
when the usual term of credit has expired, and the high price
which was calculated on has not arrived. But the tea
speculators mentioned by Mr. Tooke could not have carried
their speculations beyond the three months which are the
usual term of credit in their trade, unless they had been able
to obtain advances from bankers, which, if the expectation of
a rise of price had still continued, they probably could have
done.

Since, then, credit in the form of bank notes is a more
potent instrument for raising prices than book credits, an
unrestrained power of resorting to this instrument may con-

VOL. II. F



66


BOOK III. CHAPTER XII. § 5 .

tribute to prolong and heighten the speculative rise of prices,
and hence to aggravate the subsequent recoil. But in what
degree ? and what importance ought we to ascribe to this
possibility ? It may help us to form some judgment on this
point, if we consider the proportion which the utmost increase
of bank notes in a period of speculation, bears, I do not say to
the whole mass of credit in the country, but to the bills of
exchange alone. The average amount of bills in existence at
any one time is supposed considerably to exceed a hundred
millions sterling.* The bank note circulation of Great
Britain and Ireland is less than thirty-five millions, and the
increase in speculative periods at most two or three. And
even this, as we have seen, hardly ever comes into play until
that advanced period of the speculation at which the tide
shows signs of turning, and the dealers generally are rather
thinking of the means of fulfilling their existing engagements,
than meditating an extension of them : while the quantity of


* The most approved estimate is that of Mr. Leatham, grounded on the
official returns of bill stamps issued. The following are the results : —


Year.

Bills created in Great Britain
and Ireland, founded on
returns of Bill Stamps
issued from the Stamp Office.

Average amount in
circulation at one time in
each year.

1832

£356,153,409

£89,038,352

1833

383,659,585

95,914,896

1834

379,155,052

405,403,051

94,788,763

1835

101,350,762

1836

485,943,473

121,485,868

1837

455,084,445

113,771,111

1838

465,504,041

116,376,010

1839

528,493,842

132,123,460


“Mr. Leatham,” says Mr. Tooke, “gives the process by which, upon the
data furnished by the returns of stamps, he arrives at these results ; and I am
disposed to think that they are as near an approximation to the truth as the
nature of the materials admits of arriving at.”— Inquiry into the Currency
Principle , p. 26.



INFLUENCE OF CREDIT ON PRICES. 67

bills in existence is largely increased from the very commence-
ment of the speculations.

§ 6. It is well known that of late years, an artificial
limitation of the issue of bank notes has been regarded by
many political economists, and by a great portion of the
public, as an expedient of supreme efficacy for preventing,
and when it cannot prevent, for moderating, the fever of
speculation; and this opinion received the recognition and
sanction of the legislature by the Currency Act of 1844. At
the point, however, which our inquiries have reached,
though we have conceded to bank notes a greater power
over prices than is possessed by bills or book credits, we
have not found reason to think that this superior efficacy
has much share in producing the rise of prices which
accompanies a period of speculation, nor consequently that
any restraint applied to this one instrument, can be efficacious
to the degree which is often supposed, in moderating either
that rise, or the recoil which follows it. We shall be still less
inclined to think so, when we consider that there is a fourth
form of credit transactions, by cheques on bankers, and
transfers in a banker’s books, which is exactly parallel
in every respect to bank notes, giving equal facilities to
an extension of credit, and capable of acting on prices quite
as powerfully. In the words of Mr. Fullarton,* “ there is
not a single object at present attained through the agency
of Bank of England notes, which might not be as effectually
accomplished by each individual keeping an account with
the bank, and transacting all his payments of five pounds
and upwards by cheque.” A bank, instead of lending its
notes to a merchant or dealer, might open an account with
him, and credit the account with the sum it had agreed
to advance : on an understanding that he should not draw
out that sum in any other mode than by drawing cheques


On the Regulation of Currencies, p. 41.

F 2



68


BOOK III. CHAPTER XII. § 6.

against it in favour of those to whom he had occasion .to make
payments. These cheques might possibly even pass from
hand to hand like bank notes; more commonly however
the receiver would pay them into the hands of his own
banker, and when he wanted the money, would draw a
fresh cheque against it : and hence an objector may urge
that as the original cheque would very soon be presented
for payment, when it must be paid either in notes or in coin,
notes or coin to an equal amount must be provided as the
ultimate means of liquidation. It is not so, however. The
person to whom the cheque is transferred, may perhaps deal
with the same banker, and the cheque may return to the very
bank on which it was drawn : this is very often the case in
country districts ; if so, no payment will be called for, but a
simple transfer in the banker’s books will settle the trans-
action. If the cheque is paid into a different bank, it will
not be presented for payment, but liquidated by set-off
against other cheques; and in a state of circumstances favour-
able to a general extension of banking credits, a banker
who has granted more credit, and has therefore more cheques
drawn on him, will also have more cheques on other bankers
paid to him, and will only have to provide notes or cash for
the payment of balances ; for which purpose the ordinary
reserve of prudent bankers, one-third of their liabilities, will
abundantly suffice. Now, if he had granted the extension of
credit by means of an issue of his own notes, he must equally
have retained, in coin or Bank of England notes, the usual
reserve: so that he can, as Mr. Fullarton says, give every
facility of credit by what may be termed a cheque circulation,
which he could give by a note circulation.

This extension of credit by entries in a banker's books,
has all that superior efficiency in acting on prices, which we
ascribed to an extension by means of bank notes. As a
bank note of 20?., paid to any one, gives him 20 1 . of pur-
chasing-power based on credit, over and above whatever
credit he had of his own, so does a cheque paid to him do



INFLUENCE OF CREDIT ON PRICES.


69


the same : for, although he may make no purchase with the
cheque itself, he deposits it with his banker, and can draw
against it. As this act of drawing a cheque against another
which has been exchanged and cancelled, can be repeated
as often as a purchase with a bank note, it effects the same
increase of purchasing power. The original loan, or credit,
given by the banker to his customer, is potentially multiplied
as a means of purchase, in the hands of the successive per-
sons to whom portions of the credit are paid away, just as
the purchasing power of a bank note is multiplied by the
number of persons through whose hands it passes before it
is returned to the issuer.

These considerations abate very much from the importance
of any effect which can be produced in allaying the vicissi-
tudes of commerce, by so superficial a contrivance as the one
so much relied on of late, the restriction of the issue of bank
notes by an artificial rule. An examination of all the con-
sequences of that restriction, and an estimate of the reasons
for and against it, must be deferred until we have treated of
the foreign exchanges, and the international movements of
bullion. At present we are only concerned with the general
theory of prices, of which the different influence of different
kinds of credit is an essential part.

§ 7. There has been a great amount of discussion and argu-
ment on the question whether several of these forms of credit,
and in particular whether bank notes, ought to be considered
as money. The question is so purely verbal as to be almost
frivolous, and one would have some difficulty in comprehending
why so much importance is attached to it, if there were not
some writers who, still adhering to the doctrine of the infancy
of society and of political economy, that the quantity of money,
compared with that of commodities, determines general prices,
think it important to prove that bank notes and no other
forms of credit are money, in order to support the inference
that bank notes and no other forms of credit influence prices.



70


BOOK III. CHAPTER XII. § 7 .

It is obvious, however, that prices do not depend on money,
but on purchases. Money left with a banker, and not drawn
against, or drawn against for other purposes than buying com-
modities, has no effect on prices, any more than credit which
is not used. Credit which is used to purchase commodities,
affects prices in the same manner as money. Money and
credit are thus exactly on a par, in their effect on prices ; and
whether we choose to class bank notes with the one or the
other, is in this respect entirely immaterial.

Since, however, this question of nomenclature has been
raised, it seems desirable that it should be answered. The
reason given for considering bank notes as money, is, that by
law and usage they have the property, in common with
metallic money, of finally closing the transactions in which
they are employed ; while no other mode of paying one debt
by transferring another, has that privilege. The first remark
which here suggests itself is, that on this showing, the notes at
least of private banks are not money; for a creditor cannot be
forced to accept them in payment of a debt. They certainly
close the transaction if he does accept them ; but so, on the
same supposition, would a bale of cloth, or a pipe of wine ;
which are not for that reason regarded as money. It seems
to be an essential part of the idea of money, that it be legal
tender. An inconvertible paper which is legal tender is uni-
versally admitted to be money; in the French language the
phrase papier-monnaie actually means inconvertibility, con-
vertible notes being merely billets a porteur. It is only
in the case of Bank of England notes under the law of con-
vertibility, that any difficulty arises ; those notes not being a
legal tender from the Bank itself, though a legal tender from
all other persons. Bank of England notes undoubtedly do
close transactions, so far as respects the buyer. When he has
once paid in Bank of England notes, he can in no case be re-
quired to pay over again. But I confess I cannot see how the
transaction can be deemed complete as regards the seller,
when he will only be found to have received the price of his



INFLUENCE OF CREDIT ON PRICES.


71


commodity provided the Bank keeps its promise to pay. An
instrument which would be deprived of all value by the insol-
vency of a corporation, cannot be money in any sense in which
money is opposed to credit. It either is not money, or it is
money and credit too. It may be most suitably described as
coined credit. The other forms of credit may be distinguished
from it as credit in ingots.

§ 8. Some high authorities have claimed for bank notes,
as compared with other modes of credit, a greater distinction
in respect to influence on price than we have seen reason to
allow; a difference, not in degree, but in kind. They ground
this distinction on the fact, that all bills and cheques, as well
as all book-debts, are from the first intended to be, and
actually are, ultimately liquidated either in coin or in notes.
The bank notes in circulation, jointly with the coin, are there-
fore, according to these authorities, the basis on which all the
other expedients of credit rest; and in proportion to the
basis will be the superstructure ; insomuch that the quantity
of bank notes determines that of all the other forms of credit.
If bank notes are multiplied, there will, they seem to think,
be more bills, more payments by cheque, and, I presume,
more book credits; and, by regulating and limiting the
issue of bank notes, they think that all other forms of credit
are, by an indirect consequence, brought under a similar
limitation. I believe I have stated the opinion of these
authorities correctly, though I have nowhere seen the grounds
of it set forth with such distinctness as to make me feel
quite certain that I understand them. It may be true, that
according as there are more or fewer bank notes, there is also,
in general (though not invariably), more or less of other
descriptions of credit; for the same state of affairs which leads
to an increase of credit in one shape, leads to an increase of it
in other shapes. But I see no reason for believing that the
one is the cause of the other. If indeed we begin by assuming^
as I suspect is tacitly done, that prices are regulated by coin



72


BOOK III. CHAPTER XII. § 8.


and bank notes, the proposition maintained will certainly
follow; for, according as prices are higher or lower, the
same purchases will give rise to bills, cheques, and book
credits of a larger or a smaller amount. But the premise in
this reasoning is the very proposition to be proved. Setting
this assumption aside, I know not how the conclusion can be
substantiated. The credit given to any one by those with
whom he deals, does not depend on the quantity of bank notes
or coin in circulation at the time, but on their opinion of his
solvency : if any consideration of a more general character
enters into their calculation, it is only in a time of pressure on
the loan market, when they are not certain of being themselves
able to obtain the credit on which they have been accustomed
to rely; and even then, what they look to is the general
state of the loan market, and not (preconceived theory
apart) the amount of bank notes. So far, as to the willing-
ness to give credit. And the willingness of a dealer to
use his credit, depends on his expectations of gain, that is,
on his opinion of the probable future price of his commodity;
an opinion grounded either on the rise or fall already going
on, or on his prospective judgment respecting the supply
and the rate of consumption. When a dealer extends his
purchases beyond his immediate means of payment, engaging
to pay at a specified time, he does so in the expectation
either that the transaction will have terminated favourably
before that time arrives, or that he shall then be in possession
of sufficient funds from the proceeds of his other transactions.
The fulfilment of these expectations depends upon prices,
but not specially upon the amount of bank notes. He may,
doubtless, also ask himself, in case he should be disappointed
in these expectations, to what quarter he can look for a
temporary advance, to enable him, at the worst, to keep
bis engagements. But in the first place, this prospective
reflection on the somewhat more or less of difficulty which
he may have in tiding over his embarrassments, seems too
slender an inducement to be much of a restraint in a period



INFLUENCE OF CREDIT ON PRICES.


73


supposed to be one of rash adventure, and upon persons so
confident of success as to involve themselves beyond their
certain means of extrication. And further, I apprehend that
their confidence of being helped out in the event of ill
fortune, will mainly depend on their opinion of their own
individual credit, with, perhaps, some consideration, not of
the quantity of the currency, but of the general state of the
loan market. They are aware that, in case of a commercial
crisis, they shall have difficulty in obtaining advances. But
if they thought it likely that a commercial crisis would occur
before they had realized, they would not speculate. If no
great contraction of general credit occurs, they will feel no
doubt of obtaining any advances which they absolutely re-
quire, provided the state of their own affairs at the time
affords in the estimation of lenders a sufficient prospect that
those advances will be repaid.



CHAPTER XIII.


OF AN INCONVERTIBLE PAPER CURRENCY.

§ 1. After experience bad shown that pieces of paper, of
no intrinsic value, by merely bearing upon them the written
profession of being equivalent to a certain number of francs,
dollars, or pounds, could be made to circulate as such, and to
produce all the benefit to the issuers which could have been
produced by the coins which they purported to represent;
governments began to think that it would be a happy device
if they could appropriate to themselves this benefit, free
from the condition to which individuals issuing such paper
substitutes for money were subject, of giving, when required,
for the sign, the thing signified. They determined to try
whether they could not emancipate themselves from this
unpleasant obligation, and make a piece of paper issued by
them pass for a pound, by merely calling it a pound, and
consenting to receive it in payment of the taxes. And such
is the influence of almost all established governments, that
they have generally succeeded in attaining this object: I
believe I might say they have always succeeded for a time,
and the power has only been lost to them after they had
compromised it by the most flagrant abuse.

In the case supposed, the functions of money are per-
formed by a thing which derives its power of performing
them solely from convention ; but convention is quite suffi-
cient to confer the power ; since nothing more is needfu] to
make a person accept anything as money, and even at any
arbitrary value, than the persuasion that it will be taken
from him on the same terms by others. The only question
is, what determines the value of such a currency; since it



INCONVERTIBLE PAPER CURRENCY.


75


cannot be, as in the case of gold and silver (or paper ex-
changeable for them at pleasure), the cost of production.

We have seen, however, that even in the case of a metallic
currency, the immediate agency in determining its value is
its quantity. If the quantity, instead of depending on the
ordinary mercantile motives of profit and loss, could be
arbitrarily fixed by authority, the value would depend on the
fiat of that authority, not on cost of production. The quan-
tity of a paper currency not convertible into the metals at
the option of the holder, can be arbitrarily fixed ; especially
if the issuer is the sovereign power of the state. The value,
therefore, of such a currency, is entirely arbitrary.

Suppose that, in a country of which the currency is wholly
metallic, a paper currency is suddenly issued, to the amount
of half the metallic circulation : not by a banking establish-
ment, or in the form of loans, but by the government, in pay-
ment of salaries and purchase of commodities. The currency
being suddenly increased by one-half, all prices will rise, and
among the rest, the prices of all things made of gold and
silver. An ounce of manufactured gold will become more
valuable than an ounce of gold coin, by more than that custo-
mary difference which compensates for the value of the
workmanship ; and it will be profitable to melt the coin for
the purpose of being manufactured, until as much has been
taken from the currency by the subtraction of gold, as had
been added to it by the issue of paper. Then prices will
relapse to what they were at first, and there will be nothing
changed except that a paper currency has been substituted
for half of the metallic currency which existed before. Sup-
pose, now, a second emission of paper; the same series of
effects will be renewed ; and so on, until the whole of the
metallic money has disappeared : that is, if paper be issued
of as low a denomination as the lowest coin ; if not, as much
will remain, as convenience requires for the smaller pay-
ments. The addition made to the quantity of gold and
silver disposable for ornamental purposes, will somewhat



76 BOOK III. CHAPTER XIII. § 1.

reduce, for a time, the s value of the article ; and as long as
this is the case, even though paper has been issued to the
original amount of the metallic circulation, as much coin will
remain in circulation along with it, as will keep the value of
the currency down to the reduced value of the metallic
material : but the value having fallen below the cost of pro-
duction, a stoppage or diminution of the supply from the
mines will enable the surplus to be carried off by the ordi-
nary agents of destruction, after which, the metals and the
currency will recover their natural value. We are here sup-
posing, as we have supposed throughout, that the country
has mines of its own, and no commercial intercourse with
other countries : for, in a country having foreign trade, the
coin which is rendered superfluous by an issue of paper is
carried off by a much prompter method.

Up to this point, the effects of a paper currency are sub-
stantially the same, whether it is convertible into specie or
not. It is when the metals have been completely super-
seded and driven from circulation, that the difference between
convertible and inconvertible paper begins to be operative.
When the gold or silver has all gone from circulation, and
an equal quantity of paper has taken its place, suppose that a
still further issue is superadd ed. The same series of pheno-
mena recommences: prices rise, among the rest the prices
of gold and silver articles, and it becomes an object as before
to procure coin in order to convert it into bullion. There is
no longer any coin in circulation ; but if the paper currency is
convertible, coin may still be obtained from the issuers, in
exchange for notes. All additional notes, therefore, which
are attempted to be forced into circulation after the metals
have been completely superseded, will return upon the
issuers in exchange for coin ; and they will not be able to
maintain in circulation such a quantity of convertible paper,
as to sink its value below the metal which it represents. It
is not so, however, with an inconvertible currency. To the*
increase of that (if permitted by law) there is no check. The



INCONVERTIBLE PAPER CURRENCY.


77


issuers may add to it indefinitely, lowering its value and
raising prices in proportion ; they may, in other words,
depreciate the currency without limit.

Such a power, in whomsoever vested, is an intolerable
evil. All variations in the value of the circulating medium
are mischievous: they disturb existing contracts and expec-
tations, and the liability to such changes renders every
pecuniary engagement of long date entirely precarious. The
person who buys for himself, or gives to another, an annuity
of 100i., does not know whether it will be equivalent to 200L
or to 50£. a few years hence. Great as this evil would be if
it depended only on accident, it is still greater when placed
at the arbitrary disposal of an individual or a body of indi-
viduals ; who may have any kind or degree of interest to be
served by an artificial fluctuation in fortunes ; and who have
at any rate a strong interest in issuing as much as possible,
each issue being in itself a source of profit. Not to add, that
the issuers may have, and in the case of a government paper,
always have, a direct interest in lowering the value of the
currency, because it is the medium in which their own debts
are computed.

§ 2. In order that the value of the currency may be
secure from being altered by design, and may be as little as
possible liable to fluctuation from accident, the articles least
liable of all known commodities to vary in their value, the
precious metals, have been made in all civilized countries the
standard of value for the circulating medium; and no paper
currency ought to exist of which the value cannot be made
to conform to theirs. Nor has this fundamental maxim ever
been entirely lost sight of, even by the governments which
have most abused the power of creating inconvertible paper.
If they have not (as they generally have) professed an inten-
tion of paying in specie at some indefinite future time, they
have at least, by giving to their paper issues the names of
their coins, made a virtual, though generally a false, profess



80 BOOK III. CHAPTER XIII. § 8 .

the national debt, defray the expenses of government without
taxation, and in fipe, to make the fortunes of the whole com-
munity, is a brilliant prospect, when once a man is capable of
believing that printing a few characters on bits of paper will
do it. The philosopher's stone could not be expected to do
more.

As these projects, however often slain, always resuscitate,
it is not superfluous to examine one or two of the fallacies by
which the schemers impose upon themselves. One of the
commonest is, that a paper currency cannot be issued in
excess so long as every note issued represents property, or has
& foundation of actual property to rest on. These phrases, of
representing and resting, seldom convey any distinct or well-
defined idea: when they do, their meaning is no more than
this — that the issuers of the paper must leave property, either
of their own, or entrusted to them, to the value of all the
notes they issue ; though for what purpose, does not very
clearly appear; for if the property cannot be claimed in ex-
change for the notes, it is difficult to divine in what manner
its mere existence can serve to uphold their value. I pre-
sume, however, it is intended as a guarantee that the holders
would be finally reimbursed, in case any untoward event
should cause the whole concern to be wound up. On this
theory there have been many schemes for “ coining the whole
land of the country into money" and the like.

In so far as this notion has any connexion at all with
reason, it seems to originate in confounding two entirely dis-
tinct evils, to which a paper currency is liable. One is, the
insolvency of the issuers ; which, if the paper is grounded on
their credit — if it makes any promise of payment in cash,
either on demand or at any future time — of course deprives
the paper of any value which it derives from the promise.
To this evil paper credit is equally liable, however moderately
used; and against it, a proviso that all issues should be
“ founded on property," as for instance that notes should
only be issued on the security of some valuable thing



INCONVERTIBLE PAPER CURRENCY.


81


expressly pledged for their redemption, would really be effi-
cacious as a precaution. But the theory takes no account of
another evil, which is incident to the notes of the most sol-
vent firm, company, or government : that of being depreciated
in value from being issued in excessive quantity. The assig-
nats, during the French Revolution, were an example of a
currency grounded on these principles. The assignats “ re-
presented" an immense amount of highly valuable pro-
perty, namely the lands of the crown, the church, the monas-
teries, and the emigrants ; amounting perhaps to half the ter-
ritory of France. They were, in fact, orders or assignments
on this mass of land. The revolutionary government had the
idea of “coining" these lands into money; but, to do them
justice, they did not originally contemplate the immense
multiplication of issues to which they were eventually driven
by the failure of all other financial resources. They imagined
that the assignats would come rapidly back to the issuers in
exchange for land, and that they should be able to reissue
them continually until the lands were all disposed of, without
having at any time more than a very moderate quantity in
circulation. Their hope was frustrated : the land did not sell
so quickly as they expected; buyers were not inclined to
invest their money in possessions which were likely to be
resumed without compensation if the Revolution succumbed :
the bits of paper which represented land, becoming prodi-
giously multiplied, could no more keep up their value than
the land itself would have done if it had all been brought to
market at once: and the result was that it at last required an
assignat of five hundred francs to pay for a cup of coffee.

The example of the assignats has been said not to be con-
clusive, because an assignat only represented land in general,
but not a definite quantity of land. To have prevented their
depreciation, the proper course, it is affirmed, would have been
to have made a valuation of all the confiscated property at its
metallic value, and to have issued assignats up to, but not
beyond, that limit ; giving to the holders a right to demand

YOL. II. G



82


BOOK III. CHAPTER XIII. § 3.


any piece of land, at its registered valuation, in exchange for
assignats to the same amount. There can be no question
about the superiority of this plan over the one actually
adopted. Had this course been followed, the assignats could
never have been depreciated to the inordinate degree they
were; for — as they would have retained all their purchasing
power in relation to land, however much they might have
fallen in respect to other things — before they had lost very
much of their market value, they would probably have been
brought in to be exchanged for land. It must be remem-
bered, however, that their not being depreciated would pre-
suppose that no greater number of them continued in circu-
lation than would have circulated if they had been convertible
into cash. However convenient, therefore, in a time of revo-
lution, this currency convertible into land on demand might
have been, as a contrivance for selling rapidly a great quantity
of land with the least possible sacrifice; it is difficult to see
what advantage it would have, as the permanent system of a
country, over a currency convertible into coin : while it is not
at all difficult to see what would be its disadvantages; since
land is far more variable in value than gold and silver ; and
besides, land, to most persons, being rather an incumbrance
than a desirable possession, except to be converted into
money, people would submit to a much greater depreciation
before demanding land, than they will before demanding gold
or silver.*


* Among the schemes of currency to which, strange to say, intelligent
writers have been found to give their sanction, one is as follows : that the state
should receive in pledge or mortgage, any kind or amount of property, such as
land, stock, &c., and should advance to the owners inconvertible paper money
to the estimated value. Such a currency would not even have the recom-
mendations of the imaginary assignats supposed in the text ; since those into
whose hands the notes were paid by the persons who received them, could not
return them to the Government, and demand in exchange land or stock which
was only pledged, not alienated. There would be no reflux of such assignats
as these, and their depreciation would be indefinite.



INCONVERTIBLE PAPER CURRENCY.


83


§ 4. One of the most transparent of the fallacies by
which the principle of the convertibility of paper money has
been assailed, is that which pervades a recent work by Mr.
John Gray:* the author of the most ingenious, and least
exceptionable plan of an inconvertible currency which I have
happened to meet with. This writer has seized several of the
leading doctrines of political economy with no ordinary
grasp, and among others, the important one, that commodities
are the real market for commodities, and that Production is
essentially the cause and measure of Demand. But this pro-
position, true in a state of barter, he affirms to be false under
a monetary system regulated by the precious metals, because
if the aggregate of goods is increased faster than the aggre-
gate of money, prices must fall, and all producers must be
losers; now neither gold nor silver, nor any other valuable
thing “ can by any possibility be increased ad libitum , as
fast as all other valuable things put together a limit, there-
fore, is arbitrarily set to the amount of production which can
take place without loss to the producers: and on this foun-
dation Mr. Gray accuses the existing system of rendering the
produce of this country less by at least one hundred million
pounds annually, than it would be under a currency which
admitted of expansion in exact proportion to the increase of
commodities.

But, in the first place, what hinders gold, or any other
commodity whatever, from being “ increased as fast as all
other valuable things put together ?" If the produce of the
world, in all commodities taken together, should come to be
doubled, what is to prevent the annual produce of gold from
being doubled likewise ? for that is all that would be neces-
sary, and not, (as might be inferred from Mr. Grays language)
that it should be doubled as many times over as there are
other “ valuable things" to compare it with. Unless it can be
proved that the production of bullion cannot be increased by


* “ Lectures on the Nature and Use of Money. By John Gray.”



84


BOOK III. CHAPTER XIII. § 5.


the application of increased labour and capital, it is evident
that the stimulus of an increased value of the commodity
will have the same effect in extending the mining operations,
as it is admitted to have in all other branches of produc-
tion.

But, secondly, even if the currency could not be increased
at all, and if every addition to the aggregate produce of the
country must necessarily be accompanied by a proportional
diminution of general prices; it is incomprehensible how any
person who has attended to the subject can fail to see that a
fall of price, thus produced, is no loss to producers: they
receive less money; but the smaller amount goes exactly as
far, in all expenditure, whether productive or personal, as the
larger quantity did before. The only difference would be in
the increased burthen of fixed money payments; and of that
(coming, as it would, very gradually) a very small portion
would fall on the productive classes, who have rarely any
debts of old standing, and who would suffer almost solely in
the increased onerousness of their contribution to the taxes
which pay the interest of the National Debt.

§ 5. Another of the fallacies from which the advocates
of an inconvertible currency derive support, is the notion
that an increase of the currency quickens industry. This
idea was set afloat by Hume, in his Essay on Money, and
has had many devoted adherents since ; witness the Birming-
ham currency school, of whom Mr. Attwood was at one time
the most conspicuous representative. Mr. Attwood main-
tained that a rise of prices produced by an increase of
paper currency, stimulates every producer to his utmost exer-
tions, and brings all the capital and labour of the country into
complete employment; and that this has invariably hap-
pened in all periods of rising prices, when the rise was on a
sufficiently great scale. I presume, however, that the in-
ducement which, according to Mr. Attwood, excited this
unusual ardour in all persons engaged in production, must



INCONVERTIBLE PAPER CURRENCY.


85


have been the expectation of getting more of commodities
generally, more real wealth, in exchange for the produce of
their labour, and not merely more pieces of paper. This
expectation, however, must have been, by the very terms of
the supposition, disappointed, since, all prices being sup-
posed to rise equally, no one was really better paid for his
goods than before. Those who agree with Mr. Attwood
could only succeed in winning people on to these unwonted
exertions, by a prolongation of what would in fact be a delu-
sion; contriving matters so, that by a progressive rise of money
prices, every producer shall always seem to be in the very act
of obtaining an increased remuneration which he never, in
reality, does obtain. It is unnecessary to advert to any
other of the objections to this plan, than that of its total
impracticability. It calculates on finding the whole world
persisting for ever in the belief that more pieces of paper are
more riches, and never discovering that, with all their paper,
they cannot buy more of anything than they could before.
No such mistake was made during any of the periods of high
prices, on the experience of which this school lays so much
stress. At the periods which Mr. Attwood mistook for
times of prosperity, and which were simply (as all periods of
high prices, under a convertible currency, must be) times of
speculation, the speculators did not think they were growing
rich because the high prices would last, but because they
would not last, and because whoever contrived to realize
while they did last, would find himself, after the recoil, in
possession of a greater number of pounds sterling, without
their having become of less value. If, at the close of the
speculation, an issue of paper had been made, sufficient to
keep prices up to the point which they attained when at the
highest, no one would have been more disappointed than the
speculators; since the gain which they thought to have reaped
by realizing in time (at the expense of their competitors,
who bought when they sold, and had to sell after the revul-
sion) would have faded away in their hands, and instead of



86


BOOK III. CHAPTER XIII. § 6.

it they would have got nothing except a few more paper
tickets to count by.

Hume's version of the doctrine differed in a slight degree
from Mr. Attwood's. He thought that all commodities would
not rise in price simultaneously, and that some persons there-
fore would obtain a real gain, by getting more money for
what they had to sell, while the things which they wished
to buy might not yet have risen. And those who would
reap this gain would always be (he seems to think) the
first comers. It seems obvious, however, that for every
person who thus gains more than usual, there is necessarily
some other person who gains less. The loser, if things
took place as Hume supposes, would be the seller of the
commodities which are slowest to rise ; who, by the supposi-
tion, parts with his goods at the old prices, to purchasers
who have already benefited by the new. This seller has
obtained for his commodity only the accustomed quantity
of money, while there are already some things of which that
money will no longer purchase as much as before. If, there-
fore, he knows what is going on, he will raise his price, and
then the buyer will not have the gain, which is supposed to
stimulate his industry. But if, on the contrary, the seller
does not know the state of the case, and only discovers it
when he finds, in laying his money out, that it does not go so
far, he then obtains less than the ordinary remuneration for
his labour and capital; and if the other dealers industry is
encouraged, it should seem that his must, from the opposite
cause, be impaired.

§ 6. There is no way in which a general and permanent
rise of prices, or in other words, depreciation of money, can
benefit anybody, except at the expense of somebody else.
The substitution of paper for metallic currency is a national
gain : any further increase of paper beyond this is but a form
of robbery.

An issue of notes is a manifest gain to the issuers, who,



INCONVERTIBLE PAPER CURRENCY.


87


until the notes are returned for payment, obtain the use of
them as if they were a real capital: and so long as the notes
are no permanent addition to the currency, but merely super-
sede gold or silver to the same amount, the gain of the issuer
is a loss to no one ; it is obtained by saving to the community
the expense of the more costly material. But if there is no
gold or silver to be superseded — if the notes are added to
the currency, instead of being substituted for the metallic
part of it — all holders of currency lose, by the depreciation of
its value, the exact equivalent of what the issuer gains. A
tax is virtually levied on them for his benefit. It will be
objected by some, that gains are also made by the producers
and dealers who, by means of the increased issue, are accom-,
modated with loans. Theirs, however, is not an additional
gain, but a portion of that which is reaped by the issuer at
the expense of all possessors of money. The profits arising
from' the contribution levied upon the public, he does not
keep to himself, but divides with his customers.

But besides the benefit reaped by the issuers, or by
others through them, at the expense of the public generally,
there is another unjust gain obtained by a larger class,
namely by those who are under fixed pecuniary obligations.
All such persons are freed, by a depreciation of the currency,
from a portion of the burthen of their debts or other engage-
ments : in other words, part of the property of their creditors
is gratuitously transferred to them. On a superficial view it
may be imagined that this is an advantage to industry; since
the productive classes are great borrowers, and generally owe
larger debts to the unproductive (if we include among the
latter all persons not actually in business) than the unpro-
ductive classes owe to them ; especially if the national debt
be included. It is only thus that a general rise of prices
can be a source of benefit to producers and dealers; by
diminishing the pressure of their fixed burthens. And this
might be accounted an advantage, if integrity and good faith
were of no importance to the world, and to industry and



88


BOOK III. CHAPTER XIII. § 7.

commerce in particular. Not many, however, have been
found toe say that the currency ought to be depreciated on
the simple ground of its being desirable to rob the national
creditor and private creditors of a part of what is in their
bond. The schemes which have tended that way have almost
always had some appearance of special and circumstantial
justification, such as the necessity of compensating for a prior
injustice committed in the contrary direction.

§ 7. Thus in England, from 1819 to the present time,
it has been pertinaciously contended, that a large portion of
the national debt, and a multitude of private debts still in
existence, were contracted between 1797 and 1819, when the
Bank of England was exempted from giving cash for its
notes ; and that it is grossly unjust to borrowers, (that is, in
the case of the national debt, to all tax-payers) that they
should now be paying interest on the same nominal sums in
a currency of full value, which were borrowed in a depreciated
one. The depreciation, according to the views and objects
of the particular writer, is represented to have averaged
thirty, fifty, or even more than fifty per cent : and the con-
clusion is, that either we ought to return to this depreciated
currency, or to strike off from the national debt, and from
mortgages or other private debts of old standing, a per-
centage corresponding to the estimated amount of the depre-
ciation.

To this doctrine, the following is the answer usually made.
Granting that, by returning to cash payments without lower-
ing the standard, an injustice was done to debtors, in holding
them liable for the same amount of a currency enhanced in
value, which they had borrowed while it was depreciated; it
is now too late to make reparation for this injury. The
debtors and creditors of to-day are not the debtors and
creditors of 1819: the lapse of years has entirely altered the
pecuniary relations of the community; and it being impos-
sible now to ascertain the particular persons who were either
benefited on injured, to attempt to retrace our steps would



INCONVERTIBLE PAPER CURRENCY.


89


be not redressing a wrong, but superadding a second act of
wide-spread injustice to the one already committed. This
argument is certainly conclusive on the practical question;
but it places the honest conclusion on too narrow and too
low a ground. It concedes that the measure of ] 819, called
PeeFs Bill, by which cash payments were resumed at the
original standard of 3?. 17s. lO^cZ., was really the injustice it
is said to be. This is an admission wholly opposed to the
truth. Parliament had no alternative : it was absolutely
bound to adhere to the acknowledged standard ; as may be
shown on three distinct grounds, two of fact, and one of
principle.

The reasons of fact are these. In the first place, it is not
true that the debts, private or public, incurred during the
Bank restriction, were contracted in a currency of lower
value than that in which the interest is now paid. It is
indeed true that the suspension of the obligation to pay in
specie, did put it in the power of the Bank to depreciate the
currency. It is true also that the Bank really exercised that
power, though to a far less extent than is often pretended ;
since the difference between the market price of gold and
the mint valuation, during the greater part of the interval,
was very trifling, and when it was greatest, during the last
five years of the war, did not much exceed thirty per cent.
To the extent of that difference, the currency was depreciated,
that is, its value was below that of the standard to which it
professed to adhere. But the state of Europe at that time
was such — there was so unusual an absorption of the precious
metals, by hoarding, and by the military chests of the vast
armies which then desolated the Continent, that the value of
the standard itself was very considerably raised : and the best
authorities, among whom it is sufficient to name Mr. Tooke,
have, after an elaborate investigation, satisfied themselves
that the difference between paper and bullion was not greater
than the enhancement in value of gold itself, and that the
paper, though depreciated relatively to the then value of gold,
did not sink below the ordinary value, at other times, either



90 BOOK III. CHAPTER XIII. § 7.

of gold or of a convertible paper. If this be true (and the
evidences of the fact are conclusively stated in Mr. Tooke's
History of Prices) the foundation of the whole case against
the fundholder and other creditors on the ground of depre-
ciation is subverted.

But, secondly, even if the currency had really been
lowered in value at each period of the Bank restriction, in
the same degree in which it was depreciated in relation to
its standard, we must remember that a part only of the
national, debt, or of other permanent engagements, was
incurred during the Bank restriction. A large part had
been contracted before 1797; a still larger during the early
years of the restriction, when the difference between paper
and gold was yet small. To the holders of the former
part, an injury was done, by paying the interest for twenty-
two years in a depreciated currency’: those of the second,
suffered an injury during the years in which the interest was
paid in a currency more depreciated than that in which the
loans were contracted. To have resumed cash payments at
a lower standard w T ould have been to perpetuate the injury to
these two classes of creditors, in order to avoid giving an
undue benefit to a third class, who had lent their money
during the few years of greatest depreciation. As it is, there
was an underpayment to one set of persons, and an over-
payment to another. The late Mr. Mushet took the trouble
to make an arithmetical comparison between the two amounts.
He ascertained by calculation, that if an account had been
made out in 1819, of what the fundholders had gained and
lost by the variation of the paper currency from its standard,
they would have been found as a body to have been losers;
so that if any compensation was due on the ground of depre-
ciation, it would not be from the fundholders collectively,
but to them.

Thus it is with the facts of the case. But these reasons
of fact are not the strongest. There is a reason of principle,
still more powerful. Suppose that, not a part of the debt
merely, but the whole, had been contracted in a depreciated



INCONVERTIBLE PAPER CURRENCY.


91


currency, depreciated not only in comparison with its standard,
but with its own value before and after; and that we are now
paying the interest of this debt in a currency fifty or even a
hundred per cent more valuable than that in which it was
contracted. What difference would this make in the obliga-
tion of paying it, if the condition that it should be so paid
was part of the original compact? Now this is not only
truth, but less than the truth. The compact stipulated better
terms for the fundholder than he has received. During the
whole continuance of the Bank restriction, there was a parlia-
mentary pledge, by which the legislature was as much bound
as any legislature is capable of binding itself, that cash pay-
ments should be resumed on the original footing, at farthest in
six months after the conclusion of a general peace. This was
therefore an actual condition of every loan ; and the terms
of the loan were more favourable in consideration of it.
Without some such stipulation, the Government could not
have expected to borrow unless on the terms on which loans
are made to the native princes of India. If it had been
understood and avowed that, after borrowing the money, the
standard at which it was computed might be permanently
lowered, to any extent which to the “ collective wisdom” of a
legislature of borrowers might seem fit — who can say what rate
of interest would have been a sufficient inducement to persons
of common sense to risk their savings in such an adventure ?
However much the fundholders had gained by the resumption
of cash payments, the terms of the contract insured their
giving ample value for it. They gave value for more than
they received; since cash payments were not resumed in six
months, but in as many years, after the peace. So that
waving all our arguments except the last, and conceding all
the facts asserted on the other side of the question, the fund-
holders, instead of being unduly benefited, are the injured
party ; and would have a claim to compensation, if such claims
were not very properly barred by the impossibility of adjudi-
cation, and by the salutary general maxim of law and policy,

“ qu&d interest reipublicae ut sit finis litium.”



CHAPTER XIY.


OF EXCESS OF SUPPLY.

§ 1 . After the elementary exposition of the theory of
money contained in the last few chapters, we shall return
to a question in the general theory of Value, which could
not be satisfactorily discussed until the nature and operations
of Money were in some measure understood, because the
errors against which we have to contend mainly originate in
a misunderstanding of those operations.

We have seen that the value of everything gravitates
towards a certain medium point (which has been called the
Natural Value), namely, that at which it exchanges for every
other thing in the ratio of their cost of production. We
have seen, too, that the actual or market value coincides, or
nearly so, with the natural value, only on an average of years ;
and is continually either rising above, or falling below it,
from alterations in the demand, or casual fluctuations in the
supply : but that these variations correct themselves, through
the tendency of the supply to accommodate itself to the
demand which exists for the commodity at its natural value.
A general convergence thus results from the balance of
opposite divergences. Dearth, or scarcity, on the one hand,
and over-supply, or, in mercantile language, glut, on the
other, are incident to all commodities. In the first case, the
commodity affords to the producers or sellers, while the defi-
ciency lasts, an unusually high rate of profit : in the second,
the supply being in excess of that for which a demand exists
at such a value as will afford the ordinary profit, the sellers
must be content with less, and must, in extreme cases, submit
to a loss.

Because this phenomenon of over-supply, and consequent



EXCESS OF SUPPLY.


93


inconvenience or loss to the producer or dealer, may exist in
the case of any one commodity whatever, many persons, in-
cluding some distinguished political economists, have thought
that it may exist with regard to all commodities; that there
may be a general over-production of wealth; a supply of
commodities in the aggregate, surpassing the demand ; and
a consequent depressed condition of all classes of producers.
Against this doctrine, of which Mr. Malthus and Dr. Chal-
mers in this country, and M. de Sismondi on the Continent,
were the chief apostles, I have already contended in the
First Book;* but it was not possible, in that stage of our
inquiry, to enter into a complete examination of an error (as
I conceive) essentially grounded on a misunderstanding of
the phenomena of Value and Price.

The doctrine appears to me to involve so much inconsis-
tency in its very conception, that I feel considerable difficulty
in giving any statement of it which shall be at once clear, and
satisfactory to its supporters. They agree in maintaining
that there may be, and sometimes is, an excess of produc-
tions in general beyond the demand for them ; that when
this happens, purchasers cannot be found at prices which will
repay the cost of production with a profit ; that there ensues
a general depression of prices or values (they are seldom accu-
rate in discriminating between the two), so that producers,
the more they produce, find themselves the poorer, instead of
richer ; and Dr. Chalmers accordingly inculcates on capitalists
the practice of a moral restraint in reference to the pursuit
of gain : while Sismondi deprecates machinery, and the
various inventions which increase productive power. They
both maintain that accumulation of capital may proceed too
fast, not merely for the moral, but for the material interests
of those who produce and accumulate; and they enjoin the
rich to guard against this evil by an ample unproductive
consumption.


* Supra, vol. i. pp. 82—5.


94


BOOK III. CHAPTER XIV. § 2.

§ 2. When these writers speak of the supply of com-
modities as outrunning the demand, it is not clear which of
the two elements of demand they have in view — the desire to
possess, or the means of purchase ; whether their meaning is
that there are, in such cases, more consumable products in
existence than the public desires to consume, or merely more
than it is able to pay for. In this uncertainty, it is necessary
to examine both suppositions.

First, let us suppose that the quantity of commodities
produced is not greater than the community would be glad
to consume : is it, in that case, possible that there should be
a deficiency of demand for all commodities, for want of the
means of payment ? Those who think so cannot have con-
sidered what it is which constitutes the means of payment
for commodities. It is simply, commodities. Each person's
means of paying for the productions of other people consists
of those which he himself possesses. All sellers are inevi-
tably and ex vi termini buyers. Could we suddenly double
the productive powers of the country, we should double the
supply of commodities in every market ; but we should, by
the same stroke, double the purchasing power. Everybody
would bring a double demand as well as supply : everybody
would be able to buy twice as much, because every one would
have twice as much to offer in exchange. It is probable, in-
deed, that there would now be a superfluity of certain things.
Although the community would willingly double its aggre-
gate consumption, it may already have as much as it desires
of some commodities, and it may prefer to do more than
double its consumption of others, or to exercise its increased
purchasing power on some new thing. If so, the supply
will adapt itself accordingly, and the values of things will
continue to conform to their cost of production. At any
rate, it is a sheer absurdity that all things should fall in
value, and that all producers should, in consequence, be
insufficiently remunerated. If values remain the same, what
becomes of prices is immaterial, since the remuneration of



EXCESS OF SUPPLY.


95


producers does not depend on how much money, but on how
much of consumable articles, they obtain for their goods.
Besides, money is a commodity ; and if all commodities are
supposed to be doubled in quantity, we must suppose money
to be doubled too, and then prices would no more fall than
values would.

§ 3. A general over-supply, or excess of all commodi-
ties above the demand, so far as demand consists in means of
payment, is Ihus shown to be an impossibility. But it may
perhaps be supposed that it is not the ability to purchase,
but the desire to possess, that falls short, and that the general
produce of industry may be greater than the community
desires to consume — the part, at least, of the community
which has an equivalent to give. It is evident enough, that
produce makes a market for produce, and that there is wealth
in the country with which to purchase all the wealth in the
country ; but those who have the means, may not have the
wants, and those who have the wants may be without the
means. A portion, therefore, of the commodities produced
may be unable to find a market, from the absence of means
in those who have the desire to consume, and the want of
desire in those who have the means.

This is much the most plausible form of the doctrine, and
does not, like that which we first examined, involve a contra-
diction. There may easily be a greater quantity of any parti-
cular commodity than is desired by those who have the ability
to purchase, and it is abstractedly conceivable that this might
be the case with all commodities. The error is in not per-
ceiving that though all who have an equivalent to give, might
be fully provided with every consumable article which they
desire, the fact that they go on adding to the production
proves that this is not actually the case. Assume the most
favourable hypothesis for the purpose, that of a limited com-
munity, every member of which possesses as much of neces-
saries and of all known luxuries as he desires : and since it



96


BOOK III. CHAPTER XIV* § 3.

is not conceivable that persons whose wants were completely
satisfied would labour and economize to obtain what they
did not desire, suppose that a foreigner arrives, and produces
an additional quantity of something of which there was
already enough. Here, it will be said, is over-production:
true, I reply; over-production of that particular article : the
community wanted no more of that, but it wanted some-
thing. The old inhabitants, indeed, wanted nothing; but did
not the foreigner himself want something ? When he pro-
duced the superfluous article, was he labouring without a
motive f He has produced, but the wrong thing instead of
the right. He wanted, perhaps, food, and has produced
watches, with which everybody was sufficiently supplied.
The newcomer brought with him into the country a demand
for commodities, equal to all that he could produce by his
industry, and it was his business to see that the supply he
brought should be suitable to that demand. If he could not
produce something capable of exciting a new want or desire
in the community, for the satisfaction of which some one
would grow more food and give it to him in exchange, he
had the alternative of growing food for himself ; either on
fresh land, if there was any unoccupied, or as a tenant, or
partner, or servant, of some former occupier, willing to be
partially relieved from labour. He has produced a thing not
wanted, instead of what was wanted ; and he himself, perhaps,
is not the kind of producer who is wanted; but there is no
over-production ; production is not excessive, but merely ill
assorted. We saw before, that whoever brings additional
commodities to the market, brings an additional power of
purchase; we now see that he brings also an additional desire
to consume; since if he had not that desire, he would not
have troubled himself to produce. Neither of the elements
of demand, therefore, can be wanting, when there is an addi-
tional supply; though it is perfectly possible that the demand
may be for one thing, and the supply may unfortunately
consist of another.



EXCESS OF SUPPLY.


97


Driven to liis last retreat, an opponent may perhaps
allege, that there are persons who produce and accumulate
from mere habit; not because they have any object in grow-
ing richer, or desire to add in any respect to their consump-
tion, but from vis inertice. They continue producing because
the machine is ready mounted, and save and re-invest their
savings because they have nothing on which they care to
expend them. I grant that this is possible, and in some few
instances probably happens; but these do not in the smallest
degree affect our conclusion. For, what do these persons do
with their savings? They invest them productively; that
is, expend them in employing labour. In other words,
having a purchasing power belonging to them, more than they
know what to do with, they make over the surplus of it for
the general benefit of the labouring class. Now, will that
class also not know what to do with it ? Are we to suppose
that they too have their wants perfectly satisfied, and go on
labouring from mere habit ? Until this is the case; until the
working classes have also reached the point of satiety — there
will be no want of demand for the produce of capital, how-
ever rapidly it may accumulate : since, if there is nothing
else for it to do, it can always find employment in producing
the necessaries or luxuries of the labouring class. And when
they too had no further desire for necessaries or luxuries,
they would take the benefit of any further increase of wages
by diminishing their work; so that the over-production which
then for the first time would be possible in idea, could not
even then take place in fact, for want of labourers. Thus, in
whatever manner the question is looked at, even though we
go to the extreme verge of possibility to invent a supposition
favourable to it, the theory of general over-production implies
an absurdity.

§ 4. What then is it by which men who have reflected
much on economical phenomena, and have even contributed
to throw new light upon them by original speculations, have

VOL. II. H



9S


BOOK HI. CHAPTER XIV. § 4.

been led to embrace so irrational a doctrine? I conceive
them to have been deceived by a mistaken interpretation of
certain mercantile facts. They imagined that the possibility
of a general oversupply of commodities was proved by ex-
perience. They believed that they saw this phenomenon in
certain conditions of the markets, the true explanation of
which is totally different.

I have already described the state of the markets for
commodities which accompanies what is termed a commercial
crisis. At such times there is really an excess of all com-
modities above the money demand : in other words, there is
an under-supply of money. From the sudden annihilation
of a great mass of credit, every one dislikes to part with
ready money, and many are anxious to procure it at any
sacrifice. Almost everybody therefore is a seller, and there
are scarcely any buyers : so that there may really be, though
only while the crisis lasts, an extreme depression of general
prices, from what may be indiscriminately called a glut of
commodities or a dearth of money. But it is a great error
to suppose, with Sismondi, that a commercial crisis is the
effect of a general excess of production. It is simply the
consequence of an excess of speculative purchases. It is not
a gradual advent of low prices, but a sudden recoil from prices
extravagantly high : its immediate cause is a contraction of
credit, and the remedy is, not a diminution of supply, but the
restoration of confidence. It is also evident that this tem-
porary derangement of markets is an evil only because it is
temporary. The fall being solely of money prices, if prices
did not rise again no dealer would lose, since the smaller price
would be worth as much to him as the larger price was before.
In no manner does this phenomenon answer to the descrip-
tion which these celebrated economists have given of the evil
of over-production. That permanent decline in the circum-
stances of producers, for want of markets, which those writers
contemplate, is a conception to which the nature of a com-
mercial crisis gives no support.



EXCESS OF SUPPLY.


99


The other phenomenon from which the notion of a gene-
ral excess of wealth and superfluity of accumulation seems
to derive countenance, is one of a more permanent nature,
namely, the fall of profits and interest which naturally takes
place with the progress of population and production. The
cause of this decline of profit is the increased cost of main-
taining labour, which results from an increase of population
and of the demand for food, outstripping the advance of
agricultural improvement. This important feature in the
economical progress of nations will receive full consideration
and discussion in the succeeding Book.* It is obviously a
totally different thing from a want of market for commodities,
though often confounded with it in the complaints of the
producing and trading classes. The true interpretation of
the modern or present state of industrial economy, is, that
there is hardly any amount of business which may not be
done, if people will be content to do it on small profits :
and this, all active and intelligent persons in business per-
fectly well know : but even those who comply with the
necessities of their time, grumble at what they comply with,
and wish that there were less capital, or as they express it,
less competition, in order that there might be greater profits.
Low profits, however, are a different thing from deficiency
of demand; and the production and accumulation which
merely reduce profits, cannot be called excess of supply or of
production. What the phenomenon really is, and its effects
and necessary limits, will be seen when we treat of that express
subject.

I know not of any economical facts, except the two I have
specified, which can have given occasion to the opinion that a
general over-production of commodities ever presented itself
in actual experience. I am convinced that there is no fact in
commercial affairs, which, in order to its explanation, stands
in need of that chimerical supposition.


* Infra, book iv. ch. 4.
H 2



100 BOOK III. CHAPTER XIV. § 4 .

The point is fundamental; any difference of opinion on it
involves radically different conceptions of Political Economy,
especially in its practical aspect. On the one view, we have
only to consider how a sufficient production may be combined
with the best possible distribution, but on the other there is a
third thing to be considered — how a market can be created
for produce, or how production can be limited to the capa-
bilities of the market. Besides ; a theory so essentially self-
contradictory cannot intrude itself without carrying confusion
into the very heart of the subject, and making it impossible
even to conceive with any distinctness many of the more
complicated economical workings of society. This error has
been, I conceive, fatal to the systems, as systems, of the three
distinguished economists to whom I before referred, Malthus,
Chalmers, and Sismondi ; all of whom have admirably con-
ceived and explained several of the elementary theorems of
political economy, but this fatal misconception has spread
itself like a veil between them and the more difficult portions
of the subject, not suffering one ray of light to penetrate.
Still more is this same confused idea constantly crossing and
bewildering the speculations of minds inferior to theirs. It is
but justice to two eminent names, to call attention to the fact,
that the merit of having placed this most important point in
its true light, belongs principally, on the Continent, to the
judicious J. B. Say, and in this country to Mr. Mill; who,
(besides the conclusive exposition which he gave of -the subject
in his Elements of Political Economy), had set forth the
correct doctrine with great force and clearness in an early
pamphlet, called forth by a temporary controversy, and en-
titled, “ Commerce Defended ” the first of his writings which
attained any celebrity, and which he prized more as having
been his first introduction to the friendship of David Bicardo,
the most valued and most intimate friendship of his life.



CHAPTER XV.


OF A MEASURE OF VALUE.

§ 1. There has been much discussion among political
economists respecting a Measure of Value. An importance
has been attached to the subject, greater than it deserved, and
what has been written respecting it has contributed not a
little to the reproach of logomachy, which is brought, with
much exaggeration, but not altogether without ground, against
the speculations of political economists. It is necessary
however to touch upon the subject, if only to show how little
there is to be said on it.

A Measure of Value, in the ordinary sense of the word
measure, would mean, something, by comparison with which
we may ascertain what is the value of any other thing. When
we consider farther, that value itself is relative, and that two
things are necessary to constitute it, independently of the
third thing which is to measure it ; we may define a Measure
of Value to be something, by comparing with which any
two other things, we may infer their value in relation to one
another.

In this sense, any commodity will serve as a measure of
value at a given time and place; since we can always infer
the proportion in which things exchange for one another,
when we know the proportion in which each exchanges for
any third thing. To serve as a convenient measure of value
is one of the functions of the commodity selected as a
medium of exchange. It is in that commodity that the
values of all other things are habitually estimated. We say
that one thing is worth 21 ., another 31 . ; and it is then known
without express statement, that one is worth two-thirds of
the other, or that the things exchange for one another in the



102 BOOK III. CHAPTER XV. § 1.

proportion of 2 to 3. Money is a complete measure of their
value.

But the desideratum sought by political economists is not
a measure of the value of things at the same time and place,
but a measure of the value of the same thing at different times
and places : something by comparison with which it may be
known whether any given thing is of greater or less value
now than a century ago, or in this country than in America
or China. And for this also, money, or any other commodity,
will serve quite as well as at the same time and place,
provided we can obtain the same data ; provided we are able
to compare with the measure not one commodity only, but the
two or more which are necessary to the idea of value. If
wheat is now 40s. the quarter, and a fat sheep the same, and
if in the time of Henry the Second wheat was 20s., and a
sheep 10s., we know that a quarter of wheat was then worth
two sheep, and is now only worth one, and that the value
therefore of a sheep, estimated in wheat, is twice as great as it
was then ; quite independently of the value of money at the
two periods, either in relation to those two articles (in respect
to both of which we suppose it to have fallen), or to other
commodities, in respect to which we need not make any
supposition.

What seems to be desired, however, by writers on the
subject, is some means of ascertaining the value of a com-
modity by merely comparing it with the measure, without
referring it specially to any other given commodity. They
would wish to be able, from the mere fact that wheat is now
40s. the quarter, and was formerly 20s., to decide whether
wheat has varied in its value, and in what degree, without
selecting a second commodity, such as a sheep, to compare it
with; because they are not desirous of knowing how much
wheat has varied in value relatively to sheep, but how much
it has varied relatively to things in general.

The first obstacle arises from the necessary indefiniteness
of the idea of general exchange value — value in relation not



MEASURE OF VALUE.


103


to some one commodity, but to commodities at large. Even
if we knew exactly how much a quarter of wheat would have
purchased at the earlier period, of every marketable article
considered separately, and that it will now purchase more of
some things and less of others, we should often find it impos-
sible to say whether it had risen or fallen in relation to things
in general. How much more impossible when we only know
how it has varied in relation to the measure. To enable the
money price of a thing at two different periods to measure
the Quantity of things in general which it will exchange for,
the same sum of money must correspond at both periods to
the same quantity of things in general, that is, money must
always have the same exchange value, the same general pur-
chasing power. Now, not only is this not true of money, or
of any other commodity, but we cannot even suppose any
state of circumstances in which it would be true.

§ 2. A measure of exchange value, therefore, being im-
possible, writers have formed a notion of something, under
the name of a measure of value, which would be more pro-
perly termed a measure of cost of production. They have
imagined a commodity invariably produced by the same
quantity of labour; to which supposition it is necessary to
add, that the fixed capital employed in the production must
bear always the same proportion to the wages of the imme-
diate labour, and must be always of the same durability: in
short, the same capital must be advanced for the same length
of time, so that the element of value which consists of profits,
as well as that which consists of wages, may be unchangeable.
We should then have a commodity always produced under
one and the same combination of all the circumstances which
affect permanent value. Such a commodity would be by no
means constant in its exchange value; for (even without
reckoning the temporary fluctuations arising from supply and
demand) its exchange value would be altered by every change
in the circumstances of production of the things against which



104


BOOK III. CHAPTER XV. § 2.

it was exchanged. But if there existed such a commodity, we
should derive this advantage from it, that whenever any other
thing varied in relation to it, we should know that the cause
of variation was not in it, but in the other thing. It would
thus be fitted to serve as a measure, not indeed of the value of
other things, but of their cost of production. If a commodity
acquired a greater permanent purchasing power in relation to
the invariable commodity, its cost of production must have
become greater ; and in the contrary case, less. This measure
of cost, is what political economists have generally meafit by
a measure of value.

But a measure of cost, though perfectly conceivable, can
no more exist in fact, than a measure of exchange value.
There is no commodity which is invariable in its cost of
production. Gold and silver are the least variable, but even
these are liable to changes in their cost of production, from
the exhaustion of old sources of supply, the discovery of new,
and improvements in the mode of working. If we attempt
to ascertain the changes in the cost of production of any
commodity from the changes in its money price, the conclu-
sion will require to be corrected by the best allowance we can
make for the intermediate changes in the cost of the produc-
tion of money itself.

Adam Smith fancied that there were two commodities
peculiarly fitted to serve as a measure of value : corn, and
labour. Of corn, he said that although its value fluctuates
much from year to year, it does not vary greatly from century
to century. This we now know to be an error : corn tends
to rise in cost of production with every increase of popula-
tion, and to fall with every improvement in agriculture, either
in the country itself, or in any foreign country from which it
draws a portion of its supplies. The supposed constancy of
the cost of the production of corn depends on the maintenance
of a complete equipoise between these antagonizing forces,
an equipoise which, if ever realized, can only be accidental.
With respect to labour as a measure of value, the language of



MEASURE OF VALUE.


105


Adam Smith is not uniform. He sometimes speaks of it as
a good measure only for short periods, saying that the value
of labour (or wages) does not vary much from year to year,
though it does from generation to generation. On other
occasions he speaks as if labour were intrinsically the most
proper measure of value, on the ground, that one day’s ordi-
nary muscular exertion of one man, may be looked upon as
always, to him, the same amount of effort or sacrifice. But
this proposition, whether in itself admissible or not, discards
the idea of exchange value altogether, substituting a totally
different idea, more analogous to value in use. If a day's
labour will purchase in America twice as much of ordinary
consumable articles as in England, it seems a vain subtlety
to insist on saying that labour is of the same value in both
countries, and that it is the value of the other things which
is different. Labour, in this case, may be correctly said to
be twice as valuable, both in the market and to the labourer
himself, in America as in England.

If the object were to obtain an approximate measure by
which to estimate value in use, perhaps nothing better could
be chosen than one day's subsistence of an average man,
reckoned in the ordinary food consumed by the class of un-
skilled labourers. If in America a pound of maize flour
will support a labouring man for a day, a thing might be
deemed more or less valuable in proportion to the number of
pounds of maize flour it exchanged for. If one thing, either
by itself or by what it would purchase, could maintain a
labouring man for a day, and another could maintain him for
a week, there would be some reason in saying that the one
was worth, for ordinary human uses, seven times as much as
the other. But this would not measure the worth of the
thing to its possessor for his own purposes, which might be
greater to any amount, though it could not be less, than the
worth of the food which the thing would purchase.

The idea of a Measure of Value must not be confounded
with the idea of the regulator, or determining principle, of



106 BOOK III. CHAPTER XV. § 2 .

value. When it is said by Ricardo and others, that the value
of a thing is regulated by quantity of labour, they do not
mean the quantity of labour for which the thing will ex-
change, but the quantity required for producing it. This,
they mean to affirm, determines its value; causes it to be
of the value it is, and of no other. But when Adam Smith
and Malthus say that labour is a measure of value, they do
not mean the labour by which the thing was or can be made,
but the quantity of labour which it will exchange for, or
purchase ; in other words, the value of the thing, estimated
in labour. And they do not mean that this regulates the
general exchange value of the thing, or has any effect in
determining what that value shall be, but only ascertains
what it is, and whether and how much it varies from time to
time and from place to place. To confound these two ideas,
would be much the same thing as to overlook the distinction
between the thermometer and the fire.



CHAPTER XYI.


OF SOME PECULIAR CASES OF VALUE.

§ 1. The general laws of value, in all the more impor-
tant cases of the interchange of commodities in the same
country, have now been investigated. We examined, first,
the case of monopoly, in which the value is determined by
either a natural or an artificial limitation of quantity, that is,
by demand and supply : secondly, the case of free competi-
tion, when the article can be produced in indefinite quantity
at the same cost; in which case the permanent value is
determined by the cost of production, and only the fluctua-
tions by supply and demand : thirdly, a mixed case, that of
the articles which can be produced in indefinite quantity, but
not at the same cost ; in which case the permanent value is
determined by the greatest cost which it is necessary to incur
in order to obtain the required supply. And lastly, we have
found that money itself is a commodity of the third class ;
that its value, in a state of freedom, is governed by the same
laws as the values of other commodities of its class; and
that prices, therefore, follow the same laws as values.

From this it appears that demand and supply govern the
fluctuations of values and prices in all cases, and the perma-
nent values and prices of all things of which the supply is
determined by any agency other than that of free competi-
tion: but that, under the regime of competition, things are,
on the average, exchanged for each other at such values, and
sold at such prices, as afford equal expectation of advantage
to all classes of producers; which can only be when things
exchange for one another in the ratio of their cost of produc-
tion.

It is now, however, necessary to take notice of certain



108


BOOK III. CHAPTER XVI. § 1.

cases, to which, from their peculiar nature, this law of
exchange value is inapplicable.

It sometimes happens that two different commodities have
what may be termed a joint cost of production. They are
both products of the same operation, or set of operations, and
the outlay is incurred for the sake of both together, not part
for one and part for the other. The same outlay would have
to be incurred for either of the two, if the other were not
wanted or used at all. There are not a few instances of
commodities thus associated in their production. For exam-
ple, coke and coal-gas are both produced from the same
material, and by the same operation. In a more partial
sense, mutton and wool are an example: beef, hides, and
tallow: calves and dairy produce : chickens and eggs. Cost
of production can have nothing to do with deciding the value
of the associated commodities relatively to each other. It
only decides their joint value. The gas and the coke toge-
ther have to repay the expenses of their production, with the
ordinary profit. To do this, a given quantity of gas, together
with the coke which is the residuum of its manufacture,
must exchange for other things in the ratio of their joint cost
of production. But how much of the remuneration of the
producer shall be derived from the coke, and how much from
the gas, remains to be decided. Cost of production does not
determine their prices, but the sum of their prices. A prin-
ciple is wanting to apportion the expenses of production
between the two.

Since cost of production here fails us, we must revert to
a law of value anterior to cost of production, and more
fundamental, the law of demand and supply. The law is,
that the demand for a commodity varies with its value, and
that the value adjusts itself so that the demand shall be equal
to the supply. This supplies the principle of repartition
which we are in quest of.

Suppose that a certain quantity of gas is produced and
sold at a certain price, and that the residuum of coke is



SOME PECULIAR CASES OF VALUE. 109

offered at a price which, together with that of the gas, repays
the expenses with the ordinary rate of profit. Suppose, too,
that at the price put upon the gas and coke respectively, the
whole of the gas finds an easy market, without either sur-
plus or deficiency, but that purchasers cannot be found for all
the coke corresponding to it. The coke will be offered at a
lower price in order to force a market. But this lower price,
together with the price of the gas, will not be remunerating:
the manufacture, as a whole, will not pay its expenses with
the ordinary profit, and will not, on these terms, continue to
be carried on. The gas, therefore, must be sold at a higher
price, to make up for the deficiency on the coke. The
demand consequently contracting, the production will be
somewhat reduced; and prices will become stationary when,
by the joint effect of the rise of gas and the fall of coke, so
much less of the first is sold, and so much more of the
second, that there is now a market for all the coke which
results from the existing extent of the gas manufacture.

Or suppose the reverse case ; that more coke is wanted at
the present prices, than can be supplied by the operations
required by the existing demand for gas. Coke, being now in
deficiency, will rise in price. The whole operation will yield
more than the usual rate of profit, and additional capital will
be attracted to the manufacture. The unsatisfied demand for
coke will be supplied; but this cannot be done without
increasing the supply of gas too ; and as the existing demand
was fully supplied already, an increased quantity can only find
a market by lowering the price. The result will be that the
two together will yield the return required by their joint cost
of production, but that more of this return than before will
be furnished by the coke, and less by the gas. Equilibrium
will be attained when the demand for each article fits so well
with the demand for the other, that the quantity required of
each is exactly as much as is generated in producing the
quantity required of the other. If there is any surplus or
deficiency on either side; if there is a demand for coke, and



110


BOOK III. CHAPTER XVI. § 2.

not a demand for all the gas produced along with it, or vice
verm; the values and prices of the two things will so re-
adjust themselves that both shall find a market.

When, therefore, two or more commodities have a joint
cost of production, their natural values relatively to each other
are those which will create a demand for each, in the ratio of
the quantities in which they are sent forth by the productive
process. This theorem is not in itself of any great import-
ance: but the illustration it affords of the law of demand,
and of the mode in which, when cost of production fails to be
applicable, the other principle steps in to supply the vacancy,
is worthy of particular attention, as we shall find in the next
chapter but one that something very similar takes place in
cases of much greater moment.

§ 2. Another case of value which merits attention, is
that of the different kinds of agricultural produce. This is
rather a more complex question than the last, and requires
that attention should be paid to a greater number of influ-
encing circumstances.

The case would present nothing peculiar, if different
agricultural products were either grown indiscriminately and
with equal advantage on the same soils, or wholly on diffe-
rent soils. The difficulty arises from two things: first, that
most soils are fitter for one kind of produce than another,
without being absolutely unfit for any; and secondly, the
rotation of crops.

For simplicity, we will confine our supposition to two
kinds of agricultural produce, for instance, wheat and oats.
If all soils were equally adapted for wheat and for oats, both
would be grown indiscriminately on all soils, and their relative
cost of production, being the same everywhere, would govern
their relative value. If the same labour which grows three
quarters of wheat on any given soil, would always grow on
that soil five quarters of oats, the three and the five quarters
would be of the same value. If, again, wheat and oats could



SOME PECULIAR CASES OF VALUE.


Ill


not be grown on the same soil at all, the value of each would
be determined by its peculiar cost of production on the least
favourable of the soils adapted for it which the existing
demand required a recourse to. The fact, however, is that
both wheat and oats can be grown on almost any soil which
is capable of producing either: but some soils, such as the
stiff clays, are better adapted for wheat, while others (the light
sandy soils) are more suitable for oats. There might be
some soils which would yield, to the same quantity of labour,
only four quarters of oats to three of wheat ; others perhaps
less than three of wheat to five quarters of oats. Among these
diversities, what determines the relative value of the two
things ?

It is evident that each grain will be cultivated in prefe-
rence, on the soils which are better adapted for it than for the
other ; and if the demand is supplied from these alone, the
values of the two grains will have no reference to one another.
But when the demand for both is such as to require that each
should be grown not only on the soils peculiarly fitted for it,
but on the medium soils which, without being specifically
adapted to either, are about equally suited for both, the cost
of production on those medium soils will determine the
relative value of the two grains ; while the rent of the soils
specifically adapted to each, will be regulated by their pro-
ductive power, considered with reference to that one alone to
which they are peculiarly applicable. Thus far the question
presents no difficulty, to any one to whom the general prin-
ciples of value are familiar.

It may happen, however, that the demand for one of the
two, as for example wheat, may so outstrip the demand for
the other, as not only to occupy the soils specially suited for
wheat, but to engross entirely those equally suitable to both,
and even encroach upon those which are better adapted to
oats. To create an inducement for this unequal apportion-
ment of the cultivation, wheat must be relatively dearer, and
oats cheaper, than according to the cost of their production



112


BOOK III. CHAPTER XVI. § 2 .

on the medium land. Their relative value must be in pro-
portion to the cost on that quality of land, whatever it may
be, on which the comparative demand for the two grains
requires that both of them should be grown. If, from the
state of the demand, the two cultivations meet on land more
favourable to one than to the other, that one will be cheaper
and the other dearer, in relation to each other and to things
in general, than if the proportional demand were as we at
first supposed.

Here, then, we obtain a fresh illustration, in a somewhat
different manner, of the operation of demand, not as an occa-
sional disturber of value, but as a permanent regulator of it,
conjoined with, or supplementary to, cost of production.

The case of rotation of crops does not require separate
analysis, being a case of joint cost of production, like that
of gas and coke. If it were the practice to grow white and
green crops on all land in alternate years, the one being
necessary as much for the sake of the other as for its own
sake ; the farmer would derive his remuneration for two years'
expenses from one white and one green crop, and the prices
of the two would so adjust themselves as to create a demand
which would carry off an equal breadth of white and of green
crops.

There would be little difficulty in finding other anomalous
cases of value, which it might be a useful exercise to resolve:
but it is neither desirable nor possible, in a work like the pre-
sent, to enter more into details than is necessary for the eluci-
dation of principles. I now therefore proceed to the only part
of the general theory of exchange which has not yet been
touched upon, that of International Exchanges, or, to speak
more generally, exchanges between distant places.



CHAPTER XVII.


OF INTERNATIONAL TRADE.

§ 1. The causes which occasion a commodity to be
brought from a distance, instead of being produced, as con-
venience would seem to dictate, as near as possible to the
market where it is to be sold for consumption, are usually
conceived in a rather superficial manner. Some things it is
physically impossible to produce, except in particular circum-
stances of heat, soil, water, or atmosphere. But there are
many things which, though they could be produced at home
without difficulty, and in any quantity, are yet imported from
a distance. The explanation which would be popularly given
of this would be, that it is cheaper to import than to produce
them : and this is the true reason. But this reason itself re-
quires that a reason be given for it. Of two things produced
in the same place, if one is cheaper than the other, the reason
is that it can be produced with less labour and capital, or, in
a word, at less cost. Is this also the reason as between things
produced in different places ? Are things never imported but
from places where they can be produced with less labour (or
less of the other element of cost, time) than in the place to
which they are brought ? Does the law, that permanent value
is proportioned to cost of production, hold good between com-
modities produced in distant places, as it does between those
produced in adjacent places ?

We shall find that it does not. A thing may sometimes
be sold cheapest, by being produced in some other place than
that at which it can be produced with the smallest amount of
labour and abstinence. England might import com from
Poland and p^y for it in cloth, even though England had a
decided advantage over Poland in the production of both the

VOL. II. I



114 BOOK III. CHAPTER XVII. § 1 .

one and the other. England might send cottons to Portugal
in exchange for wine, although Portugal might be able to
produce cottons with a less amount of labour and capital than
England could.

This could not happen between adjacent places. If the
north bank of the Thames possessed an advantage over the
south bank in the production of shoes, no shoes would be
produced on the south side ; the shoemakers would remove
themselves and their capitals to the north bank, or would
have established themselves there originally ; for, being com-
petitors in the same market with those on the north side, they
could not compensate themselves for their disadvantage at
the expense of the consumer: the amount of it would fall
entirely on their profits; and they would not long content
themselves with a smaller profit, when, by simply crossing a
river, they could increase it. But between distant places,
and especially between different countries, profits may con-
tinue different; because persons do not usually remove
themselves or their capitals to a distant place, without a very
strong motive. If capital moved to remote parts of the world
as readily, and for as small an inducement, as it moves to
another quarter of the same town; if people would transport
their manufactories to America or China whenever they could
save a small per centage in their expenses by it; profits would
be alike (or equivalent) all over the world, and all things
would be produced in the places where the same labour and
capital would produce them in greatest quantity and of best
quality. A tendency may, even now, be observed towards
such a state of things; capital is becoming more and more
cosmopolitan ; there is so much greater similarity of manners
and institutions than formerly, and so much less alienation of
feeling, among the more civilized countries, that both popu-
lation and capital now move from one of those countries to
another on much less temptation than heretofore. But there
are still extraordinary differences, both of wages and of
profits, between different parts of the world. It needs but a



INTERNATIONAL TRADE.


115


small motive to transplant capital, or even persons, from
Warwickshire to Yorkshire ; but a much greater to make
them remove to India, the colonies, or Ireland. To France,
Germany, or Switzerland, capital moves perhaps almost as
readily as to the colonies; the differences of language and
government being scarcely so great a hindrance as climate
and distance. To countries still barbarous, or, like Russia
or Turkey, only beginning to be civilized, capital will not
migrate, unless under the inducement of a very great extra
profit.

Between all distant places therefore in some degree, but
especially between different countries (whether under the
same supreme government or not,) there may exist great
inequalities in the return to labour and capital, without
causing them to move from one place to the other in such
quantity as to level those inequalities. The capital belonging
to a country will, to a great extent, remain in the country,
even if there be no mode of employing it in which it would
not be more productive elsewhere. Yet even a country thus
circumstanced might, and probably would, carry on trade with
other countries. It would export articles of some sort, even
to places which could make them with less labour than itself ;
because those countries, supposing them to have an advan-
tage over it in all productions, would have a greater advantage
in some things than in others, and would find it their interest
to import the articles in which their advantage was smallest,
that they might employ more of their labour and capital on
those in which it was greatest.

§ 2. As I have said elsewhere* after Ricardo (the
thinker who has done most towards clearing up this subject)
“it is not a difference in the absolute cost of production,
which determines the interchange, but a difference in the
comparative cost. It may be to our advantage to procure


* Essays on some Unsettled Questions of Political Economy, Essay I.



116


BOOK III. CHAPTER XVII. § 2.

iron from Sweden in exchange for cottons, even although the
mines of England as well as her manufactories should be
more productive than those of Sweden; for if we have an
advantage of one-half in cottons, and only an advantage of a
quarter in iron, and could sell our cottons to Sweden at the
price which Sweden must pay for them if she produced them
herself, we should obtain our iron with an advantage of one-
half, as well as our cottons. We may often, by trading with
foreigners, obtain their commodities at a smaller expense of
labour and capital than they cost to the foreigners themselves.
The bargain is still advantageous to the foreigner, because the
commodity which he receives in exchange, though it has cost
us less, would have cost him more ”

To illustrate the cases in which interchange of commodi-
ties will not, and those in which it will, take place between
two countries, Mr. Mill, in his Elements of Political Eco-
nomy,* makes the supposition, that Poland has an advan-
tage over England in the production both of cloth and of
corn. He first supposes the advantage to be of equal amount
in both commodities ; the cloth and the com, each of which
required 100 days labour in Poland, requiring each 150 days
labour in England. “It would follow, that the cloth of 150
days labour in England, if sent to Poland, would be equal to
the cloth of 100 days labour in Poland ; if exchanged for
corn, therefore, it would exchange for the com of only 100
days labour. But the com of 100 days labour in Poland, was
supposed to be the same quantity with that of 150 days
labour in England. With 150 days labour in cloth, there-
fore, England would only get as much com in Poland as she
could raise with 150 days labour at home; and she would,
in importing it, have the cost of carriage besides. In these
circumstances no exchange would take place/" In this case
the comparative costs of the two articles in England and in
Poland were supposed to be the same, though the absolute


* Third ed. p. 120.



INTERNATIONAL TRADE.


117


costs were different; on which supposition we see that there
would be no labour saved to either country by confining its
industry to one of the two productions, and importing the
other.

It is otherwise when the comparative, and not merely the
absolute costs of the two articles are different in the two
countries. “ If,” continues the same author, “ while the cloth
produced with J00 days labour in Poland was produced with
1 50 days labour in England, the com which was produced in
Poland with J 00 days labour could not be produced in England
with less than 200 days labour ; an adequate motive to ex-
change would immediately arise. With a quantity of cloth
which England produced with 150 days labour, she would be
able to purchase as much corn in Poland as was there pro-
duced with 100 days labour; but the quantity which was
there produced with 100 days labour, would be as great as
the quantity produced in England with 200 days labour.’'
By importing corn, therefore, from Poland, and paying for it
with cloth, England would obtain for 150 days labour what
would otherwise cost her 200; being a saving of 50 days
labour on each repetition of the transaction : and not merely
a saving to England, but a saving absolutely; for it is not
obtained at the expense of Poland, who, with corn that costs
her 100 days labour, has purchased cloth which, if produced
at home, would have cost her the same. Poland, therefore,
on this supposition, loses nothing; but also she derives no
advantage from the trade, the imported cloth costing her as
much as if it were made at home. To enable Poland to
gain anything by the interchange, something must be abated
from the gain of England : the corn produced in Poland by
100 days labour, must be able to purchase from England
more cloth than Poland could produce by that amount of
labour; more therefore than England could produce by 150
days labour, England thus obtaining the corn which would
have cost her 200 days, at a cost exceeding 150, though short
of 200. England therefore no longer gains the whole of the



118 BOOK III. CHAPTER XVII. § 4.

labour which is saved to the two jointly by trading with one
another.


§ 3. From this exposition we perceive in what consists
the benefit of international exchange, or in other words,
foreign commerce. Setting aside its enabling countries to
obtain commodities which they could not themselves produce
at all; its advantage consists in a more efficient employment
of the productive forces of the world. If two countries which
trade together attempted, as far as was physically possible,
to produce for themselves what they now import from one
another, the labour and capital of the two countries would
not be so productive, the two together would not obtain from
their industry so great a quantity of commodities, as when
each employs itself in producing, both for itself and for the
other, the things in which its labour is relatively most effi-
cient. The addition thus made to the produce of the two
combined, constitutes the advantage of the trade. It is
possible that one of the two countries may be altogether
inferior to the other in productive capacities, and that its
labour and capital could be employed to greatest advantage
by being removed bodily to the other. The labour and
capital which have been sunk in rendering Holland habitable,
would have produced a much greater return if transported to
America or Ireland. The produce of the whole world would
be greater, or the labour less, than it is, if everything were
produced where there is the greatest absolute facility for its
production. But nations do not, at least in modern times,
emigrate en masse; and while the labour and capital of a
country remain in the country, they are most beneficially
employed in producing for foreign markets as well as for its
own, the things in which it lies under the least disadvantage,
if there be none in which it possesses an advantage.


§ 4. Before proceeding further, let us contrast this view
of the benefits of international commerce with other theories



INTERNATIONAL TRADE.


119


which have prevailed, and which to a certain extent still
prevail, on the same subject.

According to the doctrine now stated, the only direct
advantage of foreign commerce consists in the imports. A
country obtains things which it either could not have pro-
duced at all, or which it must have produced at a greater
expense of capital and labour than the cost of the things
which it exports to pay for them. It thus obtains a more
ample supply of the commodities it wants, for the same
labour and capital ; or the same supply, for less labour and
capital, leaving the surplus disposable to produce other
things. The vulgar theory disregards this benefit, and deems
the advantage of commerce to reside in the exports : as if
not what a country obtains, but what it parts with, by its
foreign trade, was supposed to constitute the gain to it. An
extended market for its produce — an abundant consumption
for its goods — a vent for its surplus — are the phrases by
which it has been customary to designate the uses and recom-
mendations of commerce with foreign countries. This notion
is intelligible, when we consider that the authors and leaders
of opinion on mercantile questions have always hitherto been
the selling class. It is in truth a surviving relic of the Mer-
cantile Theory, according to which, money being the only
wealth, selling, or in other words, exchanging goods for
money, was (to countries without mines of their own) the
only way of growing rich — and importation of goods, that
is to say, parting with money, was so much subtracted from
the benefit.

The notion that money alone is wealth, has been long
defunct, but it has left many of its progeny behind it ; and
even its destroyer, Adam Smith, retained some opinions which
it is impossible to trace to any other origin. Adam Smith’s
theory of the benefit of foreign trade, was that it afforded
an outlet for the surplus produce of a country, and enabled
a portion of the capital of the country to replace itself with a
profit. These expressions suggest ideas inconsistent with a



120


BOOK III. CHAPTER XVII. § 4 .

clear conception of the phenomena. The expression, surplus
produce, seems to imply that a country is under some kind of
necessity of producing the corn or cloth which it exports ; so
that the portion which it does not itself consume, if not
wanted and consumed elsewhere, would either be produced in
sheer waste, or if it were not produced, the corresponding
portion of capital would remain idle, and the mass of produc-
tions in the country would be diminished by so much. Either
of these suppositions would be entirely erroneous. The
country produces an exportable article in excess of its own
wants, from no inherent necessity, but as the cheapest mode
of supplying itself with other things. If prevented from
exporting this surplus, it would cease to produce it, and would
no longer import anything, being unable to give an equiva-
lent ; but the labour and capital which had been employed in
producing with a view to exportation, would find employment
in producing those desirable objects which were previously
brought from abroad : or, if some of them could not be pro-
duced, in producing substitutes for them. These articles
would of course be produced at a greater cost than that of the
things with which they had previously been purchased from
foreign countries. But the value and price of the articles
would rise in proportion; and the capital would just as much
be replaced, with the ordinary profit, from the returns, as it
was when employed in producing for the foreign market. The
only losers (after the temporary inconvenience of the change)
would be the consumers of the heretofore imported articles ;
who would be obliged either to do without them, consuming
in lieu of them something which they did not like so well, or
to pay a higher price for them than before.

There is much misconception in the common notion of
what commerce does for a country. When commerce is
spoken of as a source of national wealth, the imagination
fixes itself upon the large fortunes acquired by merchants,
rather than upon the saving of price to consumers. But the
gains of merchants, when they enjoy no exclusive privilege,



INTERNATIONAL TRADE.


121


are no greater than the profits obtained by the employment
of capital in the country itself. If it be said that the capital
now employed in foreign trade could not find employment
in supplying the home market, I might reply, that this is
the fallacy of general over-production, discussed in a former
chapter : but the thing is in this particular case too evident,
to require an appeal to any general theory. We not only
see that the capital of the merchant would find employment,
but we see what employment. There would be employment
created, equal to that which would be taken away. Exporta-
tion ceasing, importation to an equal value would cease also,
and all that part of the income of the country which had
been expended in imported commodities, would be ready to
expend itself on the same things produced at home, or on
others instead of them. Commerce is virtually a mode of
cheapening production; and in all such cases the consumer
is the person ultimately benefited ; the dealer, in the end, is
sure to get his profit, whether the buyer obtains much or
little for his money. This is said without prejudice to the
effect (already touched upon, and to be hereafter fully dis-
cussed) which the cheapening of commodities may have in
raising profits; in the case when the commodity cheapened,
being one of those consumed by labourers, enters into
the cost of labour, by which the rate of profits is deter-
mined.


§ 5. Such, then, is the direct economical advantage of
foreign trade. But there are, besides, indirect effects, which
must be counted as benefits of a high order. One is, the
tendency of every extension of the market to improve the
processes of production. A country which produces for a
larger market than its own, can introduce a more extended
division of labour, can make greater use of machinery, and
is more likely to make inventions and improvements in the
processes of production. Whatever causes a greater quantity
of anything to be produced in the same place, tends to the



122 BOOK III. CHAPTER XVII. § 5 .

general increase of the productive powers of the world.*
There is another consideration, principally applicable to an
early stage of industrial advancement. A people may be in
a quiescent, indolent, uncultivated state, with all their tastes
either fully satisfied or entirely undeveloped, and they may
fail to put forth the whole of their productive energies for
want of any sufficient object of desire. The opening of a
foreign trade, by making them acquainted with new objects,
or tempting them by the easier acquisition of things which
they had not previously thought attainable, sometimes works
a sort of industrial revolution in a country whose resources
were previously undeveloped for want of energy and ambi-
tion in the people : inducing those who were satisfied with
scanty comforts and little work, to work harder for the gratifi-
cation of their new tastes, and even to save, and accumulate
capital, for the still more complete satisfaction of those tastes
at a future time'

But the economical advantages of commerce are surpassed
in importance by those of its effects which are intellectual and
moral. It is hardly possible to overrate the value, in the
present low state of human improvement, of placing human
beings in contact with persons dissimilar to themselves, and
with modes of thought and action unlike those with which they
are familiar. Commerce is now, what war once was, the prin-
cipal source of this contact. Commercial adventurers from
more advanced countries have generally been the first civilizers
of barbarians. And commerce is the purpose of the far greater
part of the communication which takes place between civilized
nations. Such communication has always been, and is
peculiarly in the present age, one of the primary sources of
progress. To human beings, who, as hitherto educated, can
scarcely cultivate even a good quality without running it into
a fault, it is indispensable to be perpetually comparing their
own notions and customs with the experience and example of


* Vide supra, book i. chap. ix. § 1.


INTERNATIONAL TRADE.


123


persons in different circumstances from themselves : and there
is no nation which does not need to borrow from others, not
merely particular arts or practices, but essential points of
character in which its own type is inferior. Finally, commerce
first taught nations to see with good will the wealth and
prosperity of one another. Before, the patriot, unless suffi-.
ciently advanced in culture to feel the world his country,
wished all countries weak, poor, and ill-governed, but his
own : he now sees in their wealth and progress a direct
source of wealth and progress to his own country. It
is commerce which is rapidly rendering war obsolete, by
strengthening and multiplying the personal interests which
are in natural opposition to it. And it may be said without
exaggeration that the great extent and rapid increase of
international trade, in being the principal guarantee of the
peace of the world, is the great permanent security for the
uninterrupted progress of the ideas, the institutions, and the
character of the human race.



CHAPTER XVIII.


OF INTERNATIONAL VALUES.

§ 1. The values of commodities produced at the same
place, or in places sufficiently adjacent for capital to move
freely between them — let us say, for simplicity, of com-
modities produced in the same country — depend (temporary
fluctuations apart) upon their cost of production. But the
value of a commodity brought from a distant place, especially
from a foreign country, does not depend on its cost of produc-
tion in the place from whence it comes. On what, then, does
it depend ? The value of a thing in any place, depends on
the cost of its acquisition in that place ; which, in the case of
an imported article, means the cost of production of the thing
which is exported to pay for it.

Since all trade is in reality barter, money being a mere
instrument for exchanging things against one another, we will,
for simplicity, begin by supposing the international trade to
be in form, what it always is in reality, an actual trucking of
one commodity against another. As far as we have hitherto
proceeded, we have found all the laws of interchange to be
essentially the same, whether money is used or not ; money
never governing, but always obeying, those general laws.

If, then, England imports wine from Spain, giving for
every pipe of wine a bale of cloth, the exchange value of a
pipe of wine in England will not depend upon what the
production of the wine may have cost in Spain, but upon
what the production of the cloth has cost in England.
Though the wine may have cost in Spain the equivalent of
only ten days labour, yet, if the cloth costs in England twenty
days labour, the wine, when brought to England, will exchange
for the produce of twenty days English labour, plus the cost



INTERNATIONAL VALUES.


125


of carriage, including the usual profit on the importer’s capital
during the time it is locked up, and withheld from other
employment.

The value, then, in any country, of a foreign commodity,
depends on the quantity of home produce which must be
given to the foreign country in exchange for it. In other
words, the values of foreign commodities depend on the
terms of international exchange. What, then, do these
depend upon? What is it, which, in the case supposed,
causes a pipe of wine from Spain to be exchanged with
England for exactly that quantity of cloth? We have seen
that it is not their cost of production. If the cloth and the
wine were both made in Spain, they would exchange at their
cost of production in Spain ; if they were both made in
England, they would exchange at their cost of production in
England : but all the cloth being made in England, and all
the wine in Spain, they are in circumstances to which we
have already determined that the law of cost of production is
not applicable. We must accordingly, as we have done
before in a similar embarrassment, fall back upon an ante-
cedent law, that of supply and demand : and in this we shall
again find the solution of our difficulty.

I have discussed this question in a separate Essay, already
once referred to; and a quotation of part of the exposition
then given, will be the best introduction to my present view
of the subject. I must give notice that we are now in the
region of the most complicated questions which political
economy affords; that the subject is one which cannot pos-
sibly be made elementary ; and that a more continuous effort
of attention than has yet been required, will be necessary to
follow the series of deductions. The thread, however, which
we are about to take in hand, is in itself very simple and
manageable; the only difficulty is in following it through
the windings and entanglements of complex international
transactions.



126


BOOK III. CHAPTER XVIII. § 2.

§ 2. “ When the trade is established between the two

countries, the two commodities will exchange for each other
at the same rate of interchange in both countries — bating
the cost of carriage, of which, for the present, it will be
more convenient to omit the consideration. Supposing,
therefore, for the sake of argument, that the carriage of the
commodities from one country to the other could be effected
without labour and without cost, no sooner would the trade
be opened than the value of the two commodities, esti-
mated in each other, would come to a level in both
countries.

“ Suppose that 10 yards of broadcloth cost in England
as much labour as 15 yards of linen, and in Germany as
much as 20.” In common with most of my predecessors, I
find it advisable, in these intricate investigations, to give
distinctness and fixity to the conception by numerical ex-
amples. These examples must sometimes, as in the present
case, be purely supposititious. I should have preferred real
ones; but all that is essential is, that the numbers should
be such as admit of being easily followed through the subse-
quent combinations into which they enter.

This supposition then being made, it would be the interest
of England to import linen from Germany, and of Germany
to import cloth from England. “ When each country pro-
duced both commodities for itself, 10 yards of cloth exchanged
for 15 yards of linen in England, and for 20 in Germany.
They will now exchange for the same number of yards of
linen in both. For what number? If for 15 yards, England
will be just as she was, and Germany will gain all. If for 20
yards, Germany will be as before, and England will derive
the whole of the benefit. If for any number intermediate
between 15 and 20, the advantage will be shared between the
two countries. If, for example, 10 yards of cloth exchange
for 18 of linen, England will gain an advantage of 3 yards
on every 15, Germany will save 2 out of every 20. The
problem is, what are the causes which determine the propor-



INTERNATIONAL VALUES.


127


tion in which the cloth of England and the linen of Germany
will exchange for each other.

“As exchange value, in this case as in every other, is pro-
verbially fluctuating, it does not matter what we suppose it to
be when we begin : we shall soon see whether there be any
fixed point about which it oscillates, which it has a tendency
always to approach to, and to remain at. Let us suppose,
then, that by the effect of what Adam Smith calls the higgling
of the market, 10 yards of cloth, in both countries, exchange
for 1 7 yards of linen.

“ The demand for a commodity, that is, the quantity of
it which can find a purchaser, varies, as we have before re-
marked, according to the price. In Germany the price of 10
yards of cloth is now 17 yards of linen, or whatever quantity
of money is equivalent in Germany to 17 yards of linen.
Now, that being the price, there is some particular number
of yards of cloth, which will be in demand, or will find pur-
chasers, at that price. There is some given quantity of cloth,
more than which could not be disposed of at that price; less
than which, at that price, would not fully satisfy the demand.
Let us suppose this quantity to be 1000 times 10 yards.

“ Let us now turn our attention to England. There, the
price of 17 yards of linen is 10 yards of cloth, or whatever
quantity of money is equivalent in England to 10 yards of
cloth. There is some particular number of yards of linen
which, at that price, will exactly satisfy the demand, and no
more. Let us suppose that this number is 1000 times 17
yards.

“ As 17 yards of linen are to 10 yards of cloth, so are
1000 times 17 yards to 1000 times 10 yards. At the exist-
ing exchange value, the linen which England requires will
exactly pay for the quantity of cloth which, on the same
terms of interchange, Germany requires. The dejpr Ad on
each side is precisely sufficient to carry off the supp^ on the
other. The conditions required by the principle of demand
and supply are fulfilled, and the two commodities will con-



128 BOOK III. CHAPTER XVIII. § 2.

tinue to be interchanged, as we supposed them to be, in the
ratio of 17 yards of linen for 10 yards of cloth.

“ But our suppositions might have been different. Sup-
pose that, at the assumed rate of interchange, England had
been disposed to consume no greater quantity of linen than
800 times 17 yards : it is evident that, at the rate supposed,
this would not have sufficed to pay for the 1000 times
10 yards of cloth which we have supposed Germany to
require at the assumed value. Germany would be able to
procure no more than 800 times 10 yards at that price. To
procure the remaining 200, which she would have no means
of doing but by bidding higher for them, she would offer
more than 17 yards of linen in exchange for 10 yards of
cloth: let us suppose her to offer 18. At that price, perhaps,
England would be inclined to purchase a greater quantity of
linen. She would consume, possibly, at that price, 900 times
18 yards. On the other hand, cloth having risen in price,
the demand of Germany for it would probably have dimi-
nished. If, instead of 1000 times 10 yards, she is now con-
tented with 900 times 10 yards, these will exactly pay for
the 900 times 18 yards of linen which England is willing
to take at the altered price: the demand on each side will
again exactly suffice to take off the corresponding supply;
and 10 yards for 18 will be the rate at which, in both coun-
tries, cloth will exchange for linen.

“ The converse of all this would have happened, if, instead
of 800 times 17 yards, we had supposed that England, at the
rate of 10 for 17, would have taken 1200 times 17 yards of
linen. In this case, it is England whose demand is not fully
supplied ; it is England who, by bidding for more linen, will
alter the rate of interchange to her own disadvantage; and
1 0 yards of cloth will fall, in both countries, below the value
of 17 yards of linen. By this fall of cloth, or what is the
same thing, this rise of linen, the demand of Germany for
cloth will increase, and the demand of England for linen will
diminish, till the rate of interchange has so adjusted itself



INTERNATIONAL VALUES.


129


that the cloth and the linen will exactly pay for one another ;
and when once this point is attained, values will remain
without further alteration.

“ It may be considered, therefore, as established, that
when two countries trade together in two commodities, the
exchange value of these commodities relatively to each other
will adjust itself to the inclinations and circumstances of the
consumers on both sides, in such manner that the quantities
required by each country, of the articles which it imports
from its neighbour, shall be exactly sufficient to pay for one
another. As the inclinations and circumstances of consumers
cannot be reduced to any rule, so neither can the propor-
tions in which the two commodities will be interchanged.
We know that the limits within which the variation is con-
fined, are the ratio between their costs of production in the
one country, and the ratio between their costs of production
in the other. Ten yards of cloth cannot exchange for more
than 20 yards of linen, nor for less than 15. But they may
exchange for afiy intermediate number. The ratios, there-
fore, in which the advantage of the trade may be divided
between the two nations, are various. The circumstances on
which the proportionate share of each country more remotely
depends, admit only of a very general indication.

“ It is even possible to conceive an extreme case, in which
the whole of the advantage resulting from the interchange
would be reaped by one party, the other country gaining
nothing at all. There is no absurdity in the hypothesis
that, of some given commodity, a certain quantity is all that
is wanted at any price; and that, when that quantity is ob-
tained, no fall in the exchange value would induce other
consumers to come forward, or those who are already sup-
plied, to take more. Let us suppose that this is the case in
Germany with cloth. Before her trade with England com-
menced, when 10 yards of cloth cost her as much labour as
20 yards of linen, she nevertheless consumed as much cloth
as she wanted under any circumstances, and, if she could

VOL. II, K



130 BOOK III. CHAPTER XVIII. § 2.

obtain it at the rate of 10 yards of cloth for 15 of linen, she
would not consume more. Let this fixed quantity be 1000
times 10 yards. At the rate, however, of 10 for 20, England
would want more linen than would be equivalent to this
quantity of cloth. She would, consequently, offer a higher
value for linen; or, what is the same thing, she would offer
her cloth at a cheaper rate. But, as by no lowering of the
value could she prevail on Germany to take a greater quan-
tity of cloth, there would be no limit to the rise of linen or
fall of cloth, until the demand of England for linen was
reduced by the rise of its value, to the quantity which 1000
times 10 yards of cloth would purchase. It might be, that
to produce this diminution of the demand a less fall would
not suffice than that which would make 10 yards of cloth
exchange for 15 of linen. Germany would then gain the
whole of the advantage, and England would be exactly as
she was before the trade commenced. It would be for the
interest, however, of Germany herself to keep her linen a
little below the value at which it could be produced in Eng-
land, in order to keep herself from being supplanted by the
home producer. England, therefore, would always benefit
in some degree by the existence of the trade, though it might
be in a very trifling one.”

In this statement, I conceive, is contained the first ele-
mentary principle of International Values. I have, as is
indispensable in such abstract and hypothetical cases, sup-
posed the circumstances to be much less complex than they
really are: in the first place, by suppressing the cost of
carriage; next, by supposing that there are only two coun-
tries trading together; and lastly, that they trade only in
two commodities. To render the exposition of the principle
complete, it is necessary to restore the various circumstances
thus temporarily left out to simplify the argument. Those
who are accustomed to any kind of scientific investigation
will probably see, without formal proof, that the introduction
of these circumstances cannot alter the theory of the subject.



INTERNATIONAL VALUES.


131


Trade among any number of countries, and in any number of
commodities, must take place on the same essential principles
as trade between two countries and in two commodities.
Introducing a greater number of agents precisely similar,
cannot change the law of their action, no more than putting
additional weights into the two scales of a balance alters the
law of gravitation. It alters nothing but the numerical
results. For more complete satisfaction, however, we will
enter into the complex cases with the same particularity with
which we have stated the simpler one.

§ 3. First, let us introduce the element of cost of car-
riage. The chief difference will then be, that the cloth and
the linen will no longer exchange for each other at precisely
the same rate in both countries. Linen, having to be carried
to England, will be dearer there by its cost of carriage; and
cloth will be dearer in Germany by the cost of carrying it
from England. Linen, estimated in cloth, will be dearer in
England than in Germany, by the cost of carriage of both
articles: and so will cloth in Germany, estimated in linen.
Suppose that the cost of carriage of each is equivalent to one
yard of linen; and suppose that, if they could have been
carried without cost, the terms of interchange would have
been 10 yards of cloth for 17 of linen. It may seem at first
that each country will pay its own cost of carriage ; that is,
the carriage of the article it imports; that in Germany 10
yards of cloth will exchange for 1 8 of linen, namely, the ori-
ginal 17, and 1 to cover the cost of carriage of the cloth;
while in England, 10 yards of cloth will only purchase 16 of
linen, 1 yard being deducted for the cost of carriage of the
linen. This, however, cannot be affirmed with certainty; it
will only be true, if the linen which the English consumers
would take at the price of 10 for 16, exactly pays for the
cloth which the German consumers would take at 10 for 1 8.
The values, whatever they are, must establish this equili-
brium. No absolute rule, therefore, can be laid down for the

K 2



132 BOOK ITI. CHAPTER XVIII. § 4.

division of the cost, no more than for the division of the
advantage: and it does not follow that in whatever ratio the
one is divided, the other will be divided in the same. It is
impossible to say, if the cost of carriage could be annihilated,
whether the producing or the importing country would be
most benefited. This would depend on the play of interna-
tional demand.

Cost of carriage has one effect more. But for it, every
commodity would, (if trade be supposed free) be either regu-
larly imported or regularly exported. A country would make
nothing for itself which it did not also make for other coun-
tries. But in consequence of cost of carriage there are many
things, especially bulky articles, which every, or almost every
country produces within itself. After exporting the things in
which it can employ itself most advantageously, and import-
ing those in which it is under the greatest disadvantage, there
are many lying between, of which the relative cost of pro-
duction in that and in other countries differs so little, that the
cost of carriage would absorb more than the whole saving in
cost of production which would be obtained by importing one
and exporting another. This is the case with numerous
commodities of common consumption; including the coarser
qualities of many articles of food and manufacture, of which
the finer kinds are the subject of extensive international traffic.

§ 4. Let us now introduce a greater number of commo-
dities than the two we have hitherto supposed. Let cloth
and linen, however, be still the articles of which the compa-
rative cost of production in England and in Germany differs
the most; so that if they were confined to two commodities,
these would be the two which it would be most their interest
to exchange. We will now again omit cost of carriage,
which, having been shown not to affect the essentials of the
question, does but embarrass unnecessarily the statement of it.
Let us suppose, then, that the demand of England for linen is
either so much greater than that of Germany for cloth, or so



INTERNATIONAL VALUES.


133


much more extensible by cheapness, that if England had no
commodity but cloth which Germany would take, the demand
of England would force up the terms of interchange to 10
yards of cloth for only 16 of linen, so that England would
gain only the difference between 15 and 16, Germany the
difference between 16 and 20. But let us now suppose that
England has also another commodity, say iron, which is in
demand in Germany, and that the quantity of iron which is
of equal value in England with 10 yards of cloth, (let us call
this quantity a hundred weight) will, if produced in Ger-
many, cost as much labour as 18 yards of linen, so that if
offered by England for 17, it will undersell the German
producer. In these circumstances, linen will not be forced up
to the rate of 16 yards for 10 of cloth, but will stop, suppose
at 17; for although, at that rate of interchange, Germany
will not take enough cloth to pay for all the linen required by
England, she will take iron for the remainder, and it is the
same thing to England whether she gives a hundred weight
of iron or 10 yards of cloth, both being made at the same
cost. If we now superadd coals or cottons on the side of
England, and wine, or corn, or timber, on the side of
Germany, it will make no difference in the principle. The
exports of each country must exactly pay for the imports;
meaning now the aggregate exports and imports, not those of
particular commodities taken singly. The produce of fifty
days English labour, whether in cloth, coals, iron, or any other
exports, will exchange for the produce of forty, or fifty, or
sixty days German labour, in linen, wine, corn, or timber,
according to the international demand. There is some
proportion at which the demand of the two countries for each
other's products will exactly correspond; so that the things
supplied by England to Germany will be completely paid for,
and no more, by those supplied by Germany to England.
This accordingly will be the ratio in which the produce of
English and the produce of German labour will exchange for
one another.



134


BOOK III. CHAPTER XVIII. § 4.

If, therefore, it be asked what country draws to itself the
greatest share of the advantage of any trade it carries on, the
answer is, the country for whose productions there is in other
countries the greatest demand, and a demand the most sus-
ceptible of increase from additional cheapness. In so far as
the productions of any country possess this property, the
country obtains all foreign commodities at less cost. It gets
its imports cheaper, the greater the intensity of the demand in
foreign countries for its exports. It also gets its imports
cheaper, the less the extent and intensity of its own demand
for them. The market is cheapest to those whose demand is
small. A country which desires few foreign productions, and
only a limited quantity of them, while its own commodities
are in great request in foreign countries, will obtain its limited
imports at extremely small cost, that is, in exchange for the
produce of a very small quantity of its labour and capital.

Lastly, having introduced more than the original two
commodities into the hypothesis, let us also introduce more
than the original two countries. After the demand of Eng-
land for the linen of Germany has raised the rate of inter-
change to 1 0 yards of cloth for 16 of linen, suppose a trade
opened between England and some other country which also
exports linen. And let us suppose that if England had no
trade but with this third country, the play of international
demand would enable her to obtain from it, for 10 yards of
cloth or its equivalent, 17 yards of linen. She evidently
would not go on buying linen from Germany at the former
rate: Germany would be undersold, and must consent to
give 1 7 yards, like the other country. In this case, the cir-
cumstances of production and of demand in the third country
are supposed to be in themselves more advantageous to Eng-
land than the circumstances of Germany; but this supposition
is not necessary : we might suppose that if the trade with
Germany did not exist, England would be obliged to give to
the other country the same advantageous terms which she
gives to Germany; 10 yards of cloth for 16, or even less than



INTERNATIONAL VALUES.


135


16, of linen. Even so, the opening of the third country
makes a great difference in favour of England. There is now
a double market for English exports, while the demand of
England for linen is only what it was before. This neces-
sarily obtains for England more advantageous terms of inter-
change. The two countries, requiring much more of her
produce than was required by either alone, must, in order to
obtain it, force an increased demand for their exports, by
offering them at a lower value.

It deserves notice, that this effect in favour of England
from the opening of another market for her exports, will
equally be produced even though the country from which the
demand comes should have nothing to sell which England is
willing to take. Suppose that the third country, though
requiring cloth or iron from England, produces no linen, nor
any other article which is in demand there. She however
produces exportable articles, or she would have no means of
paying for imports : her exports, though not suitable to the
English consumer, can find a market somewhere. As we are
only supposing three countries, we must assume her to find
this market in Germany, and to pay for what she imports
from England by orders on her German customers. Ger-
many, therefore, besides having to pay for her own imports,
now owes a debt to England on account of the third country,
and the means for both purposes must be derived from her
exportable produce. She must therefore tender that produce
to England on terms sufficiently favourable to force a demand
equivalent to this double debt. Everything will take place
precisely as if the third country had bought German produce
with her own goods, and offered that produce to England in
exchange for hers. There is an increased demand for
English goods, for which German goods have to furnish the
payment; and this can only be done by forcing an increased
demand for them in England, that is, by lowering their value.
Thus an increase of demand for a country's exports in any
foreign country, enables her to obtain more cheaply even



136


BOOK III. CHAPTER XVIII. § 5.

those imports which she procures from other quarters. And
conversely, an increase of her own demand for any foreign
commodity compels her, cceterid paribus , to pay dearer for all
foreign commodities.

The law which we have now illustrated, may be appro-
priately named, the Equation of International Demand.
It may be concisely stated as follows. The produce of a
country exchanges for the produce of other countries, at such
values as are required in order that the whole of her exports
may exactly pay for the whole of her imports. This law of
International Values is but an extension of the more general
law of Value, which we called the Equation of Supply and
Demand.* We have seen that the value of a commodity
always so adjusts itself as to bring the demand to the exact
level of the supply. But all trade, either between nations or
individuals, is an interchange of commodities, in which the
things that they respectively have to sell, constitute also
their means of purchase: the supply brought by the one
constitutes his demand for what is brought by the other. So
that supply and demand are but another expression for reci-
procal demand : and to say that value will adjust itself so as
to equalize demand with suppiy, is in fact to say that it will
adjust itself so as to equalize the demand on one side with the
demand on the other.

§ 5. To trace the consequences of this law of Inter-
national Values through their wide ramifications, would
occupy more space than can be here devoted to such a pur-
pose. But there is one of its applications which I will notice,
as being in itself not unimportant, as bearing on the question
which will occupy us in the next chapter, and especially as
conducing to the more full and clear understanding of the
law itself.

We have seen that the value at which a country purchases


Supra, book iii. chap, ii, § 4.



INTERNATIONAL VALUES.


137


a foreign commodity, does not conform to the cost of pro-
duction in the country from which the commodity comes.
Suppose now a change in that cost of production; an im-
provement, for example, in the process of manufacture. Will
the benefit of the improvement be fully participated in by
other countries? Will the commodity be sold as much
cheaper to foreigners, as it is produced cheaper at home?
This question, and the considerations which must be entered
into in order to resolve it, are well adapted to try the worth
of the theory.

Let us first suppose, that the improvement is of a nature
to create a new branch of export : to make foreigners resort
to the country for a commodity which they had previously
produced at home. On this supposition, the foreign demand
for the productions of the country is increased ; which neces-
sarily alters the international values to its advantage, and to
the disadvantage of foreign countries, who, therefore, though
they participate in the benefit of the new product, must
purchase that benefit by paying for all the other productions
of the country at a dearer rate than before. How much
dearer, will depend on the degree necessary for re-establishing,
under these new conditions, the Equation of International
Demand. These consequences follow in a very obvious
manner from the law of international values, and I shall
not occupy space in illustrating them, but shall pass to
the more frequent case, of an improvement which does
not create a new article of export, but lowers the cost
of production of something which . the country alreadv ex-
ported.

It being advantageous, in discussions of this complicated
nature, to employ definite numerical amounts, we shall
return to our original example. Ten yards of cloth, if pro-
duced in Germany, would require the same amount of labour
and capital as twenty yards of linen ; but, by the play of in-
ternational demand, they can be obtained from England for
seventeen. Suppose now, that by a mechanical improvement



138 BOOK III. CHAPTER XVIIT. § 5.

made in Germany, and not capable of being transferred to
England, the same quantity of labour and capital which pro-
duced twenty yards of linen, is enabled to produce thirty.
Linen falls one-third in value in the German market, as
compared with other commodities produced in Germany.
Will it also fall one-third as compared with English cloth,
thus giving to England, in common with Germany, the full
benefit of the improvement? Or (ought we not rather to
say), since the cost to England of obtaining linen was not
regulated by the cost to Germany of producing it, and since
England, accordingly, did not get the entire benefit even of
the twenty yards which Germany could have given for ten
yards of cloth, but only obtained seventeen — why should she
now obtain more, merely because this theoretical limit is
removed ten degrees further off?

It is evident that in the outset, the improvement will
lower the value of linen in Germany, in relation to all other
commodities in the German market, including, among the
rest, even the imported commodity, cloth. If 10 yards of
cloth previously exchanged for 17 yards of linen, they will
now exchange for half as much more, or 25£ yards. But
whether they will continue to do so, will depend on the
effect which this increased cheapness of linen produces
on the international demand. The demand for linen in
England could scarcely fail to be increased. But it might
be increased either in proportion to the cheapness, or in a
greater proportion than the cheapness, or in a less propor-
tion.

If the demand was increased in the same proportion with
the cheapness, England would take as many times 25 £ yards
of linen, as the number of times 17 yards which she took
previously. She would expend in linen exactly as much of
cloth, or of the equivalents of cloth, as much in short of the
collective income of her people, as she did before. Germany
on her part, would probably require, at that rate of inter-
change, the same quantity of cloth as before, because it would



INTERNATIONAL VALUES.


139


in reality cost her exactly as much; 25 ^ yards of linen being
now of the same value in her market, as 17 yards were
before. In this case, therefore, 10 yards of cloth for 2 5£ of
linen is the rate of interchange which under these new con-
ditions would restore the equation of international demand;
and England would obtain linen one-third cheaper than
before, being the same advantage as was obtained by Ger-
many.

It might happen, however, that this great cheapening of
linen would increase the demand for it in England in a greater
ratio than the increase of cheapness ; and that if she before
wanted 1000 times 17 yards, she would now require more
than 1000 times 25 \ yards to satisfy her demand. If so, the
equation of international demand cannot establish itself at
that rate of interchange ; to pay for the linen England must
offer cloth on more advantageous terms: say, for example,
10 yards for 21 of linen; so that England will not have the
full benefit of the improvement in the production of linen,
while Germany, in addition to that benefit, will also pay less
for cloth. But again, it is possible that England might not
desire to increase her consumption of linen in even so great
a proportion as that of the increased cheapness; she might
not desire so great a quantity as 1000 times 25| yards: and.
in that case Germany must force a demand, by offering more
than 25^ yards of linen for 10 of cloth; linen will be cheap-
ened in England in a still greater degree than in Germany ;
while Germany will obtain cloth on more unfavourable terms,
and at a higher exchange value than before.

After what has already been said, it is not necessary to
particularize the manner in which these results might be
modified by introducing into the hypothesis other countries
and other commodities. There is a further circumstance by
which they may also be modified. In the case supposed, the
consumers of Germany have had a part of their incomes set
at liberty by the increased cheapness of linen, which they
may indeed expend in increasing their consumption of that



140 BOOK III. CHAPTER XVIII. § 6.

article, but which they may, likewise, expend in other arti-
cles, and among others, in cloth or other imported com-
modities. This would be an additional element in the inter-
national demand, and would modify more or less the terms of
interchange.

Of the three possible varieties in the influence of cheap-
ness on demand, which is the more probable — that the demand
would be increased more than the cheapness, as much as the
cheapness, or less than the cheapness ? This depends on the
nature of the particular commodity, and on the tastes of pur-
chasers. When the commodity is one in general request, and
the fall of its price brings it within the reach of a much larger
class of incomes than before, the demand is often increased
in a greater ratio than the fall of price, and a larger sum of
money is on the whole expended in the article. Such was
the case with coffee, when its price was lowered by successive
reductions of taxation ; and such would probably be the case
with sugar, wine, and a large class of commodities which,
though not necessaries, are largely consumed, and in which
many consumers indulge when the articles are cheap and
economize when they are dear. But it more frequently
happens that when a commodity falls in price, less money is
spent in it than before : a greater quantity is consumed, but
not so great a value. The consumer who saves money by
the cheapness of the article, will be likely to expend part of
the saving in increasing his consumption of other things : and
unless the low price attracts a large class of new purchasers
who were either not consumers of the article at all, or only in
small quantity and occasionally, a less aggregate sum will be
expended on it. Speaking generally, therefore, the third of
our three cases is the most probable : and an improvement in
an exportable article is likely to be as beneficial, (if not more
beneficial,) to foreign countries, as to the country where the
article is produced.


§ 6. Thus far had the theory of international values



INTERNATIONAL VALUES.


141


been carried in the first and second editions of this work.
But intelligent criticisms, and subsequent further investiga-
tion, have shown that the doctrine stated in the preceding
pages, though correct as far as it goes, is not yet the com-
plete theory of the subject matter.

It has been shown that the exports and imports between
the two countries (or, if we suppose more than two, between
each country and the world) must in the aggregate pay for
each other, and must therefore be exchanged for one another
at such values as will be compatible with the equation of
international demand. That this, however, does not furnish
the complete law of the phenomenon, appears from the fol-
lowing consideration : that several different rates of interna-
tional value may all equally fulfil the conditions of this law.

The supposition was, that England could produce 10
yards of cloth with the same labour as 15 of linen, and
Germany with the same labour as 20 of linen; that a trade
was opened between the two countries; that England
thenceforth confined her production to cloth, and Germany
to linen ; and, that if 1 0 yards of cloth should thenceforth
exchange for 17 of linen, England and Germany would
exactly supply each other's demand: that, for instance, if
England wanted at that price 17,000 yards of linen, Germany
would want exactly the 10,000 yards of cloth, which, at that
price, England would be required to give for the linen.
Under these suppositions it appeared, that 10 cloth for 17
linen, would be in point of fact, the international values.

But it is quite possible that some other rate, such as 10
cloth for 18 linen, might also fulfil the conditions of the
equation of international demand. Suppose that at this last
rate, England would want more linen than at the rate of 10
for 17, but not in the ratio of the cheapness; that she would
not want the 18,000 which she could now buy with 10,000
yards of cloth, but would be content with 1 7,500, for which
she would pay (at the new rate of 10 for 18) 9722 yards of
cloth. Germany, again, having to pay dearer for cloth than



142 BOOK III. CHAPTER XVIII. § 7.

when it could be bought at 10 for 17, would probably reduce
her consumption to an amount below 10,000 yards, perhaps
to the very same number, 9722. Under these conditions
the Equation of International Demand would still exist.
Thus, the rate of 10 for 17, and that of 10 for 18, would
equally satisfy the Equation of Demand: and many other
rates of interchange might satisfy it in like manner. It is
conceivable that the conditions might be equally satisfied by
every numerical rate which could be supposed. There is
still therefore a portion of indeterminateness in the rate at
which the international values would adjust themselves;
showing that the whole of the influencing circumstances
cannot yet have been taken into the account.

§ 7. It will be found that to supply this deficiency, we
must take into consideration not only, as we have already
done, the quantities demanded in each country, of the im-
ported commodities; but also the extent of the means of
supplying that demand, which are set at liberty in each
country by the change in the direction of its industry.

To illustrate this point it will be necessary to choose
more convenient numbers than those which we have hitherto
employed. Let it be supposed that in England 100 yards
of cloth, previously to the trade, exchanged for 100 of linen,
but that in Germany 100 of cloth exchanged for 200 of
linen. When the trade was opened, England would supply
cloth to Germany, Germany linen to England, at an ex-
change value which would depend partly on the element
already discussed, viz. the comparative degree in which, in
the two countries, increased cheapness operates in increas-
ing the demand; and partly on some other element not yet
taken into account. In order to isolate this unknown
element, it will be necessary to make some definite and
invariable supposition in regard to the known element. Let
us therefore assume, that the influence of cheapness on
demand conforms to some simple law, common to both



INTERNATIONAL VALUES.


143


countries and to both commodities. As the simplest and
most convenient, let us suppose that in both countries any
given increase of cheapness produces an exactly propor-
tional increase of consumption : or, in other words, that the
value expended in the commodity, the cost incurred for the
sake of obtaining it, is always the same, whether that cost
affords a greater or a smaller quantity of the commodity.

Let us now suppose that England, previously to the
trade, required a million of yards of linen, which were worth,
at the English cost of production, a million yards of cloth.
By turning all the labour and capital with which that linen
was produced, to the production of cloth, she would produce
for exportation a million yards of cloth. Suppose that this
is the exact quantity which Germany is accustomed to con-
sume. England can dispose of all this cloth in Germany at
the German price ; she must consent indeed to take a little
less until she has driven the German producer from the
market, but as soon as this is effected, she can sell her
million of cloth for two millions of linen; being the quantity
that the German clothiers are enabled to make, by trans-
ferring their whole labour and capital from cloth to linen.
Thus England would gain the whole benefit of the trade,
and Germany nothing. This would be perfectly consistent
with the equation of international demand : since England
(according to the hypothesis in the preceding paragraph)
now requires two millions of linen (being able to get them
at the same cost at which she previously obtained only one),
while the prices in Germany not being altered, Germany
requires as before exactly a million of cloth, and can obtain
it by employing the labour and capital set at liberty from
the production of cloth, in producing the two millions of linen
required by England.

Thus far we have supposed that the additional cloth
which England could make, by transferring to cloth the
whole of the capital previously employed in making linen,
was exactly sufficient to supply the whole of Germany's



144 BOOK III. CHAPTER XVIII. § 7.

existing demand. But suppose next that it is more than
sufficient. Suppose that while England could make with
her liberated capital a million yards of cloth for exporta-
tion, the cloth which Germany had heretofore required was

800.000 yards only, equivalent at the German cost of pro-
duction to 1,600,000 yards of linen. England therefore
could not dispose of a whole million of cloth in Germany at
the German prices. Yet she wants, whether cheap or dear
(by our supposition), as much linen as can be bought for a
million of cloth: and since this can only be obtained from
Germany, or by the more expensive process of production at
home, the holders of the million of cloth will be forced by
each other's competition to offer it to Germany on any terms
(short of the English cost of production) which will induce
Germany to take the whole. What terms these would be,
the supposition we have made enables us exactly to define.
The 800,000 yards of cloth which Germany consumed, cost
her the equivalent of 1,600,000 linen, and that invariable
cost is what she is willing to expend in cloth, whether the
quantity it obtains for her be more or less. England there-
fore, to induce Germany to take a million of cloth, must offer
it for 1,600,000 of linen. The international values will thus
be 100 cloth for 160 linen, intermediate between the ratio of
the costs of production in England and that of the costs of
production in Germany: and the two countries will divide
the benefit of the trade, England gaining in the aggregate

600.000 yards of linen, and Germany being richer by 200,000
additional yards of cloth.

Let us now stretch the last supposition still farther, and
suppose that the cloth previously consumed by Germany
was not only less than the million yards which England is
enabled to furnish by discontinuing her production of linen,
but less in the full proportion of England's advantage in the
production, that is, that Germany only required half a mil-
lion. In this case, by ceasing altogether to produce cloth,
Germany can add a million, but a million only, to her pro-



INTERNATIONAL VALUES.


145


duction of linen, and this million being the equivalent of what
the half million previously cost her, is all that she can be
induced by any degree of cheapness to expend in cloth.
England will be forced by her own competition to give a
whole million of cloth for this million of linen, just as she
was forced in the preceding case to give it for 1,600,000.
But England could have produced at the same cost a million
yards of linen for herself. England therefore derives in this
case, no advantage from the international trade. Germany
gains the whole; obtaining a million of cloth instead of half
a million, at what the half million previously cost her.
Germany, in short, is, in this third case, exactly in the same
situation as England was in the first case; which may easily
be verified by reversing the figures.

As the general result of the three cases, it may be laid
down as a theorem, that under the supposition we have made
of a demand exactly in proportion to the cheapness, the law
of international value will be as follows: —

The whole of the cloth which England can make with
the capital previously devoted to linen, will exchange for
the whole of the linen which Germany can make with the
capital previously devoted to cloth.

Or, still more generally,

The whole of the commodities which the two countries
can respectively make for exportation, with the labour and
capital thrown out of employment by importation, will ex-
change against one another.

This law, and the three different possibilities arising from
it in respect to the division of the advantage, may be con-
veniently generalized by means of algebraical symbols, as
follows : —

Let the quantity of cloth which England can make with
the labour and capital withdrawn from the production of
linen, be = n .

Let the cloth previously required by Germany (at the
German cost of production) be = m.

VOL. II. L



146 BOOK III. CHAPTER XVIII. § 7.

Then n of cloth will always exchange for exactly 2m of linen.

Consequently if n = m, the whole advantage will be on the
side of England.

If n = 2m, the whole advantage will be on the side of
Germany.

If n be greater than m, but less than 2m, the two coun-
tries will share the advantage; England getting 2m of linen
where she before got only n; Germany getting n of cloth
where she before got only m.

It is almost superfluous to observe that the figure 2 stands
where it does, only because it is the figure which expresses
the advantage of Germany over England in linen as esti-
mated in cloth, and (what is the same thing) of England
over Germany in cloth as estimated in linen. If we had
supposed that in Germany, before the trade, 100 of cloth
exchanged for ] 000 instead of 200 of linen, then n (after the
trade commenced) would have exchanged for 10m instead
of 2m. If instead of 1000 or 200 we had supposed only

150, n would have exchanged for only -^m. If (in fine) the
cost value of cloth (as estimated in linen) in Germany, ex-
ceeds the cost value similarly estimated in England, in the
ratio of p to q , then will n, after the opening of the trade,

exchange for ^ m.*


* It may be asked, why we have supposed the number n to have as its
extreme limits, m and 2 m (or ~m) ? why may not n be less than m, or greater
than 2 m; and if so, what will be the result?

This we shall now examine, and when we do so it will appear that n is
always, practically speaking, confined within these limits.

Suppose for example that n is less than m; or, reverting to our former
figures, that the million yards of cloth, which England can make, will not
satisfy the whole of Germany’s pre-existing demand ; that demand being (let
us suppose) for 1,200,000 yards. It would then, at first sight, appear that
England would supply Germany with cloth up to the extent of a million ; that
Germany would continue to supply herself with the remaining 200,000 by
home production ; that this portion of the supply would regulate the price of
the whole; that England therefore would be able permanently to sell her



INTERNATIONAL VALUES.


147


§ 8. We have now arrived at what seems a law of Inter-
national Values, of great simplicity and generality. But we
have done so by setting out from a purely arbitrary hypo-
thesis respecting the relation between demand and cheapness.
We have assumed their relation to be fixed, though it is
essentially variable. We have supposed that every increase
of cheapness produces an exactly proportional extension of
demand; in other words, that the same invariable value is
laid out in a commodity whether it be cheap or dear; and
the law which we have investigated holds good only on this
hypothesis, or some other practically equivalent to it. Let
us now, therefore, combine the two variable elements of the
question, the variations of each of which we have considered
separately. Let us suppose the relation between demand
and cheapness to vary, and to become such as would prevent
the rule of interchange laid down in the last theorem from
satisfying the conditions of the Equation of International


million of cloth at the German cost of production (viz. for two millions of linen)
and would gain the whole advantage of the trade, Germany being no better off
than before.

That such, however, would not be the practical result, will soon be
evident. The residuary demand of Germany for 200,000 yards of cloth
furnishes a resource to England for purposes of foreign trade of which it is
still her interest to avail herself ; and though she has no more labour and
capital which she can withdraw from linen for the production of this extra
quantity of cloth, there must be some other commodities in which Germany
has a relative advantage over her (though perhaps not so great as in linen) :
these she will now import, instead of producing, and the labour and capital
formerly employed in producing them will be transferred to cloth, until the
required amount is made up. If this transfer just makes up the 200,000 and
no more, this augmented n will now be equal to m; England will sell the
whole 1,200,000 at the German values ; and will still gain the whole advantage
of the trade. But if the transfer makes up more than the 200,000, England
will have more cloth than 1,200,000 yards to offer; n will become greater
than m , and England must part with enough of the advantage to induce Ger-
many to take the surplus. Thus the case which seemed at first sight to be
beyond the limits, is transformed practically into a case either coinciding with
one of the limits or between them. And so with every other case which can be
supposed.

L 2



148 BOOK III. CHAPTER XVIII. § 8 .

Demand. Let it be supposed, for instance, that the demand
of England for linen is exactly proportional to the cheapness,
but that of Germany for cloth, not proportional. To revert
to the second of our three cases, the case in which England
by discontinuing the production of linen could produce for
exportation a million yards of cloth, and Germany by ceasing
to produce cloth could produce an additional 1,600,000
yards of linen. If the one of these quantities exactly ex-
changed for the other, the demand of England would on our
present supposition be exactly satisfied, for she requires all
the linen which can be got for a million yards of cloth : but
Germany perhaps, though she required 800,000 cloth at
a cost equivalent to 1,600,000 linen, yet when she can get
a million of cloth at the same cost, may not require the
whole million ; or may require more than a million. First,
let her not require so much; but only as much as she can
now buy for 1,500,000 linen. England will still offer a
million for these 1,500,000; but even this may not induce
Gerjnany to take so much as a million ; and if England con-
tinues to expend exactly the same aggregate cost on linen
whatever be the price, she will have to submit to take for her
million of cloth any quantity of linen (not less than a million)
which may be requisite to induce Germany to take a million
of cloth. Suppose this to be 1,400,000 yards. England
has now reaped from the trade a gain not of 600,000 but
only of 400,000 yards; while Germany, besides having ob-
tained an extra 200,000 yards of cloth, has obtained it with
only seven-eighths of the labour and capital which she pre-
viously expended in supplying herself with cloth, and may
expend the remainder in increasing her own consumption of
linen, or of any other commodity.

Suppose on the contrary that Germany, at the rate of a
million cloth for 1,600,000 linen, requires more than a
million yards of cloth. England having only a million which
she can give without trenching upon the quantity she pre-
viously reserved for herself, Germany must bid for the extra



INTERNATIONAL VALUES.


149


cloth at a higher rate than 160 for 100, until she reaches a
rate (say 170 for 100) which will either bring down her own
demand for cloth to the limit of a million, or else tempt
England to part with some of the cloth she previously con-
sumed at home.

Let us next suppose that the proportionality of demand
to cheapness, instead of holding good in one country but not
in the other, does not hold good in either country, and that
the deviation is of the same kind in both; that for instance,
neither of the two increases its demand in a degree equiva-
lent to the increase of cheapness. On this supposition, at the
rate of one million cloth for 1,600,000 linen, England will
not want so much as 1,600,000 linen, nor Germany so much
as a million cloth : and if they fall short of that amount in
exactly the same degree; if England only wants linen to the
amount of nine-tenths of 1,600,000 (1,440,000), and Ger-
many only nine hundred thousand of cloth, the interchange
will continue to take place at the same rate. And so if
England wants a tenth more than 1,600,000, and Germany a
tenth more than a million. This coincidence (which, # it is
to be observed, supposes demand to extend cheapness in a
corresponding, but not in an equal degree*) evidently could
not exist unless by mere accident : and in any other case,
the equation of international demand would require a different
adjustment of international values.

The only general law, then, which can be laid down, is
this. The values at which a country exchanges its produce
with foreign countries depend on two things : first, on the
amount and extensibility of their demand for its commodities,
compared with its demand for theirs ; and secondly, on the


* The increase of demand from 800,000 to 900,000, and that from a million
to 1,440,000, are neither equal in themselves, nor bear an equal proportion to
the increase of cheapness. Germany’s demand for cloth has increased one-
eighth, while the cheapness is increased one-fourth. England’s demand for
linen is increased 44 per cent, while the cheapness is increased 00 per cent.



150 BOOK III. CHAPTER XVIII. § 9.

capital which it has to spare, from the production of domestic
commodities for its own consumption. The more the foreign
demand for its commodities exceeds its demand for foreign
commodities, and the less capital it can spare to produce for
foreign markets, compared with what foreigners spare to pro-
duce for its markets, the more favourable to it will be the terms
of interchange : that is, the more it will obtain of foreign
commodities in return for a given quantity of its own.

But these two influencing circumstances are in reality
reducible to one: for the capital which a country has to
spare from the production of domestic commodities for its
own use, is in proportion to its own demand for foreign com-
modities : whatever proportion of its collective income it ex-
pends in purchases from abroad, that same proportion of its
capital is left without a home market for its productions.
The new element, therefore, which for the sake of scientific
correctness we have introduced into the theory of interna-
tional values, does not seem to make any very material
difference in the practical result. It still appears to me,
that the countries which carry on their foreign trade on the
most advantageous terms, are those whose commodities are
most in demand by foreign countries, and which have them-
selves the least demand for foreign commodities. From
which, among other consequences, it follows, that the richest
■countries, cceteris paribus , gain the least by a given amount
of foreign commerce : since, having a greater demand for
commodities generally, they are likely to have a greater
demand for foreign commodities, and thus modify the terms
of interchange to their own disadvantage. Their aggregate
gains by foreign trade, doubtless, are generally greater than
those of poorer countries, since they carry on a greater amount
of such trade, and gain the benefit of cheapness on a larger
consumption : but their gain is less on each individual article
consumed.

§ 9. We now pass to another essential part of the theory



INTERNATIONAL VALUES.


151


of the subject. There are two senses in which a country
obtains commodities cheaper by foreign trade; in the sense
of Value, and in the sense of Cost. It gets them cheaper in
the first sense, by their falling in value relatively to other
things: the same quantity of them exchanging, in the coun-
try, for a smaller quantity than before of the other produce of
the country. To revert to our original figures; in England,
all consumers of linen obtained, after the trade was opened,
17 or some greater number of yards for the same quantity of
all other things for which they before obtained only 15. The
degree of cheapness, in this sense of the term, depends on the
laws of International Demand, so copiously illustrated in the
preceding sections. But in the other sense, that of Cost, a
country gets a commodity cheaper, when it obtains a greater
quantity of the commodity with the same expenditure of labour
and capital. In this sense of the term, cheapness in a great
measure depends upon a cause of a different nature : a coun-
try gets its imports cheaper, in proportion to the general
productiveness of its domestic industry; to the general effi-
ciency of its labour. The labour of one country may be, as
a whole, much more efficient than that of another; all or
most of the commodities capable of being produced in both,
may be produced in one at less absolute cost than in the
other; which, as we have seen, will not necessarily prevent
the two countries from exchanging commodities. The things
which the more favoured country will import from others,
are of course those in which it is least superior; but by im-
porting them it acquires, even in those commodities, the same
advantage which it possesses in the articles it gives in ex-
change for them. Thus the countries which obtain their
own productions at least cost, also get their imports at least
cost.

This will be made still more obvious if we suppose two
competing countries. England sends cloth to Germany, and
gives ten yards of it for 17 yards of linen, or for something
else which in Germany is the equivalent of those 17 yards.



152


BOOK III. CHAPTER XVIII. § 9 .


Another country, as for example France, does the same.
The one giving 10 yards of cloth for a certain quantity of
German commodities, so must the other: if, therefore, in
England, these 10 yards are produced by only half as much
labour as that by which they are produced in France, the linen
or other commodities of Germany will cost to England only
half the amount of labour which they will cost to France.
England would thus obtain her imports at less cost than
France, in the ratio of the greater efficiency of her labour in
the production of cloth : which might be taken, in the case
supposed, as an approximate estimate of the efficiency of
her labour generally; since France, as well as England, by
selecting cloth as her article of export, would have shown
that with her also it was the commodity in which labour
was relatively the most efficient. It follows, therefore, that
every country gets its imports at less cost, in proportion to
the general efficiency of its labour.

This proposition was first clearly seen and expounded by
Mr. Senior,* but only as applicable to the importation of the
precious metals. I think it important to point out that the
proposition holds equally true of all other imported commo-
dities; and further, that it is only a portion of the truth.
For, in the case supposed, the cost to England of the linen
which she pays for with ten yards of cloth, does not depend
solely upon the cost to herself of ten yards of cloth, but
partly also upon how many yards of linen she obtains in
exchange for them. What her imports cost to her is a func-
tion of two variables; the quantity of her own commodities
which she gives for them, and the cost of those commodities.
Of these, the last only depends on the efficiency of her
labour: the first depends on the law of international values;
that is, on the intensity and extensibility of the foreign de-
mand for her commodities, compared with her demand for
foreign commodities.


* Three Lectures on the Cost of Obtaining Money.


INTERNATIONAL VALUES.


153


In the case just now supposed of a competition between
England and France, the state of international values affected
both competitors alike, since they were supposed to trade
with the same country, and to export and import the same
commodities. The difference, therefore, in what their imports
cost them, depended solely on the other cause, the unequal
efficiency of their labour. They gave the same quantities;
the difference could only be in the cost of production. But
if England traded to Germany with cloth, and France with
iron, the comparative demand in Germany for those two
commodities would bear a share in determining the compa-
rative cost, in labour and capital, with which England and
France would obtain German products. If iron were more
in demand in Germany than cloth, France would recover,
through that channel, part of her disadvantage ; if less, her
disadvantage would be increased. The efficiency, therefore,
of a country's labour, is not the only thing which determines
even the cost at which that country obtains imported com-
modities — while it has no share whatever in determining
either their exchange value , or, as we shall presently see,
their price.



CHAPTER XIX.


OF MONEY, CONSIDERED AS AN IMPORTED COMMODITY.

§ 1. The degree of progress which we have now made in
the theory of Foreign Trade, puts it in our power to supply
what was previously deficient in our view of the theory of
Money; and this, when completed, will in its turn enable us
to conclude the subject of Foreign Trade.

Money, or the material of which it is composed, is, in
Great Britain, and in most other countries, a foreign com-
modity. Its value and distribution must therefore be regulated,
not by the law of value which obtains in adjacent places, but
by that which is applicable to imported commodities — the law
of International Values.

In the discussion into which we are now about to enter, I
shall use the terms Money and the Precious Metals indiscri-
minately. This may be done without leading to any error;
it having been shown that the value of money, when it con-
sists of the precious metals, or of a paper currency con-
vertible into them on demand, is entirely governed by the
value of the metals themselves : from which it never perma-
nently differs, except by the expense of coinage when this is
paid by the individual and not by the state.

Money is brought into a country in two different ways.
It is imported (chiefly in the form of bullion) like any other
merchandize, as being an advantageous article of commerce.
It is also imported in its other character of a medium of
exchange, to pay some debt due to the country, either for
goods exported or on any other account. There are other
ways in which it may be introduced casually; these are the
two in which it is received in the ordinary course of business,



MONEY AS AN IMPORTED COMMODITY.


155


and which determine its value. The existence of these two
distinct modes in which money flows into a country, while
other commodities are habitually introduced only in the first
of these modes, occasions somewhat more of complexity and
obscurity than exists in the case of other commodities, and
for this reason only is any special and minute exposition
necessary.

§ 2. In so far as the precious metals are imported in the
ordinary way of commerce, their value must depend on the
same causes, and conform to the same laws, as the value of
any other foreign production. It is in this mode chiefly that
gold and silver diffuse themselves from the mining countries
into all other parts of the commercial world. They are the
staple commodities of those countries, or at least are among
their great articles of regular export; and are shipped on
speculation, in the same manner as other exportable commo-
dities. The quantity, therefore, which a country (say Eng-
land) will give of its own produce, for a certain quantity of
bullion, will depend, if we suppose only two countries and
two commodities, upon the demand in England for bullion,
compared with the demand in the mining country (which we
will call Brazil) for what England has to give. They must
exchange in such proportions as will leave no unsatisfied
demand on either side, to alter values by its competition.
The bullion required by England must exactly pay for the
cottons or other English commodities required by Brazil. If,
however, we substitute for this simplicity the degree of com-
plication which really exists, the equation of international
demand must be established not between the bullion wanted
in England and the cottons or broadcloth wanted in Brazil,
but between the whole of the imports of England and the
whole of her exports. The demand in foreign countries for
English products, must be brought into equilibrium with the
demand in England for the products of foreign countries; and
all foreign commodities, bullion among the rest, must be



156 BOOK III. CHAPTER XIX. § 2 .

exchanged against English products in such proportions, as
will, by the effect they produce on the demand, establish this
equilibrium.

There is nothing in the peculiar nature or uses of the pre-
cious metals, which should make them an exception to the
general principles of demand. So far as they are wanted for
purposes of luxury or the arts, the demand increases with the
cheapness, in the same irregular way as the demand for any
other commodity. So far as they are required for money, the
demand increases with the cheapness in a perfectly regular
way, the quantity needed being always in inverse proportion
to the value. This is the only real difference, in respect to
demand, between money and other things; and for the pre-
sent purpose it is a difference altogether immaterial.

Money, then, if imported solely as a merchandize, will,
like other imported commodities, be of lowest value in the
countries for whose exports there is the greatest foreign de-
mand, and which have themselves the least demand for
foreign commodities. To these two circumstances it is how-
ever necessary to add two others, which produce their effect
through cost of carriage. The cost of obtaining bullion is
compounded of two elements ; the goods given to purchase it,
and the expense of transport: of which last, the bullion
countries will bear a part, (though an uncertain part,) in the
adjustment of international values. The expense of transport
is partly that of carrying the goods to the bullion countries,
and partly that of bringing back the bullion; both these
items are influenced by the distance from the mines; and the
former is also much affected by the bulkiness of the goods.
Countries whose exportable produce consists of the finer
manufactures, obtain bullion, as well as all other foreign
articles, cceteris paribus, at less expense than countries which
export nothing but bulky raw produce.

To be quite accurate, therefore, we must say — The coun-
tries whose exportable productions are most in demand
abroad, and contain greatest value in smallest bulk, which are



MONEY AS AN IMPORTED COMMODITY.


157


nearest to the mines, and which have least demand for foreign
productions, are those in which money will be of lowest
value, or in other words, in which prices will habitually range
the highest. If we are speaking not of the value of money,
but of its cost, (that is, the quantity of the country's labour
which must be expended to obtain it,) we must add to these
four conditions of cheapness a fifth condition, namely, “whose
productive industry is the most efficient." This last, however,
does not at all affect the value of money, estimated in com-
modities: it affects the general abundance and facility with
which all things, money and commodities together, can be
obtained.

Although, therefore, Mr. Senior is right in pointing out
the great efficiency of English labour as the chief cause why
the precious metals are obtained at less cost by England than
by most other countries, I cannot admit that it at all accounts
for their being of less value ; for their going less far in the
purchase of commodities. This, in so far as it is a fact, and
not an illusion, must be occasioned by the great demand in
foreign countries for the staple commodities of England, and
the generally unbulky character of those commodities, com-
pared with the corn, wine, timber, sugar, wool, hides, tallow,
hemp, flax, tobacco, raw cotton &c., which form the exports
of other commercial countries. These two causes will ac-
count for a somewhat higher range of general prices in Eng-
land than elsewhere, notwithstanding the counteracting influ-
ence of her own great demand for foreign commodities. I
am, however, strongly of opinion that the high prices of com-
modities, and low purchasing power of money in England,
are more apparent than real. Food, indeed, is somewhat
dearer; and food composes so large a portion of the expen-
diture when the income is small and the family large, that to
such families England is a dear country. Services, also, of
most descriptions, are dearer than in the other countries of
Europe, from the less costly mode of living of the poorer
classes on the Continent. But manufactured commodities



158


BOOK III. CHAPTER XIX. § 3.

(except most of those in which good taste is required) are
decidedly cheaper; or would be so, if buyers would be con-
tent with the same quality of material and of workmanship.
What is called the dearness of living in England, is mainly an
affair not of necessity but of foolish custom ; it being thought
imperative by all classes in England above the condition of a
day-labourer, that the things they consume should either be of
the same quality with those used by much richer people, or at
least should be as nearly as possible undistinguishable from
them in outward appearance.

§ 3. From the preceding considerations, it appears that
those are greatly in error who contend that the value of
money, in countries where it is an imported commodity, must
be entirely regulated by its value in the countries which pro-
duce it; and cannot be raised or lowered in any permanent
manner unless some change has taken place in the cost of
production at the mines. On the contrary, any circumstance
which disturbs the equation of international demand with
respect to a particular country, not only may, but must,
affect the value of money in that country — its value at the
mines remaining the same. The opening of a new branch
of export trade from England; an increase in the foreign
demand for English products, either by the natural course
of events or by the abrogation of duties; a check to the
demand in England for foreign commodities, by the laying on
of import duties in England or of export duties elsewhere ;
these and all other events of similar tendency, would make
the imports of England (bullion and other things taken toge-
ther) no longer an equivalent for the exports; and the coun-
tries which take her exports would be obliged to offer their
commodities, and bullion among the rest, on cheaper terms,
in order to re-establish the equation of demand: and thus
England would obtain money cheaper, and would acquire
a generally higher range of prices. Incidents the reverse of
these would produce effects the reverse — would reduce prices;



MONEY AS AN IMPORTED COMMODITY.


159


or, in other words, raise the value of the precious metals. It
must be observed, however, that money would be thus raised
in value only with respect to home commodities : in relation
to all imported articles it would remain as before, since their
values would be affected in the same way and in the same
degree with its own. A country which, from any of the
causes mentioned, gets money cheaper, obtains all its other
imports cheaper likewise.

It is by no means necessary that the increased demand
for English commodities, which enables England to supply
herself with bullion at a cheaper rate, should be a demand in
the mining countries. England might export nothing what-
ever to those countries, and yet might be the country which
obtained bullion from them on the lowest terms, provided
there were a sufficient intensity of demand in other foreign
countries for English goods, which would be paid for circuit-
ously, with gold and silver from the mining countries. The
whole of its exports are what a country exchanges against the
whole of its imports, and not its exports and imports to and
from any one country ; and the general foreign demand for
its productions will determine what equivalent it must give
for imported goods, in order to establish an equilibrium be-
tween its sales and purchases generally; without regard to
the maintenance of a similar equilibrium between it and any
country singly.



CHAPTER XX.


OF THE FOREIGN EXCHANGES.

§ 1. We have thus far considered the precious metals as
a commodity, imported like other commodities in the com-
mon course of trade, and have examined what are the cir-
cumstances which would in that case determine their value.
But those metals are also imported in another character, that
which belongs to them as a medium of exchange; not as an
article of commerce, to be sold for money, but as themselves
money, to pay a debt, or effect a transfer of property. It
remains to consider whether the liability of gold and silver to
be transported from country to country for such purposes, in
any way modifies the conclusions we have already arrived at,
or places those metals under a different law of value from
that to which, in common with all other imported commo-
dities, they would be subject if international trade were an
affair of direct barter.

Money is sent from one country to another for various
purposes : such as the payment of tributes or subsidies ;
remittances of revenue to or from dependencies, or of rents
or other incomes to their absent owners ; emigration of capital,
or transmission of it for foreign investment. The most usual
purpose, however, is that of payment for goods. To show
in what circumstances money actually passes from country to
country for this or any of the other purposes mentioned, it
is necessary briefly to state the nature of the mechanism by
which international trade is carried on, when it takes place
not by barter but through the mediurii of money.

§ 2. In practice, the exports and imports of a country
not only are not exchanged directly against each other, but



THE FOREIGN EXCHANGES.


161


often do not even pass through the same hands. Each is
separately bought and paid for with money. We have seen,
however, that, even in the same country, money does not
actually pass from hand to hand each time that purchases are
made with it, and still less does this happen between different
countries. The habitual mode of paying and receiving pay-
ment for commodities, between country and country, is by
bills of exchange.

A merchant in England, A, has exported English commo-
dities, consigning them to his correspondent B in France.
Another merchant in France, C, has exported French com-
modities, suppose of equivalent value, to a merchant D in
England. It is evidently unnecessary that B in France should
send money to A in England, and that D in England should
send an equal sum of money to C in France. The one debt
may be applied to the payment of the other, and the double
cost and risk of carnage be thus saved. A draws a bill on
B for the amount which B owes to him : D, having an equal
amount to pay in France, buys this bill from A, and sends it
to C, who, at the expiration of the number of days which the
bill has to run, presents it to B for payment. Thus the debt
due from France to England, and the debt due from England
to France, are both paid without sending an ounce of gold or
silver from one country to the other.

In this statement, however, it is supposed, that the sum
of the debts due from France to England, and the sum of
those due from England to France, are equal; that each
country has exactly the same number of ounces of gold or
silver to pay and to receive. This implies, (if we exclude
for the present any other international payments than those
occurring in the course of commerce,) that the exports and
imports exactly pay for one another, or in other words, that
the equation of international demand is established. When
such is the fact, the international transactions are liquidated
without the passage of any money from one country to the
other. But if there is a greater sum due from England to
VOL. II. M



16 a


BOOK III. CHAPTER XX. § 2 .

France, than is due from France to England, or vice vevsd y the
debts cannot be simply written off against one another. After
the one has been applied, as far as it will go, towards covering
the other, the balance must be transmitted in the precious
metals. In point of fact, the merchant who has the amount
to pay, will even then pay for it by a bill. When a person
has a remittance to make to a foreign country, he does not
himself search for some one who has money to receive from
that country, and ask him for a bill of exchange. In this, as
in other branches of business, there is a class of middlemen
or brokers, who bring buyers and sellers together, or stand
between them, buying bills from those who have money to
receive, and selling bills to those who have money to pay.
When a customer comes to a broker for a bill on Paris or
Amsterdam, the broker sells to him, perhaps the bill he may
himself have bought that morning from a merchant, perhaps
a bill on his own correspondent in the foreign city : and to
enable his correspondent to pay, when due, all the bills he
has granted, he remits to him all those which he has bought
and has not resold. In this manner these brokers take upon
themselves the whole settlement of the pecuniary trans-
actions between distant places, being remunerated by a
small commission or percentage on the amount of each bill
which they either sell or buy. Now, if the brokers find that
they are asked for bills on the one part, to a greater amount
than bills are offered to them on the other, they do not on
this account refuse to give them; but since, in that case,
they have no means of enabling the correspondents on whom
their bills are drawn, to pay them when due, except by
transmitting part of the amount in gold or silver, they
require from those to whom they sell bills an additional
price, sufficient to cover the freight and insurance of the gold
and silver, with a profit sufficient t6 compensate them for
their trouble and for the temporary occupation of a portion
of their capital. This premium (as it is called) the buyers
are willing to pay, because they must otherwise go to the



THE FOREIGN EXCHANGES.


163


expense of remitting the precious metals themselves, and
it is done cheaper by those who make doing it a part of
their especial business. But though only some of those
who have a debt to pay would have actually to remit money,
all will be obliged, by each other's competition, to pay the
premium; and the brokers are for the same reason obliged
to pay it to those whose bills they buy. The reverse of
all this happens, if, on the comparison of exports and im-
ports, the country, instead of having a balance to pay, has
a balance to receive. The brokers find more bills offered to
them, than are sufficient to cover those which they are re-
quired to grant. Bills on foreign countries consequently
fall to a discount; and the competition among the brokers,
which is exceedingly active, prevents them from retaining
this discount as a profit for themselves, and obliges them to
give the benefit of it to those who buy the bills for purposes
of remittance.

Let us suppose that all countries had the same currency,
as in the progress of political improvement they one day will
have : and, as the most familiar to the reader, though not the
best, let us suppose this currency to be the English. When
England had the same number of pounds sterling to pay to
France, which France had to pay to her, one set of merchants
in England would want bills, and another set would have bills
to dispose of, for the very same number of pounds sterling;
and consequently a bill on France for 100Z. would sell for
exactly 100Z., or, in the phraseology of merchants, the
exchange would be at par. As France also, on this supposi-
tion, would have an equal number of pounds sterling to pay
and to receive, bills on England would be at par in France,
whenever bills on France were at par in England.

If, however, England had a larger sum to pay to France
than to receive from her, there would be persons requiring
bills on France for a greater number of pounds sterling than
there were bills drawn by persons to whom money was due.
A bill on France for 100Z. would then sell for more than 100Z.-

M 2



164


BOOK III. CHAPTER XX. § &.

and bills would be said to be at a premium. The premium,
however, could not exceed the cost and risk of making the
remittance in gold, together with a trifling profit; because
if it did, the debtor would send the gold itself, in preference
to buying the bill.

If, on the contrary, England had more money to receive
from France than to pay, there would be bills offered for a
greater number of pounds than were wanted for remittance,
and the price of bills would fall below par: a bill for 100Z.
might be bought for somewhat less than 100Z., and bills
would be said to be at a discount.

When England has more to pay than to receive, France
has more to receive than to pay, and vice versa. When,
therefore, in England, bills on France bear a premium, then,
in France, bills on England are at a discount: and when
bills on France are at a discount in England, bills on England
are at a premium in France. If they are at par in either
country, they are so, as we have already seen, in both.

Thus do matters stand between countries, or places, which
have the same currency. So much of barbarism, however,
still remains in the transactions of the most civilized nations,
that almost all independent countries choose to assert their
nationality by having, to their own inconvenience and that
of their neighbours, a peculiar currency of their own. To our
present purpose this makes no other difference, than that
instead of speaking of equal sums of money, we have to
speak of equivalent sums. By equivalent sums, when both
currencies are composed of the same metal, are meant sums
which contain exactly the same quantity of the metal, in
weight and fineness; but when, as in the case of France and
England, the metals are different, what is meant is that the
quantity of gold in the one sum, and the quantity of silver in
the other, are of the same value in the general market of the
world: there being no material difference between one place
and another in the relative value of these metals. Suppose
25 francs to be (as within a trifling fraction it is) the equiva-



THE FOREIGN EXCHANGES.


105


lent of a pound sterling. The debts and credits of the two
countries would be equal, when the one owed as many times
25 francs, as the other owed pounds. When this was the
case, a bill on France for 2500 francs would be worth in
England 100 J., and a bill on England for lOOi. would be
worth in France 2500 francs. The exchange is then said to
be at par: and 25 francs (in reality 25 francs and a trifle
more) is called the par of exchange with France. When
England owed to France more than the equivalent of what
France owed to her, a bill for 2500 francs would be at a
premium, that is, would be worth more than lOOi. When
France owed to England more than the equivalent of what
England owed to France, a bill for 2500 francs would be
worth less than 100Z., or would be at a discount.

When bills on foreign countries are at a premium, it is
customary to say that the exchanges are against the country,
or unfavourable to it. In order to understand these phrases,
we must take notice of what “ the exchange” in the language
of merchants, really means. It means the power which
the money of the country has of purchasing the money of
other countries. Supposing 25 francs to be the exact par of
exchange, then when it requires more than 100£. to buy a
bill for 2500 francs, 100£. of English money are worth less
than their real equivalent of French money: and this is
called, an exchange unfavourable to England. The only
persons in England, however, to whom it is really unfavour-
able, are those who have money to pay in France; for they
come into the bill market as buyers, and have to pay a
premium : but to those who have money to receive in France,
the same state of things is favourable; for they come as
sellers and receive the premium. The premium, however,
indicates that a balance is due by England, which must be
eventually liquidated in the precious metals; and since,
according to the old theory, the benefit of a trade consisted
in bringing money into the country, this prejudice introduced
the practice of calling the exchange favourable when it indi-



166


•BOOK III. CHAPTER XX. § 3.

cated a balance to receive, and unfavourable when it indi-
cated one to pay: and the phrases in turn tended to main-
tain the prejudice.

§ 3. It might be supposed at first sight that when the
exchange is unfavourable, or in other words, when bills are
at a premium, the premium must always amount to a full
equivalent for the cost of transmitting money: since, as there
is really a balance to pay, and as the full cost must therefore
be incurred by some of those who have remittances to make,
their competition will compel all to submit to an equivalent
sacrifice. And such would certainly be the case, if it were
always necessary that whatever is destined to be paid should
be paid immediately. The expectation of great and imme-
diate foreign payments sometimes produces a most startling
effect on the exchanges.* But a small excess of imports above
exports, or any other small amount of debt to be paid to
foreign countries, does not usually affect the exchanges to the
full extent of the cost and risk of transporting bullion. The
length of credit allowed, generally permits, on the part of
some of the debtors, a postponement of payment, and in the
mean time the balance may turn the other way, and restore
the equality of debts and credits without any actual trans-


* On the news of Bonaparte’s landing from Elba, the price of bills ad-
vanced in one day as much as ten per cent. Of course this premium was not
a mere equivalent for cost of carriage, since the freight of such an article as
gold, even with the addition of war insurance, could never have amounted to
so much. This great price was an equivalent not for the difficulty of sending
gold, but for the anticipated difficulty of procuring it to send ; the expectation
being that there would be such immense remittances to the Continent in sub-
sidies and for the support of armies, as would press hard on the stock of
bullion in the country (which was then entirely denuded of specie), and this,
too, in a shorter time than would allow of its being replenished. Accordingly
the price of bullion rose likewise, with the same suddenness. It is hardly
necessary to say that this took place during the Bank restriction. In a con-
vertible state of the currency, no such thing could have occurred until the
Bank stopped payment.



THE FOREIGN EXCHANGES.


167


mission of the metals. And this is the more likely to happen,
as there is a self-adjusting power in the variations of the
exchange itself. Bills are at a premium because a greater
money value has been imported than exported. But the
premium is itself an extra profit to those who export. Besides
the price they obtain for their goods, they draw for the
amount and gain the premium. It is, on the other hand, a
diminution of profit to those who import. Besides the price
of the goods, they have to pay a premium for remittance.
So that what is called an unfavourable exchange is an encou-
ragement to export, and a discouragement to import. And
if the balance due is of small amount, and is the consequence
of some merely casual disturbance in the ordinary course of
trade, it is soon liquidated in commodities, and the account
adjusted by means of bills, without the transmission of any
bullion. Not so, however, when the excess of imports above
exports, which has made the exchange unfavourable, arises
from a permanent cause. In that case, what disturbed the
equilibrium must have been the state of prices, and it can
only be restored by acting on prices. It is impossible that
prices should be such as to invite to an excess of imports,
and yet that the exports should be kept permanently up to
the imports by the extra profit on exportation derived from
the premium on bills ; for if the exports were kept up to the
imports, bills would not be at a premium, and the extra profit
would not exist. It is through the prices of commodities that
the correction must be administered.

Disturbances, therefore, of the equilibrium of imports and
exports, and consequent disturbances of the exchange, may
be considered as of two classes ; the one casual or accidental,
which, if not on too large a scale, correct themselves through
the premium on bills, without any transmission of the pre-
cious metals; the other arising from the general state of
prices, which cannot be corrected without the subtraction of
actual money from the circulation of one of the countries, or
an annihilation of credit equivalent to it, since the mere



1C8


BOOK III. CHAPTER XX. § 3.

transmission of bullion (as distinguished from money), not
having any effect on prices, is of no avail to abate the cause
from which the disturbance proceeded.

It remains to observe, that the exchanges do not depend
on the balance of debts and credits with each country sepa-
rately, but with all countries taken together. England may
owe a balance of payments to France; but it does not follow
that the exchange with France will be against England, and
that bills on France will be at a premium; because a balance
may be due to England from Holland or Hamburg, and she
may pay her debt to France with bills on those places; which
is technically called arbitration of exchange. There is some
little additional expense, partly commission and partly loss of
interest, in settling debts in this circuitous manner, and to
the extent of that small difference the exchange with one
country may vary apart from that with others; but in the
main, the exchanges with all foreign countries vary together,
according as the country has a balance to receive or to pay on
the general result of its foreign transactions.



CHAPTER XXI.


OF THE DISTRIBUTION OF THE PRECIOUS METALS THROUGH
THE COMMERCIAL WORLD.

§ 1. Having now examined the mechanism by which
the commercial transactions between nations are actually con-
ducted, we have next to inquire whether this mode of con-
ducting them makes any difference in the conclusions respect-
ing international values, which we previously arrived at on the
hypothesis of barter.

The nearest analogy would lead us to presume the nega-
tive. We did not find that the intervention of money and its
substitutes made any difference in the law of value as applied
to adjacent places. Things which would have been equal in
value if the mode of exchange had been by barter, are worth
equal sums of money. The introduction of money is a mere
addition of one more commodity, of which the value is
regulated by the same laws as that of all other commodities.
We shall not be surprised, therefore, if we find that inter-
national values also are determined by the same causes
under a money and bill system, as they would be under a
system of barter; and that money has little to do in the
matter, except to furnish a convenient mode of comparing
values.

All interchange is, in substance and effect, barter: who-
ever sells commodities for money, and with that money buys
other goods, really buys those goods with his own commodi-
ties. And so of nations: their trade is a mere exchange
of exports for imports; and whether money is employed or
not, things are only in their permanent state when the ex-
ports and imports exactly pay for each other. When this is
the case, equal sums of money are due from each country to



170 BOOK III. CHAPTER XXI. § 1 .

the other, the debts are settled by bills, and there is no
balance to be paid in the precious metals. The trade is in a
state like that which is called in mechanics a condition of
stable equilibrium.

But the process by which things are brought back to
this state when they happen to deviate from it, is, at least
outwardly, not the same in a barter system and in a money
system. Under the first, the country which wants more im-
ports than its exports will pay for, must offer its exports at a
cheaper rate, as the sole means of creating a demand for
them sufficient to re-establish the equilibrium. When
money is used, the country seems to do a thing totally dif-
ferent. She takes the additional imports at the same price
as before, and as she exports no equivalent, the balance of
payments turns against her; the exchange becomes unfavour-
able, and the difference has to be paid in money. This is
in appearance a very distinct operation from the former.
Let us see if it differs in its essence, or only in its
mechanism.

Let the country which has the balance to pay be Eng-
land, and the country which receives it, France. By this
transmission of the precious metals, the quantity of the cur-
rency is diminished in England, and increased in France.
This I am at liberty to assume. As we shall see hereafter,
it would be a very erroneous assumption if made in regard to
all payments of international balances. A balance which
has only to be paid once, such as the payment made for an
extra importation of corn in a season of dearth, may be paid
from hoards, or from the reserves of bankers, without acting
on the circulation. But we are now supposing that there is
an excess of imports over exports, arising from the fact that
the equation of international demand is not yet established :
that there is at the ordinary prices a permanent demand in
England for more French goods than the English goods
required in France at the ordinary prices will pay for. When
this is the case, if a change were not made in the prices,



DISTRIBUTION OP THE PRECIOUS METALS. 171


there would be a perpetually renewed balance to be paid in
money. The imports require to be permanently diminished
or the exports to be increased; which can only be accom-
plished through prices ; and hence, even if the balances are
at first paid from hoards, or by the exportation of bullion,
they will reach the circulation at last, for until they do,
nothing can stop the drain.

When, therefore, the state of prices is such that the
equation of international demand cannot establish itself, the
country requiring more imports than can be paid for by the
exports ; it is a sign that the country has more of the precious
metals or their substitutes, in circulation, than can perma-
nently circulate, and must necessarily part with some of
them before the balance can be restored. The currency is
accordingly contracted: prices fall, and among the rest, the
prices of exportable articles; for which, accordingly, there
arises, in foreign countries, a greater demand: while im-
ported commodities have possibly risen in price, from the
influx of money into foreign countries, and at all events have
not participated in the general fall. But until the increased
cheapness of English goods induces foreign countries to take
a greater pecuniary value, or until the increased dearness
(positive or comparative) of foreign goods makes England
take a less pecuniary value, the exports of England will be
no nearer to paying for the imports than before, and the
stream of the precious metals which had begun to flow out
of England, will still flow on. This efflux will continue, until
the fall of prices in England brings within reach of the
foreign market some commodity which England did not pre-
viously send thither; or until the reduced price of the things
which she did send, has forced a demand abroad for a suffi-
cient quantity to pay for the imports, aided, perhaps, by a
reduction of the English demand for foreign goods, through
their enhanced price, either positive or comparative.

Now this is the very process whioh took place on our
original supposition of barter. Not only, therefore, does the



172


BOOK III. CHATTER XXI. § 1.


trade between nations tend to the same equilibrium between
exports and imports, whether money is employed or not, but
the means by which this equilibrium is established are essen-
tially the same. The country whose exports are not sufficient
to pay for her imports, offers them on cheaper terms, until
she succeeds in forcing the necessary demand : in other words,
the Equation of International Demand, under a money system
as well as under a barter system, is a law of international
trade. Every country exports and imports the very same
things, and in the very same quantity, under the one system
as under the other. In a barter system, the trade gravitates
to the point at which the sum of the imports exactly exchanges
for the sum of the exports: in a money system, it gravitates
to the point at which the sum of the imports and the sum of
the exports exchange for the same quantity of money. And
since things which are equal to the same thing are equal to
one another, the exports and imports which are equal in
money price, would, if money were not used, precisely ex-
change for one another.*


* The subjoined extract from the separate Essay previously referred to, will
give some assistance in following the course of the phenomena. It is adapted
to the imaginary case used for illustration throughout that Essay, the case of a
trade between England and Germany in cloth and linen.

“We may, at first, make whatever supposition we will with respect to the
value of money. Let us suppose, therefore, that before the opening of the
trade, the price of cloth is the same in both countries, namely, six shillings per
yard. As ten yards of cloth were supposed to exchange in England for 15
yards of linen, in Germany for 20, we must suppose that linen is sold in
England at four shillings per yard, in Germany at three. Cost of carriage
and importer’s profit are left, as before, out of consideration.

“In this state of prices, cloth, it is evident, cannot yet be exported from
England into Germany : but linen can be imported from Germany into England.
It will be so ; and, in the first instance, the linen will be paid for in money.

“The efflux of money from England, and its influx into Germany, will
raise money prices in the latter country, and lower them in the former.
Linen will rise in Germany above three shillings per yard, and cloth above
six shillings. Linen in England, being imported from Germany, will (since
cost of carriage is not reckoned) sink to the same price as in that country,



DISTRIBUTION OF THE PRECIOUS METALS. 173


§ 2. It thus appears that the law of international values,
and, consequently, the division of the advantages of trade
among the nations which carry it on, are the same, on the
supposition of money, as they would be in a state of barter.
In international, as in ordinary domestic interchanges, money
is to commerce only what oil is to machinery, or railways to


while cloth will fall below six shillings. As soon as the price of cloth is lower
in England than in Germany, it will begin to be exported, and the price of
cloth in Germany will fall to what it is in England. As long as the cloth
exported does not suffice to pay for the linen imported, money will continue to
flow from England into Germany, and prices generally will continue to fall in
England and rise in Germany. By the fall, however, of cloth in England,
cloth will fall in Germany also, and the demand for it will increase. By the
rise of linen in Germany, linen must rise in England also, and the demand for
it will diminish. As cloth fell in price and linen rose, there would be some
particular price of both articles at which the cloth exported and the linen im-
ported would exactly pay for each other. At this point prices would remain,
because money would then cease to move out of England into Germany.
What this point might be, would entirely depend upon the circumstances and
inclinations of the purchasers on both sides. If the fall of cloth did not much
increase the demand for it in Germany, and the rise of linen did not diminish
very rapidly the demand for it in England, much money must pass before the
equilibrium is restored ; cloth would fall very much, and linen would rise, until
England, perhaps, had to pay nearly as much for it as when she produced it
for herself. But if, on the contrary, the fall of cloth caused a very rapid
increase of the demand for it in Germany, and the rise of linen in Germany
reduced very rapidly the demand in England from what it was under the
influence of the first cheapness produced by the opening of the trade ; the
cloth would very soon suffice to pay for the linen, little money would pass
between the two countries, and England would derive a large portion of the
benefit of the trade. We have thus arrived at precisely the same conclusion,
in supposing the employment of money, which we found to hold under the
supposition of barter.

“ In what shape the benefit accrues to the two nations from the trade is
clear enough. Germany, before the commencement of the trade, paid six
shillings per yard for broadcloth : she now obtains it at a lower price. This,
however, is not the whole of her advantage. As the money-prices of all her
other commodities have risen, the money-incomes of all her producers have
increased. This is no advantage to them in buying from each other, because
the price of what they buy has risen in the same ratio with their means of
paying foi^ it: but it is an advantage to them in buying anything which has
not risen, and, still more, anything which has fallen. They, therefore, benefit



174 BOOK III. CHAPTER XXI. § 2 .

locomotion, a contrivance t o diminish friction . In order still
further to test these conclusions, let us proceed to re-examine,
on the supposition of money, a question which we have
already investigated on the hypothesis of barter, namely, to
what extent the benefit of an improvement in the production


as consumers of cloth, not merely to the extent to which cloth has fallen, but
also to the extent to which other prices have risen. Suppose that this is one-
tenth. The same proportion of their money- incomes as before, will suffice to
supply their other wants ; and the remainder, being increased one-tenth in
amount, will enable them to purchase one-tentli more cloth than before, even
though cloth had not fallen : but it has fallen ; so that they are doubly gainers.
They purchase the same quantity with less money, and have more to expend
upon their other wants.

“ In England, on the contrary, general money-prices have fallen. Linen,
however, has fallen more than the rest, having been lowered in price by im-
portation from a country where it was cheaper; whereas the others have fallen
only from the consequent efflux of money. Notwithstanding, therefore, the
general fall of money-prices, the English producers will be exactly as they were
in all other respects, while they will gain as purchasers of linen.

“ The greater the efflux of money required to restore the equilibrium, the
greater will be the gain of Germany, both by the fall of cloth and by the rise
of her general prices. The less the efflux of money requisite, the greater will
be the gain of England ; because the price of linen will continue lower, and
her general prices will not be reduced so much. It must not, however, be
imagined that high money-prices are a good, and low money-prices an evil, in
themselves. But the higher the general money -prices in any country, the
greater will be that country’s means of purchasing those commodities, which,
being imported from abroad, are independent of the causes which keep prices
high at home.”

In practice, the cloth and the linen would not, as here supposed, be at the
same price in England and in Germany : each would be dearer in money-price
in the country which imported than in that which produced it, by the amount
of the cost of carriage, together with the ordinary profit on the importer’s

capital for the average length of time which elapsed before the commodity
could be disposed of. But it does not follow that each country pays the cost of
carnage of the commodity it imports ; for the addition of this item to the price
may operate as a greater check to demand on one side than on the other ; and
the equation of international demand, and consequent equilibrium of payments,
may not be maintained. Money would then flow out of one country into the
other, until, in the manner already illustrated, the equilibrium was restored :
and, when this was effected, one country would be paying more th&n its own
cost of carriage, and the other less.



DISTRIBUTION OF THE PRECIOUS METALS. 175

of an exportable article, is participated in by tlie countries
importing it.

The improvement may either consist in the cheapening
of some article which was already a staple production of the
country, or in the establishment of some new branch of
industry, or of some process rendering an article exportable
which had not till then been exported at all. It will be con-
venient to begin with the case of a new export, as being
somewhat the simpler of the two.

The first effect is that the article falls in price, and a
demand arises for it abroad. This new exportation disturbs
the balance, turns the exchanges, money flows into the coun-
try (which we shall suppose to be England), and continues
to flow until prices rise. This higher range of prices will
somewhat check the demand in foreign countries for the
new article of export ; and will diminish the demand which
existed abroad for the other things which England was in
the habit of exporting. The exports will thus be diminished;
while at the same time the English public, having more
money, will have a greater power of purchasing foreign com-
modities. If they make use of this increased power of pur-
chase, there will be an increase of imports ; and by this, and
the check to exportation, the equilibrium of imports and ex-
ports will be restored. The result to foreign countries will
be, that they have to pay dearer than before for their other
imports, and obtain the new commodity cheaper than before,
but not so much cheaper as England herself does. I say
this, being well aware that the article would be actually at
the very same price (cost of carriage excepted) in England
and in other countries. The cheapness, however, of the
article is not measured solely by the money-price, but by that
price compared with the money incomes of the consumers.
The price is the same to the English and to the foreign con-
sumers; but the former pay that price from money incomes
which have been increased by the new distribution of the
precious metals ; while the latter have had their money in-



176


BOOK III. CHAPTER XXI. § 2.

comes probably diminished by the same cause. The trade,
therefore, has not imparted to the foreign consumer the whole,
but only a portion, of the benefit which the English consumer
has derived from the improvement ; while England has also
benefited in the prices of foreign commodities. Thus, then,
any industrial improvement which leads to the opening of a
new branch of export trade, benefits a country not only by
the cheapness of the article in which the improvement has
taken place, but by a general cheapening of all imported
products.

Let us now change the hypothesis, and suppose that the
improvement, instead of creating a new export from England,
cheapens an existing one. When we examined this case on
the supposition of barter, it appeared to us that the foreign
consumers might either obtain the same benefit from the
improvement as England herself, or a less benefit, or even a
greater benefit, according to the degree in which the con-
sumption of the cheapened article is calculated to extend
itself as the article diminishes in price. The same conclu-
sions will be found true on the supposition of money.

Let the commodity in which there is an improvement, be
cloth. The first effect of the improvement is that its price
falls, and there is an increased demand for it in the foreign
market. But this demand is of uncertain amount. Suppose
the foreign consumers to increase their purchases in the exact
ratio of the cheapness, or in other words, to lay out in cloth
the same sum of money as before ; the same aggregate pay-
ment as before will be due from foreign countries to England ;
the equilibrium of exports and imports will remain undis-
turbed, and foreigners will obtain the full advantage of the
increased cheapness of cloth. But if the foreign demand for
cloth is of such a character as to increase in a greater ratio
than the cheapness, a larger sum than formerly will be due to
England for cloth, and when paid will raise English prices,
the price of cloth included ; this rise, however, will affect
only the foreign purchaser, English incomes being raised in a



DISTRIBUTION OF THE PRECIOUS METALS. 177


corresponding proportion; and the foreign consumer will
thus derive a less advantage than England from the improve-
ment. If, on the contrary, the cheapening of cloth does not
extend the foreign demand for it in a proportional degree, a
less sum of debts than before will be due to England for cloth,
while there will be the usual sum of debts due from England
to foreign countries; the balance of trade will turn against
England, money will be exported, prices (that of cloth in-
cluded) will fall, and cloth will eventually be cheapened
to the foreign purchaser in a still greater ratio, than the
improvement has cheapened it to England. These are the
very conclusions which we deduced on the hypothesis of
barter.

The result of the preceding discussion cannot be better
summed up than in the words of Ricardo.* “Gold and
silver having been chosen for the general medium of circula-
tion, they are, by the competition of commerce, distributed in
such proportions amongst the different countries of the world,
as to accommodate themselves to the natural traffic which
would take place if no such metals existed, and the trade
between countries were purely a trade of barter/' Of this
principle, so fertile in consequences, previous to which the
theory of foreign trade was an unintelligible chaos, Mr.
Ricardo, though he did not pursue it into its ramifications,
was the real originator. No writer who preceded him appears
to have had a glimpse of it: and few are those who even
since his time have had an adequate conception of its
scientific value.

§ 3. It is now necessary to inquire, in what manner this
law of the distribution of the precious metals by means of
the exchanges, affects the exchange value of money itself;
and how it tallies with the law by which we found that the
value of money is regulated when imported as a mere article


* Principles of Political Economy and Taxation, 3rd ed. p. 143.
VOL. II. N


178 BOOK III. CHAPTER XXI. § 3 .

of merchandize. For there is here a semblance of contradic-
tion, which has, I think, contributed more than anything
else to make some distinguished political economists resist
the evidence of the preceding doctrines. Money, they justly
think, is no exception to the general laws of value ; it is a
commodity like any other, and its average or natural value
must depend on the cost of producing, or at least of obtaining
it. That its distribution through the world, therefore, and its
different value in different places, should be liable to be
altered, not by causes affecting itself, but by a hundred causes
unconnected with it ; by everything which affects the trade in
other commodities, so as to derange the equilibrium of ex-
ports and imports ; appears to these thinkers a doctrine alto-
gether inadmissible.

But the supposed anomaly exists only in semblance. The
causes which bring money into or carry it out of a country
through the exchanges to restore the equilibrium of trade,
and which thereby raise its value in some countries and lower
it in others, are the very same causes on which the local value
of money would depend, if it were never imported except as
a merchandize, and never except directly from the mines.
When the value of money in a country is permanently lowered
by an influx of it through the balance of trade, the cause, if it
is not diminished cost of production, must be one of those
causes which compel a new adjustment, more favourable to
the country, of the equation of international demand : namely,
either an increased demand abroad for her commodities, or a
diminished demand on her part for those of foreign countries.
Now an increased foreign demand for the commodities of a
country, or a diminished demand in the country for imported
commodities, are the very causes which, on the general prin-
ciples of trade, enable a country to purchase all imports, and
consequently the precious metals, at a lower value. There is
therefore no contradiction, but the most perfect accordance
in the results of the two different modes in which the precious
metals may be obtained. When money flows from country



DISTRIBUTION OF THE PRECIOUS METALS. 179

to country in consequence of changes in the international
demand for commodities, and by so doing alters its own local
value, it merely realizes, by a more rapid process, the effect
which would otherwise take place more slowly, by an altera-
tion in the relative breadth of the streams by which the
precious metals flow into different regions of the earth from
the mining countries. As therefore we before saw that the
use of money as a medium of exchange does not in the least
alter the law on which the values of other things, either in the
same country or internationally, depend, so neither does it
alter the law of the value of the precious metal itself : and
there is in the whole doctrine of international values as now
laid down, a unity and harmony which is a strong collateral
presumption of truth.

§ 4. Before closing this discussion, it is fitting to point
out in what manner and degree the preceding conclusions
are affected by the existence of international payments not
originating in commerce, and for which no equivalent in
either money or commodities is expected or received ; such
as a tribute, or remittances of rent to absentee landlords or
of interest to foreign creditors, or a government expenditure
abroad, such as England incurs in the management of some
of her colonial dependencies.

To begin with the case of barter. The supposed annual
remittances being made in commodities, and being exports for
which there is to be no return, it is no longer requisite that
the imports and exports should pay for one another : on the
contrary, there must be an annual excess of exports over
imports, equal to the value of the remittance. If, before the
country became liable to the annual payment, foreign com-
merce was in its natural state of equilibrium, it will now be
necessary for the purpose of effecting the remittances, that
foreign countries should be induced to take a greater quantity
of exports than before : which can only be done by offering
those exports on cheaper terms, or in other words, by paying

N 2



180 BOOK III. CHAPTER XXI. § 4 .

dearer for foreign commodities. The international values
will so adjust themselves that either by greater exports, or
smaller imports, or both, the requisite excess on the side of
exports will be brought about ; and this excess will become
the permanent state. The result is, that a country which
makes regular payments to foreign countries, besides losing
what it pays, loses also something more, by the less advan-
tageous terms on which it is forced to exchange its productions
for foreign commodities.

The same results follow on the supposition of money.
Commerce being supposed to be in a state of equilibrium
when the obligatory remittances begin, the first remittance
is necessarily made in money. This lowers prices in the
remitting country, and raises them in the receiving. The
natural effect is that more commodities are exported than
before, and fewer imported, and that, on the score of com-
merce alone, a balance of money will be constantly due from
the receiving to the paying country. When the debt thus
annually due to the tributary country becomes equal to the
annual tribute or other regular payment due from it, no
further transmission of money takes place ; the equilibrium of
exports and imports will no longer exist, but that of payments
will ; the exchange will be at par, the two debts will be set
off against one another, and the tribute or remittance will be
virtually paid in goods. The result to the interests of the
two countries will be as already pointed out: the paying
country will give a higher price for all that it buys from the
receiving country, while the latter, besides receiving the tri-
bute, obtains the exportable produce of the tributary country
at a lower price.



CHAPTER XXII.


INFLUENCE OF THE CURRENCY ON THE EXCHANGES AND ON
FOREIGN TRADE.

§ 1. In our inquiry into the laws of international trade,
we commenced with the principles which determine inter-
national exchanges and international values on the hypothesis
of barter. We next showed that the introduction of money
as a medium of exchange, makes no difference in the laws of
exchanges and of values between country and country, no
more than between individual and individual : since the
precious metals, under the influence of those same laws, dis-
tribute themselves in such proportions among the different
countries of the world, as to allow the very same exchanges to
go on, and at the same values, as would be the case under a
system of barter. We lastly considered how the value of
money itself is affected, by those alterations in the state of
trade which arise from alterations either in the demand and
supply of commodities or in their cost of production. It
remains to consider the alterations in the state of trade which
originate not in commodities but in money.

Gold and silver may vary like other things, though they
are not so likely to vary as other things, in their cost of pro-
duction. The demand for them in foreign countries may
also vary. It may increase, by augmented employment of
the metals for purposes of art and ornament, or because the
increase of production and of transactions has created a
greater amount of business to be done by the circulating
medium. It may diminish, for the opposite reasons; or
from the extension of the economizing expedients by which
the use of metallic money is partially dispensed with. These
changes act upon the trade between other countries and the



182 BOOK III. CHAPTER XXII. § 2.

mining countries, and upon the value of the precious metals,
according to the general laws of the value of imported com-
modities: which have been set forth in the previous chapters
with sufficient fulness.

What I propose to examine in the present chapter, is not
those circumstances affecting money, which alter the perma-
nent conditions of its value; but the effects produced on in-
ternational trade by casual or temporary variations in the
value of money, which have no connexion with any causes
affecting its permanent value. This is a subject of import-
ance, on account of its bearing upon the practical problem
which has excited so much discussion for fifty years past, the
regulation of the currency.

§ 2. Let us suppose in any country a circulating medium
purely metallic, and a sudden casual increase made to it ; for
example, by bringing into circulation hoards of treasure, which
had been concealed in a previous period of foreign invasion or
internal disorder. The natural effect would be a rise of
prices. This would check exports, and encourage imports;
the imports would exceed the exports, the exchanges would
become unfavourable, and the newly-acquired stock of money
would diffuse itself over all countries with which the sup-
posed country carried on trade, and from them, progressively,
through all parts of the commercial world. The money which
thus overflowed would spread itself to an equal depth over
all commercial countries. For it would go on flowing until
the exports and imports again balanced one another: and this
(as no change is supposed in the permanent circumstances of
international demand) could only be, when the money had
diffused itself so equally that prices had risen in the same
ratio in all countries, so that the alteration of price would be
for all practical purposes ineffective, and the exports and im-
ports, though at a higher money valuation, would be exactly
the same as they were originally. This diminished value of
money throughout the world, (at least if the diminution



INFLUENCE OF CURRENCY ON FOREIGN TRADE. 183


was considerable) would cause a suspension, or at least
a diminution, of the annual supply from the mines ;
since the metal would no longer command a value equi-
valent to its highest cost of production. The annual waste
would, therefore, not be fully made up, and the usual causes
of destruction would gradually reduce the aggregate quan-
tity of the precious metals to its former amount; after
which their production would recommence on its former
scale. The discovery of the treasure would thus produce
only temporary effects; namely, a brief disturbance of inter-
national trade until the treasure had disseminated itself
through the world, and then a temporary depression in the
value of the metal, below that which corresponds to the cost
of producing or of obtaining it; which depression would
gradually be corrected, by a temporarily diminished produc-
tion in the producing countries, and importation in the im-
porting countries.

The same effects which would thus arise from the dis-
covery of a treasure, accompany the process by which bank
notes, or any of the other substitutes for money, take the
place of the precious metals. Suppose that England pos-
sessed a currency wholly metallic, of twenty millions ster-
ling, and that suddenly twenty millions of bank notes were
sent into circulation. If these were issued by bankers, they
would be employed in loans, or in the purchase of securities,
and would therefore create a sudden fall in the rate of inte-
rest, which would probably send a great part of the twenty
millions of gold out of the country as capital, to seek a higher
rate of interest elsewhere, before there had been time for any
action on prices. But we will suppose that the notes are not
issued by bankers, or money-lenders of any kind, but by
manufacturers, in the payment of wages and purchase of
materials, or by the government in its ordinary expenses, so
that the whole amount would be rapidly carried into the
markets for commodities. The following would be the na-
tural order of consequences. All prices would rise greatly.



184 BOOK III. CHAPTER XXII. § 2 .

Exportation would almost cease; importation would be pro-
digiously stimulated. A great balance of payments would
become due; the exchanges would turn against England, to
the full extent of the cost of exporting money ; and the sur-
plus coin would pour itself rapidly forth, over the various
countries of the world, in the order of their proximity, geo-
graphically and commercially, to England. The efflux would
continue until the currencies of all countries had come to a
level; by which I do not mean, until money became of the
same value everywhere, but until the differences were only
those which existed before, and which corresponded to per-
manent differences in the cost of obtaining it. When the
rise of prices had extended itself in an equal degree to all
countries, exports and imports would everywhere revert to
what they were at first, would balance one another, and the
exchanges would return to par. If such a sum of money as
twenty millions, when spread over the whole surface of the
commercial world, were sufficient to raise the general level
in a perceptible degree, the effect would be of no long dura-
tion. No alteration having occurred in the general conditions
Under which the metals were procured, either in the world at
large or in any part of it, tlie reduced value would no longer
be remunerating, and the supply from the mines would cease
partially or wholly, until the twenty millions were absorbed;
after which absorption, the currencies of all countries would
be, in quantity and in value, nearly at their original level. I
say nearly, for in strict accuracy there would be a slight dif-
ference. A somewhat smaller annual supply of the precious
metals would now be required, there being in the world
twenty millions less of metallic money undergoing waste.
The equilibrium of payments, consequently, between the
mining countries and the rest of the world, would thenceforth
require that the mining countries should either export rather
more of something else, or import rather less of foreign
commodities ; which implies a somewhat lower range of prices
than previously in the mining countries, and a somewhat



INFLUENCE OF CURRENCY ON FOREIGN TRADE. 185

higher in all others; a scantier currency in the former, and
rather fuller currencies in the latter. This effect, which
would be too trifling to require notice except for the illustra-
tion of a principle, is the only permanent change which
would be produced on international trade, or on the value or
quantity of the currency of any country.

Effects of another kind, however, will have been produced.
Twenty millions which formerly existed in the unproductive
form of metallic money, have been converted into what is, or
is capable of becoming, productive capital. This gain is at
first made by England at the expense of other countries,
who have taken her superfluity of this costly and unpro-
ductive article off her hands, giving for it an equivalent value
in other commodities. By degrees the loss is made up to
those countries by diminished influx from the mines, and
finally the world has gained a virtual addition of twenty mil-
lions to its productive resources. Adam Smith's illustration,
though so well known, deserves for its extreme aptness to be
once more repeated. He* compares the substitution of paper »
in the room of the precious metals, to the construction of a {
highway through the air, by which the ground now occupied
by roads would become available for agriculture. As in that \
case a portion of the soil, so in this a part of the accumulated
wealth of the country, would be relieved from a function in
which it was only employed in rendering other soils and
capitals productive, and would itself become applicable to
production; the office it previously fulfilled being equally
well discharged by a medium which costs nothing.

The value saved to the community by thus dispensing
with metallic money, is a clear gain to those who provide the
substitute. They have the use of twenty millions of circu-
lating medium which have cost them only the expense of an
engraver's plate. If they employ this accession to their
fortunes as productive capital, the produce of the country is
increased and the community benefited, as much as by any
other capital of equal amount. Whether it is so employed



186


BOOK III. CHAPTER XXII. § 2.


or not, depends, in some degree, upon the mode of issuing it.
If issued by the government, and employed in paying off
debt, it would probably become productive capital. The
government, however, may prefer employing this extra-
ordinary resource in its ordinary expenses; may squander it
uselessly, or make it a mere temporary substitute for taxation
to an equivalent amount; in which last case the amount is
saved by the taxpayers at large, who either add it to their
capital or spend it as income. When paper currency is sup-
plied, as in our own country, by bankers and banking com-
panies, the amount is almost wholly turned into productive
capital: for the issuers, being at all times liable to be called
upon to refund the value, are under the strongest induce-
ments not to squander it, and the only cases in which it is
not forthcoming are cases of fraud or mismanagement. A
bankers profession being that of a money-lender, his issue
of notes is a simple extension of his ordinary occupation.
He lends the amount to farmers, manufacturers, or dealers,
who employ it in their several businesses. So employed, it
yields, like any other capital, wages of labour and profits of
stock. The profit is shared between the banker, who receives
interest, and a succession of borrowers, mostly for short
periods, who after paying the interest, gain a profit in addition,
or a convenience equivalent to profit. The capital itself in
the long run becomes entirely wages, and when replaced by
the sale of the produce, becomes wages again; thus affording
a perpetual fund of the value of twenty millions for the
maintenance of productive labour, and increasing the annual
produce of the country by all that can be produced through
the means of a capital of that value. To this gain must be
added a further saving to the country, of the annual supply
of the precious metals necessary for repairing the wear and
tear, and other waste, of a metallic currency.

The substitution, therefore, of paper for the precious
metals, should always be carried as far as is consistent with
safety; no greater amount of metallic currency being retained,



INFLUENCE OF CURRENCY ON FOREIGN TRADE. 187


than is necessary to maintain, both in fact and in public
belief, the convertibility of the paper. A country with the
extensive commercial relations of England, is liable to be
suddenly called upon for large foreign payments, sometimes
in loans, or other investments of capital abroad, sometimes
as the price of some unusual importation of goods, the most
frequent case being that of large importations of food conse-
quent on a bad harvest. To meet such demands it is neces-
sary that there should be, either in circulation or in the
coffers of the banks, coin or bullion to a very considerable
amount, and that this, when drawn out by any emergency,
should be allowed to return after the emergency is past. But
since gold wanted for exportation is almost invariably drawn
from the reserves of the banks, and is never likely to be
taken directly from the circulation while the banks remain
solvent, the only advantage which can be obtained from
retaining partially a metallic currency for daily purposes is,
that the banks may occasionally replenish their reserves
from it.


§ 3. When metallic money had been entirely superseded
and expelled from circulation, by the substitution of an equal
amount of bank notes, any attempt to keep a still further
quantity of paper in circulation must, if the notes are con-
vertible, be a complete failure. The new issue would again
set in motion the same train of consequences by which the
gold coin had already been expelled. The metals would, as
before, be required for exportation, and would be for that
purpose demanded from the banks, to the full extent of the
superfluous notes; which thus could not possibly be retained
in circulation. If, indeed, the notes were inconvertible, there
would be no such obstacle to the increase of their quantity.
An inconvertible paper acts in the same way as a convertible,
while there remains any coin for it to supersede : the differ-
ence begins to manifest itself when all the coin is driven
from circulation (except what may be retained for the con-



188


BQOK III. CHAPTER XXII. § 3.

venience of small change), and the issues still go on increas-
ing. When the paper begins to exceed in quantity the
metallic currency which it superseded, prices of course rise;
things which were worth hi. in metallic money, become worth
6 1. in inconvertible paper, or more, as the case may be. But
this rise of price will not, as in the cases before examined,
stimulate import, and discourage export. The imports and
exports are determined by the metallic prices of things, not
by the paper prices: and it is only when the paper is ex-
changeable at pleasure for the metals, that paper prices and
metallic prices must correspond.

Let us suppose that England is the country which has the
depreciated paper. Suppose that some English production
could be bought, while the currency was still metallic, for hi .,
and sold in France for hi. 10s., the difference covering the
expense and risk, and affording a profit to the merchant. On
account of the depreciation, this commodity will now cost in
England 61 ., and cannot be sold in France for more than
hi. 10s., and yet it will be exported as before. Why? Be-
cause the hi. 10 s. which the exporter can get for it in France,
is not depreciated paper, but gold or silver: and since in
England bullion has risen, in the same proportion with other
things — if the merchant brings the gold or silver to England,
he can sell his hi. 10s. for 61. 12s., and obtain as before 10
per cent for profit and expenses.

It thus appears, that a depreciation of the currency does
not affect the foreign trade of the country: this is carried on
precisely as if the currency maintained its value. But though
the trade is not affected, the exchanges are. When the
imports and exports are in equilibrium, the exchange, in a
metallic currency, would be at par; a bill on France for the
equivalent of five sovereigns, would be worth five. sovereigns.
But five sovereigns, or the quantity of gold contained in them,
having come to be worth in England 6 £., it follows that a bill
on France for hi. will be worth 61. When, therefore, the
real exchange is at par, there will be a nominal exchange



INFLUENCE OF CURRENCY ON FOREIGN TRADE. 189

against the country, of as much per cent as the amount of the
depreciation. If the currency is depreciated 10, 15, or 20 per
cent, then in whatever way the real exchange, arising from
the variations of international debts and credits, may vary,
the quoted exchange will always differ 10, 15, or 20 per cent
from it. However high this nominal premium may be, it
has no tendency to send gold out of the country, for the pur-
pose of drawing a bill against it and profiting by the pre-
mium*; because the gold so sent must be procured, not from
the banks and at par, as in the case of a convertible cur-
rency, but in the market, at an advance of price equal to the
premium. In such cases, instead of saying that the exchange
is unfavourable, it would be a more correct representation to
say that the par has altered, since there is now required a
larger quantity of English currency to be equivalent to the
same quantity of foreign. The exchanges, however, con-
tinue to be computed according to the metallic par. The
quoted exchanges, therefore, when there is a depreciated
currency, are compounded of two elements or factors; the
real exchange, which follows the variations of international
payments, and the nominal exchange, which varies with the
depreciation of the currency, but which, while there is any
depreciation at all, must always be unfavourable. Since the
amount of depreciation is exactly measured by the degree in
which the market price of bullion exceeds the mint valuation,
we have a sure criterion to determine what portion of the
quoted exchange, being referable to depreciation, may be
struck off as nominal ; the result so corrected expressing the
real exchange.

The same disturbance of the exchanges and of interna-
tional trade, which is produced by an increased issue of con-
vertible b$nk notes, is in like manner produced by those
extensions of credit, which, as was so fully shown in a pre-
ceding chapter, have the same effect on prices as an increase
of the currency. "Whenever circumstances have given such
an impulse to the spirit of speculation as to occasion a great



190 BOOK III. CHAPTER XXII. § 3 .

increase of purchases on credit, money prices rise, just as
much as they would have risen if each person who so buys
on credit had bought with money. All the effects, therefore,
must be similar. As a consequence of high prices, exporta-
tion is checked and importation stimulated; though in fact
the increase of importation seldom waits for the rise of prices
which is the consequence of speculation, inasmuch as some of
the great articles of import are usually among the things in
which speculative overtrading first shows itself. There is,
therefore, in such periods, usually a great excess of imports
over exports; and when the time comes at which these must
be paid for, the exchanges become unfavourable, and gold
flows out of the country. In what precise manner this efflux
of gold takes effect on prices, depends on circumstances of
which we shall presently speak more fully; but that its effect
is to make them recoil downwards, is certain and evident.
The recoil, once begun, generally becomes a total rout, and
the unusual extension of credit is rapidly exchanged for an
unusual contraction of it. Accordingly, when credit has been
imprudently stretched, and the speculative spirit carried to
excess, the turn of the exchanges, and consequent pressure
on the banks to obtain gold for exportation, are generally
the proximate cause of the catastrophe. But these phenomena,
though a conspicuous accompaniment, are no essential part,
of the collapse of credit called a commercial crisis; which, as
we formerly showed,* might happen to as great an extent,
and is quite as likely to happen, in a country, if any such
there were, altogether destitute of foreign trade.


Supra, pp. 54 — 6.



CHAPTER XXIII.


OF THE RATE OF INTEREST.

§ 1 . The present seems the most proper place for dis-
cussing the circumstances which determine the rate of interest.
The interest of loans, being really a question of exchange value,
falls naturally into the present division of our subject: and
the two topics of Currency and Loans, though in themselves
distinct, are so intimately blended in the phenomena of what
is called the money market, that it is impossible to understand
the one without the other, and in many minds the two sub-
jects are mixed up in the most inextricable confusion.

In the preceding Book* we defined the relation in which
interest stands to profit. We found that the gross profit of
capital might be distinguished into three parts, which are
respectively the remuneration for risk, for trouble, and for
the capital itself, and may be termed insurance, wages of
superintendence, and interest. After making compensation
for risk, that is, after covering the average losses to which
capital is exposed either by the general circumstances of
society or by the hazards of the particular employment, there
remains a surplus, which partly goes to repay the owner of
the capital for his abstinence, and partly the employer of it
for his time and trouble. How much goes to the one and
how much to the other, is shown by the amount of the remu-
neration which, when the two functions are separated, the
owner of capital can obtain from the employer for its use.
This is evidently a question of demand and supply. Nor
have demand and supply any different meaning or effect in
this case from what they have in all others. The rate of


Supra, book ii. cb. xv. § 1.


192


BOOK III. CHAPTER XXIII. § 2.

interest will be such as to equalize the demand for loans with
the supply of them. It will be such, that exactly as much as
some people are desirous to borrow at that rate, others shall
be willing to lend. If there is more offered than demanded,
interest will fall; if more is demanded than offered, it will
rise ; and in both cases, to the point at which the equation of
supply and demand is re-established.

Both the demand and supply of loans fluctuate more in-
cessantly than any other demand or supply whatsoever. The
fluctuations in other things depend on a limited number of
influencing circumstances; but the desire to borrow, and the
willingness to lend, are more or less influenced by every cir-
cumstance which affects the state or prospects of industry or
commerce, either generally or in any of their branches. The
rate of interest, therefore, on good security, which alone we
have hereto consider (for interest in which considerations of
risk bear a part may swell to any amount) is seldom, in the
great centres of money transactions, precisely the same for
two days together; as is shown by the never-ceasing varia-
tions in the quoted prices of the funds and other negotiable
securities. Nevertheless, there must be, as in other cases of
value, some rate which (in the language of Adam Smith and
Ricardo) may be called the natural rate; some rate about
which the market rate oscillates, and to which it always tends
to return. This rate partly depends on the amount of accu-
mulation going on in the hands of persons who cannot them-
selves attend to the employment of their savings, and partly
on the comparative taste existing in the community for the
active pursuits of industry, or for the leisure, ease, and inde-
pendence of an annuitant.

§ 2. To exclude casual fluctuations, we will suppose
commerce to be in a quiescent condition, no employment
being unusually prosperous, and none particularly distressed.
In these circumstances, the more thriving producers and
traders have their capital fully employed, and many are able



RATE OF INTEREST.


193


to transact business to a considerably greater extent than
they have capital for. These are naturally borrowers; and
the amount which they desire to borrow, and can give
security for, constitutes the demand for loans on account of
productive employment. To these must be added the loans
required by Government, and by landowners* or other unpro-
ductive consumers who have good security to give. This
constitutes the mass of loans for which there is an habitual
demand.

Now it is conceivable that there might exist, in the hands
of persons disinclined or disqualified for engaging personally
in business, a mass of capital equal to, and even exceeding,
this demand. In that case there would be an habitual excess
of competition on the part of lenders, and the rate of interest
would bear a low proportion to the rate of profit. Interest
would be forced down to the point which would either tempt
borrowers to take a greater amount of loans than they had a
reasonable expectation of being able to employ in their
business, or would so discourage a portion of the lenders, as
to make them either forbear to accumulate, or endeavour to
increase their income by engaging in business on their own
account, and incurring the risks, if not the labours, of indus-
trial employment.

On the other hand, the capital owned by persons who
prefer lending it at interest, or whose avocations prevent
them from personally superintending its employment, may
be short of the habitual demand for loans. It may be in
great part absorbed by the investments afforded by the
public debt and by mortgages, and the remainder may not
be sufficient to supply the wants of commerce. If so, the
rate of interest will be raised so high as in some way to re-
establish the equilibrium. When there is only a small dif-
ference between interest and profit, many borrowers may no
longer be willing to increase their responsibilities and involve
their credit for so small a remuneration : or some who would
otherwise have engaged in business, may prefer leisure, and

VOL. II. 0



194 BOOK III. CHAPTER XXIII. § 2 .

become lenders instead of borrowers: or others, under the
inducement of high interest and easy investment for their
capital, may retire from business earlier, and with smaller
fortunes, than they otherwise would have done. Or, lastly,
there is another process by which, in England and other
commercial countries, a large portion of the requisite supply
of loans is obtained. Instead of its being afforded by per-
sons not in business, the affording it may itself become a
business. A portion of the capital employed in trade may
be supplied by a class of professional money lenders. These
money lenders, however, must have more than a mere
interest; they must have the ordinary rate of profit on their
capital, risk and all other circumstances being allowed for.
But it can never answer to any one who borrows for the
purposes of his business, to pay a full profit for capital from
which he will only derive a full profit : and money-lending, as
an employment, for the regular supply of trade, cannot, there-
fore, be carried on except by persons who, in addition to their
own capital, can lend their credit, or, in other words, the
capital of other people: that is, bankers, and persons (such
as bill-brokers) who are virtually bankers, since they receive
money in deposit. A bank which lends its notes, lends
capital which it borrows from the community, and for which
it pays no interest. A bank of deposit lends capital which
it collects from the community in small parcels; sometimes
without paying any interest, as is the case with the London
private bankers; and if, like the Scotch, the joint stock, and
most of the country banks, it does pay interest, it still pays
much less than it receives; for the depositors, who in any
other way could mostly obtain for such small balances no
interest worth taking any trouble for, are glad to receive even
a little. Having this subsidiary resource, bankers are enabled
to obtain, by lending at interest, the ordinary rate of profit
on their own capital. In any other manner, money-lending
could not be carried on as a regular mode of business, except
upon terms on which none would consent to borrow but



RATE OP INTEREST.


195


persons either counting on extraordinary profits, or in urgent
need; unproductive consumers who have exceeded their
means, or merchants in fear of bankruptcy. The disposable
capital deposited in banks, or represented by bank notes,
together with the funds belonging to those who, either from
necessity or preference, live upon the interest of their pro-
perty, constitute the general loan fund of the country: and
the amount of this aggregate fund, when set against the
habitual demands of producers and dealers, and those of
the government and of unproductive consumers, determine
the permanent or average rate of interest ; which must always
be such as to adjust these two amounts to one another.*
But while the whole of this mass of lent capital takes effect
upon the permanent rate of interest, the fluctuations depend
almost entirely upon the portion which is in the hands of
bankers; for it is that portion almost exclusively, which,
being lent for short times only, is continually in the market
seeking an investment. The capital of those who live on
the interest of their own fortunes, has generally sought and
found some fixed investment, such as the public funds,
mortgages, or the bonds of public companies, which invest-
ment, except under peculiar temptations or necessities, is
not changed.

§ 3. Fluctuations in the rate of interest arise from varia-
tions either in the demand for loans, or in the supply. The


* I do not include in the general loan fund of the country the capitals,
large as they sometimes are, which are habitually employed in speculatively
buying and selling the public funds and other securities. It is true, that all
who buy securities add, for the time, to the general amount of money on loan,
and lower pro tanto the rate of interest. But as the persons I speak of buy
only to sell again at a higher price, they are alternately in the position of
lenders and of borrowers : their operations raise the rate of interest at one
time, exactly as much as they lower it at another. Like all persons who buy
and sell on speculation, their function is to equalize, not to raise or lower, the
value of the commodity. When they speculate prudently, they temper the
fluctuations of price ; when imprudently, they often aggravate them.

02



196 BOOK III. CHAPTER XXIII. § 3 .

supply is liable to variation, though less so than the demand.
The willingness to lend is greater than usual at the com-
mencement of a period of speculation, and much less than
usual during the revulsion which follows. In speculative
times, money-lenders as well as other people are inclined to
extend their business by stretching their credit ; they lend
more than usual (just as other classes of dealers and producers
employ more than usual) of capital which does not belong
to them. Accordingly, these are the times when the rate of
interest is low; though for this too (as we shall immediately
see) there are other causes. During the revulsion, on the
contrary, interest always rises inordinately, because, while
there is a most pressing need on the part of many persons
to borrow, there is a general disinclination to lend. This
disinclination, when at its extreme point, is called a panic.
It occurs when a succession of unexpected failures has created
in the mercantile, and sometimes also in the non-mercantile
public, a general distrust in each others solvency; disposing
every one not only to refuse fresh credit, except on very
onerous terms, but to call in, if possible, all credit which he
has already given. Deposits are withdrawn from banks;
notes are returned on the issuers in exchange for specie;
bankers raise their rate of discount, and withhold their
customary advances; merchants refuse to renew mercantile
bills. At such times the most calamitous consequences were
formerly experienced from the attempt of the law to prevent
more than a certain limited rate of interest from being given
or taken. Persons who could not borrow at five per cent,
had to pay, not six or seven, but ten or fifteen per cent, to
compensate the lender for risking the penalties of the law :
or had to sell securities or goods for ready money at a still
greater sacrifice.

Except at such periods, the amount of capital disposable
on loan is subject to little other variation than that which
arises from the gradual process of accumulation; which pro-
cess however, in the great commercial countries, is sufficiently



RATE OF INTEREST.


197


rapid to account for the almost periodical recurrence of these
fits of speculation; since, when a few years have elapsed
without a crisis, and no new and tempting channel for invest-
ment has been opened in the meantime, there is always found
to have occurred in those few years so large an increase of
capital seeking investment, as to have lowered considerably
the rate of interest, whether indicated by the prices of secu-
rities or by the rate of discount on bills ; and this diminution
of interest tempts the possessors to incur hazards in hopes of
a more considerable return.

The demand for loans varies much more largely than the
supply, and embraces longer cycles of years in its aberrations.
A time of war, for example, is a period of unusual drafts on
the loan markets. The Government, at such times, generally
incurs new loans, and as these usually succeed each other
rapidly as long as the war lasts, the general rate of interest
is kept higher in war than in peace, without reference to the
rate of profit, and productive industry is stinted of its usual
supplies. During part of the last French war, the government
could not borrow under six per cent, and of course all other
borrowers had to pay at least as much. Nor does the influ-
ence of these loans altogether cease when the government
ceases to contract others; for those already contracted con-
tinue to afford an investment for a greatly increased amount
of the disposable capital of the country, which, if the national
debt were paid off, would be added to the mass of capital
seeking investment, and (independently of temporary dis-
turbance) could not but, to some extent, permanently lower
the rate of interest.

The same effect on interest which is produced by govern-
ment loans for war expenditure, is produced by the sudden
opening of any new and generally attractive mode of perma-
nent investment. The only instance of the kind in recent
history on a scale comparable to that of the war loans, is the
absorption of capital in the construction of railways. This
capital must have been principally drawn from the deposits



198


BOOK III. CHAPTER XXIII. § 4 *.

in banks, or from savings which would have gone into deposit,
and which were destined to be ultimately employed in buying
securities from persons who would have employed the pur-
chase money in discounts or other loans at interest : in either
case, it was a draft on the general loan fund. It is, in fact,
evident, that unless savings were made expressly to be em-
ployed in railway adventure, the amount thus employed must
have been derived either from the actual capital of persons
in business, or from capital which would have been lent to
persons in business. In the first case, the subtraction, by
crippling their means, obliges them to be larger borrowers;
in the second, it leaves less for them to borrow; in either
case it equally tends to raise the rate of interest.

§ 4. From the preceding considerations it would be
seen, even if it were not otherwise evident, how great an error
it is to imagine that the rate of interest bears any necessary
relation to the quantity or value of the money in circulation.
An increase of the currency has in itself no effect, and is
incapable of having any effect, on the rate of interest. A
paper currency issued by government in the payment of its
ordinary expenses, in however great excess it may be issued,
affects the rate of interest in no manner whatever. It dimi-
nishes indeed the power of money to buy commodities, but
not the power of money to buy money. If a hundred
pounds will buy a perpetual annuity of four pounds a year,
a depreciation which makes the hundred pounds worth only
half as much as before, has precisely the same effect on the
four pounds, and therefore cannot alter the relation between
the two. Unless, indeed, it is known and reckoned upon
that the depreciation will only be temporary; for people
certainly might be willing to lend the depreciated currency
on cheaper terms if they expected to be repaid in money of
full value.

It is perfectly true that in England, and in most other com-
mercial countries, an addition to the currency almost always



RATE OF INTEREST.


199


seems to have the effect of lowering the rate of interest ; be-
cause it is almost always accompanied by something which
really has that tendency. The currency in common use,
being a currency provided by bankers, is all issued in the way
of loans, except such part as happens to be employed in the
purchase of gold and silver. The same operation, therefore,
which adds to the currency, also adds to the loans, or to the
capital seeking investment on loan; properly, indeed, the
currency is only increased in order that the loans may be
increased. Now, though as currency these issues have not
an effect on interest, as loans they have. Inasmuch therefore
as an expansion or contraction of paper currency, when that
currency consists of bank notes, is always also an expansion
or contraction of credit; the distinction is seldom properly
drawn between the effects which belong to it in the former
and in the latter character. The confusion is thickened by
the unfortunate misapplication of language, which designates
the rate of interest by a phrase (“ the value of money”) which
properly expresses the purchasing power of the circulating
medium. Not only, therefore, are bank notes supposed to
produce effects as currency, which they only produce as loans,
but attention is habitually diverted from effects similar in kind
and much greater in degree, when produced by an action on
loans which does not happen to be accompanied by any action
on the currency.

For example, in considering the effect produced by the
proceedings of banks in encouraging the excesses of specu-
lation, an immense effect is usually attributed to their issues
of notes, but until of late hardly any attention was paid to
the management of their deposits, though nothing is more
certain than that their imprudent extensions of credit take
place more frequently by means of their deposits than of
their issues. “ There is no doubt,” says Mr. Tooke,* “ that
banks, whether private or joint stock, may, if imprudently


Inquiry into the Currency Principle, ch. xiv.



200


BOOK III CHAPTER XXIII. § 4.

conducted, minister to an undue extension of credit for the
purpose of speculations, whether in commodities, or in over-
trading in exports or imports, or in building or mining
operations, and that they have so ministered not unfrequently,
and in some cases to an extent ruinous to themselves, and
without ultimate benefit to the parties to whose views their
resources were made subservient.” But, " supposing all the
deposits received by a banker to be in coin, is he not, just as
much as the issuing banker, exposed to the importunity of
customers, whom it may be impolitic to refuse, for loans or
discounts, or to be tempted by a high interest ? and may he
not be induced to encroach so much upon his deposits, as to
leave him, under not improbable circumstances, unable to
meet the demands of his depositors ? In what respect, indeed,
would the case of a banker in a perfectly metallic circulation,
differ from that of a London banker at the present day? He
is not a creator of money, he cannot avail himself of his pri-
vilege as an issuer in aid of his other business, and yet there
have been lamentable instances of London bankers issuing
money in excess.”

In the discussions, too, which have been for so many
years carried on respecting the operations of the Bank of
England, and the effects produced by those operations on the
state of credit, though for nearly half a century there never
has been a commercial crisis which the Bank has not been
strenuously accused either of producing or of aggravating, it
has been almost universally assumed that the influence of its
acts was felt only through the amount of its notes in circula-
tion, and that if it could be prevented from exercising any
discretion as to that one feature in its position, it would no
longer have any power liable to abuse. This at least is an
error which, after the experience of the year 1847, we may
hope has been committed for the last time. During that year
the hands of the Bank were absolutely tied, in its character
of a bank of issue ; but through its operations as a bank of
deposit it exercised as great an influence, or apparent influ-



RATE OF INTEREST.


201


ence, on the rate of interest and the state of credit, as at any
former period ; it was exposed to as vehement accusations of
abusing that influence; and a crisis occurred, such as few
that preceded it had equalled, and none perhaps surpassed,
in intensity.

§ 5. Before quitting the general subject of this chapter,
I will make the obvious remark, that the rate of interest
determines the value and price of all those saleable articles
which are desired and bought, not for themselves, but for
the income which they are capable of yielding. The public
funds, shares in joint stock companies, and all descriptions
of securities, are at a high price in proportion as the rate of
interest is low. They are sold at the price which will give
the market rate of interest on the purchase money, with
allowance for all differences in the risk incurred, or in any
circumstance of convenience. Exchequer bills, for example,
usually sell at a higher price than consols, proportionally to
the interest which they yield ; because, though the security
is the same, yet the former being annually paid off at par,
unless renewed by the holder, the purchaser (unless obliged
to sell in a moment of general emergency) is in no danger of
losing anything by the resale, except the premium he may
have paid.

The price of land, mines, and all other fixed sources of
income, depends in like manner on the rate of interest.
Land usually sells at a higher price, in proportion to the
income afforded by it, than the public funds, not only because
it is thought, even in this country, to be somewhat more
secure, but because ideas of power and dignity are associated
with its possession. But these differences are constant, or
nearly so; and in the variations of price, land follows, cceteris
paribus , the permanent (though of course not the daily)
variations of the rate of interest. When interest is low, land
will naturally be dear; when interest is high, land will be
cheap. The last long war presented a striking exception to



202


BOOK III. CHAPTER XXIII. § 5 .


this rule, since the price of land as well as the rate of interest
was then remarkably high. For this, however, there was a
special cause. The continuance of a very high average price
of corn for many years, had raised the rent of land even
more than in proportion to' the rise of interest and fall of the
selling price of fixed incomes. Had it not been for this
accident, chiefly dependent on the seasons, land must have
sustained as great a depreciation in value as the public funds :
which it probably would do, were a similar war to break out
hereafter; to the signal disappointment of those landlords
and farmers who, generalizing from the casual circumstances
of a remarkable period, so long persuaded themselves that a
state of war was peculiarly advantageous, and a state of peace
disadvantageous, to what they chose to call the interests of
agriculture.



CHAPTER XXI Y.


OF THE REGULATION OF A CONVERTIBLE PAPER
CURRENCY.

§ 1. The frequent recurrence during the last half cen-
tury of the painful series of phenomena called a commercial
crisis, has directed much of the attention both of economists
and of practical politicians to the contriving of expedients for
averting, or at the least, mitigating its evils. And the habit
which grew up during the era of the Bank restriction, of
ascribing all alternations of high and low prices to the issues
of banks, has caused inquirers in general to fix their hopes of
success in moderating those vicissitudes, upon schemes for the
regulation of bank notes. A scheme of this nature, after
having obtained the sanction of high authorities, so far esta-
blished itself in the public mind, as to be, with general ap-
probation, converted into a law, at the last renewal of the
Charter of the Bank of England : and the regulation is still in
force, though with a great abatement of its popularity, and
with its prestige impaired by a temporary suspension, on
the responsibility of the executive, little more than three years
after its enactment. It is proper that the merits of this plan
for the regulation of a convertible bank note currency should
be here considered. Before touching upon the practical pro-
visions of Sir Robert Peel's Act of 1844, I shall briefly state
the nature and examine the grounds of the theory on which
it is founded.

It is believed by many, that banks of issue universally, or
the Bank of England in particular, have a power of throwing
their notes into circulation, and thereby raising prices, arbi-
trarily ; that this power is only limited by the degree of mo-
deration with which they think fit to exercise it; that when



20 4 BOOK III. CHAPTER XXIV. § 1.

they increase their issues beyond the usual amount, the rise of
prices, thus produced, generates a spirit of speculation in
commodities, which carries prices still higher, and ultimately
causes a reaction and recoil, amounting in extreme cases to a
commercial crisis; and that every such crisis which has
occurred in this country within mercantile memory, has been
either originally produced by this cause, or greatly aggravated
by it. To this extreme length the currency theory has not
been carried by the eminent political economists who have
given to a more moderate form of the same theory the sanc-
tion of their names. But I have not overstated the extra-
vagance of the popular version; which is a remarkable in-
stance to what lengths a favourite theory will hurry, not the
closet-students whose competency in such questions is often
treated with so much contempt, but men of the world and of
business, who pique themselves on the practical knowledge
which they have at least had ample opportunities of acquir-
ing. Not only has this fixed idea of the currency as the
prime agent in the fluctuations of price, made them shut their
eyes to the multitude of circumstances which, by influencing
the expectation of supply, are the true causes of almost all
speculations and of almost all fluctuations of price; but in
order to bring about the chronological agreement required by
their theory between the variations of bank issues and those
of prices, they have played such fantastic tricks with facts and
dates as would be thought incredible, if an eminent practical
authority had not taken the trouble of meeting them, on the
ground of mere history, with an elaborate exposure. I refer,
as all conversant with the subject must be aware, to Mr.
Tooke's History of Prices. The result of Mr. Tooke's in-
vestigations was thus stated by himself, in his examination
before the Commons Committee on the Bank Charter ques-
tion in 1 832 ; and the evidences of it stand recorded in his
book: “In point of fact, and historically, as far as my re-
searches have gone, in every signal instance of a rise or fall of
prices, the rise or fall has preceded, and therefore could not be



REGULATION OF CURRENCY.


205


the effect of, an enlargement or contraction of the bank cir-
culation.”

The extravagance of the currency theorists, in attributing
almost every rise or fall of prices to an enlargement or con-
traction of the issues of bank notes, has raised up, by reaction,
a theory the extreme opposite of the former, of which, in
scientific discussion, the most prominent representatives are
Mr. Tooke and Mr. Fullarton. This counter-theory denies to
bank notes, so long as their convertibility is maintained, any
power whatever of raising prices, and to banks any power of
increasing their circulation, except as a consequence of, and in
proportion to, an increase of the business to be done. This
last statement is supported by the unanimous assurances of
all the country bankers who have been examined before
successive Parliamentary Committees on the subject. They
all bear testimony that (in the words of Mr. Fullarton*) “ the
amount of their issues is exclusively regulated by the extent
of local dealings and expenditure in their respective districts,
fluctuating with the fluctuations of production and price, and
that they neither can increase their issues beyond the limits
which the range of such dealings and expenditure prescribes,
without the certainty of having their notes immediately
returned to them, nor diminish them, but at an almost
equal certainty of the vacancy being filled up from some
other source.” From these premises it is argued by Mr.
Tooke and Mr. Fullarton, that bank issues, since they
cannot be increased in amount unless there be an increased
demand, cannot possibly raise prices; cannot encourage
speculation, nor occasion a commercial crisis; and that the
attempt to guard against that evil by an artificial manage-
ment of the issue of notes, is of no effect for the intended
purpose, and liable to produce other consequences extremely
calamitous.


Regulation of Currencies, p. 85.



206


BOOK 111. CHAPTER XXIV. § 2 .

§ 2. As much of this doctrine as rests upon testimony,
and not upon inference, appears to me incontrovertible. I
give complete credence to the assertion of the country
bankers, very clearly and correctly condensed into a small
compass in the sentence just quoted from Mr. Fullarton. I am
convinced that they cannot possibly increase their issue of
notes in any other circumstances than those which are there
stated. I believe, also, that the theory, grounded by Mr.
Fullarton upon this fact, contains a large portion of truth, and
is far nearer to being the expression of the whole truth than
any form whatever of the currency theory.

There are two states of the markets: one which may be
termed the quiescent state, the other the expectant, or specu-
lative state. The first is that in which there is nothing
tending to engender in any considerable portion of the mer-
cantile public a desire to extend their operations. The pro-
ducers produce and the dealers purchase only their usual
stocks, having no expectation of a more than usually rapid
vent for them. Each person transacts his ordinary amount
of business and no more, or increases it only in correspond-
ence with the increase of his capital or connexion, or with
the gradual growth of the demand for his commodity, occa-
sioned by the public prosperity. Not meditating any unusual
extension of their own operations, producers and dealers do
not need more than the usual accommodation from bankers
and other money lenders; and as it is only by extending
their loans that bankers increase their issues, none but a
momentary augmentation of issues is in these circumstances
possible. If at a certain time of the year a portion of the
public have larger payments to make than at other times, or
if an individual, under some peculiar exigency, requires an
extra advance, they may apply for more bank notes, and
obtain them; but the notes will no more remain in circulation,
than the extra quantity of Bank of England notes which are
issued once in every three months in payment of the divi-
dends. The person to whom, after being borrowed, the notes



REGULATION OF CURRENCY.


207


are paid away, has no extra payments to make, and no
peculiar exigency, and he keeps them by him unused, or
sends them into deposit, or repays with them a previous
advance made to him by some banker: in any case he does
not buy commodities with them, since by the supposition
there is nothing to induce him to lay in a larger stock of
commodities than before. In this case, therefore, there can
be no addition, at the discretion of bankers, to the general
circulating medium : any increase of their issues either comes
back to them, or remains idle in the hands of the public, and
no rise takes place in prices.

But there is another state of the markets, strikingly con-
trasted with the preceding, and to this state it is not so
obvious that the theory of Mr. Tooke and Mr. Fullarton is
applicable; namely, when an impression prevails, whether
well founded or groundless, that the supply of one or more
great articles of commerce is likely to fall short of the ordinary
consumption. In such circumstances all persons connected
with those commodities desire to extend their operations.
The producers or importers desire to produce or import a
larger quantity, speculators desire to lay in a stock in order
to profit by the expected rise of price, and holders of the
commodity desire additional advances to enable them to
continue holding. All these classes are disposed to make a
more than ordinary use of their credit, and to this desire it
is not denied that bankers very often unduly administer.
Effects of the same kind may be produced by anything
which, exciting more than usual hopes of profit, gives
increased briskness to business: for example, a sudden
foreign demand for commodities on a large scale, or the
expectation of it; such as occurred on the opening of Spanish
America to English trade, and has occurred on various occa-
sions in the trade with the United States. Such occurrences
produce a tendency to a rise of price in exportable articles,
and generate speculations, sometimes of a reasonable, and
(as long as a large proportion of men in business prefer



208 BOOK III. CHAPTER XXIV, § 2 .

excitement to safety) frequently of an irrational or immoderate
character. In such cases there is a desire in the mercantile
classes, or in some portion of them, to employ their credit,
in a more than usual degree, as a power of purchasing.
This is a state of business which, when pushed to an extreme
length, brings on the revulsion called a commercial crisis;
and it is a known fact that such periods of speculation hardly
ever pass off without having been attended, during some
part of their progress, by a considerable increase of bank
notes.

To this, however, it is replied by Mr. Tooke and Mr.
Fullarton, that the increase of the circulation always follows
instead of preceding the rise of prices, and is not its cause,
but its effect. That in the first place, the speculative pur-
chases by which prices are raised, are not effected by bank
notes but by cheques, or still more commonly on a simple
book credit: and secondly, even if they were made with bank
notes boiTowed for that express purpose from bankers, the
notes, after being used for that purpose, would, if not wanted
for current transactions, be returned into deposit by the per-
sons receiving them. In this I fully concur, and I regard it
as proved, both scientifically and historically, that during the
ascending period of speculation, and as long as it is confined
to transactions between dealers, the issues of bank notes are
seldom materially increased, nor contribute anything to the
speculative rise of prices. It seems to me, however, that
this can no longer be affirmed when speculation has pro-
ceeded so far as to reach the producers. Speculative orders
given by merchants to manufacturers induce them to extend
their operations, and to become applicants to bankers for
increased advances, which, if made in notes, are not paid
away to persons who return them into deposit, but are par-
tially expended in paying wages, and pass into the various
channels of retail trade, where they become directly effective
in producing a further rise of prices. I cannot but think



REGULATION OP CURRENCY.


209


that this employment of bank notes must have been power-
fully operative on prices at the time when notes of one and
two pounds value were permitted by law. Admitting, how-
ever, that the prohibition of notes below five pounds has now
rendered this part of their operation comparatively insig-
nificant by greatly limiting their applicability to the payment
of wages, there is another form of their instrumentality
which comes into play in the ' later stages of speculation, and
which forms the principal argument of the more moderate
supporters of the currency theory. Though advances by
bankers are seldom demanded for the purpose of buying on
speculation, they are largely demanded by unsuccessful specu-
lators for the purpose of holding on ; and the competition of
these speculators for a share of the loanable capital, makes
even those who have not speculated, more dependent than
before on bankers for the advances they require. Between
the ascending period of speculation and the revulsion, there
is an interval, extending to weeks and sometimes months, of
struggling against a fall. The tide having shown signs of
turning, the speculative holders are unwilling to sell in a
falling market, and in the meantime they require funds to
enable them to fulfil even their ordinary engagements. It is
this stage that is ordinarily marked by a considerable increase
in the amount of the bank note circulation. That such an
increase does usually take place, is denied by no one. And I
think it must be admitted that this increase tends to prolong
the duration of the speculations; that it enables the specu-
lative prices to be kept up for some time after they would
otherwise have collapsed; and therefore prolongs and in-
creases the drain of the precious metals for exportation, which
is a leading feature of this stage in the progress of a com-
mercial crisis: the continuance of which drain at last endan-
gering the power of the banks to fulfil their engagement of
paying their notes on demand, they are compelled to contract
their credit more suddenly and severely than would have
YOL. II. p



210


BOOK III. CHAPTER XXIV. § 3.

been necessary if they had been prevented from propping up
speculation by increased advances, after the time when the
recoil had become inevitable.

§ 3. To prevent this retardation of the recoil, and ulti-
mate aggravation of its severity, is the object of the scheme
for regulating the currency, of which Lord Overstone, Mr.
Norman, and Colonel Torrens, were the first promulgators,
and which has, in a slightly modified form, been enacted into
law.*

According to the scheme in its original purity, the issue
of promissory notes for circulation was to be confined to one
body. In the form adopted by Parliament, all existing
issuers were permitted to retain this privilege, but none were
to be thereafter admitted to it, even in the place of those who
might discontinue their issues : and, for all except the Bank
of England, a maximum of issues was prescribed, on a scale

* I think myself justified in affirming that the mitigation of commercial
revulsions is the real, and only serious, purpose of the Act of 1844. I am
quite aware that its supporters insist (especially since 1847) on its supreme
efficacy in “maintaining the convertibility of the Bank note.” But I must be
excused for not attaching any serious importance to this one among its alleged
merits. The convertibility of the Bank note was maintained, and would have
continued to be maintained, at whatever cost, under the old system. As was
well said by Lord Overstone in his Evidence, the Bank can always, by a suffi-
ciently violent action on credit, save itself at the expense of the mercantile
public. That the Act of 1844 mitigates the violence of that process, is a
sufficient claim to prefer in its behalf. Besides, if we suppose such a degree
of mismanagement on the part of the Bank, as, were it not for the Act, would
endanger the continuance of convertibility, the same (or a less) degree of mis-
management, practised under the Act, would suffice to produce a suspension of
payments by the Banking Department ; an event which the compulsory sepa-
ration of the two departments brings much nearer to possibility than it was
before, and which, involving as it would the probable stoppage of every private
banking establishment in London, and perhaps also the non-paymeut of the
dividends to the national creditor, would be a far greater immediate calamity
than a brief interruption of the convertibility of the note ; insomuch that, to
enable the Bank to resume payment of its deposits, no Government would
hesitate a moment to suspend payment of the notes, if suspension of the Act
of 1844 proved insufficient.


REGULATION OF CURRENCY.


211


intentionally low. To the Bank of England no maximum
was fixed for the aggregate amount of its notes, but only for
the portion issued on securities, or in other words, on loan.
These were never to exceed a certain limit, fixed in the first
instance at fourteen millions.* All issues beyond that amount
must be in exchange for bullion ; of which the Bank is bound
to purchase, at a trifle below the mint valuation, any quantity
which is offered to it, giving its notes in exchange. In regard,
therefore, to any issue of notes beyond the limit of fourteen
millions, the Bank is purely passive, having no function but
the compulsory one of giving its notes for gold at SI. 17 s. 9 d. 9
and gold for its notes at Si. 17 s. 10|cZ., whenever and by
whomsoever it is called upon to do so.

The object for which this mechanism is intended is, that
the bank note currency may vary in its amount at the exact
times, and in the exact degree, in which a purely metallic
currency would vary. And the precious metals being the com-
modity that has hitherto approached nearest to that inva-
riability in all the circumstances influencing value, which fits
a commodity for being adopted as a medium of exchange, it
seems to be thought that the excellence of the Act of 1844 is
fully made out, if under its operation the issues conform in all
their variations of quantity, and therefore, as is inferred, of
value, to the variations which would take place in a currency
wholly metallic.

Now, all reasonable opponents of the Act, in common with
its supporters, acknowledge as an essential requisite of any
substitute for the precious metals, that it should conform
exactly in its permanent value to a metallic standard. And
they say, that so long as it is convertible into specie on demand,
it does and must so conform. But when the value of a
metallic or of any other currency is spoken of, there are two


* A conditional increase of this maximum is permitted, but only when by
arrangement with any country bank the issues of that bank are discontinued,
and Bank of England notes substituted : and even then the increase is limited
to two- thirds of the amount of the country notes to be thereby superseded.



212 BOOK III. CHAPTER XXIV. § 3 .

points to be considered; the permanent or average value,
and the fluctuations. It is to the permanent value of a
metallic currency, that the value of a paper currency ought to
conform. But there is no obvious reason why it should be
required to conform to the fluctuations too. The only object
of its conforming at all, is steadiness of value; and with
respect to fluctuations the sole thing desirable is that they
should be the smallest possible. Now the fluctuations in the
value of the currency are determined, not by its quantity,
whether it consist of gold or of paper, but by the expansions
and contractions of credit. To discover, therefore, what cur-
rency will conform the most nearly to the permanent value
of the precious metals, we must find under what currency the
variations in credit are least frequent and least extreme.
Now, whether this object is best attained by a metallic cur-
rency (and therefore by a paper currency exactly conforming
in quantity to it) is precisely the question to be decided. If
it should prove that a paper currency which follows all the
fluctuations in quantity of a metallic, leads to more violent
revulsions of credit than one which is not held to this rigid
conformity, it will follow that the currency which agrees most
exactly in quantity with a metallic currency is not that which
adheres closest to its value; that is to say, its permanent
value, with which alone agreement is desirable.

Whether this is really the case or not we will now inquire.
And first, let us consider whether the Act effects the practical
object chiefly relied on in its defence by the more sober of its
advocates, that of arresting speculative extensions of credit at
an earlier period, with a less drain of gold, and consequently
by a milder and more gradual process. I think it must be
admitted that to a certain degree it is successful in this
object.

I am aware of what may be urged, and reasonably urged,
in opposition to this opinion. It may be said, that when the
time arrives at which the banks are pressed for increased
advances to enable speculators .to fulfil their engagements, a



REGULATION OF CURRENCY.


213


limitation of the issue of notes will not prevent the banks, if
otherwise willing, from making these advances; that they
have still their deposits as a source from which loans may be
made beyond the point which is consistent with prudence as
bankers; and that even if they refused to do so, the only
effect would be, that the deposits themselves would be drawn
out to supply the wants of the depositors; which would be
just as much an addition to the bank notes and coin in the
hands of the public, as if the notes themselves were increased.
This is true, and is a sufficient answer to those who think
that the advances of banks to prop up failing speculations
are objectionable chiefly as an increase of the currency. But
the mode in which they are really objectionable, is as an ex-
tension of credit. If, instead of lending their notes, the banks
allow the demand of their customers for disposable capital to
act on the deposits, there is the same increase of currency,
(for a short time at least,) but there is not an increase of
loans. The rate of interest, therefore, is not prevented from
rising at the first moment when the difficulties consequent on
excess of speculation begin to be felt. On the contrary, the
necessity which the banks feel of diminishing their advances
to maintain their solvency, when they find their deposits flow-
ing out, and cannot supply the vacant place by their own
notes, accelerates the rise of the rate of interest. Speculative
holders are therefore obliged to submit earlier to that loss by
resale, which could not have been prevented from coming on
them at last: the recoil of prices and collapse of general
credit take place sooner.

To appreciate the effect which this acceleration of the
crisis has in mitigating its intensity, let us advert more par-
ticularly to the nature and effects of that leading feature in
the period just preceding the collapse, the drain of gold. A
rise of prices produced by a speculative extension of credit,
even when bank notes have not been the instrument, is not
the less effectual (if it lasts long enough) in turning the ex-
changes: and when the exchanges have turned from this



214


BOOK III. CHAPTER XXIV. § 3.

cause, they can only be turned back, and the drain of gold
stopped, either by a fall of prices or by a rise of the rate of
interest. A fall of prices will stop it by removing the cause
which produced it, and by rendering goods a more advan-
tageous remittance than gold, even for paying debts already
due. A rise of the rate of interest, and consequent fall of
the prices of securities, will accomplish the purpose still
more rapidly, by inducing foreigners, instead of taking away
the gold which is due to them, to leave it for investment
within the country, and even send gold into the country to
take advantage of the increased rate of interest. Of this last
mode of stopping a drain of gold, the year 1847 afforded
signal examples. But until one of these two things takes
place — until either prices fall, or the rate of interest rises —
nothing can possibly arrest, or even moderate, the efflux of
gold. Now, neither will prices fall nor interest rise, so long
as the unduly expanded credit is upheld by the continued
advances of bankers. It is well known that when a drain of
gold has set in, even if bank notes have not increased in
quantity, it is upon them that the contraction first falls, the
gold wanted for exportation being always obtained from the
Bank of England in exchange for its notes. But under the
system which preceded 1844, the Bank of England, being
subjected, in common with other banks, to the importunities
for fresh advances which are characteristic of such a time,
could, and often did, immediately re-issue the notes which
had been returned to it in exchange for bullion. It is a
great error, certainly, to suppose that the mischief of this
re-issue chiefly consisted in preventing a contraction of the
currency. It was, how r ever, quite as mischievous as it has
ever been supposed to be. As long as it lasted, the efflux
of gold could not cease, since neither would prices fall nor
interest rise while these advances continued. Prices, having
risen without any increase of bank notes, could well have
fallen without a diminution of them; but having risen in
consequence of an extension of credit, they could not fall



REGULATION OP CURRENCY,


215


without a contraction of it. As long, therefore, as the Bank
of England and the other banks persevered in this course,
so long gold continued to flow out, until so little was left
that the Bank of England, being in danger of suspension of
payments, was compelled at last to contract its discounts
so greatly and suddenly as to produce a much more extreme
variation in the rate of interest, inflict much greater loss and
distress on individuals, and destroy a much greater amount
of the ordinary credit of the country, than any real necessity
required.

I acknowledge, (and the experience of 1847 has proved
to those who overlooked it before,) that the mischief now
described, may be wrought, and in large measure, by the
Bank of England, through its deposits alone. It may con-
tinue or even increase its discounts and advances, when it
ought to contract them; with the ultimate effect of making
the contraction much more severe and sudden than necessary.
I cannot but think, however, that banks which commit this
error with their deposits, would commit it still more if they
were at liberty to make increased loans with their issues as
well as their deposits. I am compelled to think that the
being restricted from increasing their issues, is a real impedi-
ment to their making those advances which arrest the tide
at its turn, and make it rush like a torrent afterwards. If
the restrictions of the Act of 1844 were no obstacle to the
advances of banks in the interval preceding the crisis, why
were they found an insuperable obstacle during the crisis ?
an obstacle which nothing less would overcome than a sus-
pension of the law, through the assumption by Government
of a temporary dictatorship ? Evidently they are'an obstacle ;*


* It would not be to the purpose to say, by way of objection, that the
obstacle may be evaded by granting the increased advance in book credits, to
be drawn against by cheques, without the aid of bank notes. This is indeed
possible, as Mr. Fullarton has remarked, and as I have myself said in a former
chapter. But this substitute for bank-note currency has never yet been
organized; and the law having clearly manifested its iutention that, in the



216 BOOK III. CHAPTER XXIV. § 4.

and when the Act is blamed for interposing obstacles at a
time when not obstacles but facilities are needed, it must in
justice receive credit for interposing them when they are an
acknowledged benefit. In this particular, therefore, I think
it cannot be denied, that the new system is a real improve-
ment upon the old.

§ 4. But though I am compelled to differ thus far from
the opinion of Mr. Tooke and of Mr. Fullarton, I concur
with them in thinking that these advantages, whatever value
may be put on them, are purchased by still greater disad-
vantages.

In the first place, a large extension of credit by bankers,
though most hurtful when, credit being already in an inflated
state, it can only serve to retard and aggravate the collapse,
is most salutary when the collapse has come, and when credit
instead of being in excess is in distressing deficiency, and
increased advances by bankers, instead of being an addition
to the ordinary amount of floating credit, serve to replace a
mass of other credit which has been suddenly destroyed.
Antecedently to 1844, if the Bank of England occasionally
aggravated the severity of a commercial revulsion by rendering
the collapse of credit more tardy and thence more violent than
necessary, it in return rendered invaluable services during the
revulsion itself, by coming forward with advances to support
solvent firms, at a time when all other paper and almost all
mercantile credit had become comparatively valueless. This
service was eminently conspicuous in the crisis of 1825-6, the
severest probably ever experienced; during which the Bank
increased what is called its circulation by many millions, in
advances to those mercantile firms of whose ultimate solvency


case supposed, increased credits should not be granted, it is a problem whether
the law would not reach what might be regarded as an evasion of its prohibi-
tions, or whether deference to the law would not produce (as it has hitherto
done) on the part of banking establishments, conformity to its spirit and pur-
pose, as well as to its mere letter.



REGULATION OF CURRENCY. 217

it felt no doubt; advances which if it had been obliged to
withhold, the severity of the crisis would have been still
greater than it was. If the Bank, it is justly remarked by
Mr. Fullarton,* complies with such applications, “it must
comply with them by an issue of notes, for notes constitute
the only instrumentality through which the Bank is in the
practice of lending its credit. But those notes are not intended
to circulate, nor do they circulate. There is no more demand
for circulation than there was before. On the contrary, the
rapid decline of prices which the case in supposition pre-
sumes, would necessarily contract the demand for circulation.
The notes would either be returned to the Bank of England,
as fast as they were issued, in the shape of deposits, or would
be locked up in the drawers of the private London bankers, or
distributed by them to their correspondents in the country,
or intercepted by other capitalists, who, during the fervour of
the previous excitement, had contracted liabilities which they
might be imperfectly prepared on the sudden to encounter.
In such emergencies, every man connected with business, who
has been trading on other means than his own, is placed on
the defensive, and his whole object is to make himself as
strong as possible, an object which cannot be more effectually
answered than by keeping by him as large a reserve as
possible in paper which the law has made a legal tender.
The notes themselves never find their way into the produce
market; and if they at all contribute to retard” (or, as I
should rather say, to moderate) “ the fall of prices, it is not
by promoting in the slightest degree the effective demand for
commodities, not by enabling consumers to buy more largely
for consumption, and so giving briskness to commerce, but
by a process precisely the reverse, by enabling the holders of
commodities to hold on, by obstructing traffic and repressing
consumption.”

The opportune relief thus afforded to credit, during the


P. 106 .


218


BOOK III. CHAPTER XXIV. § 4.

excessive contraction which succeeds to an undue expansion,
is consistent with the principle of the new system; for an
extraordinary contraction of credit, and fall of prices,
inevitably draw gold into the country, and the principle of
the system is that the bank-note currency shall be permitted,
and even compelled, to enlarge itself, in all cases in which a
metallic currency would do the same. But, what the principle
of the law would encourage, its provisions in this instance
preclude, by not suffering the increased issues to take place
until the gold has actually arrived ; which is never until the
worst part of the crisis is past, and almost all the losses and
failures attendant on it are consummated. The machinery of
the system withholds, until for many purposes it comes too
late, the very medicine which the theory of the system pre-
scribes as the appropriate remedy.*

This function of banks in filling up the gap made in
mercantile credit by the consequences of undue speculation
and its revulsion, is so entirely indispensable, that if the Act
of 1844 continues unrepealed, there can be no difficulty in
foreseeing that its provisions must be suspended as they were
in 1847, in every period of great commercial difficulty, as
soon as the crisis has really and completely set in. Were
this all, there would be no absolute inconsistency in main-
taining the restriction as a means of preventing a crisis, and
relaxing it for the purpose of relieving one. But there is an-
other objection, of a still more radical and comprehensive
character, to the new system.

Professing, in theory, to require that a paper currency
shall vary in its amount in exact conformity to the variations


* True, the Bank is not precluded from making increased advances from its
deposits, which are likely to be of unusually large amount, since, at these
periods, every one leaves his money in deposit in order to have it within call.
But, that the deposits are not always sufficient, was conclusively proved in
1847, when the Bank stretched to the very utmost the means of relieving com-
merce which its deposits afforded, without allaying the panic, which however
ceased at once when the Government decided on suspending the Act.



REGULATION OF CURRENCY.


219


of a metallic currency, it provides, in fact, that in every case
of an efflux of gold, a corresponding diminution shall take
place in the quantity of bank notes; in other words, that
every exportation of the precious metals shall be virtually
drawn from the circulation; it being assumed that this would
be the case if the currency were wholly metallic. This theory,
and these practical arrangements, are adapted to the case in
which the drain of gold originates in a rise of prices produced
by an undue expansion of currency or credit ; but they are
adapted to no case beside.

When the efflux of gold is the last stage of a series of
effects arising from an increase of the currency, or from an
expansion of credit tantamount in its effect on prices to an
increase of currency, it is in that case a fair assumption that
in a purely metallic system the gold exported would be drawn
from the currency itself ; because such a drain, being in its
nature unlimited, will necessarily continue as long as currency
and credit are undiminished. But an exportation of the
precious metals often arises from no causes affecting currency
or credit, but simply from an unusual extension of foreign
payments, arising either from the state of the markets for
commodities, or from some circumstance not commercial. In
this class of causes, four, of powerful operation, are included,
of each of which the last fifty years of English history afford
repeated instances. The first is that of an extraordinary
foreign expenditure by government, either political or mili-
tary ; as in the revolutionary war, and, as long as it lasted,
during the late war with Russia. The second is the case of
a large exportation of capital for foreign investment; such as
the loans and mining operations which partly contributed to
the crisis of 1825, and the American speculations which were
the principal cause of the crisis of 1839. The third is a
failure of crops in the countries which supply the raw mate-
rial of important manufactures; such as the cotton failure in
America, which compelled England, in 1847, to incur unusual
liabilities for the purchase of that commodity at an advanced



m


BOOK III. CHAPTER XXIV. § 4.

price. The fourth is a bad harvest, and a great consequent
importation of food; of which the years 1846 and 1847 pre-
sent an example surpassing all antecedent experience.

In none of these cases, if the currency were metallic,
would the gold or silver exported for the purposes in question
be necessarily, or even probably, drawn wholly from the cir-
culation. It would be drawn from the hoards, which under
a metallic currency always exist to a very large amount; in
uncivilized countries, in the hands of all who can afford it ; in
civilized countries chiefly in the form of bankers' reserves.
Mr. Tooke, in his “ Inquiry into the Currency Principle,"
bears testimony to this fact; but it is to Mr. Fullarton that the
public are indebted for the clearest and most satisfactory elu-
cidation of it. As I am not aware that this part of the
theory of currency has been set forth by any other writer with
anything like the same degree of completeness, I shall quote
somewhat largely from this able production.

“No person who has ever resided in an Asiatic country,
where hoarding is carried on to a far larger extent in propor-
tion to the existing stock of wealth, and where the practice
has become much more deeply engrafted in the habits of the
people, by traditionary apprehensions of insecurity and the
difficulty of finding safe and remunerative investments, than
in any European community — no person who has had per-
sonal experience of this state of society, can be at a loss to
recollect innumerable instances of large metallic treasures
extracted in times of pecuniary difficulty from the coffers of
individuals by the temptation of a high rate of interest, and
brought in aid of the public necessities, nor, on the other
hand, of the facility with which those treasures have been
absorbed again, when the inducements which had drawn them
into light were no longer in operation. In countries more
advanced in civilization and wealth than the Asiatic prin-
cipalities, and where no man is in fear of attracting the
cupidity of power by an external display of riches, but where
the interchange of commodities is still almost universally con-



REGULATION OF CURRENCY.


221


ducted through the medium of a metallic circulation, as is the
case with most of the commercial countries on the Continent
of Europe, the motives for amassing the precious metals may
be less powerful than in the majority of Asiatic principalities;
but the ability to accumulate being more widely extended,
the absolute quantity amassed will be found probably to bear
a considerably larger proportion to the population.* In those
states which lie exposed to hostile invasion, or whose social
condition is unsettled and menacing, the motive indeed must
still be very strong; and in a nation carrying on an extensive
commerce, both foreign and internal, without any consider-
able aid from any of the banking substitutes for money, the
reserves of gold and silver indispensably required to secure
the regularity of payments, must of themselves engross a
share of the circulating coin which it would not be easy to
estimate.

“In this country, where the banking system has been
carried to an extent and perfection unknown in any other
part of Europe, and may be said to have entirely superseded
the use of coin, except for retail dealings and the purposes of
foreign commerce, the incentives to private hoarding exist no
longer, and the hoards have all been transferred to the banks,
or rather, I should say, to the Bank of England. But in
France, where the bank-note circulation is still comparatively
limited, the quantity of gold and silver coin in existence I
find now currently estimated, on what are described as the
latest authorities, at the enormous sum of 120 millions ster-
ling; nor is the estimate at all at variance with the reasonable
probabilities of the case. Of this vast treasure there is every
reason to presume that a very large proportion, probably by


* It is known, from unquestionable facts, that the hoards of money at all
times existing in the hands of the French peasantry, often from a remote date,
surpass any amount which could have been imagined possible ; and even in
so poor a country as Ireland, it has of late been ascertained, that the small
farmers sometimes possess hoards quite disproportioned to their visible means of
subsistence.



222 BOOK III. CHAPTER XXIV. § 4 .

much the greater part, is absorbed in the hoards. If you
present for payment a bill for a thousand francs to a French
banker, he brings you the silver in a sealed bag from his
strong room. And not the banker only, but every merchant
and trader, according to his means, is under the necessity of
keeping by him a stock of cash sufficient not only for his
ordinary disbursements, but to meet any unexpected de-
mands. That the quantity of specie accumulated in these
innumerable dep6ts, not in France only, but all over the
Continent, where banking institutions are still either entirely
wanting or very imperfectly organised, is not merely immense
in itself, but admits of being largely drawn upon, and trans-
ferred even in vast masses from one country to another, with
very little, if any, effect on prices, or other material derange-
ments, we have had some remarkable proofs:” among others,
“ the signal success which attended the simultaneous efforts of
some of the principal European powers (Russia, Austria,
Prussia, Sweden, and Denmark) to replenish their treasuries,
and to replace with coin a considerable portion of the depre-
ciated paper which the necessities of the war had forced upon
them, and this at the very time when the available stock
of the precious metals over the world had been reduced by
the exertions of England to recover her metallic cur-
rency. . . . There can be no doubt that these combined
operations were on a scale of very extraordinary magnitude,
that they were accomplished without any sensible injury to
commerce or public prosperity, or any other effect than
some temporary derangement of the exchanges, and that the
private hoards of treasure accumulated throughout Europe
during the war must have been the principal source from
which all this gold and silver was collected. And no person,
I think, can fairly contemplate the vast superflux of metallic
wealth thus proved to be at all times in existence, and,
though in a dormant and inert state, always ready to spring
into activity on the first indication of a sufficiently intense
demand, without feeling themselves compelled to admit the



REGULATION OF CURRENCY.


228


possibility of the mines being even shut up for years together,
and the production of the metals altogether suspended, while
there might be scarcely a perceptible alteration in the ex-
changeable value of the metal/'*

Applying this to the currency doctrine and its advocates,
“one might imagine/' says Mr. Fullarton,t “that they sup-
posed the gold which is drained off for exportation from a
country using a currency exclusively metallic, to be collected
by driblets at the fairs and markets, or from the tills of the
grocers and mercers. They never even allude to the exist-
ence of such a thing as a great hoard of the metals, though
upon the action of the hoards depends the whole economy of
international payments between specie-circulating commu-
nities, while any operation of the money collected in hoards
upon prices must, even according to the currency hypothesis,
be wholly impossible. We know from experience what enor-
mous payments in gold and silver specie-circulating countries
are capable, at times, of making, without the least disturbance
of their internal prosperity; and whence is it supposed that
these payments come, but from their hoards? Let us think
how the mone} 7 market of a country transacting all its ex-
changes through the medium of the precious metals only,
would be likely to be affected by the necessity of making a
foreign payment of several millions. Of course the necessity
could only be satisfied by a transmission of capital; and
would not the competition for the possession of capital for
transmission which the occasion would call forth, necessarily
raise the market rate of interest? If the payment was to be
made by the government, would not the government, in all
probability, have to open a new loan on terms more than
usually favourable to the lender?" If made by merchants,
would it not be drawn either from the deposits in banks, or
from the reserves which merchants keep by them in default


* Fullarton on the Regulation of Currencies , pp. 71 — 4.
f lb. pp. 139—42.



224 BOOK III. CHAPTER XXIV. § 4.

of banks, or would it not oblige them to obtain the necessary
amount of specie by going into the money market as bor-
rowers ? “ And would not all this inevitably act upon the

hoards, and draw forth into activity a portion of the gold and
silver which the money-dealers had been accumulating, and
some of them with the express view of watching such oppor-
tunities for turning their treasures to advantage ? . . . .

“To come to the present time [1844], the balance of
payments with nearly all Europe has for about four years
past been in favour of this country, and gold has been pour-
ing in till the influx amounts to the unheard-of sum of about
fourteen millions sterling. Yet in all this time, has any one
heard a complaint of any serious suffering inflicted on the
people of the Continent? Have prices there been greatly
depressed beyond their range in this country? Have wages
fallen, or have merchants been extensively ruined by the
universal depreciation of their stock? There has occurred
nothing of the kind. The tenor of commercial and monetary
affairs has been everywhere even and tranquil; and in France
more particularly, an improving revenue and extended com-
merce bear testimony to the continued progress of internal
prosperity. It may be doubted, indeed, if this great efflux
of gold has withdrawn from that portion of the metallic
wealth of the nation which really circulates, a single napoleon.
And it has been equally obvious, from the undisturbed state
of credit, that not only has the supply of specie indispen-
sable for the conduct of business in the retail market been
all the while uninterrupted, but that the hoards have con-
tinued to furnish every facility requisite for the regularity of
mercantile payments. It is of the very essence of the
metallic system, that the hoards, in all cases of probable
occurrence, should be equal to both objects; that they should,
in the first place, supply the bullion demanded for exporta-
tion, and in the next place, should keep up the home circu-
lation to its legitimate complement. Every man trading
under that system, who, in the course of his business, may



REGULATION OP CURRENCY.


225


have frequent occasion to remit large sums in specie to foreign
countries, must either keep by him a sufficient treasure of
his own or must have the means of borrowing enough
from his neighbours, not only to make up when wanted
the amount of his remittances, but to enable him, more-
over, to carry on his ordinary transactions at home without
interruption.”

In a country in which credit is carried to so great an
extent as in England, one great reserve, in a single establish-
ment, the Bank of England, supplies the place, as far as the
precious metals are concerned, of the multitudinous reserves
of other countries. The theoretical principle, therefore, of
the currency doctrine would require, that all those drains of
the metal, which, if the currency were purely metallic, would
be taken from the hoards, should be allowed to operate freely
upon the reserve in the coffers of the Bank of England,
without any attempt to stop it either by a diminution of the
currency or by a contraction of credit. Nor to this would
there be any well-grounded objection, unless the drain were
so great as to threaten the exhaustion of the reserve, and a
consequent stoppage of payments; a danger against which it
is possible to take adequate precautions, because in the cases
which we are considering, the drain is for foreign payments
of definite amount, and stops of itself as soon as these are
effected. And in all systems it is admitted that the habitual
reserve of the Bank should exceed the utmost amount to
which experience warrants the belief that such a drain may
extend; which extreme limit Mr. Fullarton affirms to be
seven millions, but Mr. Tooke recommends an average reserve
of ten, and in his last publication of twelve millions.

The machinery, however, of the new system insists upon
bringing about by force, what its principle not only does not
require, but positively condemns. Every drain for exporta-
tion, whatever may be its cause, and whether under a metallic
currency it would affect the circulation or not, is now com-
pulsorily drawn from that source alone. The bank-note cir-

VOL. II. Q



226


BOOK III. CHAPTER XXIV. § 4.

culation must be diminished by an amount equal to that of
the metal exported, though it be to the full extent of seven or
twelve millions. And this, be it remembered, when there has
been no speculative rise of prices which it is indispensable to
correct, no unusual extension of credit requiring contraction;
but the demand for gold is solely occasioned by foreign pay-
ments on account of government, or large com importations
consequent on a bad harvest.

I grant that when large foreign payments require to be
made, the means wherewith to make them must in general
be drawn from the loanable capital of the country; the con-
sequence of which is a rise of the rate of interest. In such
circumstances some pressure on the money market is unavoid-
able : but that pressure is much increased in severity by the
operation of the Act of 1 844. The case is generally stated as if
the Act only operated in one way, namely, by preventing the
Bank, when it has parted with (say) three millions of bullion
in exchange for three millions of its notes, from again lending
those notes, in discounts or other advances. But the Act
really does much more than this. It is well known, that the
first operation of a drain is always on the banking depart-
ment. The bank deposits constitute the bulk of the unem-
ployed and disposable capital of the country; and capital
wanted for foreign payments is almost always obtained mainly
by drawing out deposits. Supposing three millions to be the
amount wanted, three millions of notes are drawn from the
banking department (either directly or through the private
bankers, who keep the bulk of their reserves with the Bank
of England), and the three millions of notes, thus obtained,
are presented at the Issue Department and exchanged against
gold for exportation. Thus a drain upon the country at large
of only three millions, is a drain upon the Bank virtually of
six millions. The deposits have lost three millions, and the
reserve of the Issue Department has lost an equal amount.
As the two departments, so long as the Act remains in opera-
tion, cannot even in the utmost extremity help one another,



REGULATION OF CURRENCY.


m


each must take its separate precautions for its own safety.
Whatever measures, therefore, on the part of the Bank, would
have been required under the old system by a drain of six
millions, are now rendered necessary by a drain only of three.
The Issue Department protects itself in the manner prescribed
by the Act, by not re-issuing the three millions of notes which
have been returned to it. But the Banking Department must
take measures to replenish its reserve, which has been reduced
by three millions. Its liabilities having also decreased three
millions, by the loss of that amount of deposits, the reserve,
on the ordinary banking principle of a third of the liabilities,
will bear a reduction of one million. But the other two
millions it must procure by letting that amount of advances
run out, and refusing to renew them. Not only therefore
must it raise its rate of interest, but it must effect, by what-
ever means, a diminution of two millions in the total amount
of its discounts. This violent action on the money market
for the purpose of replenishing the Banking reserve is wholly
occasioned by the Act of 1844. If the restrictions of that
Act did not exist, the Bank, instead of contracting its dis-
counts, would simply transfer two millions either in gold or
in notes, from the Issue to the Banking Department; not in
order to lend them to the public, but to secure the solvency of
the Banking Department in the event of further unexpected
demands by the depositors. And unless the drain continued,
and reached so great an amount as to seem likely to exceed
the whole of the gold in the reserves of both departments, the
Bank would be under no necessity, while the pressure lasted,
of withholding from commerce its accustomed amount of
accommodation, at a rate of interest corresponding to the
increased demand.

I am aware it will be said that by allowing drains of this
character to operate freely upon the Bank reserve until they
cease of themselves, a contraction of the currency and of credit
would not be prevented, but only postponed; since if a
limitation of issues were not resorted to for the purpose of

Q3



228 BOOK III. CHAPTER XXIV. § 4.

checking the drain in its commencement, the same or a still
greater limitation must take place afterwards, in order, by
acting on prices, to bring back this large quantity of gold, for
the indispensable purpose of replenishing the Bank reserve.
But in this argument several things are overlooked. In the
first place the gold might be brought back, not by a fall of
prices, but by the much more rapid and convenient medium
of a rise of the rate of interest, involving no fall of any
prices except the prices of securities. Either English secu-
rities would be bought on account of foreigners, or foreign
securities held in England would be sent abroad for sale,
both which operations took place largely during the mercan-
tile difficulties of 1847, and not only checked the efflux of
gold, but turned the tide and brought the metal back. It
was not, therefore, brought back by a contraction of the cur-
rency, though in this case it certainly was so by a contraction
of loans. But even this is not always indispensable. For in
the second place, it is not necessary that the gold should
return with the same suddenness with which it went out. A
great portion would probably return in the ordinary way of
commerce, in payment for exported commodities. The extra
gains made by dealers and producers in foreign countries
through the extra payments they receive from this country
are very likely to be partly expended in increased purchases
of English commodities, either for consumption or on specula-
tion, though the effect may not manifest itself with sufficient
rapidity to enable the transmission of gold to be dispensed
with in the first instance. These extra purchases would turn
the balance of payments in favour of the country, and gra-
dually restore a portion of the exported gold; and the re-
mainder would probably be brought back, without any con-
siderable rise of the rate of interest in England, by the fall of
it in foreign countries, occasioned by the addition of some
millions of gold to the loanable capital of those countries.
Indeed, in the state of things consequent on the gold dis-
coveries, when the enormous quantity of gold annually pro-



REGULATION OF CURRENCY.


229


duced in Australia, and much of that from California, is
distributed to other countries through England, and a month
seldom passes without a large arrival, the Bank reserves can
replenish themselves without any re-importation of the gold
previously carried off by a drain. All that is needful is an
intermission, and a very brief intermission is sufficient, of the
exportation.

For these reasons it appears to me, that notwithstanding
the beneficial operation of the Act of 1844 in the first stages
of one kind of commercial crisis (that produced by over-spe-
culation), it on the whole materially aggravates the severity of
commercial revulsions. And not only are contractions of
credit made more severe by the Act, they are also made
greatly more frequent. “ Suppose/' says Mr. George Walker,
in a clear, impartial, and conclusive series of papers in the
Aberdeen Herald, forming one of the best existing discussions
of the present question — “ Suppose that, of eighteen millions of
gold, ten are in the issue department and eight are in the
banking department. The result is the same as under a metallic
currency with only eight millions in reserve instead of eigh-
teen. . . The effect of the Bank Act is, that the proceedings of
the Bank under a drain are not determined by the amount of
gold within its vaults, but are, or ought to be, determined by
the portion of it belonging to the banking department. With
the whole of the gold at its disposal, it may find it unneces-
sary to interfere with credit, or force down prices, if a drain
leave a fair reserve behind. With only the banking reserve at
its disposal, it must, from the narrow margin it has to operate
on, meet all drains by counteractives more or less strong, to
the injury of the commercial world ; and if it fail to do so, as it
may fail, the consequence is destruction. Hence the extraor-
dinary and frequent variations of the rate of interest under
the Bank Act. Since 1 847, when the eyes of the Bank were
opened to its true position, it has felt it necessary, as a pre-
cautionary measure, that every variation in the reserve should
be accompanied by an alteration in the rate of interest/' To



230


BOOK III. CHAPTER XXIV. § 5.

make the Act innocuous, therefore, it would be necessary that
the Bank, in addition to the whole of the gold in the Issue
Department, should retain as great a reserve in gold or notes
in the Banking Department alone, as would suffice under the
old system for the security both of the issues and of the
deposits.

§ 5. There remain two questions respecting a bank-note
currency, which have also been a subject of considerable
discussion of late years : whether the privilege of providing
it should be confined to a single establishment, such as
the Bank of England, or a plurality of issuers should be
allowed; and in the latter case, whether any peculiar pre-
cautions are requisite or advisable, to protect the holders
of notes against losses occasioned by the insolvency of the
issuers.

The course of the preceding speculations has led us to
attach so much less of peculiar importance to bank notes,
as compared with other forms of credit, than accords with
the notions generally current, that questions respecting the
regulation of so very small a part of the general mass
of credit, cannot appear to us of such momentous import
as they are sometimes considered. Bank notes, however,
have so far a real peculiarity, that they are the only form
of credit sufficiently convenient for all the purposes of circu-
lation, to be able entirely to supersede the use of metallic
money for internal purposes. Though the extension of the
use of cheques has a tendency more and more to diminish
the number of bank notes, as it would that of the sovereigns
or other coins which would take their place if they were
abolished ; there is sure, for a long time to come, to be a
considerable supply of them, wherever the necessary degree
of commercial confidence exists, and their free use is per-
mitted. The exclusive privilege, therefore, of issuing them,
if reserved to the government or to some one body, is a



REGULATION OF CURRENCY.


231


source of great pecuniary gain. That this gain should be
obtained for the nation at large is both practicable and desir-
able: and if the management of a bank-note currency ought
to be so completely mechanical, so entirely a thing of fixed
rule, as it is made by the Act of 1844, there seems no reason
why this mechanism should be worked for the profit of any
private issuer, rather than for the public treasury. If, however,
a plan be preferred which leaves the variations in the amount
of issues in any degree whatever to the discretion of the
issuers, it is not desirable that to the ever-growing attributions
of the government, so delicate a function should be super-
added ; and that the attention of the heads of the state should
be diverted from larger objects, by their being besieged with
the applications, and made a mark for all the attacks, which
are never spared to those deemed to be responsible for any
acts, however minute, connected with the regulation of the
currency. It would be better that treasury notes, exchange-
able for gold on demand, should be issued to a fixed amount,
not exceeding the minimum of a bank-note currency, the
remainder of the notes which may be required being left to
be supplied either by one or by a number of private banking
establishments. Or an establishment like the Bank of Eng-
land might supply the whole country, on condition of lending
fifteen or twenty millions of its notes to the government
without interest: which would give the same pecuniary
advantage to the state as if it issued that number of its own
notes.

The reason ordinarily alleged in condemnation of the
system of plurality of issuers which existed in England before
the Act of 1844, and under certain limitations still subsists,
is, that the competition of these different issuers induces them
to increase the amount of their notes to an injurious extent.
But we have seen that the power which bankers have of
augmenting their issues, and the degree of mischief which
they can produce by it, are quite trifling compared with the



232


BOOK III. CHAPTER XXIV. § 6.

current over-estimate. As remarked by Mr. Fullarton,* the
extraordinary increase of banking competition occasioned by
the establishment of the joint-stock banks, a competition often
of the most reckless kind, has proved utterly powerless to
enlarge the aggregate mass of the bank-note circulation; that
aggregate circulation having, on the contrary, actually de-
creased. In any case it appears desirable to maintain one
great establishment like the Bank of England, distinguished
from other banks of issue in this, that it alone is required to
pay in gold, the others being at liberty to pay their notes
with notes of the central establishment. The object of this is
that there may be one body, responsible for maintaining a
reserve of the precious metals sufficient to meet any drain
that can reasonably be expected to take place. By dissemi-
nating this responsibility among a number of banks, it is
prevented from operating efficaciously upon any : or if it be
still enforced against one, the reserves of the metals retained
by all the others are capital kept idle in pure waste, which
may be dispensed with by allowing them at their option to
pay in Bank of England notes.

§ 6. The question remains whether, in case of a plurality
of issuers, any peculiar precautions are needed to protect
the holders of notes from the consequences of failure of
payment. Before 1826, the insolvency of banks of issue was
a frequent and very serious evil, often spreading distress
through a whole neighbourhood, and at one blow depriving
provident industry of the results of long and painful saving.
This was one of the chief reasons which induced Parliament,
in that year, to prohibit the issue of bank notes of a denomi-
nation below five pounds, that the labouring classes at least
might be as little as possible exposed to participate in this
suffering. As an additional safeguard, it has been suggested
to give the holders of notes a priority over other creditors,


Pp. 89—92.



REGULATION OF CURRENCY.


283


or to require bankers to deposit stock or other public secu-
rities as a pledge for the whole amount of their issues. The
insecurity of the former bank-note currency of England was
partly the work of the law, which, in order to give a qualified
monopoly of banking business to the Bank of England, had
actually made the formation of safe banking establishments a
punishable offence, by prohibiting the existence of any hanks,
in town or country, whether of issue or deposit, with a
number of partners exceeding six. This truly characteristic
specimen of the old system of monopoly and restriction, was
done away with in 1826, both as to issues and deposits, every-
where but in a district of sixty-five miles radius round
London, and in 1833 in that district also, as far as relates to
deposits. It was hoped that the numerous joint-stock banks
since established, would have furnished a more trustworthy
currency, and that under their influence the banking system
of England would have been almost as secure to the public
as that of Scotland (where banking was always free) has been
for two centuries past. But the almost incredible instances of
reckless and fraudulent mismanagement which these institu-
tions have of late afforded (though in some of the most
notorious cases the delinquent establishments have not been
banks of issue), have shown only too clearly that, south of
the Tweed at least, the joint-stock principle applied to
banking is not the adequate safeguard it was so confidently
supposed to be: and it is difficult now to resist the convic-
tion, that if plurality of issuers is allowed to exist at all, some
kind of special security in favour of the holders of notes
should be exacted as an imperative condition.



CHAPTER XXV.


OF THE COMPETITION OF DIFFERENT COUNTRIES IN
THE SAME MARKET.

§ 1. In the phraseology of the Mercantile System, the
language and doctrines of which are still the basis of what
may be called the political economy of the selling classes, as
distinguished from the buyers or consumers, there is no word
of more frequent recurrence or more perilous import than
the word underselling. To undersell other countries — not to
be undersold by other countries — were spoken of, and are
still very often spoken of, almost as if they were the sole
purposes for which production and commodities exist. The
feelings of rival tradesmen, prevailing among nations, over-
ruled for centuries all sense of the general community of
advantage which commercial countries derive from the pros-
perity of one another : and that commercial spirit which is
now one of the strongest obstacles to wars, was during a
certain period of European history their principal cause.

Even in the more enlightened view now attainable of the
nature and consequences of international commerce, some,
though a comparatively small, space must still be made for
the fact of commercial rivality. Nations may, like individual
dealers, be competitors, with opposite interests, in the markets
of some commodities, while in others they are in the more
fortunate relation of reciprocal customers. The benefit of
commerce does not consist, as it was once thought to do, in
the commodities sold; but, since the commodities sold are
the means of obtaining those which are bought, a nation
would be cut off from the real advantage of commerce, the
imports, if it could not induce other nations to take any of



COMPETITION OF COUNTRIES IN THE SAME MARKET. 235


its commodities in exchange; and in proportion as the com-
petition of other countries compels it to offer its commodities
on cheaper terms, on pain of not selling them at all, the im-
ports which it obtains by its foreign trade are procured at
greater cost.

These points have been adequately, though incidentally,
illustrated in some of the preceding chapters. But the great
space which the topic has filled, and continues to fill, in
economical speculations, and in the practical anxieties both
of politicians and of dealers and manufacturers, makes it de-
sirable, before quitting the subject of international exchange,
to subjoin a few observations on the things which do, and
on those which do not, enable countries to undersell one
another.

One country can only undersell another in a given
market, to the extent of entirely expelling her from it, on
two conditions. In the first place, she must have a greater
advantage than the second country in the production of the
article exported by both; meaning by a greater advantage
(as has been already so fully explained) not absolutely, but
in comparison with other commodities; and in the second
place, such must be her relation with the customer country in
respect to the demand for each other's products, and such the
consequent state of international values, as to give away to
the customer country more than the whole advantage pos-
sessed by the rival country; otherwise the rival will still be
able to hold her ground in the market.

Let us revert to the imaginary hypothesis of a trade
between England and Germany in cloth and linen : England
being capable of producing 10 yards of cloth at the same
cost with 15 yards of linen, Germany at the same cost with
20, and the two commodities being exchanged between the
two countries (cost of carriage apart) at some intermediate
rate, say 1 0 for 17. Germany could not be permanently
undersold in the English market, and expelled from it,
unless by a country which offered not merely more than 17,



286 BOOK III. CHAPTER XXV. § 1.

but more than 20 yards of linen for 1 0 of cloth. Short of
that, the competition would only oblige Germany to pay
dearer for cloth, but would not disable her from exporting
linen. The country, therefore, which could undersell Ger-
many, must, in the first place, be able to produce linen at less
cost, compared with cloth, than Germany herself; and in the
next place, must have such a demand for cloth, or other
English commodities, as would compel her, even when she
became sole occupant of the market, to give a greater advan-
tage to England than Germany could give by resigning the
whole of hers; to give, for example, 21 yards for 10. For if
not — if, for example, the equation of international demand, after
Germany was excluded, gave a ratio of 18 for 10, Germany
could again enter into the competition ; Germany would be
now the underselling nation; and there would be a point,
perhaps 19 for 10, at which both countries would be able to
maintain their ground, and to sell in England enough linen
to pay for the cloth, or other English commodities, for which,
on these newly adjusted terms of interchange, they had a
demand. In like manner, England, as an exporter of cloth,
could only be driven from the German market by some rival
whose superior advantages in the production of cloth enabled
her, and the intensity of whose demand for German produce
compelled her, to offer 10 yards of cloth, not merely for less
than 17 yards of linen, but for less than 15. In that case,
England could no longer carry on the trade without loss; but
in any case short of this, she would merely be obliged to give
to Germany more cloth for less linen than she had previously
given.

It thus appears that the alarm of being permanently under-
sold may be taken much too easily; may be taken when the
thing really to be anticipated is not the loss of the trade, but
the minor inconvenience of carrying it on at a diminished
advantage; an inconvenience chiefly falling on the consumers
of foreign commodities, and not on the producers or sellers of
the exported article. It is no sufficient ground of apprehen-



COMPETITION OF COUNTRIES IN THE SAME MARKET. 237

sion to the English producers, to find that some other country
can sell cloth in foreign markets at some particular time, a
trifle cheaper than they can themselves afford to do in the
existing state of prices in England. Suppose them to be
temporarily undersold, and their exports diminished ; the im-
ports will exceed the exports, there will be a new distribution
of the precious metals, prices will fall, and as all the money
expenses of the English producers will be diminished, they
will be able (if the case falls short of that stated in the pre-
ceding paragraph) again to compete with their rivals. The
loss which England will incur, will not fall upon the ex-
porters, but upon those who consume imported commodities;
who, with money incomes reduced in amount, will have to
pay the same or even an increased price for all things pro-
duced in foreign countries.

§ 2. Such, I conceive, is the true theory, or rationale, of
underselling. It will be observed that it takes no account of
some things which we hear spoken of, oftener perhaps than
any others, in the character of causes exposing a country to be
undersold.

According to the preceding doctrine, a country cannot be
undersold in any commodity, unless the rival country has a
stronger inducement than itself for devoting its labour and
capital to the production of the commodity; arising from the
fact that by doing so it occasions a greater saving of labour
and capital, to be shared between itself and its customers — a
greater increase of the aggregate produce of the world. The
underselling, therefore, though a loss to the undersold coun-
try, is an advantage to the world at large; the substituted
commerce being one which economizes more of the labour and
capital of mankind, and adds more to their collective wealth,
than the commerce superseded by it. The advantage, of
course, consists in being able to produce the commodity of
better quality, or with less labour (compared with other
things); or perhaps not with less labour, but in less time;



288 BOOK III. CHAPTER XXV. § 2 .

with a less prolonged detention of the capital employed.
This may arise from greater natural advantages (such as soil,
climate, richness of mines) ; superior capability, either natural
or acquired, in the labourers; better division of labour, and
better tools, or machinery. But there is no place left in this
theory for the case of lower wages. This, however, in the
theories commonly current, is a favourite cause of under-
selling. We continually hear of the disadvantage under which
the British producer labours, both in foreign markets and even
in his own, through the lower wages paid by his foreign
rivals. These lower wages, we are told, enable, or are always
on the point of enabling them to sell at lower prices, and to
dislodge the English manufacturer from all markets in which
he is not artificially protected.

Before examining this opinion on grounds of principle, it
is worth while to bestow a moment's consideration upon it as
a question of fact. Is it true, that the wages of manufac-
turing labour are lower in foreign countries than in England,
in any sense in which low wages are an advantage to the
capitalist? The artisan of Ghent or Lyons may earn less
wages in a day, but does he not do less work? Degrees of
efficiency considered, does his labour cost less to his em-
ployer? Though wages may be lower on the Continent, is
not the Cost of Labour, which is the real element in the
competition, very nearly the same ? That it is so, seems the
opinion of competent judges, and is confirmed by the very
little difference in the rate of profit between England and the
Continental countries. But if so, the opinion is absurd that
English producers can be undersold by their Continental rivals
from this cause. It is only in America that the supposition
is primd facie admissible. In America, wages are much
higher than in England, if we mean by wages the daily
earnings of a labourer: but the productive power of Ame-
rican labour is so great — its efficiency, combined with the
favourable circumstances in which it is exerted, makes it
worth so much to the purchaser, that the Cost of Labour is



COMPETITION OF COUNTRIES IN THE SAME MARKET. 239


lower in America than in England; as is proved by the fact
that the general rate of profits and of interest is very much
higher.

§ 3. But is it true that low wages, even in the sense of
low Cost of Labour, enable a country to sell cheaper in the
foreign market? I mean, of course, low wages which are
common to the whole productive industry of the country.

If wages, in any of the departments of industry which
supply exports, are kept, artificially, or by some accidental
cause, below the general rate of wages in the countiy, this is
a real advantage in the foreign market. It lessens the com-
parative cost of production of those articles, in relation to
others; and has the same effect as if their production required
so much less labour. Take, for instance, the case of the
United States in respect to certain commodities. In that
country, tobacco and cotton, two great articles of export, are
produced by slave labour, while food and manufactures gene-
rally are produced by free labourers, who either work on
their own account or are paid by wages. In spite of the in-
ferior efficiency of slave labour, there can be no reasonable
doubt that in a country where the wages of free labour are so
high, the work executed by slaves is a better bargain to the
capitalist. To whatever extent it is so, this smaller cost of
labour, being not general, but limited to those employments,
is just as much a cause of cheapness in the products, both in
the home and in the foreign market, as if they had been made
by a less quantity of labour. If the slaves in the Southern
States were emancipated, and their wages rose to the general
level of the earnings of free labour in America, that country
might be obliged to erase some of the slave-grown articles
from the catalogue of its exports, and would certainly be un-
able to sell any of them in the foreign market at the present
price. Their cheapness is partly an artificial cheapness, which
may be compared to that produced by a bounty on production
or on exportation : or, considering the means by which it is



240


BOOK 111. CHAPTER XXV. § 8.


obtained, an apter comparison would be with the cheapness
of stolen goods.

An advantage of a similar economical, though of a very
different moral character, is that possessed by domestic manu-
factures; fabrics produced in the leisure hours of families
partially occupied in other pursuits, who, not depending for
subsistence on the produce of the manufacture, can afford to
sell it at any price, however low, for which they think it
worth while to take the trouble of producing. In an account
of the Canton of Zurich, to which I have had occasion to
refer on another subject, it is observed,* “ The workman of
Zurich is to-day a manufacturer, to-morrow again an agricul-
turist, and changes his occupation with the seasons, in a con-
tinual round. Manufacturing industry and tillage advance
hand in hand, in inseparable alliance, and in this union of the
two occupations the secret may be found, why the simple and
unlearned Swiss manufacturer can always go on competing,
and increasing in prosperity, in the face of those extensive
establishments fitted out with great economic, and (what is still
more important) intellectual, resources. Even in those parts of
the Canton where manufactures have extended themselves the
most widely, only one-seventh of all the families belong to
manufactures alone ; four-sevenths combine that employment
with agriculture. The advantage of this domestic or family
manufacture consists chiefly in the fact, that it is compatible
with all other avocations, or rather that it may in part be
regarded as only a supplementary employment. In winter,
in the dwellings of the operatives, the whole family employ
themselves in it: but as soon as spring appears, those on
whom the early field labours devolve, abandon the in-door
work; many a shuttle stands still; by degrees, as the field-work
increases, one member of the family follows another, till at
last, at the harvest, and during the so-called ‘great works/ all
hands seize the implements of husbandry; but in unfavour-

* Uistorigch-geor/raphhch- statist ischfs Gemdlde der Schweiz. Erstes Heft,
1834, p. 105.



COMPETITION OF COUNTRIES IN THE SAME MARKET. 241

able weather, and in all otherwise vacant hours, the work in
the cottage is resumed, and when the ungenial season again
recurs, the people return in the same gradual order to their
home occupation, until they have all resumed it.”

In the case of these domestic manufactures, the compara-
tive cost of production, on which the interchange between
countries depends, is much lower than in proportion to the
quantity of labour employed. The workpeople, looking to
the earnings of their loom for a part only, if for any part, of
their actual maintenance, can afford to work for a less remu-
neration than the lowest rate of wages which can perma-
nently exist in the employments by which the labourer has
to support the whole expense of a family. Working, as they
do, not for an employer but for themselves, they may be said
to carry on the manufacture at no cost at all, except the
small expense of a loom and of the material ; and the limit of
possible cheapness is not the necessity of living by their trade,
but that of earning enough by the work, to make that social
employment of their leisure hours not disagreeable.

§ 4. These two cases, of slave labour and of domestic
manufactures, exemplify the conditions under which low
wages enable a country to sell its commodities cheaper in
foreign markets, and consequently to undersell its rivals, or
to avoid being undersold by them. But no such advantage
is conferred by low wages when common to all branches of
industry. General low wages never caused any country to
undersell its rivals, nor did general high wages ever hinder it
from doing so.

To demonstrate this, we must return to an elementary
principle which was discussed in a former chapter.* General
low wages do not cause low prices, nor high wages high
prices, within the country itself. General prices are not raised
by a rise of wages, any more than they would be raised by an


VOL. II.


Supra, book iii. ch. iv.

R



242


BOOK III. CHAPTER XXV. § 4.

increase of the quantity of labour required in all production.
Expenses which affect all commodities equally, have no
influence on prices. If the maker of broadcloth or cutlery,
and nobody else, had to pay higher wages, the price of his
commodity would rise, just as it would if he had to employ
more labour; because otherwise he would gain less profit than
other producers, and nobody would engage in the employ-
ment. But if everybody has to pay higher wages, or every-
body to employ more labour, the loss must be submitted to;
as it affects everybody alike, no one can hope to get rid of it
by a change of employment, each therefore resigns himself
to a diminution of profits, and prices remain as they were.
In like manner, general low wages, or a general increase in
the productiveness of labour, does not make prices low, but
profits high. If wages fall, (meaning here by wages the cost
of labour,) why, on that account, should the producer lower
his price ? He will be forced, it may be said, by the compe-
tition of other capitalists who will crowd into his employ-
ment. But other capitalists are also paying lower wages, and
by entering into competition with him they would gain
nothing but what they are gaining already. The rate then at
which labour is paid, as well as the quantity of it which is
employed, affects neither the value nor the price of the com-
modity produced, except in so far as it is peculiar to that com-
modity, and not common to commodities generally.

Since low wages are not a cause of low prices in the
country itself, so neither do they cause it to offer its commo-
dities in foreign markets at a lower price. It is quite true
that if the cost of labour is lower in America than in England,
America could sell her cottons to Cuba at a lower price than
England, and still gain as high a profit as the English manu-
facturer. But it is not with the profit of the English manu-
facturer that the American cotton spinner will make his com-
parison; it is with the profits of other American capitalists.
These enjoy, in common with himself, the benefit of a low
cost of labour, and have accordingly a high rate of profit.



COMPETITION OP COUNTRIES IN THE SAME MARKET. 248


This high profit the cotton spinner must also have: he will
not content himself with the English profit. It is true he
may go on for a time at that lower rate, rather than change
his employment; and a trade maybe carried on, sometimes
for a long period, at a much lower profit than that for which
it would have been originally engaged in. Countries which
have a low cost of labour, and high profits, do not for that
reason undersell others, but they do oppose a more obstinate
resistance to being undersold, because the producers can often
submit to a diminution of profit without being unable to live,
and even to thrive, by their business. But this is all which
their advantage does for them: and in this resistance they
will not long persevere, when a change of times which may
give them equal profits with the rest of their countrymen has
become manifestly hopeless.

§ 5. There is a class of trading and exporting commu-
nities, on which a few words of explanation seem to be
required. These are hardly to be looked upon as countries,
carrying on an exchange of commodities with other countries,
but more properly as outlying agricultural or manufacturing
establishments belonging to a larger community. Our West
India colonies, for example, cannot be regarded as countries,
with a productive capital of their own. If Manchester, in-
stead of being where it is, were on a rock in the North Sea
(its present industry nevertheless continuing,) it would still
be but a town of England, not a country trading with
England; it would be merely, as now, a place where England
finds it convenient to carry on her cotton manufacture. The
West Indies, in like manner, are the place where England
finds it convenient to carry on the production of sugar, coffee,
and a few other tropical commodities. All the capital em-
ployed is English capital ; almost all the industry is carried
on for English uses; there is little production of anything
except the staple commodities, and these are sent to England,
not to be exchanged for things exported to the colony and

R 2



244


BOOK III. CHAPTER XXV. § 5.

consumed by its inhabitants, but to be sold in England for
the benefit of the proprietors there. The trade with the
West Indies is therefore hardly to be considered as external
trade, but more resembles the traffic between town and coun-
try, and is amenable to the principles of the home trade.
The rate of profit in the colonies will be regulated by English
profits : the expectation of profit must be about the same as
in England, with the addition of compensation for the disad-
vantages attending the more distant and hazardous employ-
ment: and after allowance is made for those disadvantages,
the value and price of West India produce in the English
market must be regulated, (or rather must have been regu-
lated formerly,) like that of any English commodity, by the
cost of production. For the last ten or twelve years this
principle has been in abeyance : the price was first kept up
beyond the ratio of the cost of production by deficient sup-
plies, which could not, owing to deficiency of labour, be
increased; and more recently the admission of foreign com-
petition has introduced another element, and the West Indies
are undersold, not so much because wages are higher than in
Cuba and Brazil, as because they are higher than in England :
for were they not so, Jamaica could sell her sugars at Cuban
prices, and still obtain, though not a Cuban, an English rate
of profit.

It is worth while also to notice another class of small, but
in this case mostly independent communities, which have
supported and enriched themselves almost without any pro-
ductions of their own, (except ships and marine equipments,)
by a mere carrying trade, and commerce of entrepot; by
buying the produce of one country, to sell it at a profit in
another. Such were Venice and the Hanse Towns. The
case of these communities is very simple. They made them-
selves and their capital the instruments, not of production,
but of accomplishing exchanges between the productions of
other countries. These exchanges were attended with an
advantage to those countries — an increase of the aggregate



COMPETITION OP COUNTRIES IN THE SAME MARKET. 245


returns to industry — part of which went to indemnify the
agents, for the necessary expenses of transport, and another
part to remunerate the use of their capital and mercantile
skill. The countries themselves had not capital disposable
for the operation. When the Venetians became the agents
of the general commerce of Southern Europe, they had
scarcely any competitors: the thing would not have been
done at all without them, and there was really no limit
to their profits except the limit to what the ignorant feudal
nobility would give for the unknown luxuries then first pre-
sented to their sight. At a later period competition arose,
and the profit of this operation, like that of others, became
amenable to natural laws. The carrying trade was taken up
by Holland, a country with productions of its own and a
large accumulated capital. The other nations of Europe
also had now capital to spare, and were capable of con-
ducting their foreign trade for themselves: but Holland,
having, from a variety of circumstances, a lower rate of profit
at home, could afford to carry for other countries at a smaller
advance on the original cost of the goods, than would have
been required by their own capitalists ; and Holland, there-
fore, engrossed the greatest part of the carrying trade of
all those countries which did not keep it to themselves by
Navigation Laws, constructed, like those of England, for the
express purpose.



CHAPTER XXVI


OF DISTRIBUTION, AS AFFECTED BY EXCHANGE.

§ 1. We have now completed, as far as is compatible
with our purposes and limits, the exposition of the ma-
chinery through which the produce of a country is appor-
tioned among the different classes of its inhabitants; which
is no other than the machinery of Exchange, and has for
the exponents of its operation, the laws of Value and of
Price. We shall now avail ourselves of the light thus
acquired, to cast a retrospective glance at the subject of
Distribution. The division of the produce among the three
classes, Labourers, Capitalists, and Landlords, when con-
sidered without any reference to Exchange, appeared to
depend on certain general laws. It is fit that we should
now consider whether these same laws still operate, when
the distribution takes place through the complex mechanism
of exchange and money; or whether the properties of
the mechanism interfere with and modify the presiding
principles.

The primary division of the produce of human exertion
and frugality is, as we have seen, into three shares, wages,
profits, and rent; and these shares are portioned out to the
persons entitled to them, in the form of money, and by a
process of exchange; or rather, the capitalist, with whom in
the usual arrangements of society the produce remains, pays
in money, to the other two sharers, the market value of their
labour and land. If we examine, on what the pecuniary
value of labour, and the pecuniary value of the use of land,
depend, we shall find that it is on the very same causes by
which we found that wages and rent would be regulated if
there were no money and no exchange of commodities.



DISTRIBUTION AS AFFECTED BY EXCHANGE. 247


It is evident, in the first place, that the law of Wages is
not affected by the existence or non-existence of Exchange
or Money. Wages depend on the ratio between population
and capital; and would do so if all the capital in the world
were the property of one association, or if the capitalists
among whom it is shared maintained each an establishment
for the production of every article consumed in the com-
munity, exchange of commodities having no existence. As
the ratio between capital and population, everywhere but in
new colonies, depends on the strength of the checks by which
the too rapid increase of population is restrained, it may be
said, popularly speaking, that wages depend on the checks to
population; that when the check is not death, by starvation
or disease, wages depend on the prudence of the labouring
people; and that wages in any country are habitually at the
lowest rate, to which in that country the labourer will suffer
them to be depressed rather than put a restraint upon multi-
plication.

What is here meant, however, by wages, is the labourer s
real scale of comfort; the quantity he obtains of the things
which nature or habit has made necessary or agreeable to
him : wages in the sense in which they are of importance to
the receiver. In the sense in which they are of importance
to the payer, they do not depend exclusively on such simple
principles. Wages in the first sense, the wages on which
the labourer's comfort depends, we will call real wages, or
wages in kind. Wages in the second sense, we may be
permitted to call, for the present, money wages; assuming,
as it is allowable to do, that money remains for the time an
invariable standard, no alteration taking place in the con-
ditions under which the circulating medium itself is produced
or obtained. If money itself undergoes no variation in cost,
the money price of labour is an exact measure of the Cost of
Labour, and may be made use of as a convenient symbol to
express it.

The money wages of labour are a compound result of two



248 BOOK III. CHAPTER XXVI. § 1 .

elements: first, real wages, or wages in kind, or in other
words, the quantity which the labourer obtains of the ordinary
articles of consumption; and secondly, the money prices of
those articles. In all old countries — all countries in which
the increase of population is in any degree checked by the
difficulty of obtaining subsistence — the habitual money price
of labour is that which will just enable the labourers, one
with another, to purchase the commodities without which
they either cannot or will not keep up the population at
its customary rate of increase. Their standard of comfort
being given, (and by the standard of comfort in a labouring
class, is meant that, rather than forego which, they will
abstain from multiplication,) money wages depend on the
money price, and therefore on the cost of production, of
the various articles which the labourers habitually consume :
because if their wages cannot procure them a given quan-
tity of these, their increase will slacken and their wages
rise. Of these articles, food and other agricultural produce
are so much the principal, as to leave little influence to
anything else.

It is at this point that we are enabled to invoke the aid
of the principles which have been laid down in this Third
Part. The cost of production of food and agricultural pro-
duce has been analyzed in a preceding chapter. It depends
on the productiveness of the least fertile land, or of the least
productively employed portion of capital, which the neces-
sities of society have as yet put in requisition for agricultural
purposes. The cost of production of the food grown in
these least advantageous circumstances, determines, as we
have seen, the exchange value and money price of the whole.
In any given state, therefore, of the labourers' habits, their
money wages depend on the productiveness of the least fertile
land, or least productive agricultural capital; on the point
which cultivation has reached in its downward progress — in
its encroachments on the barren lands, and its gradually
increased strain upon the powers of the more fertile. Now,



DISTRIBUTION AS APPECTED BY EXCHANGE. 249


the force which urges cultivation in this downward course,
is the increase of people; while the counter-force which
checks the descent, is the improvement of agricultural science
and practice, enabling the same soil to yield to the same
labour more ample returns. The costliness of the most
costly part of the produce of cultivation, is an exact expres-
sion of the state, at any given moment, of the race which
population and agricultural skill are always running against
each other.

§ 2. It is well said by Dr. Chalmers, that many of the
most important lessons in political economy are to be learnt
at the extreme margin of cultivation, the last point which
the culture of the soil has reached in its contest with the
spontaneous agencies of nature. The degree of productive-
ness of this extreme margin, is an index to the existing state
of the distribution of the produce among the three classes, of
labourers, capitalists, and landlords.

When the demand of an increasing population for more
food cannot be satisfied without extending cultivation to less
fertile land, or incurring additional outlay, with a less pro-
portional return, on land already in cultivation, it is a neces-
sary condition of this increase of agricultural produce, that
the value and price of that produce must first rise. But as
soon as the price has risen sufficiently to give to the addi-
tional outlay of capital the ordinary profit, the rise will not
go on still further for the purpose of enabling the new land,
or the new expenditure on old land, to yield rent as well as
profit. The land or capital last put in requisition, and occu-
pying what Dr. Chalmers calls the margin of cultivation,
will yield, and continue to yield, no rent. But if this yields
no rent, the rent afforded by all other land or agricultural
capital will be exactly so much as it produces more than this.
The price of food will always on the average be such, that
the worst land, and the least productive instalment of the
capital employed' on the better lands, shall just replace the



250


BOOK III. CHAPTER XXVI. § 3.

expenses with the ordinary profit. If the least favoured
land and capital just do thus much, all other land and capital
will yield an extra profit, equal to the proceeds of the extra
produce due to their superior productiveness; and this extra
profit becomes, by competition, the prize of the landlords.
Exchange, and money, therefore, make no difference in the
law of rent : it is the same as we originally found it. Rent
is the extra return made to agricultural capital when em-
ployed with peculiar advantages; the exact equivalent of
what those advantages enable the producers to economize
in the cost of production : the value and price of the produce
being regulated by the cost of production to those producers
who have no advantages; by the return to that portion of
agricultural capital, the circumstances of which are the least
favourable.

§ 3. Wages and Rent being thus regulated by the same
principles when paid in money, as they would be if appor-
tioned in kind, it follows that Profits are so likewise. For
the surplus, after replacing wages and paying rent, consti-
tutes Profits.

We found in the last chapter of the Second Book, that
the advances of the capitalist, when analyzed to their ultimate
elements, consist either in the purchase or maintenance of
labour, or in the profits of former capitalists; and that there-
fore profits, in the last resort, depend upon the Cost of
Labour, falling as that rises, and rising as it falls. Let us
endeavour to trace more minutely the operation of this law.

There are two modes in which the Cost of Labour, which
is correctly represented (money being supposed invariable)
by the money wages of the labourer, may be increased. The
labourer may obtain greater comforts; wages in kind — real
wages — may rise. Or the progress of population may force
down cultivation to inferior soils, and more costly processes;
thus raising the cost of production, the value, and the price,
of the chief articles of the labourer's consumption. On either
of these suppositions, the rate of profit will fall.



DISTRIBUTION AS AFPECTED BY EXCHANGE. 251

If the labourer obtains more abundant commodities, only
by reason of their greater cheapness; if he obtains a greater
quantity, but not on the whole a greater cost; real wages
will be increased, but not money wages, and there will be
nothing to affect the rate of profit. But if he obtains a
greater quantity of commodities of which the cost of produc-
tion is not lowered, he obtains a greater cost; his money
wages are higher. The expense of these increased money
wages falls wholly on the capitalist. There are no conceiv-
able means by which he can shake it off. It may be said —
it used formerly to be said — that he will get rid of it by
raising his price. But this opinion we have already, and
more than once, fully refuted.*

The doctrine, indeed, that a rise of wages causes an
equivalent rise of prices, is, as we formerly observed, self-
contradictory: for if it did so, it would not be a rise of wages;
the labourer would get no more of any commodity than he
had before, let his money wages rise ever so much ; a rise of
real wages would be an impossibility. This being equally
contrary to reason and to fact, it is evident that a rise of
money wages does not raise prices ; that high wages are not
a cause of high prices. A rise of general wages falls on
profits. There is no possible alternative.

Having disposed of the case in which the increase of
money wages, and of the Cost of Labour, arises from the
labourer’s obtaining more ample wages in kind, let us now
suppose it to arise from the increased cost of production of
the things which he consumes; owing to an increase of
population, unaccompanied by an equivalent increase of
agricultural skill. The augmented supply required by the
population would not be obtained, unless the price of food
rose sufficiently to remunerate the farmer for the increased
cost of production. The farmer, however, in this case
sustains a twofold disadvantage. He has to carry on his
cultivation under less favourable conditions of productive-


Supra, book iii. ch. iv. § 2, and ch. xxv. § 4.



252


BOOK III. CHAPTER XXVI. § S.

ness than before. For this, as it is a disadvantage belong-
ing to him only as a farmer, and not shared by other em-
ployers, he will, on the general principles of value, be com-
pensated by a rise of the price of his commodity: indeed,
until this rise has taken place, he will not bring to market
the required increase of produce. But this very rise of price
involves him in another necessity, for which he is not com-
pensated. He must pay higher money wages to his labourers.
This necessity, being common to him with all other capitalists,
forms no ground for a rise of price. The price will rise,
until it has placed him in as good a situation in respect of
profits, as other employers of labour: it will rise so as to
indemnify him for the increased labour which he must now
employ in order to produce a given quantity of food: but
the increased wages of that labour are a burthen common to
all, and for which no one can be indemnified. It will be
paid wholly from profits.

Thus we see that increased wages, when common to all
descriptions of productive labourers, and when really repre-
senting a greater Cost of Labour, are always and necessarily
at the expense of profits. And by reversing the cases, we
should find in like manner that diminished wages, when
representing a really diminished Cost of Labour, are equiva-
lent to a rise of profits. But the opposition of pecuniary
interest thus indicated between the class of capitalists and
that of labourers, is to a great extent only apparent. Real
wages are a very different thing from the Cost of Labour,
and are generally highest at the times and places where,
from the easy terms on which the land yields all the produce
as yet required from it, the value and price of food being
low, the cost of labour to the employer, notwithstanding its
ample remuneration, is comparatively cheap, and the rate of
profit consequently high ; as at present in the United States.
We thus obtain a full confirmation of our original theorem
that Profits depend on the Cost of Labour: or, to express
the meaning with still greater accuracy, the rate of profit



DISTRIBUTION AS AFFECTED BY EXCHANGE. 258


and the cost of labour vary inversely as one another, and are
joint effects of the same agencies or causes.

But does not this proposition require to be slightly modi-
fied, by making allowance for that portion (though compara-
tively small) of the expenses of the capitalist, which does not
consist in wages paid by himself or reimbursed to previous
capitalists, but in the profits of those previous capitalists?
Suppose, for example, an invention in the manufacture of
leather, the advantage of which should consist in rendering it
unnecessary that the hides should remain for so great a length
of time in the tan-pit. Shoemakers, saddlers, and other
workers in leather, would save a part of that portion of the
cost of their material which consists of the tanner's profits
during the time liis capital is locked up ; and this saving, it
may be said, is a source from which they might derive an
increase of profit, though wages and the Cost of Labour
remained exactly the same. In the case here supposed, how-
ever, the consumer alone would benefit, since the prices of
shoes, harness, and all other articles into which leather enters,
would fall, until the profits of the producers were reduced to
the general level. To obviate this objection, let us suppose
that a similar saving of expenses takes place in all depart-
ments of production at once. In that case, since values and
prices would not be affected, profits would probably be
raised; but if we look more closely into the case we shall
find, that it is because the cost of labour would be lowered.
In this as in any other case of increase in the general pro-
ductiveness of labour, if the labourer obtained only the same
real wages, profits would be raised: but the same real
wages would imply a smaller Cost of Labour; the cost of
production of all things having been, by the supposition,
diminished. If, on the other hand, the real wages of labour
rose proportionally, and the Cost of Labour to the employer
remained the same, the advances of the capitalist would bear
the same ratio to his returns as before, and the rate of profit
would be unaltered. The reader who may wish for a more



254


BOOK III. CHAPTER XXVI. § 3.

minute examination of this point, will find it in the volume
of separate Essays to which reference has before been made.*
The question is too intricate in comparison with its import-
ance, to be further entered into in a work like the present ;
and I will merely say, that it seems to result from the consi-
derations adduced in the Essay, that there is nothing in the
case in question to affect the integrity of the theory which
affirms an exact correspondence, in an inverse direction,
between the rate of profit and the Cost of Labour.

* Essay IV. on Profits and Interest .



BOOK IV.


INFLUENCE OF THE PROGRESS OF SOCIETY
ON PRODUCTION AND DISTRIBUTION.


BOOK IV.


INFLUENCE OF THE PROGRESS OF SOCIETY ON
PRODUCTION AND DISTRIBUTION.


CHAPTER I.

GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS OF A PROGRESSIVE STATE
OF WEALTH.

§ 1. The three preceding Parts include as detailed a
view as our limits permit, of what, by a happy genera-
lization of a mathematical phrase, has been called the
Statics of the subject. We have surveyed the field of eco-
nomical facts, and have examined how they stand related to
one another as causes and effects; what circumstances
determine the amount of production, of employment for
labour, of capital and population; what laws regulate rent,
profits, and wages; under what conditions and in what
proportions commodities are interchanged between indi-
viduals and between countries. We have thus obtained a
collective view of the economical phenomena of society, con-
sidered as existing simultaneously. We have ascertained, to
a certain extent, the principles of their interdependence; and
when the state of some of the elements is known, we should
now be able to infer, in a general way, the contemporaneous

VOL. II. S



258 BOOK IV, CHAPTER I, § 2 .

state of most of the others. All this, however, has only put
us in possession of the economical laws of a stationary and
unchanging society. We have still to consider the econo-
mical condition of mankind as liable to change, and indeed
(in the more advanced portions of the race, and in all regions
to which their influence reaches) as at all times undergoing
progressive changes. We have to consider what these
changes are, what are their laws, and what their ultimate
tendencies; thereby adding a theory of motion to our theory
of equilibrium — the Dynamics of political economy to the
Statics.

In this inquiry, it is natural to commence by tracing the
operation of known and acknowledged agencies. Whatever
may be the other changes which the economy of society is
destined to undergo, there is one actually in progress, con-
cerning which there can be no dispute. In the leading
countries of the world, and in all others as they come within
the influence of those leading countries, there is at least one
progressive movement which continues with little interrup-
tion from year to year and from generation to generation; a
progress in wealth ; an advancement in what is called mate-
rial prosperity. All the nations which we are accustomed to
call civilized, increase gradually in production and in popula-
tion: and there is no reason to doubt, that not only these
nations will for some time continue so to increase, but that
most of the other nations of the world, including some not
yet founded, will successively enter upon the same career.
It will, therefore, be our first object to examine the nature
and consequences of this progressive change; the elements
which constitute it, and the effects it produces on the various
economical facts of which we have been tracing the laws,
and especially on wages, profits, rents, values, and prices.

§ 2. Of the features which characterize this progressive
economical movement of civilized nations, that which first



PROGRESSIVE STATE OF WEALTH.


259


excites attention, through its intimate connexion with the
phenomena of Production, is the perpetual, and so far as
human foresight can extend, the unlimited, growth of man's
power over nature. Our knowledge of the properties and
laws of physical objects shows no sign of approaching its
ultimate boundaries: it is advancing more rapidly, and in a
greater number of directions at once, than in any previous
age or generation, and affording such frequent glimpses of
unexplored fields beyond, as to justify the belief that our
acquaintance with nature is still almost in its infancy. This
increasing physical knowledge is now, too, more rapidly than
at any former period, converted, by practical ingenuity, into
physical power. The most marvellous of modern inventions,
one which realizes the imaginary feats of the magician, not
metaphorically but literally — the electro-magnetic telegraph —
sprang into existence but a few years after the establishment
of the scientific theory which it realizes and exemplifies.
Lastly, the manual part of these great scientific operations
is now never wanting to the intellectual : there is no difficulty
in finding or forming, in a sufficient number of the working
hands of the community, the skill requisite for executing
the most delicate processes of the application of science
to practical uses. From this union of conditions, it is im-
possible not to look forward to a vast multiplication and
long succession of contrivances for economizing labour and
increasing its produce; and to an ever wider diffusion of the
use and benefit of those contrivances.

Another change, which has always hitherto characterized,
and will assuredly continue to characterize, the progress of
civilized society, is a continual increase of the security of
person and property. The people of every country in
Europe, the most backward as well as the most advanced,
are, in each generation, better protected against the violence
and rapacity of one another, both by a more efficient judica-
ture and police for the suppression of private crime, and by

S 2



260 BOOK IV. CHAPTER I. § 2 .

the decay and destruction of those mischievous privileges
which enabled certain classes of the community to prey with
impunity upon the rest. They are also, in every generation,
better protected, either by institutions or by manners and
opinion, against arbitrary exercise of the power of government.
Even in semi-barbarous Russia, acts of spoliation directed
against individuals, who have not made themselves politically
obnoxious, are not supposed to be now so frequent as much
to affect any person's feelings of security. Taxation, in all
European countries, grows less arbitrary and oppressive, both
in itself and in the manner of levying it. Wars, and the
destruction they cause, are now usually confined, in almost
every country, to those distant and outlying possessions at
which it comes into contact with savages. Even the vicissi-
tudes of fortune which arise from inevitable natural cala-
mities, are more and more softened to those on whom they
fall, by the continual extension of the salutary practice of
insurance.

Of this increased security, one of the most unfailing
effects is a great increase both of production and of accumula-
tion. Industry and frugality cannot exist, where there is not
a preponderant probability that those who labour and spare
will be permitted to enjoy. And the nearer this probability
approaches to a certainty, the more do industry and frugality
become pervading qualities in a people. Experience has
shown that a large proportion of the results of labour and
abstinence may be taken away by fixed taxation, without im-
pairing, and sometimes even with the effect of stimulating,
the qualities from which a great production and an abundant
capital take their rise. But those qualities are not proof
against a high degree of uncertainty. The government may
carry off a part ; but there must be assurance that it will not
interfere, nor suffer any one to interfere, with the remainder.

One of the changes which most infallibly attend the pro-
gress of modern society, is an improvement in the business
capacities of the general mass of mankind. I do not mean



PROGRESSIVE STATE OF WEALTH.


261


that the practical sagacity of an individual human being is
greater than formerly. I am inclined to believe that econo-
mical progress has hitherto had even a contrary effect. A
person of good natural endowments, in a rude state of society,
can do a greater number of things tolerably well, has a greater
power of adapting means to ends, is more capable of extri-
cating himself and others from an unforeseen embarrassment,
than ninety-nine in a hundred of those who have known only
what is called the civilized form of life. How far these points
of inferiority of faculties are compensated, and by what
means they might be compensated still more completely, to
the civilized man as an individual being, is a question be-
longing to a different inquiry from the present. But to
civilized human beings collectively considered, the com-
pensation is ample. What is lost in the separate efficiency
of each, is far more than made up by the greater capa-
city of united action. In proportion as they put off the
qualities of the savage, they become amenable to disci-
pline; capable of adhering to plans concerted beforehand,
and about which they may not have been consulted; of
subordinating their individual caprice to a preconceived
determination, and performing severally the parts allotted
to them in a combined undertaking. Works of all sorts,
impracticable to the savage or the half-civilized, are daily
accomplished by civilized nations, not by any greatness
of faculties in the actual agents, but through the fact that
each is able to rely with certainty on the others for the portion
of the work which they respectively undertake. The peculiar
characteristic, in short, of civilized beings, is the capacity of
co-operation; and this, like other faculties, tends to improve
by practice, and becomes capable of assuming a constantly
wider sphere of action.

Accordingly there is no more certain incident of the pro-
gressive change taking place in society, than the continual
growth of the principle and practice of co-operation. Associa-
tions of individuals voluntarily combining their small contri-



262


BOOK IV. CHAPTER I. § 2.

butions, now perform works, both of an industrial and of many
other characters, which no one person or small number of
persons are rich enough to accomplish, or for the performance
of which the few persons capable of accomplishing them were
formerly enabled to exact the most inordinate remuneration.
As wealth increases and business capacity improves, we may
look forward to a great extension of establishments, both for
industrial and other purposes, formed by the collective con-
tributions of large numbers ; establishments like those known
by the technical name of joint-stock companies, or the
associations less formally constituted, which are so nume-
rous in England, to raise funds for public or philanthropic
objects.

The progress which is to be expected in the physical
sciences and arts, combined with the greater security of pro-
perty, and greater freedom in disposing of it, which are
obvious features in the civilization of modem nations, and
with the more extensive and more skilful employment of the
joint-stock principle, afford space and scope for an indefinite
increase of capital and production, and for the increase of
population which is its ordinary accompaniment. That the
growth of population will overpass the increase of production,
there is not much reason to apprehend; and that it should
even keep pace with it, is inconsistent with the supposition of
any real improvement in the poorest classes of the people. It
is, however, quite possible that there might be a great progress
in industrial improvement, and in the signs of what is com-
monly called national prosperity; a great increase of aggre-
gate wealth, and even, in some respects, a better distribution
of it; that not only the rich might grow richer, but many of
the poor might grow rich, that the intermediate classes might
become more numerous and powerful, and the means of
enjoyable existence be more and more largely diffused, while
yet the great class at the base of the whole might increase in
numbers only, and not in comfort nor in cultivation. We
must, therefore, in considering the effects of the progress of



PROGRESSIVE STATE OF WEALTH.


263


industry, admit as a supposition, however greatly we deprecate
as a fact, an increase of population as long-continued, as
indefinite, and possibly even as rapid, as the increase of pro-
duction and accumulation.

With these preliminary observations on the causes of
change at work in a society which is in a state of economical
progress, I proceed to a more detailed examination of the
changes themselves.



CHAPTER II.


INFLUENCE OF THE PROGRESS OF INDUSTRY AND POPU-
LATION, ON VALUES AND PRICES.

§ 1. The changes which the progress of industry causes
or presupposes in the, circumstances of production, are neces-
sarily attended with changes in the values of commodities.

The permanent values of all things which are neither
under a natural nor under an artificial monopoly, depend, as
we have seen, on their cost of production. But the increasing
power which mankind are constantly acquiring over nature,
increases more and more the efficiency of human exertion, or
in other words, diminishes cost of production. All inventions
by which a greater quantity of any commodity can be pro-
duced with the same labour, or the same quantity with less
labour, or which abridge the process, so that the capital
employed needs not be advanced for so long a time, lessen
the cost of production of the commodity. As, however, value
is relative; if inventions and improvements in production
were made in all commodities, and all in the same degree,
there would be no alteration in values. Things would con-
tinue to exchange for each other at the same rates as before;
and mankind would obtain a greater quantity of all things in
return for their labour and abstinence, without having that
greater abundance measured and declared (as it is when it
affects only one thing) by the diminished exchange value of
the commodity.

As for prices, in these circumstances they would be
affected or not, according as the improvements in production
did or did not extend to the precious metals. If the mate-
rials of money were an exception to the general diminution
of cost of production, the values of all other, things would



INFLUENCE OF INDUSTRIAL PROGRESS ON PRICES. 265

fall in relation to money, that is, there would be a fall of
general prices throughout the world. But if money, like
other things, and in the same degree as other things, were
obtained in greater abundance and cheapness, prices would
be no more affected than values would ; and there would be
no visible sign, in the state of the markets, of any of the
changes which had taken place ; except that there would be
(if people continued to labour as much as before) a greater
quantity of all sorts of commodities, circulated at the same
prices by a greater quantity of money.

Improvements in production are not the only circum-
stance accompanying the progress of industry, which tends
to diminish the cost of producing, or at least of obtaining,
commodities. Another circumstance is the increase of inter-
course between different parts of the world. As commerce
extends, and the ignorant attempts to restrain it by tariffs
become obsolete, commodities tend more and more to be
produced in the places in which their production can be car-
ried on at the least expense of labour and capital to mankind.
As civilization spreads, and security of person and property
becomes established, in parts of the world which have not
hitherto had that advantage, the productive capabilities of
those places are called into fuller activity, for the benefit both
of their own inhabitants and of foreigners. The ignorance
and misgovernment in which many of the regions most
favoured by nature are still grovelling, afford work, probably,
for many generations before those countries will be raised
even to the present level of the most civilized parts of
Europe. Much will also depend on the increasing migration
of labour and capital to unoccupied parts of the earth, of
which the soil, climate, and situation are found, by the ample
means of exploration now possessed, to promise not only a
large return to industry, but great facilities of producing
commodities suited to the markets of old countries. Much
as the collective industry of the earth is likely to be increased
in efficiency bji the extension of science and of the industrial



266


BOOK IV. CHAPTER II. § 2.

arts, a still more active source of increased cheapness of pro-
duction will be found, probably, for some time to come, in the
gradually unfolding consequences of Free Trade, and in the
increasing scale on which Emigration and Colonization will
be carried on.

From the causes now enumerated, unless counteracted
by others, the progress of things enables' a country to obtain
at less and less of real cost, not only its own productions but
those of foreign countries. Indeed, whatever diminishes the
cost of its own productions, when of an exportable character,
enables it, as we have already seen, to obtain its imports at
less real cost.

§ 2. But is it the fact, that these tendencies are not
counteracted ? Has the progress of wealth and industry no
effect in regard to cost of production, but to diminish it?
Are no causes of an opposite character brought into opera-
tion by the same progress, sufficient in some cases not only
to neutralize but to overcome the former, and convert the
descending movement of cost of production into an ascending
movement ? We are already aware that there are such causes,
and that, in the case of the most important classes of commo-
dities, food and materials, there is a tendency diametrically
opposite to that of which we have been speaking. The cost
of production of these commodities tends to increase.

This is not a property inherent in the commodities them-
selves. If population were stationary, and the produce of
the earth never needed to be augmented in quantity, there
would be no cause for greater cost of production. Mankind
would, on the contrary, have the full benefit of all improve-
ments in agriculture, or in the arts subsidiary to it, and there
would be no difference, in this respect, between the products
of agriculture and those of manufactures. The former, in-
deed, so far as present experience extends, has not seemed
to be susceptible of improved processes to so great a degree
as some branches of manufacture; but inventi#ns may be in



INFLUENCE OF INDUSTRIAL PROGRESS ON PRICES. 267

reserve for the future, which may invert this relation. The
only products of industry which, if population did not in-
crease, would be liable to a real increase of cost of produc-
tion, are those which, depending on a material which is not
renewed, are either wholly or partially exhaustible; such as
coal, and most if not all metals; for even iron, the most abun-
dant as well as most useful of metallic products, which forms
an ingredient of most minerals and of almost all rocks, is
susceptible of exhaustion so far as regards its richest and most
tractable ores.

When, however, population increases, as it has never yet
failed to do when the increase of industry and of the means
of subsistence made room for it, the demand for most of the
productions of the earth, and particularly for food, increases
in a corresponding proportion. And then comes into effect
that fundamental law of production from the soil, on which
we have so frequently had occasion to expatiate ; the law, that
increased labour, in any given state of agricultural skill, is
attended with a less than proportional increase of produce.
The cost of production of the fruits of the earth increases,
cceteris paribus , with every increase of the demand.

No tendency of a like kind exists with respect to manu-
factured articles. The tendency is in the contrary direction.
The larger the scale on which manufacturing operations are
carried on, the more cheaply they can in general be per-
formed. Mr. Senior has gone the length of enunciating as an
inherent law of manufacturing industry, that in it increased
production takes place at a smaller cost, while in agricultural
industry increased production takes place at a greater cost.
I cannot think, however, that even in manufactures, increased
cheapness follows increased production by anything amounting
to a law. It is a probable and usual, but not a necessary,
consequence.

As manufactures, however, depend for their materials
either upon agriculture, or mining, or the spontaneous produce
of the earth, manufacturing industry is subject, in respect of



263


BOOK IV. CHAPTER II. § 8.


one of its essentials, to the same law as agriculture. But the
crude material generally forms so small a portion of the total
cost, that any tendency which may exist to a progressive
increase in that single item, is much over-balanced by the
diminution continually taking place in all the other elements;
to which diminution it is impossible at present to assign any
limit.

The tendency, then, being to a perpetual increase of the
productive power of labour in manufactures, while in agricul-
ture and mining there is a conflict between two tendencies,
the one towards an increase of productive power, the other
towards a diminution of it, the cost of production being
lessened by every improvement in the processes, and aug-
mented by every addition to population ; it follows that the
exchange values of manufactured articles, compared with
the products of agriculture and of mines, have, as population
and industry advance, a certain and decided tendency to fall.
Money being a product of mines, it may also be laid down as
a rule, that manufactured articles tend, as society advances,
to fall in money price. The industrial history of modern
nations, especially during the last hundred years, fully bears
out this assertion.

§ 3. "Whether agricultural produce increases in absolute
as well as comparative cost of production, depends on the
conflict of the two antagonist agencies, increase of popula-
tion, and improvement in agricultural skill. In some, per-
haps in most, states of society, (looking at the whole surface
of the earth,) both agricultural skill and population are either
stationary, or increase very slowly, and the cost of production
of food, therefore, is nearly stationary. In a society which is
advancing in wealth, population generally increases faster than
agricultural skill, and food consequently tends to become
more costly; but there are times when a strong impulse sets
in towards agricultural improvement. Such an impulse has
shown itself in Great Britain during the last fifteen or twenty



INFLUENCE OF INDUSTRIAL PROGRESS ON PRICES. 269


years. In England and Scotland agricultural skill has of late
increased considerably faster than population, insomuch that
food and other agricultural produce, notwithstanding the
increase of people, can be grown at less cost than they were
thirty years ago : and the abolition of the Corn Laws has
given an additional stimulus to the spirit of improvement.
In some other countries, and particularly in France, the im-
provement of agriculture gains ground still more decidedly
upon population, because though agriculture, except in a few
provinces, advances slowly, population advances still more
slowly, and even with increasing slowness; its growth being
kept down, not by poverty, which is diminishing, but by
prudence.

Which of the two conflicting agencies is gaining upon the
other at any particular time, might be conjectured with
tolerable accuracy from the money price of agricultural pro-
duce (supposing bullion not to vary materially in value), pro-
vided a sufficient number of years could be taken, to form an
average independent of the fluctuations of seasons. This
however, is hardly practicable, since Mr. Tooke has shown
that even so long a period as half a century may include a
much greater proportion of abundant and a smaller of deficient
seasons, than is properly due to it. A mere average, there-
fore, might lead to conclusions only the more misleading, for
their deceptive semblance of accuracy. There would be less
danger of error in taking the average of only a small number
of years, and correcting it by a conjectural allowance for the
character of the seasons, than in trusting to a longer average
without any such correction. It is hardly necessary to add,
that in founding conclusions on quoted prices, allowance must
also be made as far as possible for any changes in the general
exchange value of the precious metals.*


* A still better criterion, perhaps, than that suggested in the text, would
be the increase or diminution of the amount of the labourer’s wages estimated
in agricultural produce.



270


BOOK IV. CHAPTER II. § 4.


§ 4. Thus far, of the effect of the progress of society on
the permanent or average values and prices of commodities.
It remains to be considered, in what manner the same pro-
gress affects their fluctuations. Concerning the answer to
this question there can be no doubt. It tends in a very high
degree to diminish them.

In poor and backward societies, as in the East, and in
Europe during the middle ages, extraordinary differences in
the price of the same commodity might exist in places not
very distant from each other, because the want of roads and
canals, the imperfection of marine navigation, and the insecu-
rity of communications generally, prevented things from being
transported from the places where they were cheap to those
where they were dear. The things most liable to fluctuations
in value, those directly influenced by the seasons, and espe-
cially food, were seldom carried to any great distances. Each
locality depended, as a general rule, on its own produce and
that of its immediate neighbourhood. In most years, accord-
ingly, there was, in some part or other of any large country,
a real dearth. Almost every season must be unpropitious to
some among the many soils and climates to be found in an
extensive tract of country; but as the same season is also in
general more than ordinarily favourable to others, it is only
occasionally that the aggregate produce of the whole country
is deficient, and even then in a less degree than that of many
separate portions; while a deficiency at all considerable,
extending to the whole world, is a thing almost unknown.
In modern times, therefore, there is only dearth, where there
formerly would have been famine, and sufficiency everywhere
when anciently there would have been scarcity in some places
and superfluity in others.

The same change has taken place with respect to all
other articles of commerce. The safety and cheapness of
communications, which enable a deficiency in one place to
be supplied from the surplus of another, at a moderate or
even a small advance on the ordinary price, render the flue-



INFLUENCE OF INDUSTRIAL PROGRESS ON PRICES. 271


tuations of prices much less extreme than formerly. This
effect is much promoted by the existence of large capitals,
belonging to what are called speculative merchants, whose
business it is to buy goods in order to sell them at a profit.
These dealers naturally buying things when they are cheapest,
and storing them up to be brought again into the market
when the price has become unusually high ; the tendency of
their operations is to equalize price, or at least to moderate
its inequalities. The prices of things are neither so much
depressed at one time, nor so much raised at another, as they
would be if speculative dealers did not exist.

Speculators, therefore, have a highly useful office in the
economy of society; and (contrary to common opinion) the
most useful portion of the class are those who speculate in
commodities affected by the vicissitudes of seasons. If there
were no com dealers, not only would the price of corn be
liable to variations much more extreme than at present, but
in a deficient season the necessary supplies might not be
forthcoming at all. Unless there were speculators in corn,
or unless, in default of dealers, the farmers became speculators,
the price in a season of abundance would fall without any
limit or check, except the wasteful consumption that would
invariably follow. That any part of the surplus of one year
remains to supply the deficiency of another, is owing either
to farmers who withhold com from the market, or to dealers
who buy it when at the cheapest and lay it up in store.

§ 5. Among persons who have not much considered the
subject, there is a notion that the gains of speculators are
often made by causing an artificial scarcity; that they create
a high price by their own purchases, and then profit by it.
This may easily be shown to be fallacious. If a corn-dealer
makes purchases on speculation, and produces a rise, when
there is neither at the time nor afterwards any cause for a rise
of price except his own proceedings; he no doubt appears to
grow richer as long as his purchases continue, because he is



272 BOOK IV. CHAPTER II. § 5 .

a holder of an article which is quoted at a higher and higher
price: but this apparent gain only seems within his reach so
long as he does not attempt to realize it. If he has bought,
for instance, a million of quarters, and by withholding them
from the market, has raised the price ten shillings a quarter;
just so much as the price has been raised by withdrawing a
million quarters, will it be lowered by bringing them back,
and the best that he can hope is that he will lose nothing
except interest and his expenses. If by a gradual and cautious
sale he is able to realize, on some portion of his stores, a part
of the increased price, so also he will undoubtedly have had to
pay a part of that price on some portion of his purchases. He
runs considerable risk of incurring a still greater loss; for the
temporary high price is very likely to have tempted others,
who had no share in causing it, and who might otherwise not
have found their way to this market at all, to bring their com
there, and intercept a part of the advantage. So that instead
of profiting by a scarcity caused by himself, he is by no means
unlikely, after buying in an average market, to be forced to
sell in a superabundant one.

As an individual speculator cannot gain by a rise of price
solely of his own creating, so neither can a number of specu-
lators gain collectively by a rise, which their operations have
artificially produced. Some among a number of speculators
may gain, by superior judgment or good fortune in selecting
the time for realizing, but they make this gain at the expense,
not of the consumer, but of the other speculators who are less
judicious. They, in fact, convert to their own benefit the high
price produced by the speculations of the others, leaving to
these the loss resulting from the recoil. It is not to be denied,
therefore, that speculators may enrich themselves by other
people's loss. But it is by the losses of other speculators.
As much must have been lost by one set of dealers as is
gained by another set.

When a speculation in a commodity proves profitable to
the speculators as a body, it is because in the interval between



INFLUENCE OF INDUSTRIAL PROGRESS ON PRICES. 273


their buying and reselling, the price rises from some cause
independent of them, their only connexion with it consisting
in having foreseen it. In this case, their purchases make the
price begin to rise sooner than it otherwise would do, thus
spreading the privation of the consumers over a longer period,
but mitigating it at the time of its greatest height: evidently
to the general advantage. In this, however, it is assumed
that they have not overrated the rise which they looked
forward to. For it often happens that speculative purchases
are made in the expectation of some increase of demand, or
deficiency of supply, which after all does not occur, or not to
the extent which the speculator expected. In that case the
speculation, instead of moderating fluctuations, has caused
a fluctuation of price which otherwise would not have hap-
pened,, or aggravated one which would. But in that case
the speculation is a losing one, to the speculators collectively,
however much some individuals may gain by it. All that
part of the rise of price by which it exceeds what there are
independent grounds for, cannot give to the speculators as a
body any benefit, since the price is as much depressed by
their sales as it was raised by their purchases; and while they
gain nothing by it, they lose, not only their trouble and
expenses, but almost always much more, through the effects
incident to the artificial rise of price, in checking consump-
tion, and bringing forward supplies from unforeseen quarters.
The operations, therefore, of speculative dealers, are useful to
the public whenever profitable to themselves; and though they
are sometimes injurious to the public, by heightening the
fluctuations which their more usual office is to alleviate, yet
whenever this happens the speculators are the greatest losers.
The interest, in short, of the speculators as a body, coincides
with {he interest of the public ; and as they can only fail to
serve the public interest in proportion as they miss their own,
the best way to promote the one is to leave them to pursue
the other in perfect freedom.

I do not deny that speculators may aggravate a local
VOL. II. T



274l BOOK IV. CHAPTER II. § 5.

scarcity. In collecting com from the villages to supply the
towns, they make the dearth penetrate into nooks and corners
which might otherwise have escaped from bearing their share
of it. To buy and resell in the same place, tends to alleviate
scarcity: to buy in one place and resell in another, may
increase it in the former of the two places, but relieves it in
the latter, where the price is higher, and which therefore, by
the very supposition, is likely to be suffering more. And these
sufferings always fall hardest on the poorest consumers, since
the rich, by outbidding, can obtain their accustomed supply
undiminished if they choose. To no persons, therefore, are
the operations of corn-dealers on the whole so beneficial as
to the poor. Accidentally and exceptionally, the poor may
suffer from them : it might sometimes be more advantageous
to the rural poor to have corn cheap in winter, when they
are entirely dependent on it, even if the consequence were a
dearth in spring, when they can perhaps obtain partial sub-
stitutes. But there are no substitutes, procurable at that
season, which serve in any great degree to replace bread-corn
as the chief article of food: if there were, its price would
fall in the spring, instead of continuing, as it always does, to
rise till the approach of harvest.

There is an opposition of immediate interest, at the
moment of sale, between the dealer in com and the con-
sumer, as there always is between the seller and the buyer:
and a time of dearth being that in which the speculator
makes his largest profits, he is an object of dislike and jea-
lousy at that time, to those who are suffering while he is
gaining. It is an error, however, to suppose that the corn-
dealer's business affords him any extraordinary profit : he
makes his gains not constantly, but at particular times, and
they must therefore occasionally be great, but the chances of
profit in a business in which there is so much competition,
cannot on the whole be greater than in other employments.
A year of scarcity, in which great gains are made by corn-
dealers, rarely comes to an end without a recoil which places



INFLUENCE OF INDUSTRIAL PROGRESS ON PRICES. 275

many of them in the list of bankrupts. There have been few
more promising seasons for corn-dealers than the year 1 847 ,
and seldom was there a greater break-up among the specu-
lators than in the autumn of that year. The chances of
failure, in this most precarious trade, are a set-off against
great occasional profits. If the corn-dealer were to sell his
stores, during a dearth, at a lower price than that which the
competition of the consumers assigns to him, he would make
a sacrifice, to charity or philanthropy, of the fair profits of
his employment, which may be quite as reasonably required
from any other person of equal means. His business being
a useful one, it is the interest of the public that the ordinary
motives should exist for carrying it on, and that neither law
nor opinion should prevent an operation beneficial to the
public from being attended with as much private advantage
as is compatible with full and free competition.

It appears, then, that the fluctuations of values and prices
arising from variations of supply, or from alterations in real
(as distinguished from speculative) demand, may be expected
to become more moderate as society advances. With regard
to those which arise from miscalculation, and especially from
the alternations of undue expansion and excessive contraction
of credit, which occupy so conspicuous a place among com-
mercial phenomena, the same thing cannot be affirmed with
equal confidence. Such vicissitudes, beginning with irrational
speculation and ending with a commercial crisis, have not
hitherto become either less frequent or less violent with the
growth of capital and extension of industry. Rather they
may be said to have become more so : in consequence, as is
often said, of increased competition ; but, as I prefer to say, of
a low rate of profits and interest, which make capitalists dis-
satisfied with the ordinary course of safe mercantile gains.
The connexion of this low rate of profit with the advance of.
population and accumulation, is one of the points to be illus-
trated in the ensuing chapters.



CHAPTER III.


INFLUENCE OF THE PROGRESS OF INDUSTRY AND
POPULATION, ON RENTS, PROFITS, AND WAGES.

§ 1. Continuing the inquiry into the nature of the
economical changes taking place in a society which is in a
state of industrial progress, we shall next consider what is the
effect of that progress on the distribution of the produce
among the various classes who share in it. We may confine
our attention to the system of distribution which is the most
complex, and which virtually includes all others — that in
which the produce of manufactures is shared between two
classes, labourers and capitalists, and the produce of agriculture
among three, labourers, capitalists, and landlords.

The characteristic features of what is commonly meant by
industrial progress, resolve themselves mainly into three,
increase of capital, increase of population, and improvements
in production ; understanding the last expression in its widest
sense, to include the process of procuring commodities from
a distance, as well as that of producing them. The other
changes which take place are chiefly consequences of these ;
as, for example, the tendency to a progressive increase of the
cost of production of food ; arising from an increased demand,
which may be occasioned either by increased population, or by
an increase of capital and wages, enabling the poorer classes
to increase their consumption. It will be convenient to set
out by considering each of the three causes, as operating
separately ; after which we can suppose them combined in any
manner we think fit.

Let us first suppose that population increases, capital
and the arts of production remaining stationary. One of the
effects of this change of circumstances is sufficiently obvious:



INFLUENCE OF PROGRESS ON RENTS, PROFITS, &C. 277


wages will fall; the labouring class will be reduced to an in-
ferior condition. The state of the capitalist, on the contrary,
will be improved. With the same capital, he can purchase
more labour, and obtain more produce. His rate, of profit is
increased. The dependence of the rate of profits on the cost
of labour is here verified; for the labourer obtaining a dimi-
nished quantity of commodities, and no alteration being sup-
posed in the circumstances of their production, the diminished
quantity represents a diminished cost. The labourer obtains
not only a smaller real reward, but the product of a smaller
quantity of labour. The first circumstance is the important
one to himself, the last to his employer.

Nothing has occurred, thus far, to affect in any way the
value of any commodity; and no reason, therefore, has yet
shewn itself, why rent should be either raised or lowered.
But if we look forward another stage in the series of effects,
we may see our way to such a consequence. The labourers
have increased in numbers : their condition is reduced in the
same proportion; the increased numbers divide among them
only the produce of the same amount of labour as before.
But they may economize in their other comforts, and not in
their food : each may consume as much food, and of as costly
a quality, as previously; or they may submit to a reduction,
but not in proportion to the increase of numbers. On this
supposition, notwithstanding the diminution of real wages,
the increased population will require an increased quantity of
food. But since industrial skill and knowledge are supposed
to be stationary, more food can only be obtained by resorting
to worse land, or to methods of cultivation which are less
productive in proportion to the outlay. Capital for this ex-
tension of agriculture will not be wanting; for though, by
hypothesis, no addition takes place to the capital in existence,
a sufficient amount can be spared from the industry which
previously supplied the other and less pressing wants which
the labourers have been obliged to curtail. The additional
supply of food, therefore, will be produced, but produced at



278 BOOK IV. CHAPTER III. § 1 .

a greater cost; and the exchange value of agricultural pro-
duce must rise. It may be objected, that profits having
risen, the extra cost of producing food can be defrayed from
profits, without any increase of price. It could, undoubt-
edly, but it will not: because if it did, the agriculturist
would be placed in an inferior position to other capitalists.
The increase of profits, being the effect of diminished wages, is
common to all employers of labour. The increased expenses,
arising from the necessity of a more costly cultivation, affect
the agriculturist alone. For this peculiar burthen he must
be peculiarly compensated, whether the general rate of
profit be high or low. He will not submit indefinitely to a
deduction from his profits, to which other capitalists are not
subject. He will not extend his cultivation by laying out
fresh capital, unless for a return sufficient to yield him as
high a profit as could be obtained by the same capital in
other investments. The value, therefore, of his commodity
will rise, and rise in proportion to the increased cost.
The farmer will thus be indemnified for the burthen
which is peculiar to himself, and will also enjoy the
augmented rate of profit which is common to all capi-
talists.

It follows, from principles with which we are already
familiar, that in these circumstances rent will rise. Any land
can afford to pay, and under free competition will pay, a rent
equal to the excess of its produce above the return to an equal
capital on the worst land, or under the least favourable con-
ditions. Whenever, therefore, agriculture is driven to descend
to worse land, or more onerous processes, rent rises. Its rise
will be twofold, for, in the first place, rent in kind, or corn
rent, will rise; and in the second, since the value of agricul-
tural produce has also risen, rent, estimated in manufactured
or foreign commodities (which is represented cceteris paribus
by money rent), will rise still more.

The steps of the process (if, after what has been formerly
said, it is necessary to retrace them) are as follows. Corn rises



INFLUENCE OF PROGRESS ON RENTS, PROFITS, &C. 279

in price, to repay with the ordinary profit the capital required
for producing additional corn on worse land or by more costly
processes. So far as regards this additional corn, the increased
price is but an equivalent for the additional expense; but the
rise, extending to all corn, affords on all, except the last pro-
duced, an extra profit. If the farmer was accustomed to
produce 100 quarters of wheat at 40s., and 120 quarters are
now required, of which the last twenty cannot be produced
under 45s., he obtains the extra five shillings on the entire
120 quarters, and not on the last twenty alone. He has thus
an extra 251 . beyond the ordinary profits, and this, in a state
of free competition, he will not be able to retain. He cannot
however be compelled to give it up to the consumer, since a
less price than 45s. would be inconsistent with the production
of the last twenty quarters. The price, then, will remain at
45s., and the 2 51 . will be transferred by competition not to
the consumer but to the landlord. A rise of rent is therefore
inevitably consequent on an increased demand for agricultural
produce, when unaccompanied by increased facilities for its
production. A truth which, after this final illustration, we
may henceforth take for granted.

The new element now introduced — an increased demand
for food — besides occasioning an increase of rent, still further
disturbs the distribution of the produce between capitalists
and labourers. The increase of population will have dimi-
nished the reward of labour : and if its cost is diminished as
greatly as its real remuneration, profits will be increased by
the full amount. If, however, the increase of population
leads to an increased production of food, which cannot be
supplied but at an enhanced cost of production, the cost of
labour will not be so much diminished as the real reward of
it, and profits, therefore, will not be so much raised. It is
even possible that they might not be raised at all. .The la-
bourers may previously have been so well provided for, that
, the whole of what they now lose may be struck off from
their other indulgences, and they may not, either by necessity



280 BOOK IV. CHAPTER III. § 2.

or choice, undergo any reduction in the quantity or quality of
their food. To produce the food for the increased number
may be attended with such an increase of expense, that
wages, though reduced in quantity, may represent as great a
cost, may be the product of as much labour, as before, and the
capitalist may not be at all benefited. On this supposition
the loss to the labourer is partly absorbed in the additional
labour required for producing the last instalment of agricul-
tural produce; and the remainder is gained by the landlord,
the only sharer who always benefits by an increase of popu-
lation.


§ 2. Let us now reverse our hypothesis, and, instead of
supposing capital stationary and population advancing, let us
suppose capital advancing and population stationary; the
facilities of production, both natural and acquired, being, as
before, unaltered. The real wages of labour, instead of fall-
ing, will now rise; and since the cost of production of the
things consumed by the labourer is not diminished, this rise of
wages implies an equivalent increase of the cost of labour,
and diminution of profits. To state the same deduction in
other terms; the labourers not being more numerous, and the
productive power of their labour being only the same as
before, there is no increase of the produce; the increase of
wages, therefore, must be at the charge of the capitalists. It
is not impossible that the cost of labour might be increased
in even a greater ratio than its real remuneration. The im-
proved condition of the labourers may increase the demand
for food. The labourers may have been so ill off before, as
not to have food enough ; and may now consume more : or
they may choose to expend their increased means partly or
wholly in a more costly quality of food, requiring more labour
and mpre land; wheat, for example, instead of oats or
potatoes. This extension of agriculture implies, as usual, a
greater cost of production and a higher price, so that be-
sides the increase of the cost of labour arising from the in-



INFLUENCE OF PROGRESS ON RENTS, PROFITS, &C. 281


crease of its reward, there will be a further increase (and an
additional fall of profits) from the increased costliness of the
commodities of which that reward consists. The same causes
will produce a rise of rent. What the capitalists lose, above
what the labourers gain, is partly transferred to the landlord,
and partly swallowed up in the cost of growing food on worse
land or by a less productive process.

§ 3. Having disposed of the two simple cases, an increas-
ing population and stationary capital, and an increasing
capital and stationary population, we are prepared to take
into consideration the mixed case, in which the two elements
of expansion are combined, both population and capital in-
creasing. If either element increases faster than the other,
the case is so far assimilated with one or other of the two
preceding: we shall suppose them, therefore, to increase
with equal rapidity; the test of equality being, that each
labourer obtains the same commodities as before, and the
same quantity of those commodities. Let us examine what
will be the effect, on rent and profits, of this double progress.

Population having increased, without any falling off in
the labourer's condition, there is of course a demand for more
food. The arts of production being supposed stationary,
this food must be produced at an increased cost. To com-
pensate for this greater cost of the additional food, the price
of agricultural produce must rise. The rise extending over
the whole amount of food produced, though the increased
expenses only apply to a part, there is a greatly increased
extra profit, which, by competition, is transferred to the land-
lord. Rent will rise, both in quantity of produce and in cost;
while wages, being supposed to be the same in quantity, will
be greater in cost. The labourer obtaining the same amount
of necessaries, money wages have risen; and as the rise is
common to all branches of production, the capitalist cannot
indemnify himself by changing his employment, and the loss
must be borne by profits.



m


BOOK IV. CHAPTER III. § 4.

It appears, then, that the tendency of an increase of capital
and population is to add to rent at the expense of profits :
though rent does not gain all that profits lose, a part being
absorbed in increased expenses of production, that is, in
hiring or feeding a greater number of labourers to obtain a
given amount of agricultural produce. By profits, must of
course be understood the rate of profit ; for a lower rate of
profit on a larger capital may yield a larger gross profit, consi-
dered absolutely, though a smaller in proportion to the entire
produce.

This tendency of profits to fall, is from time to time
counteracted by improvements in production: whether aris-
ing from increase of knowledge, or from an increased use
of the knowledge already possessed. This is the third of
the three elements, the effects of which on the distribution
of the produce we undertook to investigate; and the investi-
gation will be facilitated by supposing, as in the case of the
other two elements, that it operates, in the first instance,
alone.


§ 4. Let us then suppose capital and population sta-
tionary, and a sudden improvement made in the arts of
production; by the invention of more efficient machines, or
less costly processes, or by obtaining access to cheaper commo-
dities through foreign trade.

The improvement may either be in some of the necessa-
ries or indulgences which enter into the habitual consumption
of the labouring class; or it may be applicable only to luxuries
consumed exclusively by richer people. Very few, however,
of the great industrial improvements are altogether of this
last description. Agricultural improvements, except such
as specially relate to some of the rarer and more peculiar
products, act directly upon the principal objects of the
labourer's expenditure. The steam-engine, and every other
invention which affords a manageable power, are applicable
to all things, and of course to those consumed by the



INFLUENCE OF PROGRESS ON RENTS, PROFITS, &C. 283


labourer. Even the power-loom and the spinning-jenny,
though applied to the most delicate fabrics, are available no
less for the coarse cottons and woollens worn by the labour-
ing class. All improvements in locomotion cheapen the
transport of necessaries as well as of luxuries. Seldom is a
new branch of trade opened, without, either directly or in
some indirect way, causing some of the articles which the
mass of the people consume to be either produced or im-
ported at smaller cost. It may safely be affirmed, therefore,
that improvements in production generally tend to cheapen
the commodities on which the wages of the labouring class
are expended.

In so far as the commodities affected by an improvement
are those which the labourers generally do not consume, the
improvement has no effect in altering the distribution of the
produce. Those particular commodities, indeed, are cheap-
ened ; being produced at less cost, they fall in value and in
price, and all who consume them, whether landlords, capi-
talists, or skilled and privileged labourers, obtain increased
means of enjoyment. The rate of profits, however, is not
raised. There is a larger gross profit, reckoned in quantity
of commodities. But the capital also, if estimated in those
commodities, has risen in value. The profit is the same
percentage on the capital that it was before. The capitalists
are not benefited as capitalists, but as consumers. The land-
lords, and the privileged classes of labourers, if they are con-
sumers of the same commodities, share the same benefit.

The case is different with improvements which diminish
the cost of production of the necessaries of life, or of com-
modities which enter habitually into the consumption of the
great mass of labourers. The play of the different forces
being here rather complex, it is necessary to analyze it with
some minuteness.

As formerly observed/ there are two kinds of agricultural


* Supra, vol. i. p. 234.



284


BOOK IV. CHAPTER III. § 4.

improvements. Some consist in a mere saving of labour, and
enable a given quantity of food to be produced at less cost,
but not on a smaller surface of land than before. Others
enable a given extent of land to yield not only the same pro-
duce with less labour, but a greater produce; so that if no
greater produce is required, a part of the land already under
culture may be dispensed with. As the part rejected will be
the least productive portion, the market will thenceforth be
regulated by a better description of land than what was pre-
viously the worst under cultivation.

To place the effect of the improvement in a clear light,
we must suppose it to take place suddenly, so as to leave no
time during its introduction, for any increase of capital or of
population. Its first effect will be a fall of the value and price
of agricultural produce. This is a necessary consequence
of either kind of improvement, but especially of the last.

An improvement of the first kind, not increasing the pro-
duce, does not dispense with any portion of the land ; the
margin of cultivation (as Dr. Chalmers terms it,) remains
where it was; agriculture does not recede, either in extent of
cultivated land, or in elaborateness of methods : and the price
continues to be regulated by the same land, and by the same
capital, as before. But since that land or capital, and all
other land or capital which produces food, now yields its pro-
duce at smaller cost, the price of food will fall proportionally.
If one-tenth of the expense of production has been saved, the
price of produce will fall one-tenth.

But suppose the improvement to be of the second kind ;
enabling the land to produce, not only the same com with
one-tenth less labour, but a tenth more com with the same
labour. Here the effect is still more decided. Cultivation
can now be contracted, and the market supplied from a
smaller quantity of land. Even if this smaller surface of
land were of the same average quality as the larger surface,
the price would fall one-tenth, because the same produce
would be obtained with a tenth less labour. But since the



INFLUENCE OF PROGRESS ON RENTS, PROFITS, &C. 285


portion of land abandoned will be the least fertile portion,
the price of produce will thenceforth be regulated by a better
quality of land than before. In addition, therefore, to the
original diminution of one-tenth in the cost of production,
there will be a further diminution, corresponding with the
recession of the “margin” of agriculture to land of greater
fertility. There will thus be a twofold fall of price.

Let us now examine the effect of the improvements, thus
suddenly made, on the division of the produce; and in the
first place, on rent. By the former of the two kinds of im-
provement, rent would be diminished. By the second, it
would be diminished still more.

Suppose that the demand for food requires the cultivation
of three qualities of land, yielding, on an equal surface, and
at an equal expense, 100, 80, and 60 bushels of wheat. The
price of wheat will, on the average, be just sufficient to enable
the third quality to be cultivated with the ordinary profit.
The first quality therefore will yield forty and the second
twenty bushels of extra profit, constituting the rent of the
landlord. And first, let an improvement be made, which,
without enabling more corn to be grown, enables the same
corn to be grown with one-fourth less labour. The price of
wheat will fall one-fourth, and 80 bushels will be sold for
the price for which 60 were sold before. But the produce
of the land which produces 60 bushels is still required, and
the expenses being as much reduced as the price, that land
can still be cultivated with the ordinary profit. The first and
second qualities will therefore continue to yield a surplus of
40 and 20 bushels, and com rent will remain the same as
before. But corn having fallen in price one-fourth, the same
corn rent is equivalent to a fourth less of money and of all
other commodities.' So far, therefore, as the landlord ex-
pends his income in manufactured or foreign products, he is
one-fourth worse off than before. His income as landlord
is reduced to three-quarters of its amount: it is only as a
consumer of com that he is as well off.



286 BOOK IV. CHAPTER III. § 4.

If the improvement is of the other kind, rent will fall in
a still greater ratio. Suppose that the amount of produce
which the market requires, can be grown not only with a
fourth less labour, but on a fourth less of land. If all the
land already in cultivation continued to be cultivated, it
would yield a produce much larger than necessary. Land,
equivalent to a fourth of the produce, must now be aban-
doned; and as the third quality yielded exactly one-fourth,
(being 60 out of 240,) that quality will go out of cultivation.
The 240 bushels can now be grown on land of the first and
second qualities only; being, on the first, 100 bushels plus
one-third, or 133^ bushels; on the second, 80 bushels plus
one-third, or 106§ bushels; together 240. The second
quality of land, instead of the third, is now the lowest, and
regulates the price. Instead of 60, it is sufficient if 106f
bushels repay the capital with the ordinary profit. The
price of wheat will consequently fall, not in the ratio of 60
to 80, as in the other case, but in the ratio of 60 to 106§.
Even this gives an insufficient idea of the degree in which
rent will be affected. The whole produce of the second
quality of land will now be required to repay the expenses
of production. That land, being the worst in cultivation,
will pay no rent. And the first quality will only yield the
difference between 133 J bushels and 106|, being 26§ bushels
instead of 40. The landlords collectively will have lost 33 £
out of 60 bushels in corn rent alone, while the value and
price of what is left will have been diminished in the ratio
of 60 to 106§.

It thus appears, that the interest of the landlord is
decidedly hostile to the sudden and general introduction of
agricultural improvements. This assertion has been called
a paradox, and made a ground for accusing its first pro-
mulgator, Ricardo, of great intellectual perverseness, to say
nothing worse. I cannot discern in what the paradox con-
sists; and the obliquity of vision seems to me to be on the
side of his assailants. The opinion is only made to appear



INFLUENCE OF PROGRESS ON RENTS, PROFITS, &C. 287


absurd by stating it unfairly. If the assertion were that a
landlord is injured by the improvement of his estate, it would
certainly be indefensible; but what is asserted is, that he is
injured by the improvement of the estates of other people,
although bis own is included. Nobody doubts that he would
gain greatly by the improvement if he could keep it to him-
self, and unite the benefits, of an increased produce from his
land, and a price as high as before. But if the increase of
produce took place simultaneously on all lands, the price would
not be as high as before ; and there is nothing unreasonable
in supposing that the landlords would be, not benefited, but
injured. It is admitted that whatever permanently reduces
the price of produce diminishes rent : and it is quite in accord-
ance with common notions to suppose that if, by the increased
productiveness of land, less land were required for cultivation,
its value, like that of any other article for which the demand
had diminished, would fall.

I am quite willing to admit that rents have not really
been lowered by the progress of agricultural improvement;
but why ? Because improvement has never in reality been
sudden, but always slow ; at no time much outstripping, and
often falling far short of, the growth of capital and population,
which tends as much to raise rent, as the other to lower it,
and which is enabled, as we shall presently see, to raise it
much higher by means of the additional margin afforded by
improvements in agriculture. First, however, we must ex-
amine in what manner the sudden cheapening of agricultural
produce would affect profits and wages.

In the beginning, money wages would probably remain
the same as before, and the labourers would have the full
benefit of the cheapness. They would be enabled to increase
their consumption either of food or of other articles, and
would receive the same cost, and a greater quantity. So long
as this was the case, profits would be unaffected. But the
permanent remuneration of the labourers essentially depends
on what we have called their habitual standard; the extent



288 BOOK IV. CHAPTER III. § 4 .

of the requirements which, as a class, they insist on satisfy-
ing before they choose to have children. If their tastes and
requirements receive a durable impress from the sudden
improvement in their condition, the benefit to the class will
be permanent. But the same cause which enables them to
purchase greater comforts and indulgences with the same
wages, would enable them to purchase the same amount of
comforts and indulgences with lower wages; and a greater
population may now exist, without reducing the labourers
below the condition to which they are accustomed. Hitherto
this and no other has been the use which the labourers have
commonly made of any increase of their means of living; they
have treated it simply as convertible into food for a greater
number of children. It is probable, therefore, that population
would be stimulated, and that after the lapse of a generation
the real wages of labour would be no higher than before the
improvement: the reduction being partly brought about by
a fall of money wages, and partly through the price of food,
the cost of which, from the demand occasioned by the increase
of population, would be again increased. To the extent to
which money wages fell, profits would rise; the capitalist
obtaining a greater quantity of equally efficient labour by
the same outlay of capital. We thus see that a diminution
of the cost of living, whether arising from agricultural im-
provements or from the importation of foreign produce, if
the habits and requirements of the labourers are not raised,
usually lowers money wages and rent, and raises the general
rate of profit.

What is true of improvements which cheapen the pro-
duction of food, is true also of the substitution of a cheaper
for a more costly variety of it. The same land yields to the
same labour a much greater quantity of human nutriment in
the form of maize or potatoes, than in the form of wheat. If
the labourers were to give up bread, and feed only on those
cheaper products, taking as their compensation not a greater
quantity of other consumable commodities, but earlier mar-



INFLUENCE OF PROGRESS ON RENTS, PROFITS, &C. 289

riages and larger families, the cost of labour would be much
diminished, and if labour continued equally efficient, profits
would rise; while rent would be much lowered, since food
for the whole population could be raised on half or a third
part of the land now sown with corn. At the same time, it
being evident that land too barren to be cultivated for wheat
might be made in case of necessity to yield potatoes sufficient
to support the little labour necessary for producing them,
cultivation might ultimately descend lower, and rent even-
tually rise higher, on a potato or maize system, than on a
corn system; because the land would be capable of feeding
a much larger population before reaching the limit of its
powers.

If the improvement, which we suppose to take place, is not
in the production of food, but of some manufactured article
consumed by the labouring class, the effect on wages and
profits will be the same ; but the effect on rent, very different.
Instead of being lowered, it will, if the ultimate effect of the
improvement is an increase of population, be raised. The
reasons are too evident to require statement.

§ 5. We have considered, on the one hand, the manner
in which the distribution of the produce into rent, profits,
and wages, is affected by the ordinary increase of population
and capital, and on the other, how it is affected by improve-
ments in production, and more especially in agriculture. We
have found that the former cause lowers profits, and raises
rent and the cost of labour: while the tendency of agricul-
tural improvements is to diminish rent ; and all improvements
which cheapen any article of the labourer's consumption,
tend to diminish the cost of labour and to raise profits. The
tendency of each cause in its separate state being thus ascer-
tained, it is easy to determine the tendency of the actual
course of things, in which the two movements are going on
simultaneously, capital and population increasing with tole-
rable steadiness, while improvements in agriculture are made

VOL. IL U



290 BOOK IV. CHAPTER III. § 5 .

from time to time, and the knowledge and practice of im-
proved methods become diffused gradually through the com-
munity.

The habits and requirements of the labouring classes
being given (which determine their real wages,) rent, profits,
and money wages at any given time, are the result of the
composition of these rival forces. If during any period
agricultural improvement advances faster than population,
rent and money wages during that period will tend down-
ward, and profits upward. If population advances more
rapidly than agricultural improvement, either the labourers
will submit to a reduction in the quantity or quality of their
food, or if not, rent and money wages will progressively rise,
and profits will fall.

Agricultural skill and knowledge are of slow growth, and
still slower diffusion. Inventions and discoveries, too, occur
only occasionally, while the increase of population and capital
are continuous agencies. It therefore seldom happens that
improvement, even during a short time, has so much the
start of population and capital as actually to lower rent, or
raise the rate of profits. There are many countries in which
the growth of population and capital are not rapid, but in
these agricultural improvement is less active still. Popula-
tion almost everywhere treads close on the heels of agricul-
tural improvement, and effaces its effects as fast as they are
produced.

The reason why agricultural improvement seldom lowers
rent, is that it seldom cheapens food, but only prevents it
from growing dearer; and seldom, if ever, throws land out of
cultivation, but only enables worse and worse land to be
taken in for the supply of an increasing demand. What is
sometimes called the natural state of a country which is but
half cultivated, namely, that the land is highly productive,
and food obtained in great abundance by little labour, is
only true of unoccupied countries colonized by a civilized
people. In the United States the worst land in cultivation



INFLUENCE OF PROGRESS ON RENTS, PROFITS, &C. 291

is of a high quality (except sometimes in the immediate
vicinity of markets or means of conveyance, where a bad
quality is compensated by a good situation) ; and even if no
further improvements were made in agriculture or locomotion,
cultivation would have many steps yet to descend, before the
increase of population and capital would be brought to a stand :
but in Europe five hundred years ago, though so thinly peopled
in comparison to the present population, it is probable that
the worst land under the plough was, from the rude state of
agriculture, quite as unproductive as the worst land now cul-
tivated; and that cultivation had approached as near to the
ultimate limit of profitable tillage, in those times as in the
present. What the agricultural improvements since made
have really done is, by increasing the capacity of produc-
tion of land in general, to enable tillage to extend downwards
to a much worse natural quality of land than the worst which
at that time would have admitted of cultivation by a capitalist
for profit ; thus rendering a much greater increase of capital
and population possible, and removing always a little and a
little further off, the barrier which restrains them ; population
meanwhile always pressing so hard against the barrier, that
there is never any visible margin left for it to seize, every inch
of ground made vacant for it by improvement being at once
filled up by its advancing columns. Agricultural improve-
ment may thus be considered to be not so much a counterforce
conflicting with increase of population, as a partial relaxation
of the bonds which confine that increase.

The effects produced on the division of the produce by an
increase of production, under the joint influence, of increase of
population and capital, and improvements of agriculture, are
very different from those deduced from the hypothetical cases
previously discussed. In particular, the effect on rent is most
materially different. We remarked that — while a great agri-
cultural improvement made suddenly and universally would
in the first instance inevitably lower rent — such improvements
enable rent, in the progress of society, to rise gradually to a

U 2



292


BOOK IV. CHAPTER III. § 5.

much higher limit than it could otherwise attain, since they
enable a much lower quality of land to be ultimately culti-
vated. But in the case we are now supposing, which nearly
corresponds to the usual course of things, this ultimate effect
becomes the immediate effect. Suppose cultivation to have
reached, or almost reached, the utmost limit permitted by the
state of the industrial arts, and rent, therefore, to have attained
nearly the highest point to which it can be carried by the pro-
gress of population and capital, with the existing amount of
skill and knowledge. If a great agricultural improvement
were suddenly introduced, it might throw back rent for a con-
siderable space, leaving it to regain its lost ground by the
progress of population and capital, and afterwards to go on
further. But, taking place, as such improvement always does,
very gradually, it causes no retrograde movement of either
rent or cultivation; it merely enables the one to go on
rising, and the other extending, long after they must otherwise
have stopped. It would do this even without the necessity of
resorting to a worse quality of land ; simply by enabling the
lands already in cultivation to yield a greater produce, with
no increase of the proportional cost. If by improvements of
agriculture all the lands in cultivation could be made, even
with double labour and capital, to yield a double produce,
(supposing that in the meantime population increased so as to
require this double quantity) all rents would be doubled.

To illustrate the point, let us revert to the numerical
example in a former page. Three qualities of land yield
respectively 100, 80, and 60 bushels to the same outlay on
the same extent of surface. If No. 1 could be made to yield
200, No. 2, 160, and No. 3, 120 bushels, at only double the
expense, and therefore without any increase of the cost of
production, and if the population, having doubled, required
all this increased quantity, the rent of No. 1 would be ‘80
bushels instead of 40, and of No. 2, 40 instead of 20, while
the price and value per bushel would be the same as before :
so that com rent and money rent would both be doubled.



INFLUENCE OF PROGRESS ON RENTS, PROFITS, &C. 293

I need not point out the difference between this result, and
what we have shown would take place if there were an im-
provement in production without the accompaniment of an
increased demand for food.

Agricultural improvement, then, is always ultimately, and
in the manner in which it generally takes place also imme-
diately, beneficial to the landlord. We may add, that when
it takes place in that manner, it is beneficial to no one else.
When the demand for produce fully keeps pace with the in-
creased capacity of production, food is not cheapened; the
labourers are not, even temporarily, benefited; the cost of
labour is not diminished, nor profits raised. There is a
greater aggregate production, a greater produce divided
among the labourers, and a larger gross profit; but the wages
being shared among a larger population, and the profit spread
over a larger capital, no labourer is better off, nor does any
capitalist derive from the same amount of capital a larger
income.

The result of this long investigation may be summed up
as follows. The economical progress of a society constituted
of landlords, capitalists, and labourers, tends to the progressive
enrichment of the landlord class; while the cost of the la-
bourers subsistence tends on the whole to increase, and pro-
fits to fall. Agricultural improvements are a counteracting
force to the two last effects; but the first, though a case is
conceivable in which it would be temporarily checked, is
ultimately in a high degree promoted by those improvements;
and the increase of population tends to transfer all the bene-
fits derived from agricultural improvement to the landlords
alone. What other consequences, in addition to these, or in
modification of them, arise from the industrial progress of a
society thus constituted, I shall endeavour to show in the
succeeding chapter.



CHAPTER IY.


OF THE TENDENCY OF PROFITS TO A MINIMUM.

§ 1. The tendency of profits to fall as society advances,
which has been brought to notice in the preceding chapter,
was early recognized by writers on industry and commerce;
but the laws which govern profits not being then understood,
the phenomenon was ascribed to a wrong cause. Adam
Smith considered profits to be determined by what he called
the competition of capital; and concluded that when capital
increased, this competition must likewise increase, and profits
must fall. It is not quite certain what sort of competition
Adam Smith had here in view. His words in the chapter on
Profits of Stock* are, “ When the stocks of many rich mer-
chants are turned into the same trade, their mutual competi*
tion naturally tends to lower its profits ; and when there is a
like increase of stock in all the different trades carried on in
the same society, the same competition must produce the same
effect in them all/' This passage would lead us to infer that,
in Adam Smith's opinion, the manner in which the competi-
tion of capital lowers profits is by lowering prices; that
being usually the mode in which an increased investment of
capital in any particular trade, lowers the profits of that
trade. But if this was his meaning, he overlooked the cir-
cumstance, that the fall of price, which if confined to one
commodity really does lower the profits of the producer,
ceases to have that effect as soon as it extends to all commo-
dities; because, when all things have fallen, nothing has
really fallen, except nominally; and even computed in
money, the expenses of every producer have diminished as


Wealth of Nations , book i. ch. 9.



TENDENCY OF PROFITS TO A MINIMUM.


295


much as his returns. Unless indeed labour be the one com-
modity which has not fallen in money price, when all other
things have : if so, what has really taken place is a rise of
wages; and it is that, and not the fall of prices, which has
lowered the profits of capital. There is another thing which
escaped the notice of Adam Smith ; that the supposed uni-
versal fall of prices, through increased competition of capitals,
is a thing which cannot take place. Prices are not deter-
mined by the competition of the sellers only, but also by that
of the buyers ; by demand as well as supply. The demand
which affects money prices consists of all the money in the
hands of the community destined to be laid out in commo-
dities; and as long as the proportion of this to the commo-
dities is not diminished, there is no fall of general prices.
Now, howsoever capital may increase, and give rise to an in-
creased production of commodities, a full share of the capital
will be drawn to the business of producing or importing
money, and the quantity of money will be augmented in an
equal ratio with the quantity of commodities. For if this
were not the case, and if money, therefore, were, as the theory
supposes, perpetually acquiring increased purchasing power,
those who produced or imported it would obtain constantly
increasing profits; and this could not happen without attract-
ing labour and capital to that occupation from other employ-
ments. If a general fall of prices, and increased value of
money, were really to occur, it could only be as a consequence
of increased cost of production, from the gradual exhaustion
of the mines.

It is not tenable, therefore, in theory, that the increase of
capital produces, or tends to produce, a general decline of
money prices. Neither is it true, that any general decline of
prices, as capital increased, has manifested itself in fact. The
only things observed to fall in price with the progress of
society, are those in which there have been improvements in
production, greater than have taken place in the production
of the precious metals; as for example, all spun and woven



296


BOOK IV. CHAPTER IV. § 2.


fabrics. Other things again, instead of falling, have risen in
price, because their cost of production, compared with that of
gold and silver, has increased. Among these are all kinds of
food, comparison being made with a much earlier period of
history. The doctrine, therefore, that competition of capital
lowers profits by lowering prices, is incorrect in fact, as well
as unsound in principle.

But it is not certain that Adam Smith really held that
doctrine; for his language on the subject is wavering and un-
steady, denoting the absence of a definite and well-digested
opinion. Occasionally he seems to think that the mode in
which the competition of capital lowers profits, is by raising
wages. And when speaking of the rate of profit in new
colonies, he seems on the very verge of grasping the complete
theory of the subject. “ As the colony increases, the profits
of stock gradually diminish. When the most fertile and best
situated lands have been all occupied, less profit can be made
by the cultivation of what is inferior both in soil and situa-
tion/' Had Adam Smith meditated longer on the subject, and
systematized his view of it by harmonizing with each other
the various glimpses which he caught of it from different
points, he would have perceived that this last is the true
cause of the fall of profits usually consequent upon increase of
capital.

§ 2. Mr. Wakefield, in his Commentary on Adam Smith,
and his important writings on Colonization, takes a much
clearer view of the subject, and arrives, through a substan-
tially correct series of deductions, at practical conclusions
which appear to me just and important; but he is not equally
happy in incorporating his valuable speculations with the
results of previous thought, and reconciling them with other
truths. Some of the theories of Dr. Chalmers, in his chapter
“ On the Increase and Limits of Capital," and the two chap-
ters which follow it, coincide in their tendency and spirit with
those of Mr. Wakefield; but Dr. Chalmers' ideas, though



TENDENCY OF PROFITS TO A MINIMUM. 297

delivered, as is his custom, with a most attractive semblance
of clearness, are really on this subject much more confused
than even those of Adam Smith, and more decidedly infected
with the often refuted notion that the competition of capital
lowers general prices; the subject of Money apparently not
having been included among the parts of Political Economy
which this acute and vigorous writer had carefully studied.

Mr. Wakefield s explanation of the fall of profits is briefly
this. Production is limited not solely by the quantity of
capital and of labour, but also by the extent of the “ field of
employment.” The field of employment for capital is two-
fold; the land of the country, and the capacity of foreign
markets to take its manufactured commodities. On a limited
extent of land, only a limited quantity of capital can find
employment at a profit. As the quantity of capital approaches
this limit, profit falls; when the limit is attained, profit is
annihilated ; and can only be restored through an extension
of the field of employment, either by the acquisition of fertile
land, or by opening new markets in foreign countries, from
which food and materials can be purchased with the products
of domestic capital. These propositions are in my opinion
substantially true; and, even to the phraseology in which
they are expressed, considered as adapted to popular and
practical rather than scientific uses, I have nothing to object.
The error which seems to me imputable to Mr. Wakefield is
that of supposing his doctrines to be in contradiction to the
principles of the best school of preceding political economists,
instead of being, as they really are, corollaries from those
principles; though corollaries which, perhaps, would not
always have been admitted by those political economists
themselves.

The most scientific treatment of the subject which I have
met with, is an essay on the effects of Machinery, by
Mr. William Ellis;* which was doubtless unknown to Mr.


* Published in the Westminster Review for January 1826,


298 BOOK IV. CHAPTER IV. § 3.

Wakefield, but which had preceded him, though by a different
path, in several of his leading conclusions. This essay excited
little notice, partly from being published anonymously in a
periodical, and partly because it was much in advance of the
state of political economy at the time. In Mr. Ellis's view
of the subject, the questions and difficulties raised by Mr.
Wakefield's speculations and by those of Dr. Chalmers, find
a solution consistent with the principles of political economy
laid down in the present treatise.

§ 3. There is at every time and place some particular
rate of profit, which is the lowest that will induce the people
of that country and time to accumulate savings, and to
employ those savings productively. This minimum rate of
profit varies according to circumstances. It depends on
two elements. One is, the strength of the effective desire of
accumulation ; the comparative estimate made by the people
of that place and era, of future interests when weighed against
present. This element chiefly affects the inclination to save.
The other element, which affects not so much the willingness
to save as the disposition to employ savings productively,
is the degree of security of capital engaged in industrial
operations. A state of general insecurity, no doubt affects
also the disposition to save. A hoard may be a source of
additional danger to its reputed possessor. But as it may
also be a powerful means of averting dangers, the effects in
this respect may perhaps be looked upon as balanced. But in
employing any funds which a person may possess as capital on
his own account, or in lending it to others to be so employed,
there is always some additional risk, over and above that
incurred by keeping it idle in his own custody. This extra
risk is great, in proportion as the general state of society is
insecure: it may be equivalent to twenty, thirty, or fifty per
cent, or to no more than one or two ; something, however, it
must always be: and for this, the expectation of profit must
be sufficient to compensate.



TENDENCY OF PROFITS TO A MINIMUM.


299


There would be adequate motives for a certain amount of
saving, even if capital yielded no profit. There would be an
inducement to lay by in good times a provision for bad ; to
reserve something for sickness and infirmity, or as a means of
leisure and independence in the latter part of life, or a help
to children in the outset of it. Savings, however, which have
only these ends in view, have not much tendency to increase
the amount of capital permanently in existence. These
motives only prompt persons to save at one period of life
what they purpose to consume at another, or what will be
consumed by their children before they can completely pro-
vide for themselves. The savings by which an addition is
made to the national capital, usually emanate from the desire
of persons to improve what is termed their condition in life,
or to make a provision for children or others, independent of
their exertions. Now, to the strength of these inclinations it
makes a very material difference how much of the desired
object can be effected by a given amount and duration of self-
denial ; which again depends on the rate of profit. And
there is in every country some rate of profit, below which
persons in general will not find sufficient motive to save for
the mere purpose of growing richer, or of leaving others
better off than themselves. Any accumulation, therefore, by
which the general capital is increased, requires as its necessary
condition a certain rate of profit: a rate which an average
person will deem to be an equivalent for abstinence, with the
addition of a sufficient insurance against risk. There are
always some persons in whom the effective desire of accumu-
lation is above the average, and to whom less than this rate of
profit is a sufficient inducement to save ; but these merely step
into the place of others whose taste for expense and indulgence
is beyond the average, and who, instead of saving, perhaps
even dissipate what they have received.

I have already observed that this minimum rate of profit,
less than which is not consistent with the further increase of
capital, is lower in some states of society than in others; and



800 BOOK IV. CHAPTER IV. § 3 .

I may add, that the kind of social progress characteristic of
our present civilization, tends to diminish it. In the first
place, one of the acknowledged effects of that progress is an
increase of general security. Destruction by wars, and spolia-
tion by private or public violence, are less and less to be
apprehended ; and the improvements which may be looked
for in education and in the administration of justice, or, in
their default, increased regard for opinion, afford a growing
protection against fraud and reckless mismanagement. The
risks attending the investment of savings in productive em-
ployment, require therefore a smaller rate of profit to com-
pensate for them than was required a century ago, and will
hereafter require less than at present. In the second place,
it is also one of the consequences of civilization that mankind
become less the slaves of the moment, and more habituated
to carry their desires and purposes forward into a distant
future. This increase of providence is a natural result of
the increased assurance with which futurity can be looked
forward to ; and is, besides, favoured by most of the influ-
ences which an industrial life exercises over the passions and
inclinations of human nature. In proportion as life has fewer
vicissitudes, as habits become more fixed, and great prizes
are less and less to be hoped for by any other means than
long perseverance, mankind become more billing to sacrifice
present indulgence for future objects. This increased capa-
city of forethought and self-control may assuredly find other
things to exercise itself upon than increase of riches, and
some considerations connected with this topic will shortly be
touched upon. The present kind of social progress, however,
decidedly tends, though not perhaps to increase the desire
of accumulation, yet to weaken the obstacles to it, and to
diminish the amount of profit which people absolutely require
as an inducement to save and accumulate. For these two
reasons, diminution of risk and increase of providence, a
profit or interest of three or four per cent is as sufficient a
motive to the increase of capital in England at the present



TENDENCY OP PROFITS TO A MINIMUM. 801


day, as thirty or forty per cent in the Burmese Empire, or
in England at the time of King John. In Holland during
the last century a return of two per cent, on government
security, was consistent with an undiminished, if not with an
increasing capital. But though the minimum rate of profit
is thus liable to vary, and though to specify exactly what it is
would at any given time be impossible, such a minimum
always exists; and whether it be high or low, when once it is
reached, no further increase of capital can for the present
take place. The country has then attained what is known
to political economists under the name of the stationary
state.


§ 4. We now, therefore, arrive at the fundamental pro-
position which this chapter is intended to inculcate. When
a country has long possessed a large production, and a large
net income to make savings from, and when, therefore, the
means have long existed of making a great annual addition to
capital; (the country not having, like America, a large reserve
of fertile land still unused ;) it is one of the characteristics of
such a country, that the rate of profit is habitually within, as
it were, a hand's breadth of the minimum, and the country
therefore on the very verge of the stationary state. By this
I do not mean that this state is likely, in any of the great
countries of Europe, to be soon actually reached, or that
capital does not still yield a profit considerably greater than
what is barely sufficient to induce the people of those coun-
tries to save and accumulate. My meaning is, that it would
require but a short time to reduce profits to the minimum, if
capital continued to increase at its present rate, and no cir-
cumstances having a tendency to raise the rate of profit
occurred in the meantime. The expansion of capital would
soon reach its ultimate boundary, if the boundary itself did
not continually open and leave more space.

In England, the ordinary rate of interest on government
securities, in which the risk is next to nothing, may be esti-



802


BOOK IV. CHAPTER IV. § 4.


mated at a little more than three per cent : in all other invest-
ments, therefore, the interest or profit calculated upon (ex-
clusively of what is properly a remuneration for talent or
exertion) must be as much more than this amount, as is
equivalent to the degree of risk to which the capital is thought
to be exposed. Let us suppose that in England even so small
a net profit as one per cent, exclusive of insurance against
risk, would constitute a sufficient inducement to save, but
that less than this would not be a sufficient inducement. I
now say, that the mere continuance of the present annual
increase of capital, if no circumstance occurred to counteract
its effect, would suffice in a small number of years to reduce
the rate of net profit to one per cent.

To fulfil the conditions of the hypothesis, we must sup-
pose an entire cessation of the exportation of capital for
foreign investment. No more capital sent abroad for rail-
ways, or loans ; no more emigrants taking capital with them,
to the colonies, or to other countries; no fresh advances
made, or credits given, by bankers or merchants to their
foreign correspondents. We must also assume that there
are no fresh loans for unproductive expenditure by the
government, or on mortgage, or otherwise; and none of the
waste of capital which now takes place by the failure of
undertakings which people are tempted to engage in by the
hope of a better income than can be obtained in safe paths
at the present habitually low rate of profit. We must suppose
the entire savings of the community to be annually invested
in really productive employment within the country itself;
and no new channels opened by industrial inventions, or by
a more extensive substitution of the best known processes for
inferior ones.

Few persons would hesitate to say, that there would be
great difficulty in finding remunerative employment every
year for so much new capital, and most would conclude that
there would be what used to be termed a general glut; that
commodities would be produced, and remain unsold, or be



TENDENCY OF PROFITS TO A MINIMUM.


303


sold only at a loss. But the full examination which we have
already given to this question,* has shown that this is not
the mode in which the inconvenience would be experienced.
The difficulty would not consist in any want of a market.
If the new capital were duly shared among many varieties of
employment, it would raise up a demand for its own produce,
and there would be no cause why any part of that produce
should remain longer on hand than formerly. What would
really be, not merely difficult, but impossible, would be to
employ this capital without submitting to a rapid reduction
of the rate of profit.

As capital increased, population either would also increase,
or it would not. If it did not, wages would rise, and a greater
capital would be distributed in wages among the same number
of labourers. There being no more labour than before, and
no improvements to render the labour more efficient, there
would not be any increase of the produce; and as the capital,
however largely increased, would only obtain the same gross
return, the whole savings of each year would be exactly so
much subtracted from the profits of the next and of every
following year. It is hardly necessary to say that in such
circumstances profits would very soon fall to the point at
which further increase of capital would cease. An augmenta-
tion of capital, much more rapid than that of population, must
soon reach its extreme limit, unless accompanied by increased
efficiency of labour (through inventions and discoveries, or
improved mental and physical education), or unless some of
the idle people, or of the unproductive labourers, became
productive.

If population did increase with the increase of capital,
and in proportion to it, the fall of profits would still be
inevitable. Increased population implies increased demand
for agricultural produce. In the absence of industrial im-
provements, this demand can only be supplied at an increased


* Book iii. ch. 14.



804 BOOK IV. CHAPTER IV. § 5.

cost of production, either by cultivating worse land, or by a
more elaborate and costly cultivation of the land already
under tillage. The cost of the labourer's subsistence is there-
fore increased ; and unless the labourer submits to a deterio-
ration of his condition, profits must fall. In an old country
like England, if, in addition to supposing all improvement in
domestic agriculture suspended, we suppose that there is no
increased production in foreign countries for the English
market, the fall of profits would be very rapid. If both these
avenues to an increased supply of food were closed, and
population continued to increase, as it is said to do, at the
rate of a thousand a day, all waste land which admits of cul-
tivation in the existing state of knowledge would soon be
cultivated, and the cost of production and price of food would
be so increased, that, if the labourers received the increased
money wages necessary to compensate for their increased ex-
penses, profits would very soon reach the minimum. The
fall of profits would be retarded if money wages did not rise,
or rose in a less degree; but the margin which can be gained
by a deterioration of the labourers' condition is a very narrow
one: in general they cannot bear much reduction: when they
can, they have also a higher standard of necessary require-
ments, and will not. On the whole, therefore, we may
assume that in such a country as England, if the present
annual amount of savings were to continue, without any of
the counteracting circumstances which now keep in check
the natural influence of those savings in reducing profit,
the rate of profit would speedily attain the minimum, and
all further accumulation of capital would for the present
cease.


§ 5. What, then, are these counteracting circumstances,
which, in the existing state of things, maintain a tolerably
equal struggle against the downward tendency of profits, and
prevent the great annual savings which take place in this
country from depressing the rate of profit much nearer to



TENDENCY OF PROFITS TO A MINIMUM.


805


that lowest point to which it is always tending, and which,
left to itself, it would so promptly attain ? The resisting
agencies are of several kinds.

First amCng them, we may notice one which is so simple
and so conspicuous, that some political economists, especially
M. de Sismondi and Dr. Chalmers, have attended to it almost
to the exclusion of all others. Tiiis is, the waste of capital
in periods of over-trading and rash speculation, and in the
commercial revulsions by which such times are always fol-
lowed. It is true that a great part of what is lost at such
periods is not destroyed, but merely transferred, like a gam-
bler's losses, to more successful speculators. But even of
these mere transfers, a large portion is always to foreigners,
by the hasty purchase of unusual quantities of foreign goods
at advanced prices. And much also is absolutely wasted.
Mines are opened, railways or bridges made, and many other
works of uncertain profit commenced, and in these enter-
prises much capital is sunk which yields either no return, or
none adequate to the outlay. Factories are built and ma-
chinery erected beyond what the market requires, or can keep
in employment. Even if they are kept in employment, the
capital is no less sunk ; it has been converted from circulating
into fixed capital, and has ceased to have any influence on
wages or profits. Besides this, there is a great unproductive
consumption of capital, during the stagnation which follows
a period of general over-trading. Establishments are shut
up, or kept working without any profit, hands are discharged,
and numbers of persons in all ranks, being deprived of their
income, and thrown for support on their savings, find them-
selves, after the crisis has passed away, in a condition of more
or less impoverishment. Such are the effects of a com-
mercial revulsion: and that such revulsions are almost pe-
riodical, is a consequence of the very tendency of profits
which we are considering. By the time a few years have
passed over without a crisis, so much additional capital has
been accumulated, that it is no longer possible to invest it

VOL. II. X



306


BOOK IV. CHAPTER IV. § 6,

at the accustomed profit : all public securities rise to a high
price, the rate of interest on the best mercantile security
falls very low, and the complaint is general among persons in
business that no money is to be made. Does not this
demonstrate how speedily profit would be at the minimum,
and the stationary condition of capital would be attained, if
these accumulations went on without any counteracting prin-
ciple ? But the diminished scale of all safe gains, inclines
persons to give a ready ear to any projects which hold out,
though at the risk of loss, the hope of a higher rate of profit ;
and speculations ensue, which, with the subsequent revulsions,
destroy, or transfer to foreigners, a considerable amount of
capital, produce a temporary rise of interest and profit, make
room for fresh accumulations, and the same round is recom-
menced.

This, doubtless, is one considerable cause which arrests
profits in their descent to the minimum, by sweeping away
from time to time a part of the accumulated mass by which
they are forced down. But this is not, as might be inferred
from the language of some writers, the principal cause. If
it were, the capital of the country would not increase; but
in England it does increase greatly and rapidly. This is
shown by the increasing productiveness of almost all taxes,
by the continual growth of all the signs of national wealth,
and by the rapid increase of population, while the condition
of the labourers certainly is not on the whole declining.
These things prove that each commercial revulsion, however
disastrous, is very far from destroying all the capital which
has been added to the accumulations of the country since
the last revulsion preceding it, and that, invariably, room is
either found or made for the profitable employment of a per-
petually increasing capital, consistently with not forcing down
profits to a lower rate.

§ 6. This brings us to the second of the counter-agencies,
namely, improvements in production. These evidently have



TENDENCY OF PROFITS TO A MINIMUM.


307


the effect of extending what Mr. Wakefield terms the field of
employment, that is, they enable a greater amount of capital
to be accumulated and employed without depressing the rate
of profit : provided always that they do not raise, to a pro-
portional extent, the habits and requirements of the labourer.
If the labouring class gain the full advantage of the increased
cheapness, in other words, if money wages do not fall, profits
are not raised, nor their fall retarded. But if the labourers
people up to the improvement in their condition, and so relapse
to their previous state, profits will rise. All inventions which
cheapen any of the things consumed by the labourers, unless
their requirements are raised in an equivalent degree, in
time lower money wages: and by doing so, enable a greater
capital to be accumulated and employed, before profits fall
back to what they were previously.

Improvements which only affect things consumed exclu-
sively by the richer classes, do not operate precisely in the
same manner. The cheapening of lace or velvet has no
effect in diminishing the cost of labour; and no mode can
be pointed out in which it can raise the rate of profit, so as
to make room for a larger capital before the minimum is
attained. It, however, produces an effect which is virtually
equivalent ; it lowers, or tends to lower, the minimum itself.
In the first place, the cheapness of articles of consumption
promotes the inclination to save, by affording to all con-
sumers a surplus which they may lay by, consistently with
their accustomed manner of living; and unless they were
before suffering actual hardships, it will require little self-
denial to save some part at least of this surplus. In the next
place, whatever enables people to live equally well upon a
smaller income, inclines them to lay by capital for a lower
rate of profit. If people can live on an independence of
500i. a year in the same manner as they formerly could on
one of 1000£., some persons will be induced to save in hopes
of the one, who would have been deterred by the more
remote prospect of the other. All improvements, therefore,



808


BOOK IV. CHAPTER IV. § 7.


in the production of almost any commodity, tend in some
degree to widen the interval which has to be passed before
arriving at the stationary state : but this effect belongs in a
much greater degree to the improvements which affect the
articles consumed by the labourer, since these conduce to it
in two ways; they induce people to accumulate for a lower
profit, and they also raise the rate of profit itself.

§ 7. Equivalent in effect to improvements in production,
is the acquisition of any new power of obtaining cheap com-
modities from foreign countries. If necessaries are cheap-
ened, whether they are so by improvements at home or im-
portation from abroad, is exactly the same thing to wages
and profits. Unless the labourer obtains, and by an im-
provement of his habitual standard, keeps, the whole benefit,
the cost of labour is lowered, and the rate of profit raised.
As long as food can continue to be imported for an increasing
population without any diminution of cheapness, so long the *
declension of profits through the increase of population and
capital is arrested, and accumulation may go on without
making the rate of profit draw nearer to the minimum.
And on this ground it is believed by some, that the repeal of
the corn laws has opened to this country a long era of rapid
increase of capital with an undiminished rate of profit.

Before inquiring whether this expectation is reasonable,
one remark must be made, which is much at variance with
commonly received notions. Foreign trade does not neces-
sarily increase the field of employment for capital. It is not
the mere opening of a market for a country's productions, that
tends to raise the rate of profits. If nothing were obtained
in exchange for those productions but the luxuries of the
rich, the expenses of no capitalist would be diminished;
profits would not be at all raised, nor room made for the
accumulation of more capital without submitting to a reduc-
tion of profits: and if the attainment of the stationary state
were at all retarded, it would only be because the diminished



TENDENCY OF PROFITS TO A MINIMUM.


309


cost at which a certain degree of luxury could be enjoyed,
might induce people, in that prospect, to make fresh savings
for a lower profit than they formerly were willing to do. When
foreign trade makes room for more capital at the same profit,
it is by enabling the necessaries of life, or the habitual articles
of the labourer's consumption, to be obtained at smaller cost.
It may do this in two ways; either by the importation of
those commodities themselves, or of the means and appliances
for producing them. Cheap iron has, in a certain measure,
the same effect on profits and the cost of labour as cheap
corn, because cheap iron makes cheap tools for agriculture
and cheap machinery for clothing. But a foreign trade which
neither directly, nor by any indirect consequence, increases
the cheapness of anything consumed by the labourers, does
not, any more than an invention or discovery in the like case,
tend to raise profits or retard their fall ; it merely substitutes
the production of goods for foreign markets, in the room of
the home production of luxuries, leaving the employment for
capital neither greater nor less than before. It is true, that
there is scarcely any export trade which, in a country that
already imports necessaries or materials, comes within these
conditions: for every increase of exports enables the
country to obtain all its imports on cheaper terms than
before.

A country which admits food of all kinds, and all neces-
saries and the materials of necessaries, to be freely imported
from all parts of the world (which is now very nearly, and
will soon be entirely, the case of England) no longer depends
on the fertility of her own soil to keep up her rate of profits,
but on the soil of the whole world. It remains to consider
how far this resource can be counted upon for making head
during a very long period against the tendency of profits to
decline as capital increases.

It must, of course, be supposed that with the increase of
capital, population also increases ; for if it did not, the conse-
quent rise of wages would bring down profits, in spite of any



310


BOOK IV. CHAPTER IV. § 8.


cheapness of food. Suppose then that the population of
Great Britain goes on increasing at its present rate, and
demands every year a supply of imported food considerably
beyond that of the year preceding. This annual increase in
the food demanded from the exporting countries, can only be
obtained either by great improvements in their agriculture,
or by the application of a great additional capital to the
growth of food. The former is likely to be a very slow pro-
cess, from the rudeness and ignorance of the agricultural
classes in the food-exporting countries of Europe, while the
British colonies and the United States are already in posses-
sion of most of the improvements yet made, so far as suitable
to their circumstances. There remains as a resource, the
extension of cultivation. And on this it is to be remarked,
that the capital by which any such extension can take place,
is mostly still to be created. In Poland, Russia, Hungary,
Spain, the increase of capital is extremely slow. In America
it is rapid, but not more rapid than the population. The
principal fund at present available for supplying this country
with a yearly increasing importation of food, is that portion of
the annual savings of America which has heretofore been
applied to increasing the manufacturing establishments of the
United States, and which free trade in corn may possibly
divert from that purpose to growing food for our market.
This limited source of supply, unless great improvements take
place in agriculture, cannot be expected to keep pace with the
growing demand of so rapidly increasing a population as that
of Great Britain ; and if our population and capital continue
to increase with their present rapidity, the only mode in which
food can continue to be supplied cheaply to the one, is by
sending the other abroad to produce it.

§ 8. This brings us to the last of the counter-forces
which check the downward tendency of profits in a country
whose capital increases faster than that of its neighbours,
and whose profits are therefore nearer to the mi nimum. This



TENDENCY OF PROFITS TO A MINIMUM. 311

is, the perpetual overflow of capital into colonies or foreign
countries, to seek higher profits than can be obtained at home.
I believe this to have been for many years one of the principal
causes by which the decline of profits in England has been
arrested. It has a twofold operation. In the first place, it
does what a fire, or an inundation, or a commercial crisis
would have done: it carries off a part of the increase of
capital from which the reduction of profits proceeds. Se-
condly, the capital so carried off is not lost, but is chiefly
employed either in founding colonies, which become large
exporters of cheap agricultural produce, or in extending and
perhaps improving the agriculture of older communities. It
is to the emigration of English capital, that we have chiefly
to look for keeping up a supply of cheap food and cheap
materials of clothing, proportional to the increase of our popu-
lation: thus enabling an increasing capital to find employ-
ment in the country, without reduction of profit, in producing
manufactured articles with which to pay for this supply of raw
produce. Thus, the exportation of capital is an agent of great
efficacy in extending the field of employment for that which
remains : and it may be said truly that, up to a certain point,
the more capital we send away, the more we shall possess and
be able to retain at home.

In countries which are further advanced in industry and
population, and have therefore a lower rate of profit, than
others, there is always, long before the actual minimum is
reached, a practical minimum, viz. when profits have fallen
so much below what they are elsewhere, that, were they to
fall lower, all further accumulations would go abroad. In the
present state of the industry of the world, when it is neces-
sary, in any rich and improving country, to take the minimum
of profits at all into consideration for practical purposes, it
is only this practical minimum that needs be considered.
As long as there are old countries where capital increases
very rapidly, and new countries where profit is still high,
profits in the old countries will not sink to the rate which



312


BOOK IV. CHAPTER IV. § 8.


would put a stop to accumulation; the fall is stopped at the
point which sends capital abroad. It is only, however, by
improvements in production, and even in the production of
things consumed by labourers, that the capital of a country
like England is prevented from speedily reaching that degree
of lowness of profit, which would cause all further savings to
be sent to find employment in the colonies or in foreign
countries.



CHAPTER V.


CONSEQUENCES OF THE TENDENCY OF PROFITS TO
A MINIMUM.

§ 1. The theory of the effect of accumulation on profits,
laid down in the preceding chapter, materially alters many of
the practical conclusions which might otherwise be supposed
to follow from the general principles of Political Economy,
and which were, indeed, long admitted as true by the highest
authorities on the subject.

It must greatly abate, or rather, altogether destroy, in coun-
tries where profits are low, the immense importance which used
to be attached by political economists to the effects which an
event or a measure of government might have, in adding to
or subtracting from the capital of the country. We have
now seen that the lowness of profits is a proof that the spirit
of accumulation is so active, and that the increase of capital
has proceeded at so rapid a rate, as to outstrip the two
counter-agencies, improvements in production, and increased
supply of cheap necessaries from abroad : and that unless a
considerable portion of the annual increase of capital were
either periodically destroyed, or exported for foreign invest-
ment, the country would speedily attain the point at which
further accumulation would cease, or at least spontaneously
slacken, so as no longer to overpass the march of invention
in the arts which produce the necessaries of life. In such a
state of things as this, a sudden addition to the capital of the
country, unaccompanied by any increase of productive power,
would be but of transitory duration; since by depressing
profits and interest, it would either diminish by a correspond-
ing amount the savings which would be made from income
in the year or two following, or it would cause an equivalent



314 BOOK IV. CHAPTER V. § 1.

amount to be sent abroad, or to be wasted in rash specula-
tions. Neither, on the other hand, would a sudden abstrac-
tion of capital, unless of inordinate amount, have any real
effect in impoverishing the country. After a few months or
years, there would exist in the country just as much capital
as if none had been taken away. The abstraction, by raising
profits and interest, would give a fresh stimulus to the accu-
mulative principle, which would speedily fill up the vacuum.
Probably, indeed, the only effect that would ensue, would be
that for some time afterwards less capital would be exported,
and less thrown away in hazardous speculation.

In the first place, then, this view of things greatly
weakens, in a wealthy and industrious country, the force of
the economical argument against the expenditure of public
money for really valuable, even though industrially unpro-
ductive, purposes. If for any great object of justice or
philanthropic policy, such as the industrial regeneration of
Ireland, or a comprehensive measure of colonization or of
public education, it were proposed to raise a large sum by
way of loan, politicians need not demur to the abstraction of
so much capita], as tending to dry up the permanent sources
of the country's wealth, and diminish the fund which sup-
plies the subsistence of the labouring population. The
utmost expense which could be requisite for any of these
purposes, would not in all probability deprive one labourer
of employment, or diminish the next year's production by one
ell of cloth or one bushel of grain. In poor countries, the
capital of the country requires the legislator's sedulous care ;
he is bound to be most cautious of encroaching upon it, and
should favour to the utmost its accumulation at home, and its
introduction from abroad. But in rich, populous, and highly
cultivated countries, it is not capital which is the deficient
element, but fertile land; and what the legislator should desire
and promote, is not a greater aggregate saving, but a greater
return to savings, either by improved cultivation, or by access
to the produce of more fertile lands in other parts of the



TENDENCY OP PROFITS TO A MINIMUM.


315


globe. In such countries, the government may take any
moderate portion of the capital of the country and expend it
as revenue, without affecting the national wealth: the whole
being either drawn from that portion of the annual savings
which would otherwise be sent abroad, or being subtracted
from the unproductive expenditure of individuals for the next
year or two, since every million spent makes room for another
million to be saved before reaching the overflowing point.
When the object in view is worth the sacrifice of such an
amount of the expenditure that furnishes the daily enjoy-
ments of the people, the only well-grounded economical
objection against taking the necessary funds directly from
capital, consists of the inconveniences attending the process
of raising a revenue by taxation, to pay the interest of a
<lebt.

The same considerations enable us to throw aside as
unworthy of regard, one of the common arguments against
emigration as a means of relief for the labouring class.
Emigration, it is said, can do no good to the labourers, if, in
order to defray the cost, as much must be taken away from
the capital of the country as from its population. That
anything like this proportion could require to be abstracted
from capital for the purpose even of the most extensive
colonization, few, I should think, would now assert: but
even on that untenable supposition, it is an error to suppose
that no benefit would be conferred on the labouring class.
If one-tenth of the labouring people of England were trans-
ferred to the colonies, and along with them one-tenth of the
circulating capital of the country, either wages, or profits, or
both, would be greatly benefited, by the diminished pressure
of capital and population upon the fertility of the land.
There would be a reduced demand for food: the inferior
arable lands would be thrown out of cultivation, and would
become pasture; the superior would be cultivated less highly,
but with a greater proportional return ; food would be lowered
in price, and though money wages would not rise, every



316


BOOK IV. CHAPTER V. § 2.

labourer would be considerably improved in circumstances;
an improvement which, if no increased stimulus to popula-
tion and fall of wages ensued, would be permanent; while if
there did, profits would rise, and accumulation start forward
so as to repair the loss of capital. The landlords alone
would sustain some loss of income; and even they, only if
colonization went to the length of actually diminishing
capital and population, but not if it merely carried off the
annual increase.

§ 2. From the same principles we are now able to arrive
at a final conclusion respecting the effects which machinery,
and generally the sinking of capital for a productive purpose,
produce upon the immediate and ultimate interests of the
labouring class. The characteristic property of this class of
industrial improvements is the conversion of circulating
capital into fixed : and it was shown in the First Book,* that
in a country where capital accumulates slowly, the introduc-
tion of machinery, permanent improvements of land, and the
like, might be, for the time, extremely injurious; since the
capital so employed might be directly taken from the wages
fund, the subsistence of the people and the employment for
labour curtailed, and the gross annual produce of the country
actually diminished. But in a country of great annual savings
and low profits, no such effects need be apprehended. Since
even the emigration of capital, or its unproductive expendi-
ture, or its absolute waste, do not in such a country, if confined
within any moderate bounds, at all diminish the aggregate
amount of the wages fund — still less can the mere conver-
sion of a like sum into fixed capital, which continues to be
productive, have that effect. It merely draws off at one orifice
what was already flowing out at another; or if not, the greater
vacant space left in the reservoir does but cause a greater
quantity to flow in. Accordingly, in spite of the mischievous


Supra, vol. i. p. 118.


TENDENCY OP PROFITS TO A MINIMUM.


317


derangements of the money-market which have been occa-
sioned by the great sums in process of being sunk in railways,
I cannot agree with those who apprehend any mischief, from
this source, to the productive resources of the country. Not
on the absurd ground (which to any one acquainted with the
elements of the subject needs no confutation) that railway
expenditure is a mere transfer of capital from hand to hand,
by which nothing is lost or destroyed. This is true of what
is spent in the purchase of the land ; a portion too of what is
paid to parliamentary agents, counsel, engineers, and surveyors,
is saved by those who receive it, and becomes capital again :
but what is laid out in the bond Jide construction of the rail-
way itself, is lost and gone ; when once expended, it is inca-
pable of ever being paid in wages or applied to the maintenance
of labourers again; as a matter of account, the result is that
so much food and clothing and tools have been consumed,
and the country has got a railway instead. But what I would
urge is, that sums so applied are mostly a mere appropriation
of the annual overflowing which would otherwise have gone
abroad, or been thrown away unprofitably, leaving neither a
railway nor any other tangible result. The railway gambling
of 1844 and 1845 probably saved the country from a depres-
sion of profits and interest, and a rise of all public and private
securities, which would have engendered still wilder specula-
tions, and when the effects came afterwards to be complicated
by the scarcity of food, would have ended in a still more
formidable crisis than was experienced in the years imme-
diately following. In the poorer countries of Europe, the
rage for railway construction might have had worse conse-
quences than in England, were it not that in those countries
such enterprises are in a great measure carried on by foreign
capital. The railway operations of the various nations of the
world may be looked upon % as a sort of competition for the
overflowing capital of the countries where profit is low and
capital abundant, as England and Holland. The English
railway speculations are a struggle to keep our annual increase



318 BOOK IV. CHAPTER V. § 2 .

of capital at home; those of foreign countries are an effort to
obtain it.*

It already appears from these considerations, that the con-
version of circulating capital into fixed, whether by railways,
or manufactories, or ships, or machinery, or canals, or mines,
or works of drainage and irrigation, is not likely, in any rich
country, to diminish the gross produce or the amount of em-
ployment for labour. How much then is the case strength-
ened, when we consider that these transformations of capital
are of the nature of improvements in production, which,
instead of ultimately diminishing circulating capital, are the
necessary conditions of its increase, since they alone enable
a country to possess a constantly augmenting capital, without
reducing profits to the rate which would cause accumulation
to stop. There is hardly any increase of fixed capital which
does not enable the country to contain eventually a larger cir-
culating capital, than it otherwise could possess and employ
within its own limits; for there is hardly any creation of fixed
capital which, when it proves successful, does not cheapen the
articles on which wages are habitually expended. All capital
sunk in the permanent improvement of land lessens the cost
of food and materials; almost all improvements in machinery
cheapen the labourer's clothing or lodging, or the tools with
which these are made; improvements in locomotion, such as
railways, cheapen to the consumer all things which are brought
from a distance. All these improvements make the labourers
better off with the same money wages, better off if they do
not increase their rate of multiplication. But if they do,
and wages consequently fall, at least profits rise, and, while
accumulation receives an immediate stimulus, room is made
for a greater amount of capital before a sufficient motive


* It is hardly needful to point out « how fully the remarks in the text
(which I have left as they originally stood) have been verified by subsequent
facts. The capital of the country, far from having been in any degree im-
paired by the large amount sunk in railway construction, was soon again
overflowing.


TENDENCY OF PROFITS TO A MINIMUM. 319

arises for sending it abroad. Even the improvements which
do not cheapen the things consumed by the labourer, and
which, therefore, do not raise profits nor retain capital in the
country, nevertheless, as we have seen, by lowering the
minimum of profit for which people will ultimately consent to
save, leave an ampler margin than previously for eventual
accumulation, before arriving at the stationary state.

We may conclude, then, that improvements in production,
and emigration of capital to the more fertile soils and un-
worked mines of the uninhabited or thinly peopled parts of the
globe, do not, as appears to a superficial view, diminish the
gross produce and the demand for labour at home, but, on the
contrary, are what we have chiefly to depend on for increasing
both, and are even the necessary conditions of any great or
prolonged augmentation of either. Nor is it any exaggeration
to say, that within certain, and not very narrow, limits, the
more capital a country like England expends in these two
ways, the more she will have left.



CHAPTER VI.


OF THE STATIONARY STATE.

§ 1. The preceding chapters comprise the general theory
of the economical progress of society, in the sense in which
those terms are commonly understood ; the progress of capital,
of population, and of the productive arts. But in contem-
plating any progressive movement, not in its nature unlimited,
the mind is not satisfied with merely tracing the laws of the
movement; it cannot but ask the further question, to what
goal ? Towards what ultimate point is society tending by its
industrial progress? When the progress ceases, in what
condition are we to expect that it will leave mankind ?

It must always have been seen, more or less distinctly,
by political economists, that the increase of wealth is not
boundless: that at the end of what they term the progressive
state lies the stationary state, that all progress in wealth is
but a postponement of this, and that each step in advance is
an approach to it. We have now been led to recognize that
this ultimate goal is at all times near enough to be fully in
view ; that we are always on the verge of it, and that if we
have not reached it long ago, it is because the goal itself
flies before us. The richest and most prosperous countries
would very soon attain the stationary state, if no further
improvements were made in the productive arts, and if there
were a suspension of the overflow of capital from those coun-
tries into the uncultivated or ill-cultivated regions of the
earth.

This impossibility of ultimately avoiding the stationary
state — this irresistible necessity that the stream of human
industry should finally spread itself out into an apparently
stagnant sea — must have been* to the political economists of



THE STATIONARY STATE.


821


the last two generations, an nnpleasing and discouraging
prospect; for the tone and tendency of their speculations goes
completely to identify all that is economically desirable with
the progressive state, and with that alone. With Mr. M‘Cul-
loch, for example, prosperity does not mean a large production
and a good distribution of wealth, but a rapid increase of it;
his test of prosperity is high profits ; and as the tendency of
that very increase of wealth, which he calls prosperity, is
towards low profits, economical progress, according to him,
must tend to the extinction of prosperity. Adam Smith
always assumes that the condition of the mass of the people,
though it may not be positively distressed, must be pinched
and stinted in a stationary condition of wealth, and can only
be satisfactory in a progressive state. The doctrine that, to
however distant a time incessant struggling may put off our
doom, the progress of society must “ end in shallows and in
miseries,” far from being, as many people still believe, a
wicked invention of Mr. Malthus, was either expressly or
tacitly affirmed by his most distinguished predecessors, and can
only be successfully combated on his principles. Before at-
tention had been directed to the principle of population as the
active force in determining the remuneration of labour, the
increase of mankind was virtually treated as a constant
quantity: it was, at all events, assumed that in the natural
and normal state of human affairs population must constantly
increase, from which it followed that a constant increase of
the means of support was essential to the physical comfort of
the mass of mankind. The publication of Mr. Malthus'
Essay is the era from which better views of this subject must
be dated; and notwithstanding the acknowledged errors of
his first edition, few writers have done more than himself, in
the subsequent editions, to promote these juster and more
hopeful anticipations.

Even in a progressive state of capital, in old countries, a
conscientious or prudential restraint on population is indis-
pensable, to prevent the increase of numbers from outstripping

VOL. II. Y



322


BOOK IV. CHAPTER VI. § 2.


the increase of capital, and the condition of the classes who
are at the bottom of society from being deteriorated. Where
there is not, in the people, or in some very large proportion of
them, a resolute resistance to this deterioration — a determina-
tion to preserve an established standard of comfort — the con-
dition of the poorest class sinks, even in a progressive state, to
the lowest point which they will consent to endure. The
same determination would be equally effectual to keep up
their condition in the stationary state, and would be quite as
likely to exist. Indeed, even now, the countries in which the
greatest prudence is manifested in the regulating of popula-
tion, are often those in which capital increases least rapidly.
Where there is an indefinite prospect of employment for in-
creased numbers, there is apt to appear less necessity for pru-
dential restraint. If it were evident that a new hand could
not obtain employment but by displacing, or succeeding to,
one already employed, the combined influences of prudence
and public opinion might in some measure be relied on for
restricting the coming generation within the numbers neces-
sary for replacing the present.

§ 2. I cannot, therefore, regard the stationary state of
capital and wealth with the unaffected aversion so generally
manifested towards it by political economists of the old
school. I am inclined to believe that it would be, on the
whole, a very considerable improvement on our present con-
dition. I confess I am not charmed with the ideal of life
held out by those who think that the normal state of human
beings is that of struggling to get on; that the trampling,
crushing, elbowing, and treading on each other’s heels, which
form the existing type of social life, are the most desirable lot
of human kind, or anything but the disagreeable symptoms of
one of the phases of industrial progress. The northern and
middle states of America are a specimen of this stage of civi-
lization in very favourable circumstances ; having, apparently,
got rid of all social injustices and inequalities that affect per-



THE STATIONARY STATE.


323


sons of Caucasian race and of the male sex, while the pro-
portion of population to capital and land is such as to ensure
abundance to every able-bodied member of the community
who does not forfeit it by misconduct. They have the six
points of Chartism, and they have no poverty : and all that
these advantages seem to have yet done for them (notwith-
standing some incipient signs of a better tendency) is that the
life of the whole of one sex is devoted to dollar-hunting, and
of the other to breeding dollar-hunters. This is not a kind of
social perfection which philanthropists to come will feel any
very eager desire to assist in realizing. Most fitting, indeed,
is it, that while riches are power, and to grow as rich as pos-
sible the universal object of ambition, the path to its attain-
ment should be open to all, without favour or partiality. But
the best state for human nature is that in which, while no one
is poor, no one desires to be richer, nor has any reason to fear
being thrust back, by the efforts of others to push themselves
forward.

That the energies of mankind should be kept in employ-
ment by the struggle for riches, as they were formerly by the
struggle of war, until the better minds succeed in educating
the others into better things, is undoubtedly more desirable
than that they should rust and stagnate. While minds are
coarse they require coarse stimuli, and let them have them.
In the meantime, those who do not accept the present very
early stage of human improvement as its ultimate type, may
be excused for being comparatively indifferent to the kind of
economical progress which excites the congratulations of
ordinary politicians; the mere increase of production and
accumulation. For the safety of national independence it is
essential that a country should not fall much behind its
neighbours in these things. But in themselves they are of
little importance, so long as either the increase of population
or anything else prevents the mass of the people from reaping
any part of the benefit of them. I know not why it should
be matter of congratulation that persons who are already

Y 2



824


BOOK IV. CHAPTER VI. § 2 .

richer than any one needs to be, should have doubled their
means of consuming things which give little or no pleasure
except as representative of wealth ; or that numbers of indi-
viduals should pass over, every year, from the middle classes
into a richer class, or from the class of the occupied rich to
that of the unoccupied. It is only in the backward countries
of the world that increased production is still an important
object: in those most advanced, what is economically needed
is a better distribution, of which one indispensable means is a
stricter restraint on population. Levelling institutions, either
of a just or of an unjust kind, cannot alone accomplish it;
they may lower the heights of society, but they cannot, of
themselves, permanently raise the depths.

On the other hand, we may suppose this better distribu-
tion of property attained, by the joint effect of the prudence
and frugality of individuals, and of a system of legislation
favouring equality of fortunes, so far as is consistent with the
just claim of the individual to the fruits, whether great or
small, of his or her own industry. We may suppose, for in-
stance, (according to the suggestion thrown out in a former
chapter,*) a limitation of the sum which any one person may
acquire by gift or inheritance, to the amount sufficient to con-
stitute a moderate independence. Under this twofold influ-
ence, society would exhibit these leading features : a well-paid
and affluent body of labourers; no enormous fortunes, except
what were earned and accumulated during a single lifetime;
but a much larger body of persons than at present, not only
exempt from the coarser toils, but with sufficient leisure, both
physical and mental, from mechanical details, to cultivate
freely the graces of life, and afford examples of them to the
classes less favourably circumstanced for their growth. This
condition of society, so greatly preferable to the present, is not
only perfectly compatible with the stationary state, but, it
would seem, more naturally allied with that state than with
any other.


* Supra, vol. i. pp. 274-7.



THE STATIONARY STATE.


325


There is room in the world, no doubt, and even in
old countries, for a great increase of population, supposing
the arts of life to go on improving, and capital to increase.
But even if innocuous, I confess I see very little reason for
desiring it. The density of population necessary to enable
mankind to obtain, in the greatest degree, all the advantages
both of co-operation and of social intercourse, has, in all the
most populous countries, been attained. A population may
be too crowded, though all be amply supplied with food and
raiment. It is not good for man to be kept perforce at all
times in the presence of his species. A world from which
solitude is extirpated, is a very poor ideal. Solitude, in the
sense of being often alone, is essential to any depth of
meditation or of character; and solitude in the presence of
natural beauty and grandeur, is the cradle of thoughts and
aspirations which are not only good for the individual, but
which society could ill do without. Nor is there much satis-
faction in contemplating the world with nothing left to the
spontaneous activity of nature; with every rood of land
brought into cultivation, which is capable of growing food
for human beings; every flowery waste or natural pasture
ploughed up, all quadrupeds or birds which are not domes-
ticated for man's use exterminated as his rivals for food, every
hedgerow or superfluous tree rooted out, and scarcely a place
left where a wild shrub or flower could grow without being
eradicated as a weed in the name of improved agriculture.
If the earth must lose that great portion of its pleasantness
which it owes to things that the unlimited increase of wealth
and population would extirpate from it, for the mere purpose
of enabling it to support a larger, but not a better or a happier
population, I sincerely hope, for the sake of posterity, that
they will be content to be stationary, long before necessity
compels them to it.

It is scarcely necessary to remark that a stationary con-
dition of capital and population implies no stationary state of
human improvement. There would be as much scope as ever



326 BOOK IV. CHAPTER VI. § 2 .

for all kinds of mental culture, and moral and social progress;
as much room for improving the Art of Living, and much
more likelihood of its being improved, when minds ceased to
be engrossed by the art of getting on. Even the industrial
arts might be as earnestly and as successfully cultivated, with
this sole difference, that instead of serving no purpose but the
increase of wealth, industrial improvements would produce
their legitimate effect, that of abridging labour. Hitherto it
is questionable if all the mechanical inventions yet made have
lightened the day's toil of any human being. They have
enabled a greater population to live the same life of drudgery
and imprisonment, and an increased number of manufac-
turers and others to make fortunes. They have increased the
comforts of the middle classes. But they have not yet begun
to effect those great changes in human destiny, which it is in
their nature and in their futurity to accomplish. Only when,
in addition to just institutions, the increase of mankind shall
be under the deliberate guidance of judicious foresight, can
the conquests made from the powers of nature by the intellect
and energy of scientific discoverers, become the common pro-
perty of the species, and the means of improving and elevating
the universal lot.



CHAPTER VII.


ON THE PROBABLE FUTURITY OF THE LABOURING
CLASSES.

§ 1. The observations in the preceding chapter had for
their principal object to deprecate a false ideal of human
society. Their applicability to the practical purposes of
present times, consists in moderating the inordinate import-
ance attached to the mere increase of production, and fixing
attention upon improved distribution, and a large remunera-
tion of labour, as the two desiderata. Whether the aggregate
produce increases absolutely or not, is a thing in which, after
a certain amount has been obtained, neither the legislator nor
the philanthropist need feel any strong interest: but, that it
should increase relatively to the number of those who share in
it, is of the utmost possible importance; and this, (whether
the wealth of mankind be stationary, or increasing at the most
rapid rate ever known in an old country,) must depend on the
opinions and habits of the most numerous class, the class of
manual labourers.

When I speak, either in this place or elsewhere, of “ the
labouring classes,” or of labourers as a “ class,” I use those
phrases in compliance with custom, and as descriptive of an
existing, but by no means a necessary or permanent, state of
social relations. I do not recognise as either just or salutary,
a state of society in which there is any “ class” which is not
labouring; any human beings, exempt from bearing their
share of the necessary labours of human life, except those
unable to labour, or who have fairly earned rest by previous
toil. So long, however, as the great social evil exists of a non-
labouring class, labourers also constitute a class, and may be
spoken of, though only provisionally, in that character.



828 BOOK IV. CHAPTER VII. § 1 .

Considered in its moral and social aspect, the state of the
labouring people has latterly been a subject of much more
speculation and discussion than formerly; and the opinion,
that it is not now what it ought to be, has become very
general. The suggestions which have been promulgated, and
the controversies which have been excited, on detached points
rather than on the foundations of the subject, have put in
evidence the existence of two conflicting theories, respecting
the social position desirable for manual labourers. The one
may be called the theory of dependence and protection, the
other that of self-dependence.

According to the former theory, the lot of the poor, in
all things which affect them collectively, should be regulated
for them, not by them. They should not be required or
encouraged to think for themselves, or give to their own
reflection or forecast an influential voice in the determination
of their destiny. It is supposed to be the duty of the higher
classes to think for them, and to take the responsiblity of
their lot, as the commander and officers of an army take that
of the soldiers composing it. This function, it is contended,
the higher classes should prepare themselves to perform con-
scientiously, and their whole demeanour should impress the
poor with a reliance on it, in order that, while yielding pas-
sive and active obedience to the rules prescribed for them,
they may resign themselves in all other respects to a trustful
insouciance , and repose under the shadow of their protectors.
The relation between rich and poor, according to this theory
(a theory also applied to the relation between men and
women) should be only partly authoritative; it should be
amiable, moral, and sentimental : affectionate tutelage on the
one side, respectful and grateful deference on the other. The
rich should be in loco parentis to the poor, guiding and
restraining them like children. Of spontaneous action on
their part there should be no need. They should be called on
for nothing but to do their day's work, and to be moral and
religious. Their morality and religion should be provided



PROBABLE FUTURE OF THE LABOURING CLASSES. 329


for them by their superiors, who should see them properly
taught it, and should do all that is necessary to ensure their
being, in return for labour and attachment, properly fed,
clothed, housed, spiritually edified, and innocently amused.

This is the ideal of the future, in the minds of those
whose dissatisfaction with the Present assumes the form of
affection and regret towards the Past. Like other ideals, it
exercises an unconscious influence on the opinions and senti-
ments of numbers who neyer consciously guide themselves
by any ideal. It has also this in common with other ideals,
that it has never been historically realized. It makes its
appeal to our imaginative sympathies in the character of
a restoration of the good times of our forefathers. But no
times can be pointed out in which the higher classes of this
or any other country performed a part even distantly re-
sembling the one assigned to them in this theory. It is an
idealization, grounded on the conduct and character of here
and there an individual. All privileged and powerful classes,
as such, have used their power in the interest of their own self-
ishness, and have indulged their self-importance in despising,
and not in lovingly caring for, those who were, in their esti-
mation, degraded, by being under the necessity of working for
their benefit. I do not affirm that what has always been must
always be, or that human improvement has no tendency to
correct the intensely selfish feelings engendered by power;
but though the evil may be lessened, it cannot be eradicated,
until the power itself is withdrawn. This, at least, seems to
me undeniable, that long before the superior classes could
be sufficiently improved to govern in the tutelary manner
supposed, the inferior classes would be too much improved
to be so governed.

I am quite sensible of all that is seductive in the picture
of society which this theory presents. Though the facts of
it have no prototype in the past, the feelings have. In them
lies all that there is of reality in the conception. As the idea
is essentially repulsive of a society only held together by



830


BCXDK IV. CHAPTER VII. § 1.

the relations and feelings arising out of pecuniary interests,
so there is something naturally attractive in a form of society
abounding in strong personal attachments and disinterested
self-devotion. Of such feelings it must be admitted that the
relation of protector and protected has hitherto been the
richest source. The strongest attachments of human beings
in general, are towards the things or the persons that stand
between them and some dreaded evil. Hence, in an age of
lawless violence and insecurity, and general hardness and
roughness of manners, in which life is beset with dangers
and sufferings at every step, to those who have neither a
commanding position of their own, nor a claim on the pro-
tection of some one who has — a generous giving of protec-
tion, and a grateful receiving of it, are the strongest ties
which connect human beings ; the feelings arising from that
relation are their warmest feelings; all the enthusiasm and
tenderness of the most sensitive natures gather round it;
loyalty on the one part and chivalry on the other are prin-
ciples exalted into passions. I do not desire to depreciate
these qualities. The error lies in not perceiving, that these
virtues and sentiments, like the clanship and the hospitality
of the wandering Arab, belong emphatically to a rude and
imperfect state of the social union, and that the feelings
between protector and protected, whether between kings and
subjects, rich and poor, or men and women, can no longer
have this beautiful and endearing character, where there are
no longer any serious dangers from which to protect. What
is there in the present state of society to make it natural that
human beings, of ordinary strength and courage, should glow
with the warmest gratitude and devotion in return for pro-
tection ? The laws protect them, wherever the laws do not
criminally fail in their duty. To be under the power of
some one, instead of being as formerly the sole condition of
safety, is now, speaking generally, the only situation which
exposes to grievous wrong. The so-called protectors are
now the only persons against whom, in any ordinary circum-



PROBABLE FUTURE OF THE LABOURING CLASSES. 331

stances, protection is needed. The brutality and tyranny
with which every police report is filled, are those of husbands
to wives, of parents to children. That the law does not pre-
vent these atrocities, that it is only now making a first timid
attempt to repress and punish them, is no matter of necessity,
but the deep disgrace of those by whom the laws are made
and administered. No man or woman who either possesses
or is able to earn an independent livelihood, requires any other
protection than that which the law could .and ought to give.
This being the case, it argues great ignorance of human nature
to continue taking for granted that relations founded on pro-
tection must always subsist, and not to see that the assump-
tion of the part of protector, and of the power which belongs
to it, without any of the necessities which justify it, must
engender feelings opposite to loyalty.

Of the working men, at least in the more advanced
countries of Europe, it may be pronounced certain, that the
patriarchal or paternal system of government is one to which
they will not again be subject. That question was decided,
when they were taught to read, and allowed access to news-
papers and political tracts; when dissenting preachers were
suffered to go among them, and appeal to their faculties and
feelings in opposition to the creeds professed and counte-
nanced by their superiors ; when they were brought together
in numbers, to work socially under the same roof ; when rail-
ways enabled them to shift from place to place, and change
their patrons and employers as easily as their coats; when
they were encouraged to seek a share in the government by
means of the electoral franchise. The working classes have
taken their interests into their own hands, and are perpetually
showing that they think the interests of their employers not
identical with their own but opposite to them. Some among
the higher classes flatter themselves that these tendencies
may be counteracted by moral and religious education ; but
they have let the time go by for giving an education which
can serve their purpose. The principles of the Reformation



382 BOOK IV. CHAPTER VII. § 2 .

have reached as low down in society as reading and writing,
and the poor will not much longer accept morals and religion
of other people’s prescribing. I speak more particularly of
this country, especially the town population, and the districts
of the most scientific agriculture or the highest wages, Scot-
land and the north of England. Among the more inert and
less modernized agricultural population of the southern
counties, it might be possible for the gentry to retain for
some time longer something of the ancient deference and
submission of the poor, by bribing them with high wages and
constant employment; by ensuring them support, and never
requiring them to do anything which they do not like.
But these are two conditions which never have been com-
bined, and never can be, for long together. A guarantee of
subsistence can only be practically kept up, when work is
enforced, and superfluous multiplication restrained, by at
least a moral compulsion. It is then, that the would-be
revivers of old times which they do not understand, would
feel practically in how hopeless a task they were engaged.
The whole fabric of patriarchal or seignorial influence,
attempted to be raised on the foundation of caressing the
poor, would be shattered against the necessity of enforcing a
stringent Poor-law.

§ 2. It is on a far other basis that the well-being and
well-doing of the labouring people must henceforth rest.
The poor have come out of leading-strings, and cannot any
longer be governed or treated like children. To their own
qualities must now be commended the care of their destiny.
Modern nations will have to learn the lesson, that the well-
being of a people must exist by means of the justice and
self-government, the Sucaioavvri and croup poavvr], of the indi-
vidual citizens. The theory of dependence attempts to dis-
pense with the necessity of these qualities in the dependent
classes. But now, when even in position they are becoming
less and less dependent, and their minds less and less acqui-



PROBABLE FUTURE OF THE LABOURING CLASSES. 833

escent in the degree of dependence which remains, the virtues
of independence are those which they stand in need of.
Whatever advice, exhortation, or guidance is held out to the
labouring classes, must henceforth be tendered to them as
equals, and accepted with their eyes open. The prospect of
the future depends on the degree in which they can be made
rational beings.

There is no reason to believe that prospect other than
hopeful. The progress indeed has hitherto been, and still is,
slow. But there is a spontaneous education going on in the
minds of the multitude, which may be greatly accelerated
and improved by artificial aids. The instruction obtained
from newspapers and political tracts is not the best sort
of instruction, but it is vastly superior to none at all. The
institutions for lectures and discussion, the collective delibe-
rations on questions of common interest, the trades unions,
the political agitation, all serve to awaken public spirit, to
diffuse variety of ideas among the mass, and to excite thought
and reflection in the more intelligent. Although the too
early attainment of political franchises by the least educated
class might retard, instead of promoting, their improvement,
there can be little doubt that it has been greatly stimulated
by the attempt to acquire them. In the meantime, the
working classes are now part of the public; in all discussions
on matters of general interest they, or a portion of them, are
now partakers; all who use the press as an instrument may,
if it so happens, have them for an audience ; the avenues of
instruction through which the middle classes acquire such
ideas as they have, are accessible to, at least, the operatives
in the towns. With these resources, it cannot be doubted
that they will increase in intelligence, even by their own
unaided efforts; while there is reason to hope that great
improvements both in the quality and quantity of school
education will be effected by the exertions either of govern-
ment or of individuals, and that the progress of the mass of
the people in mental cultivation, and in the virtues which are



834 BOOK IV. CHAPTER VII. § 3.

dependent on it, will take place more rapidly, and with fewer
intermitten ces and aberrations, than if left to itself.

From this increase of intelligence, several effects may be
confidently anticipated. First: that they will become even
less willing than at present to be led and governed, and
directed into the way they should go, by the mere authority
and prestige of superiors. If they have not now, still less
will they have hereafter, any deferential awe, or religious
principle of obedience, holding them in mental subjection to
a class above them. The theory of dependence and protec-
tion will be more and more intolerable to them, and they
will require that their conduct and condition shall be essen-
tially self-governed. It is, at the same time, quite possible
that they may demand, in many cases, the intervention of
the legislature in their affairs, and the regulation by law of
various things which concern them, often under very mis-
taken ideas of their interest. Still, it is their own will, their
own ideas and suggestions, to which they will demand that
effect should be given, and not rules laid down for them by
other people. It is quite consistent with this, that they
should feel respect for superiority of intellect and know-
ledge, and defer much to the opinions, on any subject, of
those whom they think well acquainted with it. Such
deference is deeply grounded in human nature; but they
will judge for themselves of the persons who are and are not
entitled to it.

§ 3. It appears to me impossible but that the increase of
intelligence, of education, and of the love of independence
among the working classes, must be attended with a corre-
sponding growth of the good sense which manifests itself in
provident habits of conduct, and that population, therefore,
will bear a gradually diminishing ratio to capital and employ-
ment. This most desirable result would be much accele-
rated by another change, which lies in the direct line of the
best tendencies of the time; the opening of industrial occu-



PROBABLE FUTURE OF THE LABOURING CLASSES. 335


pations freely to both sexes. The same reasons which make
it no longer necessary that the poor should depend on the
rich, make it equally unnecessary that women should depend
on men, and the least which justice requires is that law and
custom should not enforce dependence (when the correlative
protection has become superfluous) by ordaining that a woman,
who does not happen to have a provision by inheritance, shall
have scarcely any means open to her of gaining a livelihood,
except as a wife and mother. Let women who prefer that
occupation, adopt it; but that there should be no option, no
other carridre possible for the great majority of women, except
in the humbler departments of life, is a flagrant social injustice.
The ideas and institutions by which the accident of sex is made
the groundwork of an inequality of legal rights, and a forced
dissimilarity of social functions, must ere long be recognised
as the greatest hindrance to moral, social, and even intellectual
improvement.* On the present occasion I shall only indicate,
among the probable consequences of the industrial and social
independence of women, a great diminution of the evil of over-
population. It is by devoting one-half of the human species
to that exclusive function, by making it fill the entire life of
one sex, and interweave itself with almost all the objects of
the other, that the animal instinct in question is nursed into


* It is truly disgraceful that in a woman’s reign, not one step has been
made by law towards removing even the smallest portion of the existing in-
justice to women. The brutal part of the populace can still maltreat, not to
say kill, their wives, with the next thing to impunity; and as to civil and
social statue, in framing a new reform bill for the extension of the elective
franchise, the opportunity was not taken for so small a recognition of some-
thing like equality of rights, as would have been made by admitting to the
suffrage, women of the same class and the same householding and tax- paying
qualifications as the men who already possess it. [Mr. Fitzroy’s Act for the
Better Protection of Women and Children against Assaults, is a well-meant
though inadequate attempt to wipe off the former reproach. The second is
more flagrant than ever, another Reform Bill having been since presented, largely
extending the franchise among many classes of men, but leaving all women in
their existing state of political as well as social servitude.]



836 BOOK IV. CHAPTER VII. § 4.

the disproportionate preponderance which it has hitherto
exercised in human life.

§ 4. The political consequences of the increasing power
and importance of the operative classes, and of the growing
ascendancy of numbers, which even in England and under
the present institutions, is rapidly giving to the will of the
majority at least a negative voice in the acts of government,
are too wide a subject to be discussed in this place. But,
confining ourselves to economical considerations, and notwith-
standing the effect which improved intelligence in the working
classes, together with just laws, may have in altering the dis-
tribution of the produce to their advantage, I cannot think
that they will be permanently contented with the condition
of labouring for wages as their ultimate state. They may be
willing to pass through the class of servants in their way to
that of employers; but not to remain in it all their lives. To
begin as hired labourers, then after a few years to work on
their own account, and finally employ others, is the normal
condition of labourers in a new country, rapidly increasing in
wealth and population, like America or Australia. But in
an old and fully peopled country, those who begin life as
labourers for hire, as a general rule, continue such to the end,
unless they sink into the still lower grade of recipients of
public charity. In the present stage of human progress, when
ideas of equality are daily spreading more widely among the
poorer classes, and can no longer be checked by anything
short of the entire suppression of printed discussion and even
of freedom of speech, it is not to be expected that the division
of the human race into two hereditary classes, employers and
employed, can be permanently maintained. The relation is
nearly as unsatisfactory to the payer of wages as to the
receiver. If the rich regard the poor as, by a kind of natural
law, their servants and dependants, the rich in their turn are
regarded as a mere prey and pasture for the poor; the subject
of demands and expectations wholly indefinite, increasing in



PROBABLE FUTURE OF THE LABOURING CLASSES. 337

extent with every concession made to them. The total absence
of regard for justice or fairness in the relations between the
two, is as marked on the side of the employed as on that of
the employers. We look in vain among the working classes
in general for the just pride which will choose to give good
work for good wages : for the most part, their sole endeavour
is to receive as much and return as little in the shape of
service as possible. It will sooner or later become insup-
portable to the employing classes to live in close and hourly
contact with persons whose interests and feelings are in hos-
tility to them. Capitalists are almost as much interested as
labourers, in placing the operations of industry on such a
footing, that those who labour for them may feel the same
interest in the work, which is felt by those who labour on
their own account.

The opinion expressed in a former part of this treatise
respecting small landed properties and peasant proprietors,
may have made the reader anticipate that a wide diffusion of
property in land is the resource on which I rely for exempting
at least the agricultural labourers from exclusive dependence
on labour for hire. Such, however, is not my opinion. I
indeed deem that form of agricultural economy to be most
groundlessly decried, and to be greatly preferable, in its aggre-
gate effects on human happiness, to hired labour in any form
in which it exists at present ; because the prudential check to
population acts more directly, and is shown by experience
to be more efficacious; and because, in point of security, of
independence, of exercise for any other than the animal
faculties, the state of a peasant proprietor is far superior to
that of an agricultural labourer in this or any other old coun-
try. Where the former system already exists, and works on
the whole satisfactorily, I should regret, in the present state
of human intelligence, to see it abolished in order to make way
for the other, under a pedantic notion of agricultural improve-
ment as a thing necessarily the same in every diversity of
circumstances. In a backward state of industrial improve-

VOL. II. Z



338


BOOK IV. CHAPTER VII. § 4 .

ment, as in Ireland, I should urge its introduction, in prefe-
rence to an exclusive system of hired labour; as a more
powerful instrument for raising a population from semi-savage
listlessness and recklessness, to persevering industry and
prudent calculation.

But a people who have once adopted the large system of
production, either in manufacture or in agriculture, are not
likely to recede from it; and when population is kept in due
proportion to the means of support, it is not desirable that
they should. Labour is unquestionably more productive on
the system of large industrial enterprises; the produce, if
not greater absolutely, is greater in proportion to the labour
employed: the same number of persons can be supported
equally well with less toil and greater leisure; which will
be wholly an advantage, as soon as civilization and improve-
ment have so far advanced, that what is a benefit to the
whole shall be a benefit to each individual composing it.
And in the moral aspect of the question, which is still more
important than the economical, something better should be
aimed at as the goal of industrial improvement, than to
disperse mankind over the earth in single families, each
ruled internally, as families now are, by a patriarchal despot,
and having scarcely any community of interest, or neces-
sary mental communion, with other human beings. The
domination of the head of the family over the other members,
in this state of things, is absolute ; while the effect on his own
mind tends towards concentration of all interests in the
family, considered as an expansion of self, and absorption
of all passions in that of exclusive possession, of all cares in
those of preservation and acquisition. As a step out of the
merely animal state into the human, out of reckless aban-
donment to brute instincts into prudential foresight and
self-government, this moral condition may be seen without
displeasure. But if public spirit, generous sentiments, or
true justice and equality are desired, association, not isola-
tion, of interests, is the school in which these excellences are



PROBABLE FUTURE OF THE LABOURING CLASSES. S39

nurtured. The aim of improvement should be not solely
to place human beings in a condition in which they will be
able to do without one another, but to enable them to work
with or for one another in relations not involving depend-
ence. Hitherto there has been no alternative for those who
lived by their labour, but that of labouring either each for
himself alone, or for a master. But the civilizing and im-
proving influences of association, and the efficiency and
economy of production on a large scale, may be obtained
without dividing the producers into two parties with hostile
interests and feelings, the many who do the work being
mere servants under the command of the one who supplies
the funds, and having no interest of their own in the enter-
prise except to earn their wages with as little labour as
possible. The speculations and discussions of the last fifty
years, and the events of the last ten, are abundantly con-
clusive on this point. Unless the military despotism now
triumphant on the Continent should succeed in its nefarious
attempts to throw back the human mind, there can be little
doubt that the status of hired labourers will gradually tend
to confine itself to the description of workpeople whose low
moral qualities render them unfit for anything more inde-
pendent: and that the relation of masters and workpeople will
be gradually superseded by partnership in one of two forms :
temporarily and in some cases, association of the labourers
with the capitalist; in other cases, and finally in all, asso-
ciation of labourers among themselves.

§ 5. The first of these forms of association has long
been practised, not . indeed as a rule but as an exception.
In several departments of industry there are already cases
in which every one who contributes to the work, either by
labour or by pecuniary resources, has a partner's interest in
it, proportional to the value of his contribution. It is
already a common practice to remunerate those in whom
peculiar trust is reposed, by means of a percentage on the

Z 2



840 BOOK IV. CHAPTER VII. § 5 .

profits; and cases exist in which the principle is, with ex-
cellent success, carried down to the class of mere manual
labourers.

In the American ships trading to China, it has long been
the custom for every sailor to have an interest in the profits
of the voyage; and to this has been ascribed the general
good conduct of those seamen, and the extreme rarity of
any collision between them and the government or people
of the country. An instance in England, not so well known
as it deserves to be, is that of the Cornish miners. “In
Cornwall the mines are worked strictly on the system of
joint adventure; gangs of miners contracting with the agent,
who represents the owner of the mine, to execute a certain
portion of a vein, and fit the ore for market, at the price of
so much in the pound of the sum for which the ore is sold.
These contracts are put up at certain regular periods, gene-
rally every two months, and taken by a voluntary partner-
ship of men accustomed to the mine. This system has its
disadvantages, in consequence of the uncertainty and irregu-
larity of the earnings, and consequent necessity of living for
long periods on credit; but it has advantages which more
•than counterbalance these drawbacks. It produces a degree
of intelligence, independence, and moral elevation, which
raise the condition and character of the Cornish miner far
above that of the generality of the labouring class. We are
told by Dr. Barham, that ‘they are not only, as a class,
intelligent for labourers, but men of considerable know-
ledge/ Also, that ‘they have a character of independence,
something American, 'the system by which the contracts are
let giving the takers entire freedom to make arrangements
among themselves; so that each man feels, as a partner in
his little firm, that he meets his employers on nearly equal
terms/ . . . With this basis of intelligence and inde-

pendence in their character, we are not surprised when we
hear that ‘a very great number of miners are now located
on possessions of their own, leased for three lives or ninety-



PROBABLE FUTURE OF THE LABOURING CLASSES. 341

nine years, on which they have built houses or that
‘281,541Z. are deposited in savings banks in Cornwall, of
which two-thirds are estimated to belong to miners/ ”* * * §

Mr. Babbage, who also gives an account of this system,
observes that the payment to the crews of whaling ships is
governed by a similar principle ; and that “ the profits
arising from fishing with nets on the south coast of England
are thus divided: one-half the produce belongs to the owner
of the boat and net ; the other half is divided in equal
portions between the persons using it, who are also bound
to assist in repairing the net when required/' Mr. Babbage
has the great merit of having pointed out the practicability,
and the advantage, of extending the principle to manufac-
turing industry generally.!

Some attention has been excited by an experiment of
this nature, commenced about sixteen years ago by a Paris
tradesman, a house-painter, M. Leclaire,! and described by
him in a pamphlet published in the year 1842. M. Leclaire,
according to his statement, employs on an average two
hundred workmen, whom he pays in the usual manner, by
fixed wages or salaries. He assigns to himself, besides
interest for his capital, a fixed allowance for his labour
and responsibility as manager. At the end of the year, the
surplus profits are divided among the body, himself included,
in the proportion of their salaries. § The reasons by which

* This passage is from the Prize Essay on the Causes and Remedies of
National Distress, by Mr. Samuel Laing. The extracts which it includes are
from the Appendix to the Report of the Children’s Employment Commission.

Economy of Machinery and Manufactures, 3rd edition, ch. 26.

X His establishment is (or was) 11, Rue Saint Georges.

§ It appears, however, that the workmen whom M. Leclaire had admitted
to this participation of profits, were only a portion (rather less than half) of
the whole number whom he employed. This is explained by another part of
his system. M. Leclaire pays the full market rate of wages to all his workmen.
The share of profit assigned to them is, therefore, a clear addition to the
ordinary gains of their class, which he very laudably uses as an instrument
of improvement, by making it the reward of desert, or the recompence for
peculiar trust.



342 BOOK IV. CHAPTER VII. § 5 .

M. Leclaire was led to adopt this system are highly instructive.
Finding the conduct of his workmen unsatisfactory, he first
tried the effect of giving higher wages, and by this he managed
to obtain a body of excellent workmen, who would not quit
his service for any other. “ Having thus succeeded” (I quote
from an abstract of the pamphlet in Chambers’ Journal,*)
“ in producing some sort of stability in the arrangements of
his establishment, M. Leclaire expected, he says, to enjoy
greater peace of mind. In this, however, he was disappointed.
So long as he was able to superintend everything himself,
from the general concerns of his business down to its minutest
details, he did enjoy a certain satisfaction; but from the
moment that, owing to the increase of liis business, he found
that he could be nothing more than the centre from which
orders were issued, and to which reports were brought in, his
former anxiety and discomfort returned upon him.” He
speaks lightly of the other sources of anxiety to which a
tradesman is subject, but describes as an incessant cause of
vexation the losses arising from the misconduct of workmen.
An employer “ will find workmen whose indifference to his
interests is such that they do not perform two-thirds of the
amount of work which they are capable of ; hence the conti-
nual fretting of masters, who, seeing their interests neglected,
believe themselves entitled to suppose that workmen are con-
stantly conspiring to ruin those from whom they derive their
livelihood. If the journeyman were sure of constant employ-
ment, his position would in some respects be more enviable
than that of the master, because he is assured of a certain
amount of day’s wages, which he will get whether he works
much or little. He runs no risk, and has no other motive to
stimulate him to do his best than his own sense of duty. The
master, on the other hand, depends greatly on chance for his
returns: his position is one of continual irritation and anxiety.
This would no longer be the case to the same extent, if the


For September 27, 1845.



PROBABLE FUTURE OF THE LABOURING CLASSES. 343


interests of the master and those of the workmen were bound
up with each other, connected by some bond of mutual
security, such as that which would be obtained by the plan
of a yearly division of profits/'

Even in the first year during which M. Leclaire's experi-
ment was in complete operation, the success was remarkable.
Not one of his journeymen who worked as many as three
hundred days, earned in that year less than 1 500 francs, and
some considerably more. His highest rate of daily wages
being four francs, or 1200 francs for 300 days, the remainining
300 francs, or 121 ., must have been the smallest amount which
any journeyman, who worked that number of days, obtained
as his proportion of the surplus profit. M. Leclaire describes
in strong terms the improvement which was already manifest
in the habits and demeanour of his workmen, not merely
when at work, and in their relations with their employer, but
at other times and in other relations, showing increased respect
both for others and for themselves. The system was still in
operation in 1848; and we learn from M. Chevalier that the
increased zeal of the workpeople continued to be a full com-
pensation to M. Leclaire, even in a pecuniary sense, for the
share of profit which he renounced in their favour.*


* “ Je tiens de M. Leclaire que chez lui l’avantage du zMe extreme dont
sont animus les ouvriers, depuis qu’il a adopts le systerae de la participation,
fait plus que compenser le sacrifice reprdsent^ par la soinme des parts qu’on
leur alloue.” Lettres sur l’Organisation du Travail, par Michel Chevalier,
(1848,) lettre xiv.

A recent traveller describes a similar system to that of M. Leclaire, as
practised by the Chinese at Manilla. “In these Chinese shops the owner
usually engages all the activity of his countrymen employed by him in them,
by giving each of them a share in the profits of the concern, or in fact, by
making them all small partners in the business, of which he of course takes
care to retain the lion’s share, so that while doing good for him by managing
it well, they are also benefiting themselves. To such an extent is this prin-
ciple carried, that it is usual to give even their coolies a share in the profits of
the business in lieu of fixed wages, and the plan appears to suit their temper
well ; for although they are in general most complete eye-servants when work-



344 BOOK IV. CHAPTER VII. § 6.

§ 6. The form of association, however, which if mankind
continue to improve, must be expected in the end to predo-
minate, is not that which can exist between a capitalist as
chief, and workpeople without a voice in the management,
but the association of the labourers themselves on terms of
equality, collectively owning the capital with which they
carry on their operations, and working under managers
elected and removable by themselves. So long as this idea
remained in a state of theory, in the writings of Owen or of
Louis Blanc, it may have appeared, to the common modes
of judgment, incapable of being realized, and not likely to
be tried unless by seizing on the existing capital, and con-
fiscating it for the benefit of the labourers; which is even now
imagined by many persons, and pretended by more, both in
England and on the Continent, to be the meaning and pur-
pose of Socialism. But there is a capacity of exertion and
self-denial in the masses of mankind, which is never known
but on the rare occasions on which it is appealed to in the
name of some great idea or elevated sentiment. Such an
appeal was made by the French Revolution of 1848. For
the first time it then seemed to the intelligent and generous
of the working classes of a great nation, that they had
obtained a government who sincerely desired the freedom
and dignity of the many, and who did not look upon it as
their natural and legitimate state to be instruments of pro-
duction, worked for the benefit of the possessors of capital.
Under this encouragement, the ideas sown by Socialist
writers, of an emancipation of labour to be effected by means
of association, throve and fructified ; and many working people
came to the resolution, not only that they would work for
one another, instead of working for a master tradesman
or manufacturer, but that they would also free themselves,
at whatever cost of labour or privation, from the necessity of

ing for a fixed wage, they are found to be moat industrious and useful ones
when interested even for the smallest share.” M ‘Micking’s Recollections of
Manilla and the Philippines during 1848, 1849, and 1850, p. 24.


PROBABLE FUTURE OF THE LABOURING CLASSES. 345

paying, out of the produce of their industry, a heavy tribute
for the use of capital; that they would extinguish this tax,
not by robbing the capitalists of what they or their prede-
cessors had acquired by labour and preserved by economy,
but by honestly acquiring capital for themselves. If only a
few operatives had attempted this arduous task, or if, while
many attempted it, a few only had succeeded, their success
might have been deemed to furnish no argument for their
system as a permanent mode of industrial organization.
But, excluding all the instances of failure, there exist, or
existed a short time ago, upwards of a hundred successful,
and many eminently prosperous, associations of operatives in
Paris alone, besides a considerable number in the departments.
An instructive sketch of their history and principles has
been published, under the title of “ 1/ Association Ouvribre
Industrielle et Agricole, par H. Feugueray:” and as it is
frequently affirmed in English newspapers that the associa-
tions at Paris have failed, by writers who appear to mistake
the predictions of their enemies at their first formation for
the testimonies of subsequent experience, I think it important
to show by quotations from M. Feugueray’s volume, that these
representations are not only wide of the truth, but the extreme
contrary of it.

The capital of most of the associations was originally
confined to the few tools belonging to the founders, and
the small sums which could be collected from their savings,
or which were lent to them by other workpeople as poor
as themselves. In some cases, however, loans of capital
were made to them by the republican government: but the
associations which obtained these advances, or at least which
obtained them before they had already achieved success, are,
it appears, in general by no means the most prosperous.
The most striking instances of prosperity are in the case of
those who have had nothing to rely on but their own
slender means and the small loans of fellow-workmen, and
who lived on bread and water while they devoted the



346


BOOK IV. CHAPTER VII. § 6.

whole surplus of their gains to the formation of a capital.
“ Souvent,” says M. Feugueray,* “ la caisse etait tout-&-fait
vide, et il n y avait pas de salaire du tout. Et puis la vente
ne marchait pas, les rentrdes se faisaient attendre, les valeurs
ne s'escomptaient pas, le magasin des matures premieres
etait vide; et il fallait se priver, se restreindre dans toutes
ses ddpenses, se reduire quelquefois au pain et k Teau ....
C'est au prix de ces angoisses et de ces miseres, c’est par
cette voie douloureuse, que des hommes, sans presque
aucune autre ressource au debut que leur bonne volontd
et leurs bras, sont parvenus k se former une clientele, k
acqudrir un credit, a se creer enfin un capital social, et k
fonder ainsi des associations dont Tavenir aujoimThui semble
assure.”

I will quote at length the remarkable history of one of
these associations.!

“ La ndcessitd d un puissant capital pour Tdtablissement
d une fabrique de pianos etait si bien reconnue dans la cor-
poration, qu'en 1848 les deleguds de plusieurs centaines
d’ouvriers, qui s’dtaient rdunis pour la formation d’une grande
association, demanderent en son nom au gouvemement une
subvention de 300,000 fr,, c'est-k-dire la dixieme partie du
fonds total vote par TAssemblee Constituante. J e me souviens
d'avoir fait, en qualitd de membre de la commission chargde
de distribuer ces fonds, des efforts inutiles pour convaincre
les deux ddldguds avec qui la commission etait en rapport,
que leur demande etait exorbitante. Toutes mes instances
rest brent sans succes; je prolongeai vainement la conference
pendant pres de deux heures. Les deux ddleguds me re-
pondirent imperturbablement que leur industrie etait dans
une condition spdciale; que Tassociation ne pouvait s’y dta-
blir avec chance de rdussite que sur une trbs grande dchelle et
avec un capital considerable, et que la somme de 300,000 fr.
etait un minimum au-dessous duquel ils ne pouvaient de-


* P. 112.


t Pp. 113-6.



PROBABLE FUTURE OF THE LABOURING CLASSES, 347

scendre; bref, qu'ils ne pouvaient pas rdduire leur demande
dun sou. La commission refusa.

“.Or, aprds ce refus, et le projet de la grande association
dtant abandonnd, void ce qui arriva: c'est que quatorze
ouvriers, et il est assez singulier que parmi eux se soit
trouvd Tun des deux ddldguds, se rdsolurent k fonder entre
eux une association pour la fabrique des pianos. Le
projet dtait au moins tdmdraire de la part d'hommes qui
n'avaient ni argent ni credit; mais la foi ne raisonne pas,
elle agit.

“Nos quatorze liommes se mirent done k Toeuvre, et
void le rdcit de leurs premiers travaux, que j'emprunte k un
article du National , trbs bien redigd par M. Cocliut, et dont
je me plais k attester lexactitude.

“ Quelques-uns d'entre eux, qui avaient travailld k leur
propre compte, apporterent, tant en outils qu'en materiaux,
une valeur d'environ 2000 fr. II fallait, en outre, un fond
de roulement. Cliacun des socidtaires opdra, non sans peine,
un versement de 10 fr. Un certain n ombre d’ouvriers, non
intdressds dans la socidte, firent acte dadhdsion, en apportant
de faibles ofifrandes. Bref, le 10 mars 1849, une somme de
229 fr. 50 cent, ayant dtd rdalisde, Tassociation fut declarde
constitude.

“ Ce fonds social n'dtait pas meme suffisant pour Tinstal-
lation, et pour les menues ddpenses qu'entraine au jour le jour
le service d'un atelier. Rien ne restant pour les salaires, il
se passa prds de deux mois sans que les travailleurs tou-
chassent un centime. Comment vecurent-ils pendant cette
crise? Comme vivent les ouvriers pendant le chomage,
en partageant la ration du camarade qui travaille, en ven-
dant ou en engageant piece k piece le peu d'effets qu’on
possdde.

“On avait exdcute quelques travaux. On en toucha le
prix le 4 mai 1849. Ce jour fut pour bassociat-ion ce qu’est
une victoire k l'entree dune campagne: aussi voulut-on le
cdldbrer. Toutes les dettes exigibles dtant paydes, le divi-



348 BOOK IV. CHAPTER VII. § 6.

dende de chaque societaire s'elevait a 6 fr. 61 cent. On
convint d'attribuer a chacun 5 fr. k valoir sur son salaire, et
de consacrer le surplus a un repas fratemel. Les quatorze
socidtaires, dont la plupart n’avaient pas bu de vin depuis
un an, se reunirent, avec leurs femmes et leurs enfants. On
ddpensa 32 sous par mdnage. On parle encore de cette
journde, dans les ateliers, avec une dmotion qu'il est difficile
de ne pas partager.

“Pendant un mois encore, il fallut se contenter d’une
paie de 5 fr. par semaine. Dans le courant de juin, un
boulanger, mdlomane ou spdculateur, offrit d’acheter un
piano payable en pain. On fit marchd au prix de 480 fr.
Ce fut une bonne fortune pour Tassociation. On eut du
moins Tindispen sable. On ne voulut pas dvaluer le pain
dans le compte des salaires. Chacun mangea selon son
appdtit, ou pour mieux dire, selon l’appdtit de sa famille;
car les socidtaires maries furent autorisds a emporter du pain
pour leurs femmes et leurs enfants.

“Cependant lassociation, composde d'ouvriers excellents,
surmontait peu a peu les obstacles et les privations qui
avaient entravd ses debuts. Ses livres de caisse offrent les
meilleurs tdmoignages des progrbs que ses instruments ont
faits dans Testime des acheteurs. A partir du mois d'aofLt

1849, on voit le contingent hebdomadaire s'dlever k 10, k 15,
k 20 fr. par semaine; mais cette derniere somme ne reprd-
sente pas tous les bendfices, et chaque associd a laisse k la
masse beaucoup plus qu'il n'a touchd.

“ Ce n'est pas, en effet, par la somme que touche chaque
semaine le socidtaire, qu'il faut apprecier sa situation, mais
par la part de propridtd acquise dans un etablissement
dej& considerable. Voici Tetat de situation de lassocia-
tion, tel que je Tai relevd sur Tinventaire du 30 decembre

1850.

" A cette dpoque, les associds sont au nombre de trente-
deux. De vastes ateliers ou magasins, louds 2000 fr., ne leur
suffisent plus.



PROBABLE FUTURE OF THE LABOURING CLASSES. 349

Francs. Centimes.

Independamment de Toutillage, dvalu^ k 5,922 60
Ils posskdent en marchandises, et sur-
tout en matures premieres, une va-


leur de 22,972 28

Ils ont en caisse . . 1,021 10

Leurs effets en portefeuille montent k . 3,540

Le compte des d^biteurs s dleve k* , . 5,861 90

I/actif social est done en totality de . . 39,317 88

Sur ce total, il n'est dft que 4,737 fr. 86 c.
k des cr^anciers, et 1 ,650 fr. a quatre-
vingts adherents ;f ensemble . . . 6,387 86

Kestent 32,930 2


formant Tactif reel, comprenant le capital indivisible et le
capital de reserve des socidtaires. I/assoeiation, k la meme
epoque, avait soixante-seize pianos en construction, et ne
pouvait fournir k toutes les demandes.”

The same admirable qualities by which the associations
were carried through their early struggles, maintained them
in their increasing prosperity. Their rules of discipline,
instead of being more lax, are stricter than those of ordinary
workshops; but being rules self-imposed, for the manifest
good of the community, and not for the convenience of an
employer regarded as having an opposite interest, they are
far more scrupulously obeyed, and the voluntary obedience
carries with it a sense of personal worth and dignity. With
wonderful rapidity the associated workpeople have learnt to


* u Ces deux deraiers articles ne comprennent que de trbs bonnes valeurs,
qui, presque toutes, ont ete solddes depuis. ”

+ * * Ces adherents sont des ouvriers du metier qui ont commandite l’associa-
tion dans ses debuts: une partie d’entre eux a ete remboursee depuis le com-
mencement de 1851. Le compte des creanciers a aussi beaucoup diminue ; au
23 Avril, il ne s’eievait qu’& 1,113 fr. 59 c.”



350


BOOK IV. CHAPTER VII. § 6.

correct those of the ideas they set out with, which are in
opposition to the teaching of reason and experience. Almost
all the associations, at first, excluded piecework, and gave
equal wages whether the work done was more or less. Almost
all have abandoned this system, and after allowing to every
one a fixed minimum, sufficient for subsistence, they apportion
all further remuneration according to the work done: most of
them even dividing the profits at the end of the year, in the
same proportion as the earnings.*

It is the declared principle of these associations, that
they do not exist for the mere private benefit of the indi-
vidual members, but for the promotion of the cooperative
cause. With every extension, therefore, of their business,
they take in additional members, not to receive wages from
them as hired labourers, but to enter at once into the full
benefits of the association, without being required to bring
anything in, except their labour: the only condition imposed
is that of receiving during a few years a smaller share in the
annual division of profits, as some equivalent for the sacri-
fices of the founders. When members quit the association,

* Even the association founded by M. Louis Blanc, that of the tailors of
Clicliy, after eighteen months trial of his system, adopted piece-work. One
of the reasons given by them for abandoning the original system is well worth
extracting. “ En outre des vices dont j’ai parld, les tailleurs lui reprochaient
d’engendrer Bans cesse des discussions, des querelles, h cause de l’intbrbt que
chacun avait a faire travailler ses voisins. La surveillance mutuelle de l’atelier
dbgbndrait ainsi en un esclavage vdritable, qui nc laissait h personne la libertd
de son temps et de ses actions. Ces dissensions ont disparu par l’introduction
du travail aux pibces.” Eeugueray, p. 88. One of the most discreditable indi-
cations of a low moral condition given of late by the English working classes,
is the opposition to piece-work. When the payment per piece is not sufficiently
high, that is a just ground of objection. But dislike to piece-work in itself,
except under mistaken notions, must be dislike to justice and fairness ; a desire
to cheat, by not giving work in proportion to pay. Piece-work is the perfection
of contract ; and contract, in all work, and in the most minute detail — the
principle of so much pay for so much service, carried out to the utmost extre-
mity — is the system, of all others, in the present state of society and degree of
civilization, most favourable to the worker ; though most unfavourable to the
non- worker who wishes to be paid for being idle.


PROBABLE FUTURE OF THE LABOURING CLASSES. 351


which they are always at liberty to do, they carry none of
the capital with them : it remains an indivisible property, of
which the members for the time being have the use, but not
the arbitrary disposal : by the stipulations of most of the
contracts, even if the association breaks up, the capital
cannot be divided, but must be devoted entire to some Work
of beneficence or of public utility. A fixed, and generally
a considerable proportion of the annual profits, is not shared
among the members, but added to the capital of the associa-
tion, or devoted to the repayment of advances previously
made to it : another portion is set aside to provide for the
sick and disabled, and another to form a fund for extending
the practice of association, or aiding other associations in
their need. The managers are paid like other members, for
the time which is occupied in management, usually at the
rate of the highest paid labour: but the rule is adhered to,
that the exercise of power shall never be an occasion of
profit.

It is painful to think that these bodies, formed by the
heroism and maintained by the public spirit and good sense
of the working people of Paris, are in danger of being in-
volved in the same ruin with everything free, popular, or
tending to improvement in French institutions. The un-
principled adventurer who has for the present succeeded in
reducing France to the political condition of Russia, knows
that two or three persons cannot meet together to discuss,
though it be only the affairs of a workshop, without danger
to his power. He has therefore already suppressed most of
the provincial associations, and many of those of Paris, and
the remainder, instead of waiting to be dissolved by despot-
ism, are, it is said, preparing to emigrate.* Before this cala-


* It appears however from subsequent accounts that in 1854 twenty-
five associations still existed at Paris, and several in he provinces, and that
many of these were in a most flourishing condition. This number is exclusive
of Cooperative Stores, which have greatly multiplied, especially in the South of
France, and are not understood to be disoouraged by the government*



352


BOOK IV. CHAPTER VII. § 6.

mity overtook France, the associations could be spoken of
not with the hope merely, but with positive evidence, of
their being able to compete successfully with individual
capitalists. “Les associations,” says M. Feugueray,* “qui
ont 6t6 fondees depuis deux anndes, avaient bien des obsta-
cles k vaincre; la plupart manquaient presque absolument
de capital; toutes marchaient dans une voie encore inex-
plorde ; elles bravaient les perils qui menacent toujours les
novateurs et les debutants. Et ndanmoins, dans beaucoup
dmdustries oil elles se sont dtablies, elles constituent ddj&
pour les anciennes maisons une rivalitd redoutable, qui
suscite meme des plaintes nombreuses dans une partie de la
bourgeoisie, non pas seulement chez les traiteurs, les limo-
nadiers et les coiffeurs, c’est-&-dire dans les industries oil la
nature des produits permet aux associations de compter sur
la clientele ddmocratique, mais dans dautres industries oil
elles n’ont pas les m ernes avantages. On n'a qu'a consulter
par exemple les fabricants de fauteuils, de chaises, de limes,
et Ion saura d'eux si les etablissements les plus importants
en leurs genres de fabrication ne sont pas les dtablissements
des associds/'f


* Pp. 37-8.

+ Though this beneficent movement has been so seriously checked in the
country in "which it originated, it is rapidly spreading in those other countries
which have acquired, and still retain, any political freedom. It forms already
an important feature in the social improvement which is proceeding at a
most rapid pace in Piedmont. In England also, under the impulse given
by the writings and personal exertions of a band of friends, chiefly clergy-
men and barristers, the movement has made some progress. On the 15th
of February, 1856, there had been registered under the Industrial and
Provident Societies’ Act, thirty- three associations, seventeen of which were
industrial societies, the remainder being associations for cooperative consump-
tion only: without reckoning Scotland, where, also, these associations were
rapidly spreading. It is believed that all such societies are now registered under
the Limited Liabilities Act. From later information it appears that the pro-
ductive ass6ciations (excluding the flour mills, which partake more of the
nature of stores) have fallen off in number since their first start ; and their pro-
gress, in the present moral condition of the bulk of the population, cannot



PROBABLE FUTURE OF THE LABOURING CLASSES. 353

Though the existing associations may be dissolved, or
driven to expatriate, their experience will not be lost. They
have existed long enough to furnish the type of future im-
provement : they have exemplified the process for bringing
about a change in society, which would combine the freedom
and independence of the individual, with the moral, intellec-
tual, and economical advantages of aggregate production;
and which without violence or spoliation, or even any sudden
disturbance of existing habits and expectations, would
realize, at least in the industrial department, the best aspira-
tions of the democratic spirit, by putting an end to the
division of society into the industrious and the idle, and
effacing all social distinctions but those fairly earned by
personal services and exertions. Associations like those
which we have described, by the very process of their suc-
cess, are a course of education in those moral and active
qualities by which alone success can be either deserved or
attained. As associations multiplied, they would tend more
and more to absorb all workpeople, except those who have too
little understanding, or too little virtue, to be capable of
learning to act on any other system than that of narrow
selfishness. As this change proceeded, owners of capital
would gradually find it to their advantage, instead of main-
taining the struggle of the old system with workpeople of
only the worst description, to lend their capital to the asso-
ciations ; to do this at a diminishing rate of interest, and at
last, perhaps, to exchange their capital for terminable annui-
ties. In this or some such mode, the existing accumulations
of capital might honestly, and by a kind of spontaneous
process, become in the end the joint property of all who
participate in their productive employment : a transformation


possibly be rapid. But those which subsist, continue to do as much business as
they ever did: and there are in the North of England instances of brilliant
and steadily progressive success. Cooperative stores are increasing both in
number and prosperity, especially in the North; and they are the best pre-
paration for a wider application of the principle.

VOL. II. A A



854


BOOK IV. CHAPTER VII. § 7.


which, thus effected, (and assuming of course that both sexes
participate equally in the rights and in the government of the
association) would be the nearest approach to social justice,
and the most beneficial ordering of industrial affairs for the
universal good, which it is possible at present to foresee.

§ 7. I agree, then, with the Socialist writers in their
conception of the form which industrial operations tend to
assume in the advance of improvement ; and I entirely share
their opinion that the time is ripe for commencing this trans-
formation, and that it should by all just and effectual means be
aided and encouraged. But while I agree and sympathize
with Socialists in this practical portion of their aims, I utterly
dissent from the most conspicuous and vehement part of their
teaching, their declamations against competition. With moral
conceptions in many respects far ahead of the existing
arrangements of society, they have in general very confused
and erroneous notions of its actual working; and one of their
greatest errors, as I conceive, is to charge upon competition all
the economical evils which at present exist. They forget that
wherever competition is not, monopoly is ; and that monopoly
in all its forms, is the taxation of the industrious for the sup-
port of indolence, if not of rapacity. They forget, too, that
with the exception of competition among labourers, all other
competition is for the benefit of the labourers, by cheapening
the articles they consume ; that competition even in the labour
market is a source not of low but of high wages, wherever the
competition for labour exceeds the competition of labour, as in
America, in the colonies, and in the skilled trades; and never
could be a cause of low wages, save by the overstocking of the
labour market through the too great numbers of the labourers'
families; while, if the supply of labourers is excessive, not
even Socialism can prevent their remuneration from being
low. Besides, if association were universal, there would be no
competition between labourer and labourer; and that between
association and association would be for the benefit of the



PROBABLE FUTURE OF THE LABOURING CLASSES. 855

consumers, that is, of the associations; of the industrious
classes generally.

I do not pretend that there are no inconveniences in com-
petition, or that the moral objections urged against it by
Socialist writers, as a source of jealousy and hostility among
those engaged in the same occupation, are altogether ground-
less. But if competition has its evils, it prevents greater
evils. As M. Feugueray well says,* “La racine la plus pro-
fonde des maux et des iniquitds qui couvrent le monde indus-
triel, n'est pas la concurrence, mais bien Texploitation du tra-
vail par le capital, et la part ^norme que les possesseurs des
instruments de travail prelfevent sur les produits .... Si la
concurrence a beaucoup de puissance pour le mal, elle n'a pas
moins de fdcondite pour le bien, surtout en ce qui concerne le
ddveloppement des facultds individuelles, et le succfes des in-
novations/' .It is the common error of Socialists to overlook
he natural indolence of mankind; their tendency to be pas-
sive, to be the slaves of habit, to persist indefinitely in a
course once chosen. Let them once attain any state of exist-
ence which they consider tolerable, and the danger to be ap-
prehended is that they will thenceforth stagnate ; will not
exert themselves to improve, and by letting their faculties
rust, will lose even the energy required to preserve them from
deterioration. Competition may not be the best conceivable
stimulus, but it is at present a necessary one, and no one can
foresee the time when it will not be indispensable to progress.
Even confining ourselves to the industrial department, in
which, more than in any other, the majority may be supposed
to be competent judges of improvements; it would be diffi-
cult to induce the general assembly of an association to submit
to the trouble and inconvenience of altering their habits by
adopting some new and promising invention, unless their
knowledge of the existence of rival associations made them


* P. 90.
A A 2



356


BOOK IV. CHAPTER VII. § 7 .


apprehend that what they would not consent to do, others
would, and that they would be left behind in the race.

Instead of looking upon competition as the baneful and
anti-social principle which it is held to be by the generality of
Socialists, I conceive that, even in the present state of society
and industry, every restriction of it is an evil, and every ex-
tension of it, even if for the time injuriously affecting some
class of labourers, is always an ultimate good. To be pro-
tected against competition is to be protected in idleness, in
mental dulness; to be saved the necessity of being as active
and as intelligent as other people ; and if it is also to be pro-
tected against being underbid for employment by a less highly
paid class of labourers, this is only where old custom or local
and partial monopoly has placed some particular class of arti-
sans in a privileged position as compared with all the rest ;
and the time has come when the interest of universal im-
provement is no longer promoted by prolonging the privileges
of a few. If the slopsellers and others of their class have
lowered the wages of tailors, and some other artisans, by
making them an affair of competition instead of custom, so
much the better in the end. What is now required is not to
bolster up old customs, whereby limited classes of labouring
people obtain partial gains which interest them in keeping up
the present organization of society, but to introduce new
general practices beneficial to all; and there is reason to re-
joice at whatever makes the privileged classes of skilled arti-
sans feel, that they have the same interests, and depend for
their remuneration on the same general causes, and must
resort for the improvement of their condition to the same re-
medies, as the less fortunately circumstanced and compara-
tively helpless multitude.



BOOK y.


ON THE INFLUENCE OF GOVERNMENT.


BOOK V.


OF THE INFLUENCE OF GOVERNMENT.

CHAPTER I.


OF THE FUNCTIONS OF GOVERNMENT IN GENERAL.

§ 1. One of the most disputed questions both in political
science and in practical statesmanship at this particular period,
relates to the proper limits of the functions and agency of
governments. At other times it has been a subject of con-
troversy how governments should be constituted, and accord-
ing to what principles and rules they should exercise their
authority; but it is now almost equally a question, to what
departments of human affairs that authority should extend.
And when the tide sets so strongly towards changes in govern-
ment and legislation, as a means of improving the condition
of mankind, this discussion is more likely to increase than to
diminish in interest. On the one hand, impatient reformers,
thinking it easier and shorter to get possession of the govern-
ment than of the intellects and dispositions of the public
are under a constant temptation to stretch the province of
government beyond due bounds: while, on the other, man-
kind have been so much accustomed by their rulers to inter-
ference for purposes other than the public good, or under



360


BOOK V. CHAPTER I. § 2.


an erroneous conception of what that good requires, and
so many rash propositions are made by sincere lovers of
improvement, for attempting, by compulsory regulation, the
attainment of objects which can only be effectually or only
usefully compassed by opinion and discussion, that there
has grown up a spirit of resistance in limine to the inter-
ference of government, merely as such, and a disposition to
restrict its sphere of action within the narrowest bounds.
From differences in the historical development of different
nations, not necessary to be here dwelt upon, the former
excess, that of exaggerating the province of government,
prevails most, both in theory and in practice, among the
Continental nations, while in England the contrary spirit has
hitherto been predominant.

The general principles of the question, in so far as it is a
question of principle, I shall make an attempt to determine
in a later chapter of this Book: after first considering the
effects produced by the conduct of government in the exer-
cise of the functions universally acknowledged to belong to it.
For this purpose, there must be a specification of the func-
tions which are either inseparable from the idea of a govern-
ment, or are exercised habitually and without objection by all
governments; as distinguished from those respecting which
it has been considered questionable whether governments
should exercise them or not. The former may be termed the
necessary, the latter the optional, functions of government.
By the term optional it is not meant to imply, that it can ever
be a matter of indifference or of arbitrary choice, whether the
government should or should not take upon itself the functions
in question; but only that the expediency of its exercising
them does not amount to necessity, and is a subject on which
diversity of opinion does or may exist.

§ 2. In attempting to enumerate the necessary functions
of government, we find them to be considerably more multi-
farious than most people are at first aware of, and not capable



FUNCTIONS OF GOVERNMENT IN GENERAL. 861

of being circumscribed by those very definite lines of demar-
cation, which, in the inconsiderateness of popular discussion,
it is often attempted to draw round them. We sometimes,
for example, hear it said that governments ought to confine
themselves to affording protection against force and fraud:
that, these two things apart, people should be free agents,
able to take care of themselves, and that so long as a person
practises no violence or deception, to the injury of others in
person or property, legislatures and governments are in no
way called on to concern themselves about him. But why
should people be protected by their government, that is, by
their own collective strength, against violence and fraud, and
not against other evils, except that the expediency is more
obvious ? If nothing, but what people cannot possibly do for
themselves, can be fit to be done for them by government,
people might be required to protect themselves by their skill
and courage even against force, or to beg or buy protection
against it, as they actually do where the government is not
capable of protecting them : and against fraud every one has
the protection of his own wits. But without further antici-
pating the discussion of principles, it is sufficient on the pre-
sent occasion to consider facts.

Under which of these heads, the repression of force or of
fraud, are we to place the operation, for example, of the laws
of inheritance? Some such laws must exist in all societies.
It may be said, perhaps, that in this matter government has
merely to give effect to the disposition which an individual
makes of his own property by will. This, however, is at
least extremely disputable ; there is probably no country by
whose laws the power of testamentary disposition is perfectly
absolute. And suppose the very common case of there being
no will: does not the law, that is, the government, decide on
principles of general expediency, who shall take the succes-
sion? and in case the successor is in any manner incompetent,
does it not appoint persons, frequently officers of its own, to
collect the property and apply it to his benefit? There are



362


BOOK V. CHAPTER I. § 2.

many other cases in which the government undertakes the
administration of property, because the public interest, or
perhaps only that of the particular persons concerned, is
thought to require it. This is often done in cases of litigated
property; and in cases of judicially declared insolvency. It
has never been contended that in doing these things, a
government exceeds its province.

Nor is the function of the law in defining property itself,,
so simple a thing as may be supposed. It may be imagined,
perhaps, that the law has only to declare and protect the right
of every one to what he has himself produced, or acquired by
the voluntary consent, fairly obtained, of those who produced
it. But is there nothing recognized as property except what
has been produced? Is there not the earth itself, its forests
and waters, and all other natural riches, above and below
the surface? These are the inheritance of the human race,
and there must be regulations for the common enjoyment
of it. What rights, and under what conditions, a person
shall be allowed to exercise over any portion of this com-
mon inheritance, cannot be left undecided. No function of
government is less optional than the regulation of these
things, or more completely involved in the idea of civilized
society.

Again, the legitimacy is conceded of repressing violence
or treachery; but under which of these heads are we to
place the obligation imposed on people to perform their con-
tracts? Non-performance does not necessarily imply fraud;
the person who entered into the contract may have sin-
cerely intended to fulfil it: and the term fraud, which can
scarcely admit of being extended even to the case of volun-
tary breach of contract when no deception was practised,
is certainly not applicable when the omission to perform
is a case of negligence. Is it no part of the duty of
governments to enforce contracts? Here the doctrine of non-
interference would no doubt be stretched a little, and it
would be said, that enforcing contracts is not regulating the



FUNCTIONS OF GOVERNMENT IN GENERAL. 363

affairs of individuals at the pleasure of government, but
giving effect to their own expressed desire. Let us acquiesce
in this enlargement of the restrictive theory, and take it for
what it is worth. But governments do not limit their concern
with contracts to a simple enforcement. They take upon
themselves to determine what contracts are fit to be enforced.
It is not enough that one person, not being either cheated or
compelled, makes a promise to another. There are promises
by which it is not for the public good that persons should
have the power of binding themselves. To say nothing o
engagements to do something contrary to law, there are
engagements which the law refuses to enforce, for reasons
connected with the interest of the promisor, or with the
general policy of the state. A contract by which a person
sells himself to another as a slave, would be declared void by
the tribunals of this and of most other European countries.
There are few nations whose laws enforce a contract for
what is looked upon as prostitution, or any matrimonial
engagement of which the conditions vary in any respect
from those which the law has thought fit to prescribe. IJat
when once it is admitted that there are any engagements
which for reasons of expediency the law ought not to enforce,
the same question is necessarily opened with respect to all
engagements. Whether, for example, the law should enforce
a contract to labour, when the wages are too low, or the
hours of work too severe : whether it should enforce a
contract by which a person binds himself to remain, for
more than a very limited period, in the service of a given
individual: whether a contract of marriage, entered into for
life, should continue to be enforced against the deliberate will
of the persons, or of either of the persons, who entered into
it. Every question which can possibly arise as to the policy
of contracts, and of the relations which they establish among
human beings, is a question for the legislator; and one which
he cannot escape from considering, and in some way or other
deciding.



864 BOOK V. CHAPTER I. § 2 .

Again, the prevention and suppression of force and fraud
afford appropriate employment for soldiers, policemen, and
criminal judges; but there are also civil tribunals. The
punishment of wrong is one business of an administration of
justice, but the decision of disputes is another. Innume-
rable disputes arise between persons, without mala fides on
either side, through misconception of their legal rights, or
from not being agreed about the facts, on the proof of which
those rights are legally dependent. Is it not for the general
interest that the state should appoint persons to clear up
these uncertainties and terminate these disputes? It cannot
be said to be a case of absolute necessity. People might
appoint an arbitrator, and engage to submit to his decision,
and they do so where there are no courts of justice, or where
the courts are not trusted, or where their delays and expenses,
or the irrationality of their rules of evidence, deter people
from resorting to them. Still, it is universally thought right
that the state should establish civil tribunals; and if their
defects often drive people to have recourse to substitutes, even
then the power held in reserve of carrying the case before a
legally constituted court, gives to the substitutes their principal
efficacy.

Not only does the state undertake to decide disputes, it
takes precautions beforehand that disputes may not arise.
The laws of most countries lay down rules for determining
many things, not because it is of much consequence in what
way they are determined, but in order that they may be
determined somehow, and there may be no question on the
subject. The law prescribes forms of words for many kinds
of contract, in order that no dispute or misunderstanding
may arise about their meaning : it makes provision that if a
dispute does arise, evidence shall be procurable for deciding
it, by requiring that the document be attested by witnesses
and executed with certain formalities. The law preserves
authentic evidence of facts to which legal consequences are
attached, by keeping a registry of such facts; as of births,



FUNCTIONS OF GOVERNMENT IN GENERAL. 365

deaths, and marriages, of wills and contracts, and of judi-
cial proceedings. In doing these things, it has never been
alleged that government oversteps the proper limits of its
functions.

Again, however wide a scope we may allow to the doctrine
that individuals are the proper guardians of their own interests,
and that government owes nothing to them but to save them
from being interfered with by other people, the doctrine can
never be applicable to any persons but those who are capable
of acting in their own behalf. The individual may be an
infant, or a lunatic, or fallen into imbecility. The law surely
must look after the interests of such persons. It does not
necessarily do this through officers of its own. It often devolves
the trust upon some relative or connexion. But in doing so
is its duty ended? Can it make over the interests of one
person to the control of another, and be excused from super-
vision, or from holding the person thus trusted, responsible
for the discharge of the trust ?

There is a multitude of cases in which governments, with
general approbation, assume powers and execute functions for
which no reason can be assigned except the simple one, that
they conduce to general convenience. We may take as an
example, the function (which is a monopoly too) of coining
money. This is assumed for no more recondite purpose
than that of saving to individuals the trouble, delay, and
expense of weighing and assaying. No one, however, even
of those most jealous of state interference, has objected to
this as an improper exercise of the powers of government..
Prescribing a set of standard weights and measures is ano-
ther instance. Paving, lighting, and cleansing the streets
and thoroughfares, is another; whether done by the general
government, or, as is more usual, and generally more ad-
visable, by a municipal authority. Making or improving
harbours, building lighthouses, making surveys in order to
have accurate maps and charts, raising dykes to keep the sea
out, and embankments to keep rivers in, are cases in point.



866


BOOK V. CHAPTER I. § 8.

Examples might be indefinitely multiplied without intrud-
ing on any disputed ground. But enough has been said to
show that the admitted functions of government embrace a
much wider field than can easily be included within the
ring-fence of any restrictive definition, and that it is hardly
possible to find any ground of justification common to them
all, except the comprehensive one of general expediency; nor
to limit the interference of government by any universal rule,
save the simple and vague one that it should never be admitted
but when the case of expediency is strong.

§ 3. Some observations, however, may be usefully be-
stowed on the nature of the considerations on which the
question of government interference is most likely to turn,
and on the mode of estimating the comparative magnitude of
the expediencies involved. This will form the last of the
three parts into which our discussion of the principles and
effects of government interference may conveniently be
divided. The following will be our division of the subject.

We shall first consider the economical effects arising from
the manner in which governments perform their necessary
and acknowledged functions.

We shall then pass to certain governmental interferences
of what I have termed the optional kind (i.e. overstepping the
boundaries of the universally acknowledged functions) which
have heretofore taken place, and in some cases still take place,
under the influence of false general theories.

It will lastly remain to inquire whether, independently of
any false theory, and consistently with a correct view of the
laws which regulate human affairs, there be any cases of the
optional class in which governmental interference is really
ad.visable, and what are those cases.

The first of these divisions is of an extremely miscel-
laneous character: since the necessary functions of govern-
ment, and those which are so manifestly expedient that they
have never or very rarely been objected to, are, as already



FUNCTIONS OF GOVERNMENT IN GENERAL. 867

pointed out, too various to be brought under any very simple
classification. Those, however, which are of principal im-
portance, which alone it is necessary here to consider, may be
reduced to the following general heads.

First, the means adopted by governments to raise the
revenue which is the condition of their existence.

Secondly, the nature of the laws which they prescribe on
the two great subjects of Property and Contracts.

Thirdly, the excellences or defects of the system of means
by which they enforce generally the execution of their laws,
namely, their judicature and police.

We commence with the first head, that is, with the theory
of Taxation.



CHAPTER II.


ON THE GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF TAXATION.

§ 1 . The qualities desirable, economically speaking, in a
system of taxation, have been embodied by Adam Smith in
four maxims or principles, which having been generally con-
curred in by subsequent writers, may be said to have become
classical, and this chapter cannot be better commenced than
by quoting them.*

“1. The subjects of every state ought to contribute to
the support of the government, as nearly as possible in pro-
portion to their respective abilities: that is, in proportion to
the revenue which they respectively enjoy under the pro-
tection of the state. In the observation or neglect of this
maxim consists what is called the equality or inequality of
taxation.

“ 2. The tax which each individual is bound to pay ought
to be certain, and not arbitrary. The time of payment, the
manner of payment, the quantity to be paid, ought all to be
clear and plain to the contributor, and to every other person.
Where it is otherwise, every person subject to the tax is
put more or less in the power of the taxgatherer, who can
either aggravate the tax upon any obnoxious contributor,
or extort by the terror of such aggravation, some present or
perquisite to himself. The uncertainty of taxation encou-
rages tbe insolence and favours the corruption of an order of
men who are naturally unpopular, even when they are neither
insolent nor corrupt. The certainty of what each individual
ought to pay is, in taxation, a matter of so great importance,
that a very considerable degree of inequality, it appears, I


Wealth of Nations, book v. ch. ii.



GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF TAXATION.


369


believe, from the experience of all nations, is not near so
great an evil, as a very small degree of uncertainty.

“ 3. Every tax ought to be levied at the time, or in the
manner, in which it is most likely to be convenient for the
contributor to pay it. A tax upon the rent of land or of
houses, payable at the same term at which such rents are
usually paid, is levied at a time when it is most likely to be
convenient for the contributor to pay; or when he is most
likely to have wherewithal to pay. Taxes upon such con-
sumable goods as are articles of luxury, are all finally paid
by the consumer, and generally in a manner that is very
convenient to him. He pays them by little and little, as he
has occasion to buy the goods. As he is at liberty, too,
either to buy or not to buy, as he pleases, it must be his own
fault if he ever suffers any considerable inconvenience from
such taxes.

“ 4. Every tax ought to be so contrived as both to take
out and to keep out of the pockets of the people as little as
possible over and above what it brings into the public trea-
sury of the state. A tax may either take out or keep out of
the pockets of the people a great deal more than it brings
into the public treasury, in the four following ways. First,
the levying of it may require a great number of officers,
whose salaries may eat up the greater part of the produce of
the tax, and whose perquisites may impose another additional
tax upon the people/’ Secondly, it may divert a portion of
the labour and capital of the community from a more to a less
productive employment. “Thirdly, by the forfeitures and
other penalties which those unfortunate individuals incur who
attempt unsuccessfully to evade the tax, it may frequently
ruin them, and thereby put an end to the benefit which the
community might have derived from the employment of their
capitals. An injudicious tax offers a great temptation to
smuggling. Fourthly, by subjecting the people to the frequent
visits and the odious examination of the tax-gatherers, it may
expose them to much unnecessary trouble, vexation, and

VOL. II. B B



870 BOOK V CHAPTER II. § 2 .

oppression to which may be added, that the restrictive regu-
lations to which trades and manufactures are often subjected
to prevent evasion of a tax, are not only in themselves trouble-
some and expensive, but often oppose insuperable obstacles to
making improvements in the process.

The last three of these four maxims require little other
explanation or illustration than is contained in the passage
itself. How far any given tax conforms to, or conflicts with
them, is a matter to be considered in the discussion of par-
ticular taxes. But the first of the four points, equality of
taxation, requires to be more fully examined, being a thing
often imperfectly understood, and on which many false
notions have become to a certain degree accredited, through
the absence of any definite principles of judgment in the
popular mind.

§ 2. For what reason ought equality to be the rule in
matters of taxation? For the reason, that it ought to be so
in all affairs of government. As a government ought to
make no distinction of persons or classes in the strength of
their claims on it, whatever sacrifices it requires from them
should be made to bear as nearly as possible with the same
pressure upon all, which, it must be observed, is the mode by
which least sacrifice is occasioned on the whole. If any one
bears less than his fair share of the burthen, some other person
must suffer more than his share, and the alleviation to the one
is not, cceteris paribus , so great a good to him, as the increased
pressure upon the other is an evil. Equality of taxation,
therefore, as a maxim of politics, means equality of sacrifice.
It means apportioning the contribution of each person towards
the expenses of government, so that he shall feel neither more
nor less inconvenience from his share of the payment than
every other person experiences from his. This standard, like
other standards of perfection, cannot be completely realized ;
but the first object in every practical discussion should be to
know what perfection is.



GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF TAXATION. 871

There are persons, however, who are not content with
the general principles of justice as a basis to ground a rule
of finance upon, but must have something, as they think,
more specifically appropriate to the subject. What best
pleases them is, to regard the taxes paid by each member of
the community as an equivalent for value received, in the
shape of service to himself ; and they prefer to rest the
justice of making each contribute in proportion to his means,
upon the ground, that he who has twice as much property
to be protected, receives, on an accurate calculation, twice as
much protection, and ought, on the principles of bargain and
sale, to pay twice as much for it. Since, however, the
assumption that government exists solely for the protection
of property, is not one to be deliberately adhered to ; some
consistent adherents of the quid pro quo principle go on to
observe, that protection being required for person as well as
property, and everybody's person receiving the same amount
of protection, a poll-tax of a fixed sum per head is a proper
equivalent for this part of the benefits of government, while
the remaining part, protection to property, should be paid
for in proportion to property. There is in this adjustment
a false air of nice adaptation, very acceptable to some minds.
But in the first place, it is not admissible that the protection
of persons and that of property are the sole purposes of govern-
ment. The ends of government are as comprehensive as those
of the social union. They consist of all the good, and all the
immunity from evil, which the existence of government can
be made either directly or indirectly to bestow. In the
second place, the practice of setting definite values on things
essentially indefinite, and making them a ground of practical
conclusions, is peculiarly fertile in false views of social
questions. It cannot be admitted, that to be protected in
the ownership of ten times as much property, is to be ten
times as much protected. Whether the labour and expense
of the protection, or the feelings of the protected person, or
any other definite thing be made the standard, there is no

B B 2



372 BOOK V. CHAPTER II. § 3.

such proportion as the one supposed, nor any other definable
proportion. If we wanted to estimate the degrees of benefit
which different persons derive from the protection of govern-
ment, we should have to consider who would suffer most
if that protection were withdrawn : to which question if
any answer could be made, it must be, that those would
suffer most who were weakest in mind or body, either by
nature or by position. Indeed, such persons would almost
infallibly be slaves. If there were any justice, therefore, in
the theory of justice now under consideration, those who are
least capable of helping or defending themselves, being those
to whom the protection of government is the most indis-
pensable, ought to pay the greatest share of its price: the
reverse of the true idea of distributive justice, which consists
not in imitating but in redressing the inequalities and wrongs
of nature.

Government must be regarded as so pre-eminently a con-
cern of all, that to determine who are most interested in it is
of no real importance. If a person or class of persons receive
so small a share of the benefit as makes it necessary to raise
the question, there is something else than taxation which is
amiss, and the thing to be done is to remedy the defect, not
to recognize it and make it a ground for demanding less taxes.
As, in a case of voluntary subscription for a purpose in which
all are interested, all are thought to have done their part fairly
when each has contributed according to his means, that is, has
made an equal sacrifice for the common object; in like manner
should this be the principle of compulsory contributions, and
it is superfluous to look for a more ingenious or recondite
ground to rest the principle upon.

§ 3. Setting out, then, from the maxim that equal sacri-
fices ought to be demanded from all, we have next to inquire
whether this is in fact done, by making each contribute the
same percentage on his pecuniary means. Many persons
piain tain the negative, saying that a tenth part taken from a



GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF TAXATION.


373


small income is a heavier burthen than the same fraction
deducted from one much larger: and on this is grounded the
very popular scheme of what is called a graduated property
tax, viz. an income tax in which the percentage rises with the
amount of the income.

On the best consideration I am able to give to this
question, it appears to me that the portion of truth which the
doctrine contains, arises principally from the difference be-
tween a tax which can be saved from luxuries, and one which
trenches, in ever so small a degree, upon the necessaries of
life. To take a thousand a year from the possessor of ten
thousand, would not deprive him of anything really conducive
either to the support or to the comfort of existence; and if
such would be the effect of taking five pounds from one whose
income is fifty, the sacrifice required from the last is not only
greater than, but entirely incommensurable with, that im-
posed upon the first. The mode of adjusting these inequalities
of pressure which seems to be the most equitable, is that
recommended by Bentham, of leaving a certain minimum of
income, sufficient to provide the necessaries of life, untaxed.
Suppose 50Z. a year to be sufficient to provide the number of
persons ordinarily supported from a single income, with the
requisites of life and health, and with protection against
habitual bodily suffering, but not with any indulgence.
This then should be made the minimum, and incomes ex-
ceeding it should pay taxes not upon their whole amount,
but upon the surplus. If the tax be ten per cent, an income
of 60Z. should be considered as a net income of 1()Z., and
charged with 1Z. a year, while an income of 1000Z. should be
charged as one of 950Z Each would then pay a fixed pro-
portion, not of his whole means, but of his superfluities.
An income not exceeding 501. should not be taxed at all,
either directly or by taxes on necessaries ; for as by suppo-
sition this is the smallest income which labour ought to be
able to command, the government ought not to be a party to
making it smaller. This arrangement however would con-



374


BOOK V. CHAPTER II. § 3.

stitute a reason, in addition to others which might be stated,
for maintaining taxes on articles of luxury consumed
by the poor. The immunity extended to the income re-
quired for necessaries, should depend on its being actually
expended for that purpose; and the poor who, not having
more than enough for necessaries, divert any part of it
to indulgences, should like other people contribute their
quota out of those indulgences to the expenses of the
state.

The exemption in favour of the smaller incomes should
not, I think, be stretched further than to the amount of
income needful for life, health, and immunity from bodily
pain. An income of 100Z. a year would, as it seems to me,
obtain all the relief it is entitled to, compared with one of
1000Z., by being taxed only on 50 Z. of its amount. It may
be said, indeed, that to take 100Z. from 1000Z. (even giving
back five pounds) is a heavier impost than 1000Z. taken
from 10,000Z. (giving back the same five pounds). But this
doctrine seems to me too disputable altogether, and even if
true at all, not true to a sufficient extent, to be made the
foundation of any rule of taxation. Whether the person
with 10,000Z. a year cares less for 1000Z. than the person
with only 1000Z. a year cares for 100Z., and if so, how much
less, does not appear to me capable of being decided with
the degree of certainty on which a legislator or a financier
ought to act.

Some indeed contend that the rule of proportional taxation
bears harder upon the moderate than upon the large incomes,
because the same proportional payment has more tendency
in the former case than in the latter, to reduce the payer to
a lower grade of social rank. The fact appears to me more
than questionable. But even admitting it, I object to its
being considered incumbent on government to shape its
course by such considerations, or to recognise the notion
that social importance is or can be determined by amount
of expenditure. Government ought to .set an example of



GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF TAXATION.


375


rating all things at their true value, and riches, therefore,
at the worth, for comfort or pleasure, of the things which
they will buy: and ought not to sanction the vulgarity of
prizing them for the pitiful vanity of being known to pos-
sess them, or the paltry shame of being suspected to be
without them, the presiding motives of three-fourths of the
expenditure of the middle classes. The sacrifices of real
comfort or indulgence which government requires, it is
bound to apportion among all persons with as much equality
as possible; but their sacrifices of the imaginary dignity
dependent on expense, it may spare itself the trouble of
estimating.

Both in England and on the Continent a graduated
property-tax (VimpSt progressif) has been advocated, on the
avowed ground that the state should use the instrument of
taxation as a means of mitigating the inequalities of wealth.
I am as desirous as any one, that means should be taken to
diminish those inequalities, but not so as to relieve the
prodigal at the expense of the prudent. To tax the larger
incomes at a higher percentage than the smaller, is to lay
a tax on industry and economy; to impose a penalty on
people for having worked harder and saved more than their
neighbours. It is not the fortunes which are earned, but
those which are unearned, that it is for the public good to
place under limitation. A just and wise legislation would
abstain from holding out motives for dissipating rather than
saving the earnings of honest exertion. Its impartiality
between competitors would consist in endeavouring that
they should all start fair, and not in hanging a weight upon
the swift to diminish the distance between them and the slow.
Many, indeed, fail with greater efforts than those with which
others succeed, not from difference of merits, but difference
of opportunities; but if all were done which it would be in
the power of a good government to do, by instruction and
by legislation, to remedy this inequality of opportunities,
the differences of fortune arising from people's own earnings



376 BOOK V. CHAPTER II. § 3 ,

could not justly give umbrage. With respect to the large
fortunes acquired by gift or inheritance, the power of be-
queathing is one of those privileges of property which are
lit subjects for regulation on grounds of general expediency;
and I have already suggested,* as the most eligible mode of
restraining the accumulation of large fortunes in the hands
of those who have not earned them by exertion, a limitation
of the amount which any one person should be permitted to
acquire by gift, bequest, or inheritance. Apart from this,
and from the proposal of Bentham (also discussed in a
former chapter) that collateral inheritance ab intestato should
cease, and the property escheat to the state, I conceive that
inheritances and legacies, exceeding a certain amount, are
highly proper subjects for taxation; and that the revenue
from them should be as great as it can be made without
giving rise to evasions, by donation inter vivos or conceal-
ment of property, such as it would be impossible adequately
to check. The principle of graduation (as it is called,) that
is, of levying a larger percentage on a larger sum, though
its application to general taxation would be in my opinion
objectionable, is both just and expedient as applied to legacy
and inheritance duties.

The objection to a graduated property tax applies in an
aggravated degree to the proposition of an exclusive tax on
what is called “ realized property/' that is, property not
forming a part of any capital engaged in business, or rather
in business under the superintendence of the owner : as land,
the public funds, money lent on mortgage, and shares (I
presume) in joint stock companies. Except the proposal of
applying a sponge to the national debt, no such palpable
violation of common honesty has found sufficient support in
this country, during the present generation, to be regarded as
within the domain of discussion. It has not the palliation


Supra, book ii. ch, 2 %


GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF TAXATION.


377


of a graduated property tax, that of laying the burthen on
those best able to bear it; for “ realized property” includes
the far larger portion of the provision made for those who
are unable to work, and consists, in great part, of extremely
small fractions, I can hardly conceive a more shameless
pretension, than that the major part of the property of the
country, that of merchants, manufacturers, farmers, and
shopkeepers, should be exempted from its share of taxation ;
that these classes should only begin to pay their proportion
after retiring from business, and if they never retire should
be excused from it altogether. But even this does not give
an adequate idea of the injustice of the proposition. The
burthen thus exclusively thrown on the owners of the smaller
portion of the wealth of the community, would not even be a
burthen on that class of persons in perpetual succession, but
would fall exclusively on those who happened to compose it
when the tax was laid on. As land and those particular
securities would yield a smaller net income, relatively to the
general interest of capital and to the profits of trade; the
balance would rectify itself by a permanent depreciation of
those kinds of property. Future buyers would acquire land
and securities at a reduction of price, equivalent to the
peculiar tax, which tax they would, therefore, escape from
paying, while the original possessors would remain bur-
thened with it even after parting with the property, since
they would have sold their land or securities at a loss of
value equivalent to the fee-simple of the tax. Its imposition
would thus be tantamount to the confiscation for public uses
of a percentage of their property, equal to the percentage
laid on their income by the tax. That such a proposition
should find any favour, is a striking instance of the want of
conscience in matters of taxation, resulting from the absence
of any fixed prinoicples in the public mind, and of any indi-
cation of a sense of justice on the subject in the general
conduct of government, Should the scheme ever enlist a



378 BOOK V. CHAPTER II. § 4.

large party in its support, the fact would indicate a laxity of
pecuniary integrity in national affairs, scarcely inferior to
American repudiation.

§ 4. Whether the profits of trade may not rightfully be
taxed at a lower rate than incomes derived from interest or
rent, is part of the more comprehensive question, so often
mooted on the occasion of the present income tax, whether
life incomes should be subjected to the same rate of taxation
as perpetual incomes: whether salaries, for example, or
annuities, or the gains of professions, should pay the same
percentage as the income from inheritable property.

The existing tax treats all kinds of incomes exactly alike,
taking sevenpence in the pound as well from the person whose
income dies with him, as from the landholder, stockholder,
or mortgagee, who can transmit his fortune un diminished to
his descendants. This is a visible injustice: yet it does not
arithmetically violate the rule that taxation ought to be in
proportion to means. When it is said that a temporary
income ought to be taxed less than a permanent one, the
reply is irresistible, that it is taxed less; for the income which
lasts only ten years pays the tax only ten years, while
that which lasts for ever pays for ever. On this point some
financial reformers are guilty of a great fallacy. They con-
tend that incomes ought to be assessed to the income tax
not in proportion to their annual amount, but to their
capitalized value: that, for example, if the value of a perpetual
annuity of 100?. is 3000?., and a life annuity of the same
amount being worth only half the number of years' purchase
could only be sold for 1500?., the perpetual income should
pay twice as much per cent income tax as the terminable
income; if the one pays 10?. a year the other should pay
only 5?. But in this argument there is the obvious oversight,
that it values the incomes by one standard and the payments
by another; it capitalizes the incomes, but forgets to capitalize



GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF TAXATION.


379


the payments. An annuity worth 30007. ought, it is alleged,
to be taxed twice as highly as one which is only worth 1500?.,
and no assertion can be more unquestionable ; but it is for-
gotten that the income worth 3000?. pays to the supposed
income tax 10?. a year in perpetuity, which is equivalent, by
supposition, to 300?., while the terminable income pays the
same 10?. only during the life of its owner, which on the same
calculation is a value of 150?. Already, therefore, the income
which is only half as valuable, pays only half as much to the
tax; and if in addition to this its annual quota were reduced
from 10?. to 5?., it would pay, not half, but a fourth part only
of the payment demanded from the perpetual income. To
make it just that the one income should pay only half as much
per annum as the other, it would be necessary that it should
pay that half for the same period, that is, in perpetuity.

All attemps to establish a claim in favour of terminable
incomes on numerical grounds — to make out, in short, that a
proportional tax is not a proportional tax — are manifestly
absurd. The claim does not rest on grounds of arithmetic,
but of human feelings and necessities. It is not because the
temporary annuitant has smaller means, but because he has
greater wants, that he ought to be assessed at a lower rate.

In spite of the nominal equality of income, A, an annui-
tant of 1000?. a year, cannot so well afford to pay 100?. out of
it, as B who derives the same annual sum from heritable pro-
perty; A having usually a demand on his income which B has
not, namely, to provide by saving for children or others; to
which, in the case of salaries or professional gains, must gene-
rally be added a provision for his own later years; while B
may expend his whole income without injury to his old age,
and still have it all to bestow on others after his death. If
A, in order to meet these exigencies, must lay by 300?. of his
income, to take 100?. from him as income tax is to take 1007.
from 700?., since it must be retrenched from that part only of
his means which he can afford to spend on his own consump-



880


BOOK V. CHAPTER II. § 4.

tion. Were he to throw it rateably on what he spends and on
what he saves, abating 70 1. from his consumption and 30 J.
from his annual saving, then indeed his immediate sacrifice
would be proportionally the same as B’s : but then his chil-
dren or his old age would be worse provided for in conse-
quence of the tax. The capital sum which would be accu-
mulated for them would be one-tenth less, and on the reduced
income afforded by this reduced capital, they would be a
second time charged with income tax ; while A's heirs would
only be charged once.

The principle, therefore, of equality of taxation, inter-
preted in its only just sense, equality of sacrifice, requires that
a person who has no means of providing for old age, or for
those in whom he is interested, except by saving from
income, should have the tax remitted on all that part of his
income which is really and bond fide applied to that pur-
pose.*

If, indeed, reliance could be placed on the conscience of
the contributors, or sufficient security taken for the correct-
ness of their statements by collateral precautions, the proper


* I say really applied, because (as before remarked in tbe case of an income
not more than sufficient for subsistence) an exemption grounded on an assumed
necessity, ought not to be claimable by any one who practically emancipates
himself from the necessity. One expedient might be, that the Income-Tax
Commissioners should allow, as a deduction from income, all bond fide payments
for insurance on life. This, however, would not provide for the case which
most of all deserves consideration, that of persons whose lives are not insur-
able ; nor would it include the case of savings made as a provision for age. The
latter case might, perhaps, be met by allow ing as a deduction from income all
payments made in the purchase of deferred annuities ; and the former by re-
mitting income-tax on sums actually settled, and on sums paid into the hands of
a public officer, to be invested in securities, and repaid only to the executor or
administrator: the tax so remitted, with interest from the date of deposit,
being retained (for the prevention of fraud) as a first debt chargeable on the
deposit itself, before other debts could be paid out of it ; but not demanded if
satisfactory proof were given that all debts had been paid from other resources.
[In the Income-Tax Act, as renewed and modified by Mr. Gladstone in 1853,
the first two of these three suggestions have been acted on.]



GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF TAXATION. 38l

mode of assessing an income tax would be to tax only the
part of income devoted to expenditure, exempting that which
is saved. For when saved and invested (and all savings,
speaking generally, are invested) it thenceforth pays income
tax on the interest or profit which it brings, notwithstanding
that it has already been taxed on the principal. Unless, there-
fore, savings are exempted from income tax, the contributors
are twice taxed on what they save, and only once on what
they spend. A person who spends all he receives, pays 7 d.
in the pound, or say three per cent, to the tax, and no more ;
but if he saves part of the year's income and buys stock, then
in addition to the three per cent which he has paid on the
principal, and which diminishes the interest in the same
ratio, he pays three per cent annually on the interest itself,
which is equivalent to an immediate payment of a second
three per cent on the principal. So that while unproductive
expenditure pays only three per cent, savings pay six per
cent: or more correctly, three per cent on the whole, and
another three per cent on the remaining ninety-seven. The
difference thus created to the disadvantage of prudence and
economy, is not only impolitic but unjust. To tax the sum
invested, and afterwards tax also the proceeds of the invest-
ment, is to tax the same portion of the contributor's means
twice over. The principal and the interest cannot both
together form part of his resources; they are the same por-
tion twice counted: if he has the interest, it is because he
abstains from using the principal; if he spends the principal,
he does not receive the interest. Yet because he can do either
of the two, he is taxed as if he could do both, and could have
the benefit of the saving and that of the spending, concurrently
with one another.

No income tax is really just, from which savings are not
exempted; and no income tax ought to be voted without
that provision, if the form of the returns, and the nature of
the evidence required, could be so arranged as to prevent
the exemption from being taken fraudulent advantage of, by



882 BOOK V. CHAPTER II. § 4 .

saving with one hand and getting into debt with the other,
or by spending in the following year what had been passed
tax-free as saving in the year preceding. If this difficulty
could be surmounted, the difficulties and complexities arising
from the comparative claims of temporary and permanent
incomes, would disappear; for since temporary incomes have
no just claim to lighter taxation than permanent incomes,
except in so far as their possessors are more called upon to
save, the exemption of what they do save would fully satisfy
the claim. But if no plan can be devised for the exemption
of actual savings, sufficiently free from liability to fraud, it
is necessary, as the next thing in point of justice, to take into
account in assessing the tax, what the different classes of
contributors ought to save. And there would probably be no
other mode of doing this than the rough expedient of two
different rates of assessment. There would be great diffi-
culty in taking into account differences of duration between
one terminable income and another; and in the most fre-
quent case, that of incomes dependent on life, differences of
age and health would constitute such extreme diversity as it
would be impossible to take proper cognizance of. It would
probably be necessary to be content with one uniform rate-
for all incomes of inheritance, and another uniform rate
for all those which necessarily terminate with the life of the
individual. In fixing the proportion between the two rates,
there must inevitably be something arbitrary; perhaps a
deduction of one-fourth in favour of life-incomes would be
as little objectionable as any which could be made, it being
thus assumed that one-fourth of a life-income is, on. the
average of all ages and states of health, a suitable propor-
tion to be laid by as a provision for successors and for old
age.*


* Several writers on the subject, including Mr. Mill in his Elements of
Political Economy, and Mr. M ‘Culloch in his work on Taxation, have con-
tended that as much should be deducted as would be sufficient to insure the
possessor’s life for a sum which would give to his successors for ever an income



GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF TAXATION.


883


Of the net profits of persons in business, a part, as before
observed, may be considered as interest on capital, and of a
perpetual character, and the remaining part as remuneration
for the skill and labour of superintendence. The surplus
beyond interest depends on the life of the individual, and
even on his continuance in business, and is entitled to the
full amount of exemption allowed to terminable incomes.
It has also, I conceive, a just claim to a further amount of
exemption in consideration of its precariousness. An income
which some not unusual vicissitude may reduce to nothing,
or even convert into a loss, is not the same thing to the
feelings of the possessor as a permanent income of 1000?. a
year, even though on an average of years it may yield 1000?.
a year. If life-incomes were assessed at three-fourths of
their amount, the profits of business, after deducting interest
on capital, should not only be assessed at three-fourths, but
should pay, on that assessment, a lower rate. Or perhaps
the claims of justice in this respect might be sufficiently met
by allowing the deduction of a fourth on the entire income,
interest included.


equal to what he reserves for himself; since this is what the possessor of
heritable property can do without saving at all : in other words, that tempo-
rary incomes should be converted into perpetual incomes of equal present value,
and taxed as such. But surely this is favouring them too much. Owners of
life-incomes are not bound to forego the enjoyment of them for the sake of
leaving to a perpetual line of successors an independent provision equal to their
own temporary one ; and no one ever dreams of doing so. Least of all is it to
be required or expected from those whose incomes are the fruits of personal
exertion, that they should leave to their posterity for ever, without any necessity
for exertion, the same incomes which they allow to themselves. All they are
bound to do, even for their children, is to place them in circumstances in which
they will have favourable chances of earning their own living. To give, how-
ever, either to children or to others, by bequest, being a legitimate inclination,
which these persons cannot indulge without laying by a part of their income,
while the owners of heritable property can ; this real inequality in cases where
the incomes themselves are equal, should be considered, to a reasonable degree,
in the adjustment of taxation, so as to require from both, as nearly as prac-
ticable, an equal sacrifice.



884


BOOK V. CHAPTER IT. § 5.

These are the chief cases, of ordinary occurrence, in which
any difficulty arises in interpreting the maxim of equality of
taxation. The proper sense to be put upon it, as we have
seen in the preceding example, is, that people should be
taxed, not in proportion to what they have, but to what they
can afford to spend. It is no objection to this principle that
we cannot apply it consistently to all cases. A person with a
life-income and precarious health, or who has many persons
depending on his exertions, must, if he wishes to provide for
them after his death, be more rigidly economical than one
who has a life-income of equal amount with a strong consti-
tution and few claims upon him ; and if it be conceded that
taxation cannot accommodate itself to these distinctions, it
is argued that there is no use in attending to any distinctions,
where the absolute amount of income is the same. But the
difficulty of doing perfect justice, is no reason against doing as
much as we can. Though it may be a hardship to an annui-
tant whose life is only worth five years purchase, to be allowed
no greater abatement than is granted to one whose life is
worth twenty, it is better for him even so, than if neither of
them were allowed any abatement at all.

§ 5. Before leaving the subject of Equality of Taxa-
tion, I must remark that there are cases in which exceptions
may be made to it, consistently with that equal justice which
is the groundwork of the rule. Suppose that there is a kind
of income which constantly tends to increase, without any
exertion or sacrifice on the part of the owners: those owners
constituting a class in the community, whom the natural
course of things progressively enriches, consistently with
complete passiveness on their own part. In such a case it
would be no violation of the principles on which private
property is grounded, if the state should appropriate this
increase of wealth, or part of it, as it arises. This would
not properly be taking anything from anybody; it would
merely be applying an accession of wealth, created by cir-



GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF TAXATION.


385


cumstances, to the benefit of society, instead of allowing it
to become an unearned appendage to the riches of a particular
class.

Now this is actually the case with rent. The ordinary
progress of a society which increases in wealth, is at all times
tending to augment the incomes of landlords; to give them
both a greater amount and a greater proportion of the wealth
of the community, independently of any trouble or outlay
incurred by themselves. They grow richer, as it were in their
sleep, without working, risking, or economizing. What claim
have they, on the general principles of social justice, to this
accession of riches ? In what would they have been wronged
if society had, from the beginning, reserved a right of taxing
the spontaneous increase of rent, to the highest amount re-
quired by financial exigencies ? I admit that it would be
unjust to come upon each individual estate, and lay hold of
the increase which might be found to have taken place in its
rental ; because there would be no means of distinguishing in
individual cases, between an increase owing solely to the
general circumstances of society, and one which was the effect
of skill and expenditure on the part of the proprietor. The
only admissible mode of proceeding would be by a general
measure. The first step should be a valuation of all the
land in the country. The present value of all land should
be exempt from the tax ; but after an interval had elapsed,
during which society had increased in population and capital,
a rough estimate might be made of the spontaneous increase
which had accrued to rent since the valuation was made. Of
this the average price of produce would be some criterion :
if that had risen, it would be certain that rent had increased,
and (as already shown) even in a greater ratio than the rise
of price. On this and other data, an approximate estimate
might be made, how much value had been added to the
land of the country by natural causes; and in laying on a
general land-tax, which for fear of miscalculation should be
considerably within the amount thus indicated, there would
YOL. II. C C



386


BOOK V. CHAPTER II. § 5.


be an assurance of not touching any increase of income which
might be the result of capital expended or industry exerted
by the proprietor.

But though there could be no question as to the justice
of taxing the increase of rent, if society had avowedly re-
served the right, has not society waved that right by not
exercising it ? In England, for example, have not all who
bought land for the last century or more, given value not
only for the existing income, but for the prospects of in-
crease, under an implied assurance of being only taxed in
the same proportion with other incomes? This objection,
in so far as valid, has a different degree of validity in dif-
ferent countries; depending on the degree of desuetude into
which society has allowed a right to fall, which, as no one
can doubt, it" once fully possessed. In most countries of
Europe, the right to take by taxation, as exigency might
require, an indefinite portion of the rent of land, has never
been allowed to slumber. In several parts of the Continent
the land-tax forms a large proportion of the public revenues,
and has always been confessedly liable to be raised or lowered
without reference to other taxes. In these countries no one
can pretend to have become the owner of land on the faith
of never being called upon to pay an increased land-tax. In
England the land-tax has not varied since the early part of
the last century. The last act of the legislature in relation
to its amount, was to diminish it: and though the subse-
quent increase in the rental of the country has been im-
mense, not only from agriculture, but from the growth of
towns and the increase of buildings, the ascendancy of land-
holders in the legislature has prevented any tax from being
imposed, as it so justly might, upon the very large portion of
this increase which was unearned, and, as it were, accidental.
For the expectations thus raised, it appears to me that an
amply sufficient allowance is made, if the whole increase of
income which has accrued during this long period from a
mere natural law, without exertion or sacrifice, is held sacred



GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF TAXATION. 387

from any peculiar taxation. From the present date, or any
subsequent time at which the legislature may think fit to
assert the principle, I see no objection to declaring that
the future increment of rent should be liable to special
taxation; in doing which all injustice to the landlords would
be obviated, if the present market-price of their land
were secured to them ; since that includes the present value
of all future expectations. With reference to such a tax,
perhaps a safer criterion than either a rise of rents or a rise
of the price of corn, would be a general rise in the price of
land. It would be easy to keep the tax within the amount
which would reduce the market-value of land below the
original valuation : and up to that point, whatever the amount
of the tax might be, no injustice would be done to the pro-
prietors.

§ 6. But whatever may be thought of the legitimacy of
making the state a sharer in all future increase of rent from
natural causes, the existing land-tax (which in this country
unfortunately is very small) ought not to be regarded as a
tax, but as a rent-charge in favour of the public; a portion of
the rent, reserved from the beginning by the state, which has
never belonged to or formed part of the income of the land-
lords, and should not therefore be counted to them as part of
their taxation, so as to exempt them from their fair share of
every other tax. As well might the tithe be regarded as a
tax on the landlords: as well, in Bengal, where the state,
though entitled to the whole rent of the land, gave away one-
tenth of it to individuals, retaining the other nine-tenths,
might those nine-tenths be considered as an unequal and
unjust tax on the grantees of the tenth. That a person owns
part, of the rent, does not make the rest of it his just right,
injuriously withheld from him. The landlords originally held
their estates subject to feudal burthens, for which the present
land-tax is an exceedingly small equivalent, and for their
relief from which they should have been required to pay a

C C 2



888


BOOK V. CHAPTER II. § 6.


much higher price. All who have bought land since the tax
existed have bought it subject to the tax. There is not the
smallest pretence for looking upon it as a payment exacted
from the existing race of landlords.

These observations are applicable to a land-tax, only in
so far as it is a peculiar tax, and not when it is merely a
mode of levying from the landlords the equivalent of what is
taken from other classes. In France, for example, there are
peculiar taxes on other kinds of property and income (the
mobilier and the patente), and supposing the land-tax to be
not more than equivalent to these, there would be no ground
for contending that the state had reserved to itself a rent-
charge on the land. But wherever and in so far as income
derived from land is prescriptively subject to a deduction for
public purposes, beyond the rate of taxation levied on other
incomes, the surplus is not properly taxation, but a share of
the property in the soil, reserved by the state. In this country
there are no peculiar taxes on other classes, corresponding to,
or intended to countervail, the land-tax. The whole of it,
therefore, is not taxation but a rent-charge, and is as if the
state had retained, not a portion of the rent, but a portion of
the land. It is no more a burden on the landlord, than the
share of one joint tenant is a burden on the other. The
landlords are entitled to no compensation for it, nor have they
any claim to its being allowed for, as part of their taxes. Its
continuance on the existing footing is no infringement of the
principle of Equal Taxation.*

We shall hereafter consider, in treating of Indirect
Taxation, how far, and with what modifications, the rule of
equality is applicable to that department.


* The same remarks obviously apply to those local taxes, of the peculiar
pressure of which on landed property so much has been said by the remnant of
the Protectionists. As much of these burdens as is of old standing, ought to
be regarded as a prescriptive deduction or reservation, for public purposes, of a
portion of the rent. And any recent additions have either been incurred for
the benefit of the owners of landed property, or occasioned by their fault : in
neither case giving them any just ground of complaint.



GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF TAXATION.


389


§ 7. In addition to the preceding rules, another general
rule of taxation is sometimes laid down, namely, that it should
fall on income, and not on capital. That taxation should not
encroach upon the amount of the national capital, is indeed
of the greatest importance; but this encroachment, when it
occurs, is not so much a consequence of any particular mode
of taxation, as of its excessive amount. Over-taxation, carried
to a sufficient extent, is quite capable of ruining the most
industrious community, especially when it is in any degree
arbitrary, so that the payer is never certain how much or how
little he shall be allowed to keep; or when it is so laid on as
to render industry and economy a bad calculation. But if
these errors be avoided, and the amount of taxation be not
greater than it is at present even in the most heavily taxed
country of Europe, there is no danger lest it should deprive
the country of a portion of its capital.

To provide that taxation shall fall entirely on income, and
not at all on capital, is beyond the power of any system of
fiscal arrangements. There is no tax which is not partly
paid from what would otherwise have been saved ; no tax, the
amount of which, if remitted, would be wholly employed in
increased expenditure, and no part whatever laid by as an
addition to capital. All taxes, therefore, are in some sense
partly paid out of capital; and in a poor country it is im-
possible to impose any tax which will not impede the
increase of the national wealth. But in a country where
capital abounds, and the spirit of accumulation is strong,
this effect of taxation is scarcely felt. Capital having reached
the stage in which, were it not for a perpetual succession of
improvements in production, any further increase would
soon be stopped — and having so strong a tendency even
to outrun those improvements, that profits are only kept
above the minimum by emigration of capital, or by a
periodical sweep called a commercial crisis; to take from
capital by taxation what emigration would remove, or a
commercial crisis destroy, is only to do what either of those



890 BOOK V. CHAPTER II. § 7.

causes would have done, namely, to make a clear space for
further saving.

I cannot, therefore, attach any importance, in a wealthy
country, to the objection made against taxes on legacies and
inheritances, that they are taxes on capital. It is perfectly
true that they are so. As Ricardo observes, if lOOi. are
taken from any one in a tax on houses or on wine, he
will probably save it, or a part of it, by living in a cheaper
house, consuming less wine, or retrenching from some other
of his expenses: but if the same sum be taken from him
because he has received a legacy of 1 000Z., he considers the
legacy as only 900i., and feels no more inducement than at
any other time (probably feels rather less inducement) to
economize in his expenditure. The tax, therefore, is wholly
paid out of capital: and there are countries in^ which this
would be a serious objection. But in the first place, the
argument cannot apply to any country which has a national
debt, and devotes any portion of revenue to paying it off;
since the produce of the tax, thus applied, still remains
capital, and is merely transferred from the tax-payer to the
fundholder. But the objection is never applicable in a coun-
try which increases rapidly in wealth. The amount which
would bo derived, even from a very high legacy duty, in each
year, is but a small fraction of the annual increase of capital
in such a country; and its abstraction would but make room
for saving to an equivalent amount: while the effect of not
taking it, is to prevent that amount of saving, or cause the
savings when made, to be sent abroad for investment. A
country which, like England, accumulates capital not only
for itself but for half the world, may be said to defray the
whole of its public expenses from its overflowings; and its
wealth is probably at this moment as great as if it had no
taxes at all. What its taxes really do is, to subtract from its
means, not of production but of enjoyment; since whatever
any one pays in taxes, he could, if it were not taken for that
purpose, employ in indulging his ease, or in gratifying some
want or taste which at present remains unsatisfied.



CHAPTER III.


OF DIRECT TAXES.

§ 1 . Taxes are either direct or indirect. A direct tax
is one which is demanded from the very persons who, it is
intended or desired, should pay it. Indirect taxes are those
which are demanded from one person in the expectation and
intention that he shall indemnify himself at the expense of
another: such as the excise or customs. The producer or
importer of a commodity is called upon to pay a tax on it,
not with the intention to levy a peculiar contribution upon
him, but to tax through him the consumers of the commodity,
from whom it is supposed that he will recover the amount by
means of an advance in price.

Direct taxes are either on income, or on expenditure.
Most taxes on expenditure are indirect, but some are direct,
being imposed, not on the producer or seller of an article, but
immediately on the consumer. A house-tax, for example, is
a direct tax on expenditure, if levied, as it usually is, on the
occupier of the house. If levied on the builder or owner, it
would be an indirect tax. A window tax is a direct tax on
expenditure; so are the taxes on horses and carriages, and
the rest of what are called the assessed taxes.

The sources of income are rent, profits, and wages. This
includes every source of income, except gift or plunder.
Taxes may be laid on any one of the ihree kinds of income,
or an uniform tax on all of them. We will consider these in
their order.

§ 2. A tax on rent falls wholly on the landlord. There
are no means by which he can shift the burthen upon any
one else. It does not affect the value or price of agricultural



892 BOOK V. CHAPTER III. § 2 .

produce, for this is determined by the cost of production in
the most unfavourable circumstances, and in those circum-
stances, as we have so often demonstrated, no rent is paid.
A tax on rent, therefore, has no effect, other than its obvious
one. It merely takes so much from the landlord, and trans-
fers it to the state.

This, however, is, in strict exactness, only true of the
rent which is the result either of natural causes, or of im-
provements made by tenants. When the landlord makes
improvements which increase the productive power of his
land, he is remunerated for them by an extra payment from
the tenant; and this payment, which to the landlord is pro-
perly a profit on capital, is blended and confounded with
rent; which indeed it really is, to the tenant, and in respect
of the economical laws which determine its amount. A tax
on rent, if extending to this portion of it, would discourage
landlords from making improvements : but it does not follow
that it would raise the price of agricultural produce. The
same improvements might be made with the tenant's capital,
or even with the landlords if lent by him to the tenant;
provided he is willing to give the tenant so long a lease as
will enable him to indemnify himself before it expires. But
whatever hinders improvements from being made in the
manner in which people prefer to make them, will often
prevent them from being made at all : and on this account a
tax on rent would be inexpedient, unless some means coidd be
devised of excluding from its operation that portion of the
nominal rent which may be regarded as landlord’s profit.
This argument, however, is not needed for the condemnation
of such a tax. A peculiar tax on the income of any class, not
balanced by taxes on other classes, is a violation of justice,
and amounts to a partial confiscation. I have already shown
grounds for excepting from this censure a tax which, sparing
existing rents, should content itself with appropriating a
portion of any future increase arising from the mere action of
natural causes. But even this could not be justly done,



DIRECT TAXES.


393


without offering as an alternative the market price of the land.
In the case of a tax on rent which is not peculiar, but accom-
panied by an equivalent tax on other incomes, the objection
grounded on its reaching the profit arising from improvements
is less applicable : since, profits being taxed as well as rent,
the profit which assumes the form of rent is liable to its share
in common with other profits; but since profits altogether
ought, for reasons formerly stated, to be taxed somewhat lower
than rent properly so called, the objection is only diminished,
not removed.

§ 3. A tax on profits, like a tax on rent, must, at least
in its immediate operation, fall wholly on the payer. All
profits being alike affected, no relief can be obtained by a
change of employment. If a tax were laid on the profits of
any one branch of productive employment, the tax would be
virtually an increase of the cost of production, and the value
and price of the article would rise accordingly; by which the
tax would be thrown upon the consumers of the commodity,
and would not affect profits. But a general and equal tax on
all profits would not affect general prices, and would fall, at
least in the first instance, on capitalists alone.

There is, however, an ulterior effect, which, in a rich and
prosperous country, requires to be taken into account. When
the capital accumulated is so great and the rate of annual
accumulation so rapid, that the country is only kept from
attaining the stationary state by the emigration of capital, or
by continual improvements in production; any circumstance
which virtually lowers the rate of profit, cannot be without a
decided influence on these phenomena. It may operate in
different ways. The curtailment of profit, and the conse-
quent increased difficulty in making a fortune or obtaining
a subsistence by the employment of capital, may act as a
stimulus to inventions, and to the use of them when made.
If improvements in production are much accelerated, and if
these improvements cheapen, directly or indirectly, any of



894


BOOK V. CHAPTER III. § 8.

the things habitually consumed by the labourer, profits may
rise, and rise sufficiently to make up for all that is taken
from them by the tax. In that case the tax will have been
realized without loss to any one, the produce of the country
being increased by an equal, or what would in that case be a
far greater amount. The tax, however, must even in this
case be considered as paid from profits, because the receivers
of profits are those who would be benefited if it were taken
off.

But though the artificial abstraction of a portion of profits
would have a real tendency to accelerate improvements in
production, no considerable improvements might actually
result, or only of such a kind as not to raise general profits
at all, or not to raise them so much as the tax had diminished
them. If so, the rate of profit would be brought closer to
that practical minimum, to which it is constantly approaching:
and this diminished return to capital would either give a
decided check to further accumulation, or would cause a
greater proportion than before of the annual increase to be
sent abroad, or wasted in unprofitable speculations. At its
first imposition the tax falls wholly on profits : but the amount
of increase of capital, which the tax prevents, would, if it had
been allowed to continue, have tended to reduce profits to the
same level; and at every period of ten or twenty years there
will be found less difference between profits as they are, and
profits as they would in that case have been : until at last
there is no difference, and the tax is thrown either upon the
labourer or upon the landlord. The real effect of a tax on
profits is to make the country possess at any given period, a
smaller capital and a smaller aggregate production, and to
make the stationary state be attained earlier, and with a
smaller sum of national wealth. It is possible that a tax on
profits might even diminish the existing capital of the country.
If the rate of profit is already at the practical minimum, ^hat
is, at the point at which all that portion of the annual
increment which would tend to reduce profits is carried off



DIRECT TAXES.


395


either by exportation or by speculation; then if a tax is
imposed which reduces profits still lower, the same causes
which previously carried off the increase would probably carry
off a portion of the existing capital. A tax on profits is thus,
in a state of capital and accumulation like that in England,
extremely detrimental to the national wealth. And this effect
is not confined to the case of a peculiar^ and therefore intrin-
sically unjust, tax on profits. The mere fact that profits have
to bear their share of a heavy general taxation, tends, in the
same manner as a peculiar tax, to drive capital abroad, to
stimulate imprudent speculations by diminishing safe gains, to
discourage further accumulation, and to accelerate the attain-
ment of the stationary state. This is thought to have been
the principal cause of the decline of Holland, or rather of her
having ceased to make progress.

Even in countries which do not accumulate so fast as to
be always within a short interval of the stationary state, it
seems impossible that, if capital is accumulating at all, its
accumulation should not be in some degree retarded by the
abstraction of a portion of its profit; and unless the effect in
stimulating improvements be a full counterbalance, it is
inevitable that a part of the burthen will be thrown off the
capitalist, upon the labourer or the landlord. One or other of
these is always the loser by a diminished rate of accumulation.
If population continues to increase as before, the labourer
suffers: if not, cultivation is checked in its advance, and the
landlords lose the accession of rent which would have accrued
to them. The only country in which a tax on profits
seems likely to be permanently a burthen on capitalists exclu-
sively, are those in which capital is stationary, because there
is no new accumulation. In such countries the tax might
not prevent the old capital from being kept up through habit,
or from unwillingness to submit to impoverishment, and so
the capitalist might continue to bear the whole of the tax.
It is seen from these considerations that the effects of a tax
on profits are much more complex, more various, and in some



396


BOOK V. CHAPTER III. § 4 .

points more uncertain, than writers on the subject have com-
monly supposed.

§ 4. We turn now to Taxes on Wages. The incidence
of these is very different, according as the wages taxed are
those of ordinary unskilled labour, or are the remuneration of
such skilled or privileged employments, whether manual or
intellectual, as are taken out of the sphere of competition by
a natural or conferred monopoly.

I have already remarked, that in the present low state of
popular education, all the higher grades of mental or edu-
cated labour are at a monopoly price ; exceeding the wages of
common workmen in a degree very far beyond that which is
due to the expense, trouble, and loss of time required in
qualifying for the employment. Any tax levied on these
gains, which still leaves them above (or not below) their just
proportion, falls on those who pay it ; they have no means of
relieving themselves at the expense of any other class. The
same thing is true of ordinary wages, in cases like that of the
United States, or of a new colony, where, capital increasing as
rapidly as population can increase, wages are kept up by the
increase of capital, and not by the adherence of the labourers
to a fixed standard of comforts. In such a case, some dete-
rioration of their condition, whether by a tax or otherwise,
might possibly take place without checking the increase of
population. The tax would in that case fall on the labourers
themselves, and would reduce them prematurely to that lower
state to which, on the same supposition with regard to their
habits, they would in any case have been reduced ultimately,
by the inevitable diminution in the rate of increase of capital,
through the occupation of all the fertile land.

Some will object that, even in this case, a tax on wages
cannot be detrimental to the labourers, since the money
raised by it, being expended in the country, comes back to
the labourers again through the demand for labour. The
fallacy, however, of this doctrine has been so completely



DIRECT TAXES.


897


exhibited in the First Book,* that I need do little more
than refer to that exposition. It was there shown that
funds expended unproductively have no tendency to raise or
keep up wages, unless when expended in the direct purchase
of labour. If the government took a tax of a shilling a week
from every labourer, and laid it all out in hiring labourers
for military service, public works, or the like, it would, no
doubt, indemnify the labourers as a class for all that the tax
took from them. That would really be “spending the
money among the people.” But if it expended the whole in
buying goods, or in adding to the salaries of employes who
bought goods with it, this would not increase the demand for
labour, or tend to raise wages. Without, however, reverting
to general principles, we may rely on an obvious reductio ad
absurdum. If to take money from the labourers and spend
it in commodities is giving it back to the labourers, then,
to take money from other classes, and spend it in the same
manner, must be giving it to the labourers; consequently, ’the
more a government takes in taxes, the greater will be the
demand for labour, and the more opulent the condition of
the labourers. A proposition the absurdity of which no one
can fail to see.

In the condition of most communities, wages are regu-
lated by the habitual standard of living to which the labourers
adhere, and on less than which they will not multiply.
Where there exists such a standard, a tax on wages will
indeed for a time be borne by the labourers themselves; but
unless this temporary depression has the effect of lowering
the standard itself, the increase of population will receive a
check, which will raise wages, and restore the labourers to
their previous condition. On whom, in this case, will the
tax fall? According to Adam Smith, on the community
generally, in their character of consumers; since the rise of
wages, he thought, would raise general prices. We have


Supra, vol. i. pp. 98-109.



898 BOOK V. CHAPTER III. § 5.

seen, however, that general prices depend on other causes,
and are never raised by any circumstance which affects all
kinds of productive employment in the same manner and
degree. A rise of wages occasioned by a tax, must, like any
other increase of the cost of labour, be defrayed from profits.
To attempt to tax day-labourers, in an old country, is
merely to impose an extra tax upon all employers of common
labour; unless the tax has the much worse effect of perma-
nently lowering the standard of comfortable subsistence in
the minds of the poorest class.

We find in the preceding considerations an additional
argument for the opinion already expressed, that direct tax-
ation should stop short of the class of incomes which do not
exceed what is necessary for healthful existence. These
very small incomes are mostly derived from manual labour;
and, as we now see, any tax imposed on these, either per-
manently degrades the habits of the labouring class, or falls
on profits, and burthens capitalists with an indirect tax, in
addition to their share of the direct taxes; which is doubly
objectionable, both as a violation of the fundamental rule of
equality, and for the reasons which, as already shown, render
a peculiar tax on profits detrimental to the public wealth, and
consequently to the means which society possesses of paying
any taxes whatever.

§5. We now pass, from taxes on the separate kinds of
income, to a tax attempted to be assessed fairly upon all
kinds; in other words, an Income Tax. The discussion of
the conditions necessary for making this tax consistent with
justice, has been anticipated in the last chapter. We shall
suppose, therefore, that these conditions are complied with.
They are, first, that incomes below a certain amount should
be altogether untaxed. This minimum should not be higher
than the amount which suffices for the necessaries of the
existing population. The exemption from the present
income-tax, of all incomes under 100£. a-year, and the



DIRECT TAXES.


399


lower percentage levied on those between lOOi. and
are only defensible on the ground that almost all the indirect
taxes gress more heavily on incomes between 50i. and J 50
than on any others whatever. The second condition is, that
incomes above the limit should be taxed only in proportion
to the surplus by which they exceed the limit. Thirdly,
that all sums saved from income and invested, should be
exempt from the tax: or if this be found impracticable, that
life incomes and incomes from business and professions
should be less heavily taxed than inheritable incomes, in a
degree as nearly as possible equivalent to the increased need
of economy arising from their terminable character: allow-
ance being also made, in the case of variable incomes, for
their precariousness.

An income-tax, fairly assessed on these principles, would
be, in point of justice, the least exceptionable of all taxes.
The objection to it, in the present low state of public morality,
is the impossibility of ascertaining the real incomes of the
contributors. The supposed hardship of compelling people
to disclose the amount of their incomes, ought not, in my
opinion, to count for much. One of the social evils of this
country is the practice, amounting to a custom, of maintain-
ing, or attempting to maintain, the appearance to the world
of a larger income than is possessed ; and it would be far
better for the interests of those who yield to this weakness,
if the extent of their means were universally and exactly
known, and the temptation removed to expending more than
they can afford, or stinting real wants in order to make a
false show externally. At the same time, the reason of the
case, even on this point, is not so exclusively on one side of
the argument as is sometimes supposed. So long as the
vulgar of any country are in the debased state of mind which
this national habit presupposes — so long as their respect (if
such a word can be applied to it) is proportioned to what
they suppose to be each person's pecuniary means — it may be
doubted whether anything which would remove all uncer-



400 BOOK V. CHAPTER III. § 5 .

tainty as to that point, would not considerably increase the
presumption and arrogance of the vulgar rich, and their in-
solence towards those above them in mind and character, but
below them in fortune.

Notwithstanding, too, what is called the inquisitorial
nature of the tax, no amount of inquisitorial power which
would be tolerated by a people the most disposed to submit
to it, could enable the revenue officers to assess the tax from
actual knowledge of the circumstances of contributors. Rents,
salaries, annuities, and all fixed incomes, can be exactly
ascertained. But the variable gains of professions, and still
more the profits of business, which the person interested
cannot always himself exactly ascertain, can still less be esti-
mated with any approach to fairness by a tax-collector. The
main reliance must be placed, and always has been placed,
on the returns made by the person himself. No production
of accounts is of much avail, except against the more flagrant
cases of falsehood ; and even against these the check is very
imperfect, for if fraud is intended, false accounts can gene-
rally be framed which it will baffle any means of inquiry
possessed by the revenue officers to detect : the easy resource
of omitting entries on the credit side, being often sufficient
without the aid of fictitious debts or disbursements. The
tax, therefore, on whatever principles of equality it may be
imposed, is in practice unequal in one of the worst ways,
falling heaviest on the most conscientious. The unscrupulous
succeed in evading a great proportion of what they should
pay ; even persons of integrity in their ordinary transactions
are tempted to palter with their consciences, at least to the
extent of deciding in their own favour all points on which the
smallest doubt or discussion could arise: while the strictly
veracious are often made to pay more than the state intended,
by the powers of arbitrary assessment necessarily intrusted to
the Commissioners as the last defence against the tax-payer s
power of concealment.

It is to be feared, therefore, that the fairness which



DIRECT TAXES.


401


belongs to the principle of an income-tax, cannot be made
to attach to it in practice ; and that this tax, while apparently
the most just of all modes of raising a revenue, is in effect
more unjust than many others which are pvimd facie more
objectionable. This consideration would lead us to concur
in the opinion which, until of late, has usually prevailed —
that direct taxes on income should be reserved as an extra-
ordinary resource for great national emergencies, in which
the necessity of a large additional revenue overrules all
objections.

The difficulties of a fair income-tax have elicited a pro-
position for a direct tax of so much per cent, not on income
but on expenditure; the aggregate amount of each person's
expenditure being ascertained, as the amount of income now
is, from statements furnished by the contributors themselves.
The author of this suggestion, Mr. Re vans, in a clever pam-
phlet on the subject,* contends that the returns which
persons would furnish of their expenditure would be more
trustworthy than those which they now make of their income,
inasmuch as expenditure is in its own nature more public
than income, and false representations of it more easily
detected. He cannot, I think, have sufficiently considered,
how few of the items in the annual expenditure of most
families can be judged of with any approximation to correct-
ness from the external signs. The only security would still
be the veracity of individuals, and there is no reason for sup-
posing that their statements would be more trustworthy on
the subject of their expenses than on that of their revenues;
especially as, the expenditure of most persons being composed
of many more items than their income, there would be more
scope for concealment and suppression in the detail of ex-
penses than even of receipts.

The taxes on expenditure at present in force, either in


* “ A Percentage Tax on Domestic Expenditure to supply the whole of the
Public Revenue.” By John Revans. Published by Hatchard, in 1847.

VOL. II. D D


402 BOOK V. CHAPTER III. § 6.

this or in other countries, fall only on particular kinds of ex-
penditure, and differ no otherwise from taxes on commodities
than in being paid directly by the person who consumes or
uses the article, instead of being advanced by the producer
or seller, and reimbursed in the price. The taxes on horses
and carriages, on dogs, on servants, are of this nature. They
evidently fall on the persons from whom they are levied —
those who use the commodity taxed. A tax of a similar
description, and more important, is a house-tax : which must
be considered at somewhat greater length.

§ 6. The rent of a house consists of two parts, the
ground-rent, and what Adam Smith calls the building-rent.
The first is determined by the ordinary principles of rent.
It is the remuneration given for the use of the portion of
land occupied by the house and its appurtenances; and varies
from a mere equivalent for the rent which the ground would
afford in agriculture, to the monopoly rents paid for advan-
tageous situations in populous thoroughfares. The rent of
the house itself, as distinguished from the ground, is the
equivalent given for the labour and capital expended on the
building. The fact of its being received in quarterly or half-
yearly payments, makes no difference in the principles by
which it is regulated. It comprises the ordinary profit on the
builder's capital, and an annuity, sufficient at the current rate
of interest, after paying for all repairs chargeable on the pro-
prietor, to replace the original capital by the time the house
is worn out, or by the expiration of the usual term of a
building lease.

A tax of so much per cent on the gross rent, falls on both
these portions alike. The more highly a house is rented, the
more it pays to the tax, whether the quality of the situation
or that of the house itself is the cause. The incidence, how-
ever, of these two portions of the tax must be considered
separately.

As much of it as is a tax on building-rent, must ultimately*



DIRECT TAXES.


403


fall on the consumer, in other words the occupier. For as
the profits of building are already not above the ordinary rate,
they would, if the tax fell on the owner and not on the occu-
pier, become lower than the profits of untaxed employments,
and houses would not be built. It is probable however that
for some time after the tax was first imposed, a great part of
it would fall, not on the renter, but on the owner of the house.

A large proportion of the consumers either could not afford,
or would not choose, to pay their former rent with the tax in
addition, but would content themselves with a lower scale of
accommodation. Houses therefore would be for a time in
excess of the demand. The consequence of such excess, in
the case of most other articles, would be an almost immediate
diminution of the supply: but so durable a commodity as
houses does not rapidly diminish in amount. New buildings
indeed, of the class for which the demand had decreased,
would cease to be erected, except for special reasons; but in
the meantime the temporary superfluity would lower rents,
and the consumers would obtain, perhaps, nearly the same
accommodation as formerly, for the same aggregate payment,
rent and tax together. By degrees, however, as the existing
houses wore out, or as increase of population demanded a
greater supply, rents would again rise ; until it became profit-
able to recommence building, which would not be until the
tax was wholly transferred to the occupier. In the end,
therefore, the occupier bears that portion of a tax on rent,
which falls on the payment made for the house itself, exclu-
sively of the ground it stands on.

The case is partly different with the portion which is a tax
on ground-rent. As taxes on rent, properly so called, fall on
the landlord, a tax on ground-rent, one would suppose, must
fall on the ground-landlord, at least after the expiration of the
building lease. It will not however fall wholly on the land-
lord, unless with the tax on ground-rent there is combined an
equivalent tax on agricultural rent. The lowest rent of land
let for building is very little above the rent which the same

D D 2



404


BOOK V. CHAPTER III. § 6.

ground would yield in agriculture: since it is reasonable to
suppose that land, unless in case of exceptional circum-
stances, is let or sold for building, as soon as it is decidedly
worth more for that purpose than for cultivation. If, there-
fore, a tax were laid on ground-rents without being also laid
on agricultural rents, it would, unless of trifling amount,
reduce the return from the lowest ground-rents below the
ordinary return from land, and would check further building
quite as effectually as if it were a tax on building-rents,
until either the increased demand of a growing population,
or a diminution of supply by the ordinary causes of destruc-
tion, had raised the rent by a full equivalent for the tax. But
whatever raises the lowest ground-rents, raises all others,
since each exceeds the lowest by the market value of its
peculiar advantages. If, therefore, the tax on ground-rents
were a fixed sum per square foot, the more valuable situations
paying no more than those least in request, this fixed payment
would ultimately fall on the occupier. Suppose the lowest
ground-rent to be lOi. per acre, and the highest 1000Z., a tax
of 1 1 . per acre on ground-rents would ultimately raise the
former to 11 1 ., and the latter consequently to 1 001 1 ., since
the difference of value between the two situations would be
exactly what it was before: the annual pound, therefore,
would be paid by the occupier. But a tax on ground-rent is
supposed to be a portion of a house-tax, which is not a fixed
payment, but a percentage on the rent. The cheapest site,
therefore, being supposed as before to pay 1 1 ., the dearest
would pay 100i., of which only the 11 . could be thrown upon
the occupier, since the rent would still be only raised to 1001Z.
Consequently, 99 J. of the 100J. levied from the expensive site,
would fall on the ground-landlord. A house-tax thus requires
to be considered in a double aspect, as a tax on all occupiers
of houses, and a tax on ground-rents.

In the vast majority of houses, the ground-rent forms but
a small proportion of the annual payment made for the house,
and nearly all the tax falls on the occupier. It is only in



DIRECT TAXES.


405


exceptional cases, like that of the favourite situations in large
towns, that the predominant element in the rent of the house
is the ground-rent; and among the very few kinds of income
which are fit subjects for peculiar taxation, these ground-rents
hold the principal place, being the most gigantic example
extant of enormous accessions of riches acquired rapidly, and
in many cases unexpectedly, by a few families, from the mere
accident of their possessing certain tracts of land, without their
having themselves aided in the acquisition by the smallest
exertion, outlay, or risk. So far therefore as a house-tax falls
on the ground-landlord, it is liable to no valid objection.

In so far as it falls on the occupier, if justly proportioned
to the value of the house, it is one of the fairest and most
unobjectionable of all taxes. No part of a person's expenditure
is a better criterion of his means, or bears, on the whole, more
nearly the same proportion to them. A house-tax is a nearer
approach to a fair income-tax, than a direct assessment on
income can easily be; having the great advantage, that it
makes spontaneously all the allowances which it is so difficult
to make, and so impracticable to make exactly, in assessing
an income-tax : for if what a person pays in house-rent is a
test of anything, it is a test not of what he possesses, but of
what he thinks he can afford to spend. To the equality of
this tax, there are but two decided objections. The first is,
that a miser may escape it. This objection applies to all
taxes on expenditure : nothing but a direct tax on income can
reach a miser. But as misers do not now hoard their treasure,
but invest it in productive employments, it not only adds to
the national wealth, and consequently to the general means of
paying taxes, but the payment claimable from itself is only
transferred from the principal sum to the income afterwards
derived from it, which pays taxes as soon as it comes to be
expended. The second objection is that a person may re-
quire a larger and more expensive house, not from having
greater means, but from having a larger family. Of this,
however, he is not entitled to complain; since having a



406


BOOK V. CHAPTER III. § 6.


large family is at a person's own choice : and, so far as con-
cerns the public interest, is a thing rather to be discouraged
than promoted.*

A large portion of the taxation of this country is raised
by a house-tax. The parochial taxation of the towns en-
tirely, and of the rural districts partially, consists of an
assessment on house-rent. The window-tax, which was also
a house-tax, but of a bad kind, operating as a tax on light,
and a cause of deformity in building, was exchanged in 1851
for a house-tax properly so called, but on a much lower
scale than that which existed previously to 1834. It is to be
lamented that the new tax retains the unjust principle on
which the old house -tax was assessed, and which contributed
quite as much as the selfishness of the middle classes to
produce the outcry against the tax. The public were justly
scandalized on learning that residences like Chatsworth or
Belvoir were only rated on an imaginary rent of perhaps 200Z.
a-year, under the pretext that owing to the great expense of


* Another common objection is that large and expensive accommodation is
often required, not as a residence, but for business. But it is an admitted
principle that buildings or portions of buildings occupied exclusively for busi-
ness, such as shops, warehouses, or manufactories, ought to be exempted from
house-tax. The plea that persons in business may be compelled to live in situ-
ations, such as the great thoroughfares of London, where house-rent is at a
monopoly rate, seems to me unworthy of regard : since no one does so but
because the extra profit which he expects to derive from the situation, is more
than an equivalent to him for the extra cost. But in any case, the bulk of the
tax on this extra rent will not fall on him, but on the ground-landlord.

It has been also objected that house- rent in the rural districts is much lower
than in towns, and lower in some towns and in Borne rural districts than in
others: so that a tax proportioned to it would have a corresponding inequality
of pressure. To this, however, it may be answered, that in places where
house-rent is low, persons of the same amount of income usually live in larger
and better houses, and thus expend in house- rent more nearly the same propor-
tion of their incomes than might at first sight appear. Or if not, the proba-
bility will be, that many of them live in those places precisely because they are
too poor to live elsewhere, and have therefore the strongest claim to be taxed
lightly. In some cases, it is precisely because the people are poor, that house-
rent remains low.



DIRECT TAXES.


407


keeping them up, they could not be let for more. Probably,
indeed, they could not be let even for that, and if the argument
were a fair one, they ought not to have been taxed at all. But
a house-tax is not intended as a tax on incomes derived from
houses, but on expenditure incurred for them. The thing
which it is wished to ascertain is what a house costs to the
person who lives in it, not what it would bring in if let to
some one else. When the occupier is not the owner, the
rent he pays is the measure of what it costs him : but when he
is the owner, some other measure must be sought. A valuation
should be made of the house, not at what it would sell for,
but at what would be the cost of rebuilding it, and this valua-
tion might be periodically corrected by an allowance for what
it had lost in value by time, or gained by repairs and im-
provements. The amount of the amended valuation would
form a principal sum, the interest of which, at the current
price of the public funds, would form the annual value at
which the building should be assessed to the tax.

As incomes below a certain amount ought to be exempt
from income-tax, so ought houses below a certain value, from
house-tax, on the universal principle of sparing from all
taxation the absolute necessaries of healthful existence. In
order that the occupiers of lodgings, as well as of houses,
might benefit, as in justice they ought, by this exemption, it
might be optional with the owners to have every portion of
a house which is occupied by a separate tenant, valued and
assessed separately, as is now usually the case with chambers.



CHAPTER IV.


OF TAXES ON COMMODITIES.

§ 1. By taxes on commodities are commonly meant,
those which are levied either on the producers, or on the
carriers or dealers who intervene between them and the final
purchasers for consumption. Taxes imposed directly on the
consumers of particular commodities, such as a house-tax, or
the tax in this country on horses and carriages, might be
called taxes on commodities, but are not; the phrase being,
by custom, confined to indirect taxes — those which are ad-
vanced by one person, to be, as is expected and intended,
reimbursed by another. Taxes on commodities are either
on production within the country, or on importation into it,
or on conveyance or sale within it ; and are classed respec-
tively as excise, customs, or tolls and transit duties. To
whichever class they belong, and at whatever stage in the
progress of the commodity they may be imposed, they are
equivalent to an increase of the cost of production; using
that term in its most enlarged sense, which includes the cost
of transport and distribution, or, in common phrase, of bring-
ing the commodity to market.

When the cost of production is increased artificially by a
tax, the effect is the same as when it is increased by natural
causes. If only one or a few commodities are affected, their
value and price rise, so as to compensate the producer or
dealer for the peculiar burthen; but if there were a tax on
all commodities, exactly proportioned to their value, no such
compensation would be obtained: there would neither be a
general rise of values, which is an absurdity, nor of prices,
which depend on causes entirely different. There would,
however, as Mr. McCulloch has pointed out, be a disturbance



TAXES ON COMMODITIES.


409


of values, some falling, others rising, owing to a circumstance,
the effect of which on values and prices we formerly dis-
cussed ; the different durability of the capital employed in
different occupations. The gross produce of industry consists
of two parts ; one portion serving to replace the capital con-
sumed, while the other portion is profit. Now equal capitals
in two branches of production must have equal expectations
of profit; but if a greater portion of the one than of the other
is fixed capital, or if that fixed capital is more durable, there
will be a less consumption of capital in the year, and less will
be required to replace it, so that the profit, if absolutely the
same, will form a greater proportion of the annual returns.
To derive from a capital of lOOOi. a profit of 1001., the one
producer may have to sell produce to the value of 1100Z.,
the other only to the value of 5001. If on these two
branches of industry a tax be imposed of five per cent ad
valorem , the last will be charged only with 251., the first with
5 51.) leaving to the one 7 51. profit, to the other only 4 51.
To equalize, therefore, their expectation of profit, the one
commodity must rise in price, or the other must fall, or both :
commodities made chiefly by immediate labour must rise in
value, as compared with those which are chiefly made by
machinery. It is unnecessary to prosecute this branch of the
inquiry any further.

§ 2. A tax on any one commodity, whether laid on its
production, its importation, its carriage from place to place,
or its sale, and whether the tax be a fixed sum of money for
a given quantity of the commodity, or an ad valorem duty,
will, as a general rule, raise the value and price of the com-
modity by at least the amount of the tax. There are few
cases in which it does not raise them by more than that
amount. In the first place, there are few taxes on produc-
tion on account of which it is not found or deemed neces-
sary to impose restrictive regulations on the manufacturers or
dealers, in order to check evasions of the tax. These regu-



410 BOOK V. CHAPTER IV. § 2 .

lations are always sources of trouble and annoyance, and
generally of expense, for all of which, being peculiar disad-
vantages, the producers or dealers must have compensation in
the price of their commodity. These restrictions also fre-
quently interfere with the processes of manufacture, requiring
the producer to carry on his operations in the way most con-
venient to the revenue, though not the cheapest, or most effi-
cient for purposes of production. Any regulations whatever,
enforced by law, make it difficult for the producer to adopt new
and improved processes. Further, the necessity of advancing
the tax obliges producers and dealers to carry on their business
with larger capitals than would otherwise be necessary, on
the whole of which they must receive the ordinary rate of
profit, though a part only is employed in defraying the real
expenses of production or importation. The price of the
article must be such as to afford a profit on more than its
natural value, instead of a profit on only its natural value.
A part of the capital of the country, in short, is not employed
in production, but in advances to the state, repaid in the price
of goods ; and the consumers must give an indemnity to the
sellers, equal to the profit which they could have made on
the same capital if really employed in production. Neither
ought it to be forgotten, that whatever renders a larger
capital necessary in any trade or business, limits the com-
petition in that business; and by giving something like a
monopoly to a few dealers, may enable them either to keep
up the price beyond what would afford the ordinary rate of
profit, or to obtain the ordinary rate of profit with a less
degree of exertion for improving and cheapening their
commodity. In these several modes, taxes on commodities
often cost to the consumer, through the increased price of
the article, much more than they bring into the treasury of
the state. There is still another consideration. The rise of
price occasioned by the tax, almost always checks the demand
for the commodity; and since there are many improve-
ments in production which, to make them practicable, require



TAXES ON COMMODITIES.


411


a certain extent of demand, such improvements are ob-
structed, and many of them prevented altogether. It is a
well-known fact, that the branches of production in which
fewest improvements are made, are those with which the
revenue officer interferes ; and that nothing, in general, gives
a greater impulse to improvements in the production of a
commodity, than taking off a tax which narrowed the market
for it.


§ 3. Such are the effects of taxes on commodities, consi-
dered generally; but as there are some commodities (those
composing the necessaries of the labourer) of which the values
have an influence on the distribution of wealth among diffe-
rent classes of the community, it is requisite to trace the
effects of taxes on those particular articles somewhat farther.
If a tax be laid, say on corn, and the price rises in proportion
to the tax, the rise of price may operate in two ways. First:
it may lower the condition of the labouring classes; tempo-
rarily indeed it can scarcely fail to do so. If it diminishes
their consumption of the produce of the earth, or makes them
resort to a food which the soil produces more abundantly, and
therefore more cheaply, it to that extent contributes to throw
back agriculture upon more fertile lands or less costly pro-
cesses, and to lower the value and price of corn; which
therefore ultimately settles at a price, increased not by the
whole amount of the tax, but by only a part of its amount.
Secondly, however; it may happen that the dearness of the
taxed food does not lower the habitual standard of the la-
bourer's requirements, but that wages, on the contrary, through
an action on population, rise, in a shorter or longer period, so
as to compensate the labourers for their portion of the tax;
the compensation being of course at the expense of profits.
Taxes on necessaries must thus have one of two effects.
Either they lower the condition of the labouring classes; or
they exact from the owners of capital, in addition to the
amount due to the state on their own necessaries, the amount



412


BOOK V. CHAPTER IV. § 3 .


due on those consumed by the labourers. In the last case, the
tax on necessaries, like a tax on wages, is equivalent to a
peculiar tax on profits; which is, like all other partial taxa-
tion, unjust, and is specially prejudicial to the increase of the
national wealth.

It remains to speak of the effect on rent. Assuming
(what is usually the fact,) that the consumption of food is not
diminished, the same cultivation as before will be necessary to
supply the wants of the community ; the margin of cultiva-
tion, to use Dr. Chalmers' expression, remains where it was;
and the same land or capital which, as the least productive,
already regulated the value and price of the whole produce,
will continue to regulate them. The effect which a tax on
agricultural produce will have on rent, depends on its affecting
or not affecting the difference between the return to this
least productive land or capital, and the returns to other
lands and capitals. Now this depends on the manner in
which the tax is imposed. If it is an ad valorem tax, or
what is the same thing, a fixed proportion of the produce,
such as tithe for example, it evidently lowers corn-rents. For
it takes more corn from the better lands than from the worse ;
and exactly in the degree in which they are better; land of
twice the productiveness paying twice as much to the tithe.
Whatever takes more from the greater of two quantities than
from the less, diminishes the difference between them. The
imposition of a tithe on corn would take a tithe also from
corn-rent: for if we reduce a series of numbers by a
tenth each, the differences between them are reduced one-
tenth.

For example, let there be five qualities of land, which
severally yield, on the same extent of ground and with the
same expenditure, 100, 90, 80, 70, and 60 bushels of wheat;
the last of these being the lowest quality which the demand
for food renders it necessary to cultivate. The rent of these
lands will be as follows: —



TAXES ON COMMODITIES.


413


The land )
producing j

100

bushels

f will yield |
( a rent of J

100 — 60, or 40 bushels.

That producing

90

ft

>t

90 — 60, or 30

tt

80

tt

ft

80—60, or 20 „

»

70

»t

tt

70—60, or 10 „

tt

60

tt

tt

no rent.


Now let a tithe be imposed, which takes from these five
pieces of land 10, 9, 8, 7, and 6 bushels respectively, the fifth
quality still being the one which regulates the price, but re-
turning to the farmer, after payment of tithe, no more than 54
bushels:


The land )
producing J
That )
producing /

tt

»


100 bushels reduced to 90, <

f will yield ]
^ a rent of J

> 90 — 54, or 36 bushels.

90 „

it

81

t>

81—54, or 27 „

80 „

tt

72

tt

72—54, or 18 „

70 „

tt

63

t>

63 — 54, or 9 ,,


and that producing 60 bushels, reduced to 54, will yield, as
before, no rent. So that the rent of the first quality of land
has lost four bushels; of the second, three; of the third, two;
and of the fourth, one: that is, each has lost exactly one-
tenth. A tax, therefore, of a fixed proportion of the produce,
lowers, in the same proportion, corn-rent.

But it is only corn-rent that is lowered, and not rent esti-
mated in money, or in any other commodity. For, in the
same proportion as corn-rent is reduced in quantity, the com
composing it is raised in value. Under the tithe, 54 bushels
will be worth in the market what 60 were before; and nine-
tenths will in all cases sell for as much as the whole ten-
tenths previously sold for. The landlords will therefore be
compensated in value and price for what they lose in quan-
tity; and will suffer only so far as they consume their rent in
kind, or, after receiving it in money, expend it in agricultural
produce : that is, they only suffer as consumers of agricultural
produce, and in common with all the other consumers. Con-
sidered as landlords, they have the same income as before; the
tithe, therefore, falls on the consumer, and not on the landlord.



414


BOOK V. CHAPTER IV. § 4.


The same effect would be produced on rent, if the tax,
instead of being a fixed proportion of the produce, were a
fixed sum per quarter or per bushel. A tax which takes a
shilling for every bushel, takes more shillings from one field
than from another, just in proportion as it produces more
bushels; and operates exactly like tithe, except that tithe is
not only the same proportion on all lands, but is also the
same proportion at all times, while a fixed sum of money per
bushel will amount to a greater or less proportion, according
as com is cheap or dear.

There are other modes of taxing agriculture, which would
affect rent differently. A tax proportioned to the rent would
fall wholly on the rent, and would not at all raise the price
of corn, which is regulated by the portion of the produce that
pays no rent. A fixed tax of so much per cultivated acre,
without distinction of value, would have effects directly the
reverse. Taking no more from the best qualities of land
than from the worst, it would leave the differences the same as
before, and consequently the same corn-rents, and the land-
lords would profit to the full extent of the rise of price. To put
the thing in another manner; the price must rise sufficiently
to enable the worst land to pay the tax : thus enabling all lands
which produce more than the worst, to pay not only the tax,
but also an increased rent to the landlords. These, however,
are not so much taxes on the produce of land, as taxes on
the land itself. Taxes on the produce, properly so called,
whether fixed or ad valorem, do not affect rent, but fall on
the consumer: profits, however, generally bearing either the
whole or the greatest part of the portion which is levied on
the consumption of the labouring classes.

§ 4. The preceding is, I apprehend, a correct statement
of the manner in which taxes on agricultural produce operate
when first laid on. When, however, they are of old standing,
their effect may be different, as was first pointed out, I
believe, by Mi. Senior. It is, as we have seen, an almost



TAXES ON COMMODITIES.


415


infallible consequence of any reduction of profits, to retard
the rate of accumulation. Now the effect of accumulation,
when attended by its usual accompaniment, an increase of
population, is to increase the value and price of food, to raise
rent, and to lower profits: that is, to do precisely what is
done by a tax on agricultural produce, except that this does
not raise rent. The tax, therefore, merely anticipates the
rise of price, and fall of profits, which would have taken
place ultimately through the mere progress of accumulation ;
while it at the same time prevents, or at least retards, that
progress. If the rate of profit was such, previous to the
imposition of a tithe, that the effect of the tithe reduces it
to the practical minimum, the tithe will put a stop to all
further accumulation, or cause it to take place out of the
country; and the only effect which the tithe will then have
had on the consumer, is to make him pay earlier the price
which he would have had to pay somewhat later — part of
which, indeed, in the gradual progress of wealth and popu-
lation, he would have almost immediately begun to pay.
After a lapse of time which would have admitted of a rise
of one-tenth from the natural progress of wealth, the con-
sumer will be paying no more than he would have paid if the
tithe had never existed ; he will have ceased to pay any por-
tion of it, and the person who will really pay it is the land-
lord, whom it deprives of the increase of rent which would
by that time have accrued to him. At every successive point
in this interval of time, less of the burden will rest on the
consumer, and more of it on the landlord : and in the ultimate
result, the minimum of profits will be reached with a smaller
capital and population, and a lower rental, than if the course
of things had not been disturbed by the imposition of the
tax. If, on the other hand, the tithe or other tax on agri-
cultural produce *does not reduce profits to the minimum,
but to something above the minimum, accumulation will
not be stopped, but only slackened : and if population also
increases, the two-fold increase will continue to produce its



416 BOOK V. CHAPTER IV. § 4 .

effects — a rise of the price of corn, and an increase of rent.
These consequences, however, will not take place with the
same rapidity as if the higher rate of profit had continued.
At the end of twenty years the country will have a smaller
population and capital, than, but for the tax, it would by that
time have had; the landlords will have a smaller rent; and
the price of corn, having increased less rapidly than it would
otherwise have done, will not be so much as a tenth higher
than what, if there had been no tax, it would by that time
have become. A part of the tax, therefore, will already have
ceased to fall on the consumer, and devolved upon the land-
lord ; and the proportion will become greater and greater by
lapse of time.

Mr. Senior illustrates this view of the subject by likening
the effects of tithes, or other taxes on agricultural produce,
to those of natural sterility of soil. If the land of a country
without access to foreign supplies, were suddenly smitten
with a permanent deterioration of quality, to an extent
which would make a tenth more labour necessary to raise
the existing produce, the price of corn would undoubtedly
rise one-tenth. But it cannot hence be inferred that if the
soil of the country had from the beginning been one-tenth
worse than it is, corn would at present have been one-tenth
dearer than we find it. It is far more probable, that the
smaller return to labour and capital, ever since the first
settlement of the country, would have caused in each suc-
cessive generation a less rapid increase than has taken place :
that the country would now have contained less capital, and
maintained a smaller population, so that notwithstanding the
inferiority of the soil, the price of corn would not have been
higher, nor profits lower, than at present; rent alone would
certainly have been lower. We may suppose two islands,
which, being alike in extent, in natural fertility, and indus-
trial advancement, have up to a certain time been equal in
population and capital, and have had equal rentals, and the
same price of com. Let us imagine a tithe imposed in one



TAXES ON COMMODITIES.


417


of these islands, but not in the other. There will be imme-
diately a difference in the price of corn, and therefore pro-
bably in profits. While profits are not tending downwards
in either country, that is, while improvements in the pro-
duction of necessaries fully keep pace with the increase of
population, this difference of prices and profits between the
islands may continue. But if, in the untithed island, capital
increases, and population along with it, more than enough
to counterbalance any improvements which take place, the
price of corn will gradually rise, profits will fall, and rent will
increase; while in the tithed island capital and population
will either not increase (beyond what is balanced by the
improvements), or if they do, will increase in a less degree;
so that rent and the price of corn will either not rise at all,
or rise more slowly. Rent, therefore, will soon be higher
in the untithed, than in the tithed island, and profits not so
much higher, nor corn so much cheaper, as they were on
the first imposition of the tithe. These effects will be pro-
gressive. At the end of every ten years there will be a
greater difference between the rentals and between the aggre-
gate wealth and population of the two islands, and a less
difference in profits and in the price of corn.

At what point will these last differences entirely cease,
and the temporary effect of taxes on agricultural produce, in
raising the price, have entirely given place to the ultimate
effect, that of limiting the total produce of the country?
Though the untithed island is always verging towards the
point at which the price of food would overtake that in the
tithed island, its progress towards that point naturally
slackens as it draws nearer to attaining it; since — the differ-
ence between the two islands in the rapidity of accumula-
tion, depending upon the difference in the rates of profit — in
proportion as these approximate, the movement which draws
them closer together, abates of its force. The one may not
actually overtake the other, until both islands reach the
minimum of profits: up to that point, the tithed island may



418


BOOK V. CHAPTER IV. § 4 .

continue more or less ahead of the untithed island in the
price of com : considerably ahead if it is far from the mini-
mum, and is therefore accumulating rapidly ; very little ahead
if it is near the minimum, and accumulating slowly.

But whatever is true of the tithed and untithed islands,
in our hypothetical case, is true of any country having a
tithe, compared with the same country if it had never had a
tithe.

In England the great emigration of capital, and the almost
periodical occurrence of commercial crises through the specu-
lations occasioned by the habitually low rate of profit, are
indications that profit has attained the practical, though not
the ultimate minimum, and that all the savings which take
place (beyond what improvements, tending to the cheapening
of necessaries, make room for) are either sent abroad for
investment, or periodically swept away. There can therefore,
I think, be little doubt that if England had never had a tithe,
or any tax on agricultural produce, the price of corn would
have been by this time as high, and the rate of profits as low,
as at present. Independently of the more rapid accumula-
tion which would have taken place if profits had not been
prematurely lowered by these imposts; the mere saving of a
part of the capital which has been wasted in unsuccessful
speculations, and the keeping at home a part of that which
has been sent abroad, would have been quite sufficient to
produce the effect. I think, therefore, with Mr. Senior, that
the tithe, even before its commutation, had ceased to be a
cause of high prices or low profits, and had become a mere
deduction from rent; its other effects being, that it caused
the country to have no greater capital, no larger production,
and no more numerous population than if it had been one-
tenth less fertile than it is; or let us rather say one-twentieth,
(considering how great a portion of the land of Great Britain
was tithe-free.)

But though tithes and other taxes on agricultural pro-
duce, when of long standing, either do not raise the price of



TAXES ON COMMODITIES.


419


food and lower profits at all, or if at all, not in proportion to
the tax; yet the abrogation of such taxes, when they exist,
does not the less diminish price, and, in general, raise the
rate of profit. The abolition of a tithe takes one-tenth from
the cost of production, and consequently from the price, of
all agricultural produce; aud unless it permanently raises
the labourer's requirements, it lowers the cost of labour, and
raises profits. Rent, estimated in money or in commodities,
generally remains as before; estimated in agricultural pro-
duce, it is raised. The country adds as much by the repeal
of a tithe, to the margin which intervenes between it and the
stationary state, as was cut off from that margin by the tithe
when first imposed. Accumulation is greatly accelerated;
and if population also increases, the price of corn immedi-
ately begins to recover itself, and rent to rise; thus gradually
transferring the benefit of the remission, from the consumer
to the landlord.

The effects which thus result from abolishing tithe, result
equally from what has been done by the arrangements under
the Commutation Act for converting it into a rent charge.
When the tax, instead of being levied on the whole produce
of the soil, is levied only from the portions which pay rent,
and does not touch any fresh extension of cultivation, the
tax no longer forms any part of the cost of production of
the portion of the produce which regulates the price of all
the rest. The land or capital which pays no rent, can now
send its produce to market one-tenth cheaper. The com-
mutation of tithe ought therefore to have produced a con-
siderable fall in the average price of com. If it had not
come so gradually into operation, and if the price of corn had
not during the same period been under the influence of several
other causes of change, the effect would probably have been
markedly conspicuous. As it is, there can be no doubt that
this circumstance has had its share in the fall which has
taken place in the cost of production and in the price of
home-grown produce; though the effects of the great agrioul-



420


BOOK V. CHAPTER IV. § 5.

tural improvements which have been simultaneously advanc-
ing, and of the free admission of agricultural produce from
foreign countries, have masked those of the other cause.
This fall of price would not in itself have any tendency
injurious to the landlord, since corn-rents are increased in the
same ratio in which the price of corn is diminished. But
neither does it in any way tend to increase his income. The
rent- charge, therefore, which is substituted for tithe, is a
dead loss to him at the expiration of existing leases: and the
commutation of tithe was not a mere alteration in the mode
in which the landlord bore an existing burthen, but the im-
position of a new one ; relief being afforded to the consumer
at the expense of the landlord, who, however, begins imme-
diately to receive progressive indemnification at the con-
sumer's expense, by the impulse given to accumulation and
population.

§ 5. We have hitherto inquired into the effects of taxes
on commodities, on the assumption that they are levied
impartially on every mode in which the commodity can be
produced or brought to market. Another class of considera-
tions is opened, if we suppose that this impartiality is not
maintained, and that the tax is imposed, not on the com-
modity, but on some particular mode of obtaining it.

Suppose that a commodity is capable of being made by
two different processes; as a manufactured commodity may
be produced either by hand or by steam-power; sugar may
be made either from the sugar-cane or from beet-root, cattle
fattened either on hay and green crops, or on oil-cake and
the refuse of breweries. It is the interest of the community,
that of the two methods, producers should adopt that which
produces the best article at the lowest price. This being
also the interest of the producers, unless protected against
competition, and shielded from the penalties of indolence;
the process most advantageous to the community is that
which, if not interfered with by government, they ultimately



TAXES ON COMMODITIES.


4*21


find it to their advantage to adopt. Suppose however that
a tax is laid on one of the processes, and no tax at all, or one
of smaller amount, on the other. If the taxed process is the
one which the producers would not have adopted, the
measure is simply nugatory. But if the tax falls, as it is
of course intended to do, upon the one which they would
have adopted, it creates an artificial motive for preferring
the untaxed process, though the inferior of the two. I£
therefore, it has any effect at all, it causes the commodity
to be produced of worse quality, or at a greater expense of
labour; it causes so much of the labour of the community to
be wasted, and the capital employed in supporting and remu-
nerating that labour to be expended as uselessly, as if it were
spent in hiring men to dig holes and fill them up again. This
waste of labour and capital constitutes an addition to the cost
of production of the commodity, which raises its value and
price in a corresponding ratio, and thus the owners of the
capital are indemnified. The loss falls on the consumers;
though the capital of the country is also eventually dimi-
nished, by the diminution of their means of saving, and in
some degree, of their inducements to save.

The kind of tax, therefore, which comes under the general
denomination of a discriminating duty, transgresses the rule
that taxes should take as little as possible from the tax-payer
beyond what they bring into the treasury of the state. A
discriminating duty makes the consumer pay two distinct
taxes, only one of which is paid to the government, and that
frequently the less onerous of the two. If a tax were laid
on sugar produced from the cane, leaving the sugar from
beet-root untaxed, then in so far as cane sugar continued to
be used, the tax on it would be paid to the treasury, and
might be as unobjectionable as most other taxes; but if cane
sugar, having previously been cheaper than beet-root sugar,
was now dearer, and beet-root sugar was to any considerable
amount substituted for it, and fields laid out and manufac-
tories established in consequence, the government would gain



422


BOOK V. CHAPTER IV. § 5 .

no revenue from the beet-root sugar, while the consumers
of it would pay a real tax. They would pay for beet-root
sugar more than they had previously paid for cane sugar, and
the difference would go to indemnify producers for a portion
of the labour of the country actually thrown away, in pro-
ducing by the labour of (say) three hundred men, what could
be obtained by the other process with the labour of two
hundred.

One of the commonest cases of discriminating duties, is
that of a tax on the importation of a commodity capable of
being produced at home, unaccompanied by an equivalent
tax on the home production. A commodity is never perma-
nently imported, unless it can be obtained from abroad at a
smaller cost of labour and capital on the whole, than is neces-
sary for producing it. If, therefore, by a duty on the impor-
tation, it is rendered cheaper to produce the article than to
import it, an extra quantity of labour and capital is expended,
without any extra result. The labour is useless, and the
capital is spent in paying people for laboriously doing nothing.
All custom duties which operate as an encouragement to the
home production of the taxed article, are thus an eminently
wasteful mode of raising a revenue.

This character belongs in a peculiar degree to custom
duties on the produce of land, unless countervailed by excise
duties on the home production. Such taxes bring less into
the public treasury, compared with what they take from the
consumers, than any other imposts to which civilized nations
are usually subject. If the wheat produced in a country is
twenty millions of quarters, and the consumption twenty-
one millions, a million being annually imported, and if on
this million a duty is laid which raises the price ten shil-
lings per quarter, the price which is raised is not that of
the million only, but of the whole twenty-one millions.
Taking the most favourable, but extremely improbable sup-
position, that the importation is not at all checked, nor the
home production enlarged, the state gains a revenue of only



TAXES ON COMMODITIES.


423


half a million, while the consumers are taxed ten millions
and a half: the ten millions being a contribution to the home
growers, who are forced by competition to resign it all to the
landlords. The consumer thus pays to the owners of land
an additional tax, equal to twenty times that which he pays
to the state. Let us now suppose that the tax really checks
importation. Suppose importation stopped altogether in
ordinary years; it being found that the million of quarters
can be obtained, by a more elaborate cultivation, or by break-
ing up inferior land, at a less advance than ten shillings upon
the previous price — say, for instance, five shillings a quarter.
The revenue now obtains nothing, except from the extraor-
dinary imports which may happen to take place in a season of
scarcity. But the consumers pay every year a tax of five
shillings on the whole twenty-one millions of quarters,
amounting to 5^ millions sterling. Of this the odd 250,000?.
goes to compensate the growers of the last million of quarters
for the labour and capital wasted under the compulsion of
the law. The remaining five millions go to enrich the land-
lords as before.

Such is the operation of what are technically termed
Com Laws, when first laid on; and such continues to be
their operation, so long as they have any effect at all in
raising the price of corn. But I am by no means of opinion
that in the long run they keep up either prices or rents in
the degree which these considerations might lead us to sup-
pose. What we have said respecting the effect of tithes and
other taxes on agricultural produce, applies in a great degree
to corn laws: they anticipate artificially a rise of price and
of rent, which would at all events have taken place through
the increase of population and of production. The difference
between a country without corn laws, and a country which
has long had corn laws, is not so much that the last has a
higher price or a larger rental, but that it has the same price
and the same rental with a smaller aggregate capital and a
smaller population. The imposition of corn laws raises rents,



424 BOOK V. CHAPTER IV. § 6.

but retards that progress of accumulation which would in no
long period have raised them fully as much. The repeal of
com laws tends to lower rents, but it unchains a force which,
in a progressive state of capital and population, restores and
even increases the former amount. There is every reason to
expect that under the virtually free importation of agricul-
tural produce, recently extorted from the ruling powers of
this country, the price of food, if population goes on increas-
ing, will gradually but steadily rise; though this effect may
for a time be postponed by the strong current which in this
country has set in (and the impulse may extend itself to other
countries) towards the extension of agricultural science, and its
increased application to practice.

What we have said of duties on importation generally, is
equally applicable to discriminating duties which favour
importation from one place or in one particular manner, in
contradistinction to others: such as the preference given to
the produce of a colony, or of a country with which there is a
commercial treaty: or the higher duties imposed until lately
by our navigation laws on goods imported in other than Bri-
tish shipping. Whatever else may be alleged in favour of
such distinctions, whenever they are not nugatory, they are
economically wasteful. They induce a resort to a more costly
mode of obtaining a commodity, in lieu of one less costly, and
thus cause a portion of the labour which the country employs
in providing itself with foreign commodities, to be sacrificed
without return.

§ 6. There is one more point, relating to the operation
of taxes on commodities conveyed from one country to
another, which requires notice: the influence which they
exert on international exchanges. Every tax on a commodity
tends to raise its price, and consequently to lessen the demand
for it in the market in which it sold. All taxes on inter-
national trade tend, therefore, to produce a disturbance and a
re-adjustment of what we have termed the Equation -of Inter-



TAXES ON COMMODITIES.


425


national Demand. This consideration leads to some rather
curious consequences, which have been pointed out in the
separate essay on International Commerce, already several
times referred to in this treatise.

Taxes on foreign trade are of two kinds — taxes on imports,
and on exports. On the first aspect of the matter it would
seem that both these taxes are paid by the consumers of the
commodity ; that taxes on exports consequently fall entirely
on foreigners, taxes on imports wholly on the home consumer.
The true state of the case, however, is much more com-
plicated.

“ By taxing exports, we may, in certain circumstances,
produce a division of the advantage of the trade more favour-
able to ourselves. In some cases we may draw into our
coffers, at the expense of foreigners, not only the whole tax,
but more than the tax : in other cases, we should gain exactly
the tax; in others, less than the tax. In this last case, a part
of the tax is borne by ourselves : possibly the whole, possibly
even, as we shall show, more than the whole."

Reverting to the supposititious case employed in the
Essay, of a trade between Germany and England in broad-
cloth and linen, “ suppose that England taxes her export of
cloth, the tax not being supposed high enough to induce
Germany to produce cloth for herself. The price at which
cloth can be sold in Germany is augmented by the tax. This
will probably diminish the quantity consumed. It may
diminish it so much that, even at the increased price, there
will not be required so great a money value as before. Or it
may not diminish it at all, or so little, that in consequence of
the higher price, a greater money value will be purchased
than before. In this last case, England will gain, at the
expense of Germany, not only the whole amount of the duty?
but more; for, the money value of her exports to Germany
being increased, while her imports remain the same, money
will flow into England from Germany. The price of cloth
will rise in England, and consequently in Germany; but the



426


BOOK V. CHAPTER IV. § 6.


price of linen will fall in Germany, and consequently in Eng-
land. We shall export less cloth, and import more linen, till
the equilibrium is restored. It thus appears (what is at first
sight somewhat remarkable) that by taxing her exports,
England would, in some conceivable circumstances, not only
gain from her foreign customers the whole amount of the
tax, but would also get her imports cheaper. She would get
them cheaper in two ways; for she would obtain them for
less money, and would have more money to purchase them
with. Germany, on the other hand, would suffer doubly:
she would have to pay for her cloth a price increased not
only by the duty, but by the influx of money into Eng-
land, while the same change in the distribution of the cir-
culating medium would leave her less money to purchase it
with.

“This, however, is only one of three possible cases. If,
after the imposition of the duty, Germany requires so dimi-
nished a quantity of cloth, that its total value is exactly the
same as before, the balance of trade would be undisturbed;
England will gain the duty, Germany will lose it, and no-
thing more. If, again, the imposition of the duty occasions
such a falling off in the demand that Germany requires a
less pecuniary value than before, our exports will no longer
pay for our imports; money must pass from England into
Germany; and Germany's share of the advantage of the
trade will be increased. By the change in the distribution
of money, cloth will fall in England ; and therefore it will, of
course, fall in Germany. Thus Germany will not pay the
whole of the tax. From the same cause, linen will rise in
Germany, and consequently in England. When this altera-
tion of prices has so adjusted the demand, that the cloth and
the linen again pay for one another, the result is that Ger-
many has paid only a part of the tax, and the remainder of
what has been received into our treasury has come indirectly
out of the pockets of our own consumers of linen, who pay a
higher price for that imported commodity in consequence of



TAXES ON COMMODITIES,


427


the tax on our exports, while at the same time they, in con-
sequence of the efflux of money and the fall of prices, have
smaller money incomes wherewith to pay for the linen at that
advanced price.

“ It is not an impossible supposition that by taxing our
exports we might not only gain nothing from the foreigner,
the tax being paid out of our own pockets, but might even
compel our own people to pay a second tax to the foreigner.
Suppose, as before, that the demand of Germany for cloth
falls off so much on the imposition of the duty, that she
requires a smaller money value than before, but that the case
is so different with linen in England, that when the price
rises the demand either does not fall off at all, or so little
that the money value required is greater than before. The
first effect of laying on the duty is, as before, that the cloth
exported will no longer pay for the linen imported. Money
will therefore flow out of England into Germany. One
effect is to raise the price of linen in Germany, and conse-
quently in England. But this, by the supposition, instead of
stopping the efflux of money, only makes it greater, because
the higher the price, the greater the money value of the
linen consumed. The balance, therefore, can only be restored
by the other effect, which is going on at the same time,
namely, the fall of cloth in the English and consequently in
the German market. Even when cloth has fallen so low that
its price with the duty is only equal to what its price without
the duty was at first, it is not a necessary consequence that
the fall will stop; for the same amount of exportation as
before will not now suffice to pay the increased money value
of the imports; and although the German consumers have
now not only cloth at the old price, but likewise increased
money incomes, it is not certain that they will be inclined
to employ the increase of their incomes in increasing their
purchases of cloth. The price of cloth, therefore, must
perhaps fall, to restore the equilibrium, more than the whole
amount of the duty; Germany may be enabled to import



428


BOOK V. CHAPTER IV. § 6.


cloth at a lower price when it is taxed, than when it waa
untaxed : and this gain she will acquire at the expense of the
English consumers of linen, who, in addition, will be the
real payers of the whole of what is received at their own
custom-house under the name of duties on the export of
cloth.”

It is almost unnecessary to remark that cloth and linen
are here merely representatives of exports and imports in
general; and that the effect which a tax on exports might
have in increasing the cost of imports, would affect the
imports from all countries, and not peculiarly the articles
w T hich might be imported from the particular country to which
the taxed exports were sent.

“ Such are the extremely various effects which may result
to ourselves and to our customers from the imposition of taxes
on our exports; and the determining circumstances are of a
nature so imperfectly ascertainable, that it must be almost im-
possible to decide with any certainty, even after the tax has
been imposed, whether we have been gainers by it or losers.”
In general however there could be little doubt that a country
which imposed such taxes would succeed in making foreign
countries contribute something to its revenue ; but unless the
taxed article be one for which their demand is extremely
urgent, they will seldom pay the whole of the amount which
the tax brings in.* “ In any case, whatever we gain is lost
by somebody else, and there is the expense of the collection
besides: if international morality, therefore, were rightly
understood and acted upon, such taxes, as being contrary to
the universal weal, would not exist.”

Thus far of duties on exports. We now proceed to the
more ordinary case of duties on imports. “We have had an

* Probably the strongest known instance of a large revenue raised from
foreigners by a tax on exports, is the opium trade with China. The high price
of the article under the Government monopoly (which is equivalent to a high
export duty) has so little effect in discouraging its consumption, that it is said
to have been occasionally sold in China for as much as its weight in silver.


TAXES ON COMMODITIES.


429


example of a tax on exports, that is, on foreigners, falling in
part on ourselves. We shall therefore not be surprised if we
find a tax on imports, that is, on ourselves, partly falling upon
foreigners.

(t Instead of taxing the cloth which we. export, suppose
that we tax the linen which we import. The duty which we
are now supposing must not be what is termed a protecting
duty, that is, a duty sufficiently high to induce us to produce
the article at home. If it had this effect, it would destroy
entirely the trade both in cloth and in linen, and both countries
would lose the whole of the advantage which they previously
gained by exchanging those commodities with one another.
We suppose a duty which might diminish the consumption
of the article, but which would not prevent us from con-
tinuing to import, as before, whatever linen we did con-
sume.

“ The equilibrium of trade would be disturbed if the im-
position of the tax diminished, in the slightest degree, the
quantity of linen consumed. For, as the tax is levied at our
own custom-house, the German exporter only receives the
same price as formerly, though the English consumer pays a
higher one. If, therefore, there be any diminution of the
quantity bought, although a larger sum of money may be
actually laid out in the article, a smaller one will be due from
England to Germany : this sum will no longer be an equiva-
lent for the sum due from Germany to England for cloth, the
balance therefore must be paid in money. Prices will fall in
Germany and rise in England ; linen will fall in the German
market; cloth will rise in the English. The Germans will
pay a higher price for cloth, and will have smaller money
incomes to buy it with ; while the English will obtain linen
cheaper, that is, its price will exceed what it previously was
by less than the amount of the duty, while their means of
purchasing it will be increased by the increase of their money
incomes.

“ If the imposition of the tax does not diminish the



430 BOOK V. CHAPTER IV. § 6.

demand, it will leave the trade exactly as it was before. We
shall import as much, and export as much ; the whole of the
tax will be paid out of our own pockets.

“But the imposition of a tax on a commodity almost
always diminishes the demand more or less; and it can never,
or scarcely ever, increase the demand. It may, therefore, be
laid down as a principle, that a tax on imported commodities,
when it really operates as a tax, and not as a prohibition
either total or partial, almost always falls in part upon the
foreigners who consume our goods; and that this is a mode
in which a nation may appropriate to itself, at the expense of
foreigners, a larger share than would otherwise belong to it of
the increase in the general productiveness of the labour and
capital of the world, which results from the interchange of
commodities among nations.”

Those are, therefore, in the right who maintain that taxes
on imports are partly paid by foreigners; but they are mis-
taken when they say, that it is by the foreign producer. It
is not on the person from whom we buy, but on all those
who buy from us, that a portion of our custom duties spon-
taneously falls. It is the foreign consumer of our exported
commodities, who is obliged to pay a higher price for them
because we maintain revenue duties on foreign goods.

There are but two cases in which duties on commodities
can in any degree, or in any manner, fall on the producer.
One is, when the article is a strict monopoly, and at a scarcity
price. The price in this case being only limited by the
desires of the buyer; the sum obtained for the restricted
supply being the utmost which the buyers would consent to
give rather than go without it ; if the treasury intercepts a
part of this, the price cannot be further raised to compensate
for the tax, and it must be paid from the monopoly profits.
A tax on rare and high priced wines will fall wholly on the
growers, or rather, on the owners of the vineyards. The
second case in which the producer sometimes bears a portion
of the tax, is more important : the case of duties on the



TAXES ON COMMODITIES.


431


produce of land or of mines. These might be so high as to
diminish materially the demand for the produce, and compel
the abandonment of some of the inferior qualities of land or
mines. Supposing this to be the effect, the consumers, both
in the country itself and in those which dealt with it, would
obtain the produce at smaller cost; and a part only, instead
of the whole, of the duty would fall on the purchaser, who
would be indemnified chiefly at the expense of the landowners
or mine-owners in the producing country.

Duties on importation may, then, be divided “ into two
classes: those which have the effect of encouraging some
particular branch of domestic industry, and those which have
not. The former are purely mischievous, both to the country
imposing them, and to those with whom it trades. They
prevent a saving of labour and capital, which, if permitted to
be made, would be divided in some proportion or other
between the importing country and the countries which buy
what that country does or might export.

“ The other class of duties are those which do not encou-
rage one mode of procuring an article at the expense of
another, but allow interchange to take place just as if the
duty did not exist, and to produce the saving of labour which
constitutes the motive to international, as to all other com-
merce. Of this kind are duties on the importation of any
commodity which could not by any possibility be produced
at home; and duties not sufficiently high to counterbalance
the difference of expense between the production of the
article at home and its importation. Of the money which is
brought into the treasury of any country by taxes of this last
description, a part only is paid by the people of that country;
the remainder by the foreign consumers of their goods,

“ Nevertheless, this latter kind of taxes are in principle
as ineligible as the former, though not precisely on the
same ground. A protecting duty can never be a cause of
gain, but always and necessarily of loss, to the country
imposing it, just so far as it is efficacious to its end. A non-



482 BOOK V. CHAPTER IV. § 8.

protecting duty, on the contrary, would in most cases be a
source of gain to the country imposing it, in so far as throwing
part of the weight of its taxes upon other people is a gain ;
but it would be a means which it could seldom be advisable
to adopt, being so easily counteracted by a precisely similar
proceeding on the other side.

“ If England, in the case already supposed, sought to
obtain for herself more than her natural share of the advan-
tage of the trade with Germany, by imposing a duty upon
linen, Germany would only have to impose a duty upon cloth,
sufficient to diminish the demand for that article about as
much as the demand for linen had been diminished in England
by the tax. Things would then be as before, and each
country would pay its own tax. Unless, indeed, the sum of
the two duties exceeded the entire advantage of the trade;
for in that case the trade, and its advantage, would cease
entirely.

“There would be no advantage, therefore, in imposing
duties of this kind, with a view to gain by them in the man-
ner which has been pointed out. But when any part of the
revenue is derived from taxes on commodities, these may
often be as little objectionable as the rest. It is evident, too,
that considerations of reciprocity, which are quite unessential
when the matter in debate is a protecting duty, are of ma-
terial importance when the repeal of duties of this other
description is discussed. A country cannot be expected to
renounce the power of taxing foreigners, unless foreigners
will in return practise towards itself the same forbearance.
The only mode in which a country can save itself from being
a loser by the revenue duties imposed by other countries on
its commodities, is to impose corresponding revenue duties
on theirs. Only it must take care that those duties be not
so high as to exceed all that remains of the advantage of the
trade, and put an end to importation altogether, causing the
article to be either produced at home, or imported from
another and a dearer market/'



CHAPTER V.


OF SOME OTHER TAXES.

§ 1. Besides direct taxes on income, and taxes on con-
sumption, the financial systems of most countries comprise
a variety of miscellaneous imposts, not strictly included in
either class. The modern European systems retain many
such taxes, though in much less number and variety than
those semi-barbarous governments which European influence
has not yet reached. In some of these, scarcely any incident
of life has escaped being made an excuse for some fiscal
exaction; hardly any act, not belonging to daily routine, can
be performed by any one, without obtaining leave from
some agent of government, which is only granted in consi-
deration of a payment : especially when the act requires the
aid or the peculiar guarantee of a public authority. In the
present treatise we may confine our attention to such taxes
as lately existed, or still exist, in countries usually classed as
civilized.

In almost all nations a considerable revenue is drawn
from taxes on contracts. These are imposed in various forms.
One expedient is that of taxing the legal instrument which
serves as evidence of the contract, and which is commonly the
only evidence legally admissible. In England,* scarcely any
contract is binding unless executed on stamped paper, which
has paid a tax to government ; and until very lately, when
the contract related to property the tax was proportionally
much heavier on the smaller than on the larger transactions;
which is still true of some of those taxes. There are also
stamp duties on the legal instruments which are evidence of
the fulfilment of contracts; such as acknowledgments of

VOL. II. F F



434


BOOK V. CHAPTER V. § 1.


receipt, arid deeds of release. Taxes on contracts are not
always levied by means of stamps. The duty on sales by
auction, abrogated by Sir Robert Peel, was an instance in
point. The taxes on transfers of landed property, in France,
are another: in England these are stamp-duties. In some
countries, contracts of many kinds are not valid unless regis-
tered, and their registration is made an occasion for a
tax.

Of taxes on contracts, the most important are those on the
transfer of property; chiefly on purchases and sales. Taxes
on the sale of consumable commodities are simply taxes on
those commodities. If they affect only some particular com-
modities, they raise the prices of those commodities, and are
paid by the consumer. If the attempt were made to tax all
purchases and sales, which, however absurd, was for centuries
the law of Spain, the tax, if it could be enforced, would be
equivalent to a tax on all commodities, and would not affect
prices: if levied from the sellers, it would be a tax on profits,
if from the buyers, a tax on consumption ; and neither class
could throw the burthen upon the other. If confined to
some one mode of sale, as for example by auction, it dis-
courages recourse to that mode, and if of any material
amount, prevents it from being adopted at all, unless in a
case of emergency; in which case as the seller is under a
necessity to sell, but the buyer under no necessity to buy,
the tax falls on the seller; and this was the strongest of
the objections to the auction duty: it almost always fell
on a necessitous person, and in the crisis of his neces-
sities.

Taxes on the purchase and sale of land are, in most coun-
tries, ljpble to the same objection. Landed property in old
countries is seldom parted with, except from reduced circum-
stances, or some urgent need: the seller, therefore, must take
what he can get, while the buyer, whose object is an invest-
ment, makes his calculations on the interest which he can
obtain for his money in other ways, and will not buy if he is



MISCELLANEOUS TAXES.


435


charged with a government tax on the transaction. It has
indeed been objected, that this argument would not apply if
all modes of permanent investment, such as the purchase of
government securities, shares in joint-stock companies, mort-
gages and the like, were subject to the wsame tax. But even
then, if paid by the buyer, it would be equivalent to a tax on
interest : if sufficiently heavy to be of any importance, it
would disturb the established relation between interest and
profit; and the disturbance would redress itself by a rise in
the rate of interest, and a fall of the price of land and of all
securities. It appears to me, therefore, that the seller is the
person by whom such taxes, unless under peculiar circum-
stances, will always be borne.

All taxes must be condemned which throw obstacles in
the way of the sale of land, or other instruments of produc-
tion. Such sales tend naturally to render the property more
productive. The seller, whether moved by necessity or
choice, is probably some one who is either without the means,
or without the capacity, to make the most advantageous use
of the property for productive purposes; while the buyer, on
the other hand, is at any rate not needy, and is frequently
both inclined and able to improve the property, since, as it is
worth more to such a person than to any other, he is likely to
offer the highest price for it. All taxes, therefore, and all
difficulties and expenses, annexed to such contracts, are de-
cidedly detrimental; especially in the case of land, the source
of subsistence, and the original foundation of all wealth, on
the improvement of which, therefore, so much depends. Too
great facilities cannot be given to enable land to pass into the
hands, and assume the modes of aggregation or division, most
conducive to its productiveness. If landed properties are too
large, alienation should be free, in order that they may be
subdivided; if too small, in order that they may be united.
All taxes on the transfer of landed property should be abo-
lished; but, as the landlords have no claim to be relieved
from any reservation which the state has hitherto made in its

F F 2



486 BOOK V. CHAPTER V. § 2.

own favour from the amount of their rent, an annual impost
equivalent to the average produce of these taxes should be
distributed over the land generally, in the form of a land-
tax.

Some of the taxes on contracts are very pernicious, im-
posing a virtual penalty upon transactions which it ought to
be the policy of the legislator to encourage. Of this sort is
the stamp duty on leases, which in a country of large proper-
ties are an essential condition of good agriculture; and the tax
on insurances, a direct discouragement to prudence and fore-
thought. In the case of fire insurances, the tax is exactly
double the amount of the premium of insurance on common
risks; so that the person insuring is obliged by the govern-
ment to pay for the insurance just three times the value of the
risk. If this tax existed in France, we should not see, as we
do in some of her provinces, the plate of an insurance com-
pany on almost every cottage or hovel. This, indeed, must be
ascribed to the provident and calculating habits produced by
the dissemination of property through the labouring class:
but a tax of so extravagant an amount would be a heavy drag
upon any habits of providence. '

§ 2. Nearly allied to the taxes on contracts, are those on
communication. The principal of these is the postage tax; to
which may be added taxes on advertisements, and on news-
papers, which are taxes on the communication of informa-
tion.

The common mode of levying a tax on the conveyance of
letters, is by making the government the sole authorized
carrier of them, and demanding a monopoly price. When
this price is so moderate as it is in this country under the
uniform penny postage, scarcely if at all exceeding what
would be charged under the freest competition by any private
company, it can hardly be considered as taxation, but rather
as the profits of a business; whatever excess there is above
the ordinary profits of stock being a fair result of the saving



MISCELLANEOUS TAXES.


437


of expense, caused by having only one establishment and one
set of arrangements for the whole country, instead of many
competing ones. The business, too, being one which both can
and ought to be conducted on fixed rules, is one of the few
businesses which it is not unsuitable to a government to con-
duct. The post office, therefore, is at present one of the best
of the sources from which this country derives its revenue.
But a postage much exceeding what would be paid for the
same service in a system of freedom, is not a desirable tax.
Its chief weight falls on letters of business, and increases the
expense of mercantile relations between distant places. It is
like an attempt to raise a large revenue by heavy tolls : it ob-
structs all operations by which goods are conveyed from place
to place, and discourages the production of commodities in
one place for consumption in another; which is not only in
itself one of the greatest sources of economy of labour, but is
a necessary condition of almost all improvements in produc-
tion, and one of the strongest stimulants to industry and pro-
moters of civilization.

A tax on advertisements is not free from the same objec-
tion, since in whatever degree advertisements are useful to
business, by facilitating the coming together of the dealer or
producer and the consumer, in that same degree, if the tax be
high enough to be a serious discouragement to advertising, it
prolongs the period during which goods remain unsold, and
capital locked up in idleness.

A tax on newspapers is objectionable, not so much where
it does fall as where it does not, that is, where it prevents
newspapers from being used. To the generality of those
who now buy them, newspapers are a luxury which they
can as well afford to pay for as any other indulgence, and
which is as unexceptionable a source of revenue. But to
that large part of the community who have been taught to
read, but have received little other intellectual education,
newspapers are the source of nearly all the general informa-
tion which they possess, and of nearly all their acquaintance



438 BOOK V. CHAPTER V. § 3.

with the ideas and topics current among mankind; and an
interest is more easily excited in newspapers, than in books
or other more recondite sources of instruction. Newspapers
contribute so little, in a direct way, to the origination of use-
ful ideas, that many persons undervalue the importance of
their office in disseminating them. They correct many preju-
dices and superstitions, and keep up a habit of discussion, and
interest in public concerns, the absence of which is a great
cause of the stagnation of mind usually found in the lower
and middle, if not in all, ranks, of those countries where
newspapers of an important or interesting character do not
exist. There ought to be no taxes which render this great
diffuser of information, of mental excitement, and mental
exercise, less accessible to that portion of the public which
most needs to he carried into a region of ideas and interests
beyond its own limited horizon.

§ 3. In the enumeration of bad taxes, a conspicuous
place must be assigned to law taxes; which extract a revenue
for the state from the various operations involved in an appli-
cation to the tribunals. Like all needless expenses attached
to law proceedings, they are a tax on redress, and therefore
a premium on injury. Although such taxes have been abo-
lished in this country as a general source of revenue, they
still exist in the form of fees of court, for defraying the ex-
pense of the courts of justice; under the idea, apparently,
that those may fairly be required to bear the expenses of the
administration of justice, who reap the benefit of it. The
fallacy of this doctrine was powerfully exposed by Bentham.
As he remarked, those who are under the necessity of going
to law, are those who benefit least, not most, by the law and
its administration. To them the protection which the law
affords has not been complete, since they have been obliged
to resort to a court of justice to ascertain their rights, or
maintain those rights against infringement: while the re-
mainder of the public have enjoyed the immunity from injury



MISCELLANEOUS TAXES.


439


conferred by the law and the tribunals, without the inconve-
nience of an appeal to them.

§ 4. Besides the general taxes of the State, there are in
all or most countries local taxes, to defray any expenses of
a public nature which it is thought best to place under the
control or management of a local authority. Some of these
expenses are incurred for purposes in which the particular
locality is solely or chiefly interested ; as the paving, cleans-
ing, and lighting of the streets; or the making and repairing
of roads and bridges, which may be important to people
from any part of the country, but only in so far as they, or
goods in which they have an interest, pass along the roads or
over the bridges. In other cases again, the expenses are of a
kind as nationally important as any others, but are defrayed
locally because supposed more likely to be well administered
by local bodies : as, in England, the relief of the poor and
the support of gaols, and in some other countries, of schools.
To decide for what public objects local superintendence is
best suited, and what are those which should be kept imme-
diately under the central government, or under a mixed sys-
tem of local management and central superintendence, is a
question not of political economy but of administration. It
is an important principle, however, that taxes imposed by a
local authority, being less amenable to publicity and discussion
than the acts of the government, should always be special —
laid on for some definite service, and not exceeding the expense
actually incurred in rendering the service. Thus limited, it
is desirable, whenever practicable, that the burthen should fall
on those to whom the service is rendered ; that the expense,
for instance, of roads and bridges, should be defrayed by a
toll on passengers and goods conveyed by them, thus divid-
ing the cost between those who use them for pleasure or
convenience, and the consumers of the goods which they
enable to be brought to and from the market at a diminished
expense When, however, the tolls have repaid with interest



440


BOOK V. CHAPTER V. § 4.


the whole of the expenditure, the road or bridge should be
thrown open free of toll, that it may be used also by those
to whom, unless open gratuitously, it would be valueless;
provision being made for repairs either from the funds of the
state, or by a rate levied on the localities which reap the
principal benefit.

In England, almost all local taxes are direct, (the coal
duty of the City of London, and a few similar imposts, being
the chief exceptions,) though the greatest part of the tax-
ation for general purposes is indirect. On the contrary, in
France, Austria, and other countries where direct taxation is
much more largely employed by the state, the local expenses
of towns are principally defrayed by taxes levied on commo-
dities when entering them. These indirect taxes are much
more objectionable in towns than on the frontier, because the
things which the country supplies to the towns are chiefly
the necessaries of life and the materials of manufacture, while
of what a country imports from foreign countries, the greater
part usually consists of luxuries. An octroi cannot produce
a large revenue, without pressing severely upon the labouring
classes of the towns; unless their wages rise proportionally,
in which case the tax falls in a great measure on the con-
sumers of town produce, whether residing in town or country,
since capital will not remain in the towns if its profits fall
below their ordinary proportion as compared with the rural
districts.



CHAPTER VI.


COMPARISON BETWEEN DIRECT AND INDIRECT
TAXATION.

§ 1. Are direct or indirect taxes the most eligible?
This question, at all times interesting, has of late excited a
considerable amount of discussion. In England there is a
popular feeling, of old standing, in favour of indirect, or it
should rather be said in opposition to direct, taxation. The
feeling is not grounded on the merits of the case, and is
of a puerile kind. An Englishman dislikes, not so much
the payment as the act of paying. He dislikes seeing the
face of the tax-collector, and being subjected to his peremp-
tory demand. Perhaps, too, the money which he is required
to pay directly out of his pocket is the only taxation which
he is quite sure that he pays at all. That a tax of two shil-
lings per pound on tea, or of three shillings per bottle on
wine, raises the price of each pound of tea and bottle of wine
which he consumes, by that and more than that amount,
cannot indeed be denied; it is the fact, and is intended to
be so, and he himself, at times, is perfectly aware of it;
but it makes hardly any impression on his practical feelings
and associations, serving to illustrate the distinction be-
tween what is merely known to be true and what is felt to
be so. The unpopularity of direct taxation, contrasted
with the easy manner in which the public consent to let
themselves be fleeced in the prices of commodities, has gene-
rated in many friends of improvement a directly opposite
mode of thinking to the foregoing. They contend that the
very reason which makes direct taxation disagreeable, makes
it preferable. Under it, every one knows how much he really
pays; and if he votes for a war, or any other expensive



442 BOOK V. CHAPTER VI. § 1 .

national luxury, he does so with his eyes open to what it
costs him. If all taxes were direct, taxation would be much
more perceived than at present; and there would be a
security which now there is not, for economy in the public
expenditure.

Although this argument is not without force, its weight
is likely to be constantly diminishing. The real inci-
dence of indirect taxation is every day more generally
understood and more familiarly recognized: and whatever
else may be said of the changes which are taking place in
the tendencies of the human mind, it can scarcely, I think,
be denied, that things are more and more estimated accord-
ing to their calculated value, and less according to their non-
essential accompaniments. The mere distinction between
paying money directly to the tax-collector, and contri-
buting the same sum through the intervention of the tea-
dealer or the wine-merchant, no longer makes the whole
difference between dislike or opposition, and passive ac-
quiescence. But further, while any such infirmity of the popu-
lar mind subsists, the argument grounded on it tells partly
on the other side of the question. If our present revenue
of above sixty millions were all raised by direct taxes, an
extreme dissatisfaction would certainly arise at having to
pay so much; but while men's minds are so little guided by
reason, as such a change of feeling from so irrelevant
a cause would imply, so great an aversion to taxation
might not be an unqualified good. Of the sixty millions
in question, nearly thirty are pledged, under the most
binding obligations, to those whose property has been
borrowed and spent by the state: and while this debt re-
mains unredeemed, a greatly increased impatience of tax-
ation would involve no little danger of a breach of faith,
similar to that which, in the defaulting states of America,
has been produced, and in some of them still continues, from
the same cause. That part, indeed, of the public expendi-
ture, which is devoted to the maintenance of civil and mili-



DIRECT AND INDIRECT TAXES COMPARED. 448

tary establishments, (that is, all except the interest of the
national debt) affords ample scope for retrenchment. But
while so much of the revenue is wasted under the mere
pretence of public service, so much of the most important
business of government is left undone, that whatever can
be rescued from useless expenditure is urgently required for
useful. Whether the object be education; a more efficient
and accessible administration of justice; emigration and colo-
nization ; reforms of any kind which, like the Slave Emanci-
pation, require compensation to individual interests; or what
is as important as any of these, the entertainment of a suffi-
cient staff of able and educated public servants, to conduct
in a better than the present awkward manner the business of
legislation and administration; every one of these things
implies considerable expense, and many of them have again
and again been prevented by the reluctance which existed to
apply to Parliament for an increased grant of public money,
though (besides that the existing means would be more than
sufficient if applied to the proper purposes) the cost would be
repaid, often a hundred-fold, in mere pecuniary advantage to
the community generally. If so great an addition were made
to the public dislike of taxation as might be the consequence
of confining it to the direct form, the classes who profit by
the misapplication of public money might probably succeed in
saving that by which they profit, at the expense of that which
would only be useful to the public.

There is, however, a frequent plea in support of indirect
taxation, which must be altogether rejected, as grounded on
a fallacy. We are often told that taxes on commodities are
less burdensome than other taxes, because the contributor can
escape from them by ceasing to use the taxed commodity.
He certainly can, if that be his object, deprive the govern-
ment of the money; but he does so by a sacrifice of his own
indulgences, which (if he chose to undergo it) would equally
make up to him for the same amount taken from him by
direct taxation. Suppose a tax laid on wine, sufficient to



444


BOOK V. CHAPTER VI. § 1.

add five pounds to the price of the quantity of wine which he
consumes in a year. He has only (we are told) to diminish
his consumption of wine by 51 ., and he escapes the burden.
True : but if the 51 ., instead of being laid on wine, had been
taken from him by an income-tax, he could, by expending 51 .
less in wine, equally save the amount of the tax, so that the
difference between the two cases is really illusory. If the
government takes from the contributor five pounds a year,
whether in one way or another, exactly that amount must be
retrenched from his consumption to leave him as well off as
before; and in either way the same amount of sacrifice,
neither more nor less, is imposed on him.

On the other hand, it is some advantage on the side of in-
direct taxes, that what they exact from the contributor is taken
at a time and in a manner likely to be convenient to him.
It is paid at a time when he has at any rate a payment to
make ; it causes, therefore, no additional trouble, nor (unless
the tax be on necessaries) any inconvenience but what is inse-
parable from the payment of the amount. He can also, except
in the case of very perishable articles, select his own time for
laying in a stock of the commodity, and consequently for pay-
ment of the tax. The producer or dealer who advances these
taxes, is, indeed, sometimes subjected to inconvenience; but, in
the case of imported goods, this inconvenience is reduced to
a minimum by what is called the Warehousing System, under
which, instead of paying the duty at the time of importation,
he is only required to do so when he takes out the goods for
consumption, which is seldom done until he has either actually
found, or has the prospect of immediately finding, a purchaser.

The strongest objection, however, to raising the whole or
the greater part of a large revenue by direct taxes, is the im-
possibility of assessing them fairly without a conscientious co-
operation on the part of the contributors, not to be hoped for
in the present low state of public morality. In the case of
an income-tax, we have already seen that unless it be found
practicable to exempt savings altogether from the tax, the



DIRECT AND INDIRECT TAXES COMPARED. 445


burthen cannot be apportioned with any tolerable ap-
proach to fairness upon those whose incomes are derived
from business or professions; and this is in fact admitted
by most of the advocates of direct taxation, who, I am afraid,
generally get over the difficulty by leaving those classes un-
taxed, and confining their projected income-tax to “realized
property,” in which form it certainly has the merit of being
a very easy form of plunder. But enough has been said in
condemnation of this expedient. We have seen, however,
that a house-tax is a form of direct taxation not liable to
the same objections as an income-tax, and indeed liable to
as few objections of any kind as perhaps any of our indirect
taxes. But it would be impossible to raise, by a house-tax
alone, the greatest part of the revenue of Great Britain,
without producing a very objectionable over-crowding of the
population, through the strong motive which all persons
would have to avoid the tax by restricting their house accom-
modation. Besides, even a house-tax has inequalities, and
consequently injustices; no tax is exempt from them, and it
is neither just nor politic to make all the inequalities fall in
the same places, by calling upon one tax to defray the whole
or the chief part of the public expenditure. So much of the
local taxation, in this country, being already in the form of
a house-tax, it is probable that ten millions a year would be
fully as much as could beneficially be levied, through this
medium, for general purposes.

A certain amount of revenue may, as we have seen, be
obtained without injustice by a peculiar tax on rent. Besides
the present land-tax, and an equivalent for the revenue now
derived from stamp duties on the conveyance of land, some
further taxation might, I have contended, at some future
period be imposed, to enable the state to participate in the
progressive increase of the incomes of landlords from natural
causes. Legacies and inheritances, we have also seen, ought
to be subjected to taxation sufficient to yield a considerable
revenue. With these taxes, and a house-tax of suitable



446


BOOK V. CHAPTER VI. § 2.

amount, we should, I think, have reached the prudent limits
of direct taxation, save in a national emergency so urgent as
to justify the government in disregarding the amount of in-
equality and unfairness which may ultimately be found inse-
parable from an income-tax. The remainder of the revenue
would have to be provided by taxes on consumption, and
the question is, which of these are the least objectionable.

§ 2. There are some forms of indirect taxation which
must be peremptorily excluded. Taxes on commodities, for
revenue purposes, must not operate as protecting duties, but
must be levied impartially on every mode in which the
articles can be obtained, whether produced in the country
itself, or imported. An exclusion must also be put upon all
taxes on the necessaries of life, or on the materials or instru-
ments employed in producing those necessaries. Such taxes
are always liable to encroach on what should be left untaxed,
the incomes barely sufficient for healthful existence; and on
the most favourable supposition, namely, that wages rise to
compensate the labourers for the tax, it operates as a peculiar
tax on profits, which is at once unjust, and detrimental to
national wealth.* What remain are taxes on luxuries. And
these have some properties which strongly recommend them.
In the first place, they can never, by any possibility, touch
those whose whole income is expended on necessaries ; while
they do reach those by whom what is required for neces-
saries, is expended on indulgences. In the next place, they
operate in some cases as an useful, and the only useful, kind

* Some avgue that the materials and instruments of all production should
be exempt from taxation ; but these, when they do not enter into the produc-
tion of necessaries, seem as proper subjects of taxation as the finished article.
It is chiefly with reference to foreign trade, that such taxes have been con-
sidered injurious. Internationally speaking, they may be looked upon as export
duties, and, unless in cases in which an export duty is advisable, they should
be accompanied with an equivalent drawback on exportation. But there is no
sufficient reason against taxing the materials and instruments used in the pro-
duction of anything which is itself a fit object of taxation.



DIRECT AND INDIRECT TAXES COMPARED. 447


of sumptuary law. I disclaim all asceticism, and by no means
wish to see discouraged, either by law or opinion, any indul-
gence (consistent with the means and obligations of the
person using it) which is sought from a genuine inclination
for, and enjoyment of, the thing itself ; but a great portion of
the expense of the higher and middle classes in most coun-
tries, and the greatest in this, is not incurred for the sake of
the pleasure afforded by the things on which the money is
spent, but from regard to opinion, and an idea that certain
expenses are expected from them, as an appendage of station;
and I cannot but think that expenditure of this sort is a most
desirable subject of taxation. If taxation discourages it, some
good is done, and if not, no harm ; for in so far as taxes are
levied on things which are desired and possessed from motives
of this description, nobody is the worse for them. When a
thing is bought not for its use but for its costliness, cheapness
is no recommendation. As Sismondi remarks, the conse-
quence of cheapening articles of vanity, is not that less is
expended on such things, but that the buyers substitute for
the cheapened article some other which is more costly, or a
more elaborate quality of the same thing ; and as the inferior
quality answered the purpose of vanity equally well when it
was equally expensive, a tax on the article is really paid by
nobody : it is a creation of public revenue by which nobody
loses.*


* “Were we to suppose that diamonds could only be procured from one
particular and distant country, and pearls from another, and were the produce
of the mines in the former, and of the fishery in the latter, from the operation
of natural causes, to become doubly difficult to procure, the effect would merely
be that in time half the quantity of diamonds and pearls would be sufficient to
mark a certain opulence and rank, that it had before been necessary to employ
for that purpose. The same quantity of gold, or some commodity reducible
at last to labour, would be required to produce the now reduced amount, as
the former larger amount. Were the difficulty interposed by the regulations
of legislators .... it could make no difference to the fitness of these
articles to serve the purposes of vanity.” Suppose that means were discovered
whereby the physiological process which generates the pearl might be induced
ad libitum , the result being that the amount of labour expended in procuring



448 BOOK V. CHAPTER VI. § 3.

§ 3. In order to reduce as much as possible the inconve-
niences, and increase the advantages, incident to taxes on
commodities, the following are the practical rules which sug-
gest themselves. 1st. To raise as large a revenue as conve-
niently may be, from those classes of luxuries which have
most connexion with vanity, and least with positive enjoy-
ment ; such as the more costly qualities of all kinds of per-
sonal equipment and ornament. 2ndly. Whenever possible,
to demand the tax, not from the producer, but directly from
the consumer, since when levied on the producer it raises
the price always by more, and often by much more, than the
mere amount of the tax. Most of the minor assessed taxes
in this country are recommended by both these considera-
tions. But with regard to horses and carriages, as there are
many persons to whom, from health or constitution, these
are not so much luxuries as necessaries, the tax paid by those
who have but one riding horse, or but one carriage, especially
of the cheaper descriptions, should be low; while taxation
should rise very rapidly with the number of horses and car-
riages, and with their costliness. 3rdly. But as the only


each pearl, came to be only the five hundredth part of what it was before.
“ The ultimate effect of such a change would depend on whether the fishery
were free or not. Were it free to all, as pearls could be got simply for the
labour of fishing for them, a string of them might be had for a few pence.
The very poorest class of society could therefore afford to decorate their persons
with them. They would thus soon become extremely vulgar and unfashionable,
and so at last valueless. If however we suppose that instead of the fishery
being free, the legislator owns and has complete command of the place, where
alone pearls are to be procured ; as the progress of discovery advanced, he
might impose a duty on them equal to the diminution of labour necessary to
procure them. They would then be as much esteemed as they were before.
What Bimple beauty they have would remain unchanged. The difficulty to be
surmounted in order to obtain them would be different, but equally great, and
they would therefore equally serve to mark the opulence of those who possessed
them.” The net revenue obtained by such a tax “ would not cost the society
anything. If not abused in its application, it would be a clear addition of so
much to the resources of the community.”— Rae, New Principles of Political
Economy , pp. 369-71.



DIRECT AND INDIRECT TAXES COMPARED. 449

indirect taxes which yield a large revenue are those which
fall on articles of universal or very general consumption, and
as it is therefore necessary to have some taxes on real luxu-
ries, that is, on things which afford pleasure in themselves,
and are valued on that account rather than for their cost;
these taxes should, if possible, be so adjusted as to fall with
the same proportional weight on small, on moderate, and on
large incomes. This is not an easy matter ; since the things
which are the subjects of the more productive taxes, are in
proportion more largely consumed by the poorer members of
the community than by the rich. Tea, coffee, sugar, tobacco,
fermented drinks, can hardly be so taxed, that the poor shall
not bear more than their due share of the burthen. Some-
thing might be done by making the duty on the superior
qualities, which are used by the richer consumers, much
higher in proportion to the value, (instead of much lower,
as is almost universally the practice under the present English
system) ; but in some cases the difficulty of at all adjusting
the duty to the value, so as to prevent evasion, is said, with
what truth I know not, to be insuperable ; so that it is thought
necessary to levy the same fixed duty on all the qualities
alike: a flagrant injustice to the poorer class of contributors,
unless compensated by the existence of other taxes from
winch, as from the present income-tax, they are altogether
exempt. 4thly. As far as is consistent with the preceding
rules, taxation should rather be concentrated on a few articles
than diffused over many, in order that the expenses of collec-
tion may be smaller, and that as few employments as possible
may be burthensomely and vexatiously interfered with.
5thly. Among luxuries of general consumption, taxation
should by preference attach itself to stimulants, because
these, though in themselves as legitimate indulgences as
any others, are more liable than most others to be used
in excess, so that the check to consumption, naturally arising
from taxation, is on the whole better applied to them than
to other things. 6thly. As far as other considerations
YOL. II. G G



450


BOOK V. CHAPTER VI. § 3 .

permit, taxation should be confined to imported articles,
since these can be taxed with a less degree of vexatious
interference, and with fewer incidental bad effects, than when
a tax is levied on the field or on the workshop. Custom
duties are, cceteris paribus , much less objectionable than
excise : but they must be laid only on things which either
cannot, or at least will not, be produced in the country itself ;
or else their production there must be prohibited (as in
England is the case with tobacco,) or subjected to an excise
duty of equivalent amount. 7thly. No tax ought to be kept
so high as to furnish a motive to its evasion, too strong to be
counteracted by ordinary means of prevention: and espe-
cially no commodity should be taxed so highly as to raise up
a class of lawless characters, smugglers, illicit distillers, and
the like.

Among the excise and custom duties now or lately exist-
ing in this country, some must, on the principles we have laid
down, be altogether condemned. Among these are all duties
on ordinary articles of food, whether for human beings or for
cattle; those on timber, as falling on the materials of lodging,
which is one of the necessaries of life ; all duties on the metals,
and on implements made of them ; the (now abolished) tax on
soap, which is a necessary of cleanliness, and on tallow, the
material both of that and of some other necessaries; the tax
on paper, an indispensable instrument of almost all business
and of most kinds of instruction: but ornamental paper, for
hangings, and similar purposes, might continue to be taxed.
The duties which yield the greatest part of the customs and
excise revenue, those on sugar, coffee, tea, wine, beer, spirits,
and tobacco, are in themselves, where a large amount of
revenue is necessary, extremely proper taxes; but at present
grossly unjust, from the disproportionate weight with which
they press on the poorer classes; and some of them (those on
spirits and tobacco) are so high as to cause an enormous
amount of smuggling. It is probable that most of these
taxes might bear a great reduction without any material loss



DIRECT AND INDIRECT TAXES COMPARED. 451

of revenue. In what manner the finer articles of manufac-
ture, consumed by the rich, might most advantageously be
taxed, I must leave to be decided by those who have the
requisite practical knowledge. The difficulty would be, to
effect it without an inadmissible degree of interference with
production. In countries which, like the United States,
import the principal part of the finer manufactures which
they consume, there is little difficulty in the matter: and even
where nothing is imported but the raw material, that may be
taxed, especially the qualities of it which are exclusively em-
ployed for the fabrics used by the richer class of consumers.
Thus, in England a high custom duty on raw silk would be
consistent with principle ; and it might perhaps be practicable
to tax the finer qualities of cotton or linen yarn, whether spun
in the country itself or imported.


G G 2



CHAPTER VII.


OF A NATIONAL DEBT.

§ 1. The question must now be considered, how far it is
right or expedient to raise money for the purposes of govern-
ment, not by laying on taxes to the amount required, but by
taking a portion of the capital of the country in the form of
a loan, and charging the public revenue with only the interest.
Nothing needs be said about providing for temporary wants
by taking up money ; for instance, by an issue of exchequer
bills, destined to be paid off, at furthest in a year or two, from
the proceeds of the existing taxes. This is a convenient expe-
dient, and when the government does not possess a treasure
or hoard, is often a necessary one, on the occurrence of extra-
ordinary expenses, or of a temporary failure in the ordinary
sources of revenue. What we have to discuss is the propriety
of contracting a national debt of a permanent character;
defraying the expenses of a war, or of any season of diffi-
culty, by loans, to be redeemed either very gradually and at
a distant period, or not at all.

This question has already been touched upon in the First
Book* We there remarked, that if the capital taken in
loans is abstracted from funds either engaged in production,
or destined to be employed in it, their diversion from that
purpose is equivalent to taking the amount from the wages
of the labouring classes. Borrowing, in this case, is not a
substitute for raising the supplies within the year. A govern-
ment which borrows does actually take the amount within
the year, and that too by a tax exclusively on the labouring
classes; than which it could have done nothing worse, if it
had supplied its wants by avowed taxation; and in that case


Supra, vol. i. pp. 94-8.



A NATIONAL DEBT.


453


the transaction, and its evils, would have ended with the
emergency; while by the circuitous mode adopted, the value
exacted from the labourers is gained, not by the state, but by
the employers of labour, the state remaining charged with the
debt besides, and with its interest in perpetuity. The system
of public loans, in such circumstances, may be pronounced the
very worst which, in the present state of civilization, is still
included in the catalogue of financial expedients.

We however remarked that there are other circumstances
in which loans are not chargeable with these pernicious con-
sequences: namely, first, when what is borrowed is foreign
capital, the overflowings of the general accumulation of the
world; or, secondly, when it is capital which either would
not have been saved at all unless this mode of investment
had been open to it, or, after being saved, would have been
wasted in unproductive enterprises, or sent to seek employ-
ment in foreign countries. When the progress of accumu-
lation has reduced profits either to tHe ultimate or to the
practical minimum, — to the rate, less than which would
either put a stop to the increase of capital, or send the
whole of the new accumulations abroad ; government may
annually intercept these new accumulations, without trenching
on the employment or wages of the labouring classes in the
country itself, or perhaps in any other country. To this
extent, therefore, the loan system may be carried, without
being liable to the utter and peremptory condemnation which
is due to it when it overpasses this limit. What is wanted is
an index to determine whether, in any given series of years,
as during the last great war for example, the limit has been
exceeded or not.

Such an index exists, at once a certain and an obvious
one. Did the government, by its loan operations, augment
the rate of interest ? If it only opened a channel for capital
which would not otherwise have been accumulated, or which,
if accumulated, would not have been employed within the
country; this implies that the capital, which the government



454 BOOK V. CHAPTER VII. § 1.

took and expended, could not have found employment at the
existing rate of interest. So long as the loans do no more
than absorb this surplus, they prevent any tendency to a fall
of the rate of interest, but they cannot occasion any rise.
When they do raise the rate of interest, as they did in a most
extraordinary degree during the French war, this is positive
proof that the government is a competitor for capital with the
ordinary channels of productive investment, and is carrying
off, not merely funds which would not, but funds which would,
have found productive employment within the country. To
the full extent, therefore, to which the loans of government,
during the war, caused the rate of interest to exceed what it
was before, and what it has been since, those loans are charge-
able with all the evils which have been described. If it be
objected that interest only rose because profits rose, I reply
that this does not weaken, but strengthens, the argument.
If the government loans produced the rise of profits by the
great amount of capital which they absorbed, by what means
can they have had this effect, unless by lowering the wages of
labour ? It will perhaps be said, that what kept profits high
during the war was not the drafts made on the national capital
by the loans, but the rapid progress of industrial improve-
ments. This, in a great measure, was the fact; and it no
doubt alleviated the hardship to the labouring classes, and
made the financial system which was pursued less actively
mischievous, but not less contrary to principle. These very
improvements in industry, made room for a larger amount of
capital; and the government, by draining away a great part
of the annual accumulations, did not indeed prevent that
capital from existing ultimately, (for it started into existence
with great rapidity after the peace,) but prevented it from
existing at the time, and subtracted just so much, while the
war lasted, from distribution among productive labourers. If
the government had abstained from taking this capital by
loan, and had allowed it to reach the labourers, but had raised
the supplies which it required by a direct tax on the labouring



A NATIONAL DEBT.


455


classes, it would have produced (in every respect but the ex-
pense and inconvenience of collecting the tax) the very same
economical effects which it did produce, except that we should
not now have had the debt. The course it actually took was
therefore worse than the very worst mode which it could
possibly have adopted of raising the supplies within the
year: and the only excuse, or justification, which it admits of,
(so far as that excuse could be truly pleaded) was hard neces-
sity; the impossibility of raising so enormous an annual sum
by taxation, without resorting to taxes which from their
odiousness, or from the facility of evasion, it would have been
found impracticable to enforce.

When government loans are limited to the overflowings of
the national capital, or to those accumulations which would
not take place at all unless suffered to overflow, they are at
least not liable to this grave condemnation : they occasion no
privation to any one at the time, except by the payment of
the interest, and may even be beneficial to the labouring class
during the term of their expenditure, by employing in the
direct purchase of labour, as that of soldiers, sailors, &c., funds
which might otherwise have quitted the country altogether.
In this case therefore the question really is, what it is com-
monly supposed to be in all cases, namely, a choice between a
great sacrifice at once, and a small one indefinitely prolonged.
On this matter it seems rational to think, that the prudence
of a nation will dictate the same conduct as the prudence of
an individual ; to submit to as much of the privation imme-
diately, as can easily be borne, and only when any further
burthen would distress or cripple them too much, to provide
for the remainder by mortgaging their future income. It is
an excellent maxim to make present resources suffice for present
wants; the future will have its own wants to provide for. On
the other hand, it may reasonably be taken into considera-
tion that in a country increasing in wealth, the necessary
expenses of government do not increase in the same ratio as
capital or population ; any burthen, therefore, is always less



456


BOOK V. CHAPTER VII. § 2.

and less felt: and since those extraordinary expenses of
government which are fit to be incurred at all, are mostly
beneficial beyond the existing generation, there is no injustice
in making posterity pay a part of the price, if the incon-
venience would be extreme of defraying the whole of it
by the exertions and sacrifices of the generation which first
incurred it.

§ 2. When a country, wisely or unwisely, has burthened
itself with a debt, is it expedient to take steps for redeeming
that debt ? In principle it is impossible not to maintain the
affirmative. It is true that the payment of the interest, when
the creditors are members of the same community, is no
national loss, but a mere transfer. The transfer, however,
being compulsory, is a serious evil, and the raising a great
extra revenue by any system of taxation necessitates so much
expense, vexation, disturbance of the channels of industry,
and other mischiefs over and above the mere payment of the
money wanted by the government, that to get rid of the
necessity of such taxation is at all times worth a considerable
effort. The same amount of sacrifice which would have been
worth incurring to avoid contracting the debt, it is worth
while to incur, at any subsequent time, for the purpose of
extinguishing it.

Two modes have been contemplated of paying off a
national debt: either at once by a general contribution, or
gradually by a surplus revenue. The first would be incom-
parably the best, if it were practicable; and practicable it
would be, if it could justly be done by an assessment on pro-
perty alone. If property bore the whole interest of the debt,
property might, with great advantage to itself, pay it off ; since
this would be merely surrendering to a creditor the principal
sum, the whole annual proceeds of which were already his by
law; and would be equivalent to what a landowner does when
he sells part of his estate, to free the remainder from a mort-
gage. But property, it needs hardly be said, does not pay,



A NATIONAL DEBT.


457


and cannot justly be required to pay, the whole interest of the
debt. Some indeed affirm that it can, on the plea that the
existing generation is only bound to pay the debts of its pre-
decessors from the assets it has received from them, and not
from the produce of its own industry. But has no one
received anything from previous generations except those who
have succeeded to property? Is the whole difference between
the earth as it is, with its clearings and improvements, its
roads and canals, its towns and manufactories, and the earth
as it was when the first human being set foot on it, of no
benefit to any but those who are called the owners of the
soil ? Is the capital accumulated by the labour and absti-
nence of all former generations of no advantage to any but
those who have succeeded to the legal ownership of part of
it? And have we not inherited a mass of acquired knowledge,
both scientific and empirical, due to the sagacity and industry
of those who preceded us, the benefits of which are the
common wealth of all ? Those who are born to the owner-
ship of property have, in addition to these common benefits,
a separate inheritance, and to this difference it is right
that advertence should be had in regulating taxation. It
belongs to the general financial system of the country to
take due account of this principle, and I have indicated,
as in my opinion a proper mode of ' taking account of it,
a considerable tax on legacies and inheritances. Let it be
determined directly and openly what is due from property to
the state, and from the state to property, and let the institu-
tions of the state be regulated accordingly. Whatever is the
fitting contribution from property to the general expenses of
the state, in the same, and in no greater proportion should it
contribute towards either the interest or the repayment of the
national debt.

This, however, if admitted, is fatal to any scheme for the
extinction of the debt by a general assessment on the com-
munity. Persons of property could pay their share of the
amount by a sacrifice of property, and have the same net



458


BOOK V. CHAPTER VII. § 3.

income as before; but if those who have no accumulations,
but only incomes, were required to make up by a single pay-
ment the equivalent of the annual charge laid on them by
the taxes maintained to pay the interest of the debt, they
could only do so by incurring a private debt equal to their
share of the public debt; while, from the insufficiency, in
most cases, of the security which they could give, the interest
would amount to a much larger annual sum than their share
of that now paid by the state. Besides, a collective debt
defrayed by taxes, has over the same debt parcelled out among
individuals, the immense advantage, that it is virtually a
mutual insurance among the contributors. If the fortune of
a contributor diminishes, his taxes diminish; if he is ruined,
they cease altogether, and liis portion of the debt is wholly
transferred to the solvent members of the community. If it
were laid on him as a private obligation, he would still be
liable to it even when penniless.

When the state possesses property, in land or otherwise,
which there are not strong reasons of public utility for its
retaining at its disposal, this should be employed, as far as it
will go, in extinguishing debt. Any casual gain, or godsend,
is naturally devoted to the same purpose. Beyond this, the
only mode which is both just and feasible, of extinguishing or
reducing a national debt, is by means of a surplus revenue.

§ 3. The desirableness, per se , of maintaining a surplus
for this purpose does not, I think, admit of a doubt. We
sometimes, indeed, hear it said that the amount should rather
be left to “ fructify in the pockets of the people/' This is a
good argument, as far as it goes, against levying taxes unne-
cessarily for purposes of unproductive expenditure, but not
against paying off a national debt. For, what is meant by
the word fructify? If it means anything, it means produc-
tive employment; and as an argument against taxation, we
must understand it to assert, that if the amount were left
with the people they would save it, and convert it into capital.



A NATIONAL DEBT.


459


It is probable, indeed, that they would save a part, but ex-
tremely improbable that they would save the whole : while
if taken by taxation, and employed in paying off debt, the
whole is saved, and made productive. To the fundholder
who receives the payment it is already capital, not revenue,
and he will make it “ fructify/' that it may continue to afford
him an income. The objection, therefore, is not only ground-
less, but the real argument is on the other side : the amount
is much more certain of fructifying if it is not “ left in the
pockets of the people."

It is not, however, advisable in all cases to maintain a
surplus revenue for the extinction of debt. The advantage
of paying off the national debt of Great Britain for instance,
is that it would enable us to get rid of the worse half of our
present taxation. But of this worse half some portions must
be worse than others, and to get rid of those would be a
greater benefit proportionally than to get rid of the rest.
If renouncing a surplus revenue would enable us to dispense
with a tax, we ought to consider the very worst of all our
taxes as precisely the one which we are keeping up for the
sake of ultimately abolishing taxes not so bad as itself. In
a country advancing in wealth, whose increasing revenue
gives it the power of ridding itself from time to time of the
most inconvenient portions of its taxation, I conceive that
the increase of revenue should rather be disposed of by
taking off taxes, than by liquidating debt, as long as any
very objectionable imposts remain. In the present state of
England, therefore, I hold it to be good policy in the govern-
ment, when it has a surplus of an apparently permanent
character, to take off taxes, provided these are rightly
selected. Even when no taxes remain but such as are not
unfit to form part of a permanent system, it is wise to con-
tinue the same policy by experimental reductions of those
taxes, until the point is discovered at which a given amount
of revenue can be raised with the smallest pressure on the
contributors. After this, such surplus revenue as might



460


BOOK V. CHAPTER VII. § 3 .

arise from any further increase of the produce of the taxes,
should not, I conceive, be remitted, but applied to the re-
demption of debt. Eventually, it might be expedient to
appropriate the entire produce of particular taxes to this
purpose; since there would be more assurance that the
liquidation would be persisted in, if the fund destined to
it were kept apart, and not blended with the general
revenues of the state. The succession duties would be pecu-
liarly suited to such a purpose, since taxes paid as they are,
out of capital, would be better employed in reimbursing
capital than in defraying current expenditure. If this
separate appropriation were made, any surplus afterwards
arising from the increasing produce of the other taxes, and
from the saving of interest on the successive portions of
debt paid off, might form a ground for a remission of taxa-
tion.

It has been contended that some amount of national
debt is desirable, and almost indispensable, as an investment
for the savings of the poorer or more inexperienced part of
the community. Its convenience in that respect is unde-
niable; but (besides that the progress of industry is gradu-
ally affording other modes of investment almost as safe and
untroublesome, such as the shares or obligations of great
public companies) the only real superiority of an investment
in the funds consists in the national guarantee, and this could
be afforded by other means than that of a public debt, in-
volving compulsory taxation. One mode which would answer
the purpose, would be a national bank of deposit and discount,
with ramifications throughout the country; which might re-
ceive any money confided to it, and either fund it at a fixed
rate of interest, or allow interest on a floating balance, like
the joint stock banks; the interest given being of course
lower than the rate at which individuals can borrow, in pro-
portion to the greater security of a government investment ;
and the expenses of the establishment being defrayed by the
difference between the interest which the bank would pay,



A NATIONAL DEBT.


461


and that which it would obtain, by lending its deposits on
mercantile, landed, or other security. There are no insu-
perable objections in principle, and I should think none in
practice, to an institution of this sort, as a means of supplying
the same convenient mode of investment now afforded by
the public funds. It would constitute the state a great in-
surance company, to insure that part of the community who
live on the interest of their property, against the risk of losing
it by the bankruptcy of those to whom they might otherwise
be under the necessity of confiding it.



CHAPTER VIII.


OF THE ORDINARY FUNCTIONS OF GOVERNMENT, CONSIDERED
AS TO THEIR ECONOMICAL EFFECTS.

§ 1. Before we discuss the line of demarcation between
the things with which governments should, and those with
which they should not, directly interfere, it is necessary to
consider the economical effects, whether of a bad or of a
good complexion, arising from the manner in which they
acquit themselves of the duties which devolve on them in
all societies, and which no one denies to be incumbent on
them.

The first of these is the protection of person and pro-
perty. There is no need to expatiate on the influence exer-
cised over the economical interests of society by the degree
of completeness with which this duty of government is per-
formed. Insecurity of person and property, is as much as to
say, uncertainty of the connexion between all human exertion
or sacrifice, and the attainment of the ends for the sake of
which they are undergone. It means, uncertainty whether
they who sow shall reap, whether they who produce shall
consume, and they who spare to-day shall enjoy to-morrow.
It means, not only that labour and frugality are not the road
to acquisition, but that violence is. When person and pro-
perty are to a certain degree insecure, all the possessions of
the weak are at the mercy of the strong. No one can keep
what he has produced, unless he is more capable of defending
it, than others who give no part of their time and exertions
to useful industry are of taking it from him. The productive
classes, therefore, when the insecurity surpasses a certain
point, being unequal to their own protection against the preda-
tory population, are obliged to place themselves individually in



ORDINARY FUNCTIONS OF GOVERNMENT. 463

a state of dependence on some member of the predatory class,
that it may be his interest to shield them from all depredation
except his own. In this manner, in the middle ages, allodial
property generally became feudal, and numbers of the poorer
freemen voluntarily made themselves and their posterity serfs
of some military lord.

Nevertheless, in attaching to this great requisite, security
of person and property, the importance which is justly due
to it, we must not forget that even for economical purposes
there are other things quite as indispensable, the presence
of which will often make up for a very considerable degree of
imperfection in the protective arrangements of government.
As was observed in a previous chapter,* the free cities of
Italy, Flanders, and the Hanseatic league, were habitually in
a state of such internal turbulence, varied by such destructive
external wars, that person and property enjoyed very imper-
fect protection; yet during several centuries they increased
rapidly in wealth and prosperity, brought many of the indus-
trial arts to a high degree of advancement, carried on distant
and dangerous voyages of exploration and commerce with
extraordinary success, became an overmatch in power for
the greatest feudal lords, and could defend themselves even
against the sovereigns of Europe: because in the midst of
turmoil and violence, the citizens of those towns enjoyed a
certain rude freedom, under conditions of union and co-ope-
ration, which, taken together, made them a brave, energetic,
and high-spirited people, and fostered a great amount of
public spirit and patriotism. The prosperity of these and
other free states in a lawless age, shows that a certain degree
of insecurity, in some combinations of circumstances, has
good as well as bad effects, by making energy and practical
ability the conditions of safety. Insecurity paralyzes, only
when it is such in nature and in degree, that no energy, of
which mankind in general are capable, affords any tolerable


* Supra, vol. i. p. 138.



464 BOOK V. CHAPTER VIII. § 2.

means of self-protection. And this is a main reason why-
oppression by the government, whose power is generally
irresistible by any efforts that can be made by individuals,
has so much more baneful an effect on the springs of national
prosperity, than almost any degree of lawlessness and turbu-
lence under free institutions. Nations have acquired some
wealth, and made some progress in improvement, in states
of social union so imperfect as to border on anarchy : but no
countries in which the people were exposed without limit to
arbitrary exactions from the officers of government, ever yet
continued to have industry or wealth. A few generations of
such a government never fail to extinguish both. Some of
the fairest, and once the most prosperous, regions of the
earth, have, under the Roman and afterwards under the
Turkish dominion, been reduced to a desert, solely by that
cause. I say solely, because they would have recovered with
the utmost rapidity, as countries always do, from the devas-
tations of war, or any other temporary calamities. Difficulties
and hardships are often but an incentive to exertion : what is
fatal to it, is the belief that it will not be suffered to produce
its fruits.


§ 2. Simple over-taxation by government, though a great
evil, is not comparable in the economical part of its mischiefs
to exactions much more moderate in amount, which either
subject the contributor to the arbitrary mandate of govern-
ment officers, or are so laid on as to place skill, industry, and
frugality, at a disadvantage. The burthen of taxation in our
own country is very great, yet as every one knows its limit,
and is seldom made to pay more than he expects and cal-
culates on, and as the modes of taxation are not of such a
kind as much to impair the motives to industry and economy,
the sources of prosperity are little diminished by the pressure
of taxation ; they may even, as some think, be increased, by
the extra exertions made to compensate for the pressure of
the taxes. But in the barbarous despotisms of many coun-



ORDINARY FUNCTIONS OF GOVERNMENT.


465


tries of the East, where taxation consists in fastening upon
those who have succeeded in acquiring something, in order
to confiscate it, unless the possessor buys its release by sub-
mitting to give some large sum as a compromise, we cannot
expect to find voluntary industry, or wealth derived* from any
source but plunder. And even in comparatively civilized
countries, bad modes of raising a revenue have had effects
similar in kind, though in an inferior degree. French writers
before the Revolution represented the taille as a main cause
of the backward state of agriculture, and of the wretched
condition of the rural population ; not from its amount, but
because, being proportioned to the visible capital of the cul-
tivator, it gave him a motive for appearing poor, which
sufficed to turn the scale in favour of indolence. The arbi-
trary powers also of fiscal officers, of intendants and svhde-
legu&s, were more destructive of prosperity than a far largei
amount of exactions, because they destroyed security : there
was a marked superiority in the condition of the pays d’etats,
which were exempt from this scourge. The universal vena-
lity ascribed to Russian functionaries, must be an immense
drag on the capabilities of economical improvement possessed
so abundantly by the Russian empire : since the emoluments
of public officers must depend on the success with which they
can multiply vexations, for the purpose of being bought off by
bribes.

Yet mere excess of taxation, even when not aggravated by
uncertainty, is, independently of its injustice, a serious econo-
mical evil. It may be carried so far as to discourage industry
by insufficiency of reward. Yery long before it reaches this
point, it prevents or greatly checks accumulation, or causes
the capital accumulated to be sent for investment to foreign
countries. Taxes which fall on profits, even though that
kind of income may not pay more than its just share, neces-
sarily diminish the motive to any saving except for
investment in foreign countries where profits -are higher.
Holland, for example, seems to have long ago reached

VOL. II. H H



466 BOOK V. CHAPTER VIII. § 3.

the practical minimum of profits: already in the last century
her wealthy capitalists had a great part of their fortunes in-
vested in the loans and joint-stock speculations of other coun-
tries : and this low rate of profit is ascribed to the heavy tax-
ation, which had been in some measure forced on her by the
circumstances of her position and history. The taxes, indeed,
besides their great amount, were many of them on neces-
saries, a kind of tax peculiarly injurious to industry and accu-
mulation. But when the aggregate amount of taxation is
very great, it is inevitable that recourse must be had for part
of it to taxes of an objectionable character. And any taxes
on consumption, when heavy, even if not operating on profits,
have something of the same effect, by driving persons of
moderate means to live abroad, often taking their capital
with them. Although I by no means join with those
political economists who think no state of national exist-
ence desirable in which there is not a rapid increase of
wealth, I cannot overlook the many disadvantages to an
independent nation from being brought prematurely to a
stationary state, while the neighbouring countries continue
advancing.

§ 3. The subject of protection to person and property,
considered as afforded by government, ramifies widely, into a
number of indirect channels. It embraces, for example, the
whole subject of the perfection or inefficiency of the means
provided for the ascertainment of rights and the redress of
injuries. Person and property cannot be considered secure
where the administration of justice is imperfect, either from
defect of integrity or capacity in the tribunals, or because the
delay, vexation, and expense accompanying their operation
impose a heavy tax on those who appeal to them, and make it
preferable to submit to any endurable amount of the evils
which they are designed to remedy. In England there is no
fault to be found with the administration of justice, in point
of pecuniary integrity; a result which the progress of social



ORDINARY FUNCTIONS OF GOVERNMENT. 467

improvement may also be supposed to have brought about in
several other nations of Europe. But legal and judicial im-
perfections of other kinds are abundant; and, in England
especially, are a large abatement from the value of the ser-
vices which the government renders back to the people in
return for our enormous taxation. In the first place, the
incognoscibility (as Bentham termed it) of the law, and its
extreme uncertainty, even to those who best know it, render
a resort to the tribunals often necessary for obtaining justice,
when, there being no dispute as to facts, no litigation ought to
be required. In the next place, the procedure of the tri-
bunals is so replete with delay, vexation, and expense, that the
price at which justice is at last obtained is an evil outweighing
a very considerable amount of injustice; and the wrong side,
even that which the law considers such, has many chances of
gaining its point, through the abandonment of litigation by
the other party for want of funds, or through a compromise in
which a sacrifice is made of just rights to terminate the suit,
or through some technical quirk, whereby a decision is ob-
tained on some other ground than the merits. This last de-
testable incident often happens without blame to the judge,
under a system of law, of which a great part rests on no
rational principles adapted to the present state of society, but
was originally founded partly on a kind of whims and con-
ceits, and partly on the principles and incidents of feudal
tenure, (which now survive only as legal fictions;) and has
only been very imperfectly adapted, as cases arose, to the
changes which had taken place in society. Of all parts of
the English legal system, the Court of Chancery, which has
the best substantive law, has hitherto been incomparably the
worst as to delay, vexation, and expense; and this is the only
tribunal for most of the classes of cases which are in their
nature the most complicated, such as cases of partnership, and
the great range and variety of cases which come under the
denomination of trust. The recent reforms in this Court have
abated the mischief, but are still far from having removed it.

H H 2



468


BOOK V. CHAPTER VIII. § 3.


Fortunately for the prosperity of England, the greater part
of the mercantile law is comparatively modem, and was made
by the tribunals, by the simple process of recognizing and
giving force of law to the usages which, from motives of con-
venience, had grown up among merchants themselves: so that
this part of the law, at least, was substantially made by those
who were most interested in its goodness: while the defects
of the tribunals have been the less practically pernicious in
reference to commercial transactions, because the importance
of credit, which depends on character, renders the restraints
of opinion (though, as daily experience proves, an insuffi-
cient) yet a very powerful, protection against those forms
of mercantile dishonesty which are generally recognized as
such.

The imperfections of the law, both in its substance and in
its procedure, fall heaviest upon the interests connected with
what is technically called real property ; in the general lan-
guage of European jurisprudence, immoveable property.
vVith respect to all this portion of the wealth of the com-
munity, the law fails egregiously in the protection which it
undertakes to provide. It fails, first, by the uncertainty, and
the maze of technicalities, which make it impossible for any
one, at however great an expense, to possess a title to land
which he can positively know to be unassailable. It fails,
secondly, in omitting to provide due evidence of transactions,
by a proper registration of legal documents. It fails, thirdly,
by creating a necessity for operose and expensive instruments
and formalities (independently of fiscal burthens) on occasion
of the purchase and sale, or even the lease or mortgage, of
immoveable property. And, fourthly, it fails by the intoler-
able expense and delay of law proceedings, in almost all cases
in which real property is concerned. There is no doubt that
the greatest sufferers by the defects of the higher courts of
civil law are the landowners. Legal expenses, either those of
actual litigation, or of the preparation of legal instruments,
form, I apprehend, no inconsiderable item in the annual ex-



ORDINARY FUNCTIONS OF GOVERNMENT.


469


penditure of most persons of large landed property, and the
saleable value of their land is greatly impaired, by the diffi-
culty of giving to the buyer complete confidence in the title ;
independently of the legal expenses which accompany the
transfer. Yet the landowners, though they have been masters
of the legislation of England, to say the least since 1 688 , have
never made a single move in the direction of law reform, and
have been strenuous opponents of some of the improvements
of which they would more particularly reap the benefit;
especially that great one of a registration of contracts affecting
land, which when proposed by a Commission of eminent real
property lawyers, and introduced into the House of Commons
by Lord Campbell, was so offensive to the general body of
landlords, and was rejected by so large a majority, as to have
long discouraged any repetition of the attempt. This
irrational hostility to improvement, in a case in which
their own interest would be the most benefited by it, must
be ascribed to an intense timidity on the subject of their
titles, generated by the defects of the very law which they
refuse to alter; and to a conscious ignorance, and incapacity
of judgment, on all legal subjects, which makes them help-
lessly defer to the opinion of their professional advisers,
heedless of the fact that every imperfection of the law, in
proportion as it is burtkensome to them, brings gain to the
lawyer.

In so far as the defects of legal arrangements are a mere
burthen on the landowner, they do not much affect the sources
of production: but the uncertainty of the title under which
land is held, must often act as a great discouragement to the
expenditure of capital in its improvement ; and the expense
of making transfers, operates to prevent land from coming
into the hands of those who would use it to most advantage;
often amounting, in the case of small purchases, to more than
the price of the land, and tantamount, therefore, to a pro-
hibition of the purchase and sale of land in small por-
tions, unless in exceptional circumstances. Such purchases,



470 BOOK V. CHAPTER VIII. § 3 .

«

however, are almost everywhere extremely desirable, there
being hardly any country in which landed property is not
either too much or too little subdivided, requiring either that
great estates should be broken down, or that small ones
should be bought up and consolidated. To make land as
easily transferable as stock, would be one of the greatest
economical improvements which could be bestowed on a
country; and has been shown, again and again, to have no
insuperable difficulty attending it.

Besides the excellences or defects that belong to the law
and judicature of a country as a system of arrangements for
attaining direct practical ends, much also depends, even in an
economical point of view, upon the moral influences of the
law. Enough has been said in a former place,* on the degree
in which both the industrial and all other combined opera-
tions of mankind depend for efficiency on their being able to
rely on one another for probity and fidelity to engagements;
from which we see how greatly even the economical pros-
perity of a country is liable to be affected, by anything in its
institutions by which either integrity and trustworthiness, or
the contrary qualities, are encouraged. The law everywhere
ostensibly favours at least pecuniary honesty and the faith
of contracts; but if it affords facilities for evading those
obligations, by trick and chicanery, or by the unscrupulous
use of riches in instituting unjust or resisting just litigation;
if there are ways and means by which persons may attain
the ends of roguery, under the apparent sanction of the law;
to that extent the law is demoralizing, even in regard to
pecuniary integrity. And such cases are, unfortunately, fre-
quent under the English system. If, again, the law, by a
misplaced indulgence, protects idleness or prodigality against
their natural consequences, or dismisses crime with inade-
quate penalties, the effect, both on the prudential and on the
social virtues, is unfavourable. When the law, by its own


* Supra, vol. i. p. 134.


ORDINARY FUNCTIONS OF GOVERNMENT. 471

dispensations and injunctions, establishes injustice between
individual and individual; as all laws do which recognize
any form of slavery; as the laws of all countries do, though
not all in the same degree, in respect to the family relations;
and as the laws of many countries do, though in still more
unequal degrees, as between rich and poor; the effect on the
moral sentiments of the people is still more disastrous. But
these subjects introduce considerations so much larger and
deeper than those of political economy, that I only advert to
them in order not to pass wholly unnoticed, things superior
in importance to those of which I treat.



CHAPTER IX.


THE SAME SUBJECT CONTINUED.

§ 1. Having spoken thus far of the effects produced by
the excellences or defects of the general system of the law, I
shall now touch upon those resulting from the special cha-
racter of particular parts of it. As a selection must be made,
I shall confine myself to a few leading topics. The portions
of the civil law of a country which are of most importance
economically (next to those which determine the status of the
labourer, as slave, serf, or free), are those relating to the two
subjects of Inheritance and Contract. Of the laws relating
to contract, none are more important economically, than the
laws of partnership, and those of insolvency. It happens that
on all these three points, there is just ground for condemning
some of the provisions of the English law.

With regard to Inheritance, I have, in an early chapter,
considered the general principles of the subject, and sug-
gested what appear to me to be, putting all prejudices apart,
the best dispositions which the law could adopt. Freedom
of bequest as the general rule, but limited by two things:
first, that if there are descendants, who, being unable to
provide for themselves, would become burthensome to the
state, the equivalent of whatever the state would accord to
them should be reserved from the property for their benefit :
and secondly, that no one person should be permitted to
acquire by inheritance, more than the amount of a moderate
independence. In case of intestacy, the whole property to
escheat to the state : which should be bound to make a just
and reasonable provision for descendants, that is, such a pro-
vision as the parent or ancestor ought to have made, their



INHERITANCE. 478

circumstances, capacities, and mode of bringing up being
considered.

The laws of inheritance, however, have probably several
phases of improvement to go through, before ideas so far
removed from present modes of thinking will be taken into
serious consideration: and as, among the recognized modes
of determining the succession to property, some must be
better and others worse, it is necessary to consider which of
them deserves the preference. As an intermediate course,
therefore, I would recommend the extension to all property,
of the present English law of inheritance affecting personal
property (freedom of bequest, and, in case of intestacy, equal
division): except that no rights should be acknowledged in
collaterals, and that the property of those who have neither
descendants nor ascendants, and make no will, should escheat
to the state.

The laws of existing nations deviate from these maxims in
two opposite ways. In England, and in most of the countries
where the influence of feudality is still felt in the laws, one
of the objects aimed at in respect to land and other immove-
able property, is to keep it together in large masses : accord-
ingly, in cases of intestacy, it passes, generally speaking (for
the local custom of some places is different), exclusively to
the eldest son. And though the rule of primogeniture is
not binding on testators, who in England have nominally
the power of bequeathing their property as they please, any
proprietor may so exercise this power as to deprive his suc-
cessors of it, by entailing the property on one particular line
of his descendants: which, besides preventing it from passing
by inheritance in any other than the prescribed manner, is
attended with the incidental consequence of precluding it
from being sold; since each successive possessor, having
only a life interest in the property, cannot alienate it for a
longer period than his own life. In other countries, such
as France, the law, on the contrary, compels division of
inheritances; not only, in case of intestacy, sharing the pro-



474


BOOK V. CHAPTER TX. § 2.


perty, both real and personal, equally among all the children,
or (if there are no children) among all relatives in the same
degree of propinquity ; but also not recognizing any power of
bequest, or recognizing it over only a limited portion of the
property, the remainder being subjected to compulsory equal
division.

Neither of these systems, I apprehend, was introduced,
or is perhaps maintained, in the countries where it exists,
from any general considerations of justice, or any foresight of
economical consequences, but chiefly from political motives ;
in the one case to keep up large hereditary fortunes, and
a landed aristocracy; in the other, to break these down, and
prevent their resurrection. The first object, as an aim of
national policy, I conceive to be eminently undesirable: with
regard to the second, I have pointed out what seems to me
a better mode of attaining it. The merit, or demerit, how-
ever, of either purpose, belongs to the general science of
politics, not to the limited department of that science which
is here treated of. Each of the two systems is a real and
efficient instrument for the purpose intended by it; but
each, as it appears to me, achieves that purpose at the cost
of much mischief.

§ 2. There are two arguments of an economical cha-
racter, which are urged in favour of primogeniture. One is,
the stimulus applied to the industry and ambition of younger
children, by leaving them to be the architects of their own
fortunes. This argument was put by Dr. J ohnson in a manner
more forcible than complimentary to an hereditary aristocracy,
when he said, by way of recommendation of primogeniture,
that it “ makes but one fool in a family/' It is curious that a
defender of aristocratic institutions should be the person to
assert that to inherit such a fortune as takes away any
necessity for exertion, is generally fatal to activity and
strength of mind : in the present state of education, however,



INHERITANCE.


475


the proposition, with some allowance for exaggeration, may
be admitted to be true. But whatever force there is in the
argument, counts in favour of limiting the eldest, as well as
all the other children, to a mere provision, and dispensing
with even the “ one fool” whom Dr. Johnson was willing to
tolerate. If unearned riches are so pernicious to the character,
one does not see why, in order to withhold the poison from
the junior members of a family, there should be no way but
to unite all their separate potions, and administer them in the
largest possible dose to one selected victim. It cannot be
necessary to inflict this great evil on the eldest son, for want
of knowing what else to do with a large fortune.

Some writers, however, look upon the effect of primo-
geniture in stimulating industry, as depending, not so much
on the poverty of the younger children, as on the contrast
between that poverty and the riches of the elder; thinking
it indispensable to the activity and energy of the hive, that
there should be a huge drone here and there, to impress the
working bees with a due sense of the advantages of honey.
“ Their inferiority in point of wealth,” says Mr. M'Oulloch,
speaking of the younger children, “and their desire to
escape from this lower station, and to attain to the same
level with their elder brothers, inspires them with an energy
and vigour they could not otherwise feel. But the advantage
of preserving large estates from being frittered down by a
scheme of equal division, is not limited to its influence
over the younger children of their owners. It raises uni-
versally the standard of competence, and gives new force
to the springs which set industry in motion. The manner
of living among the great landlords is that in which every
one is ambitious of being able to indulge; and their habits
of expense, though sometimes injurious to themselves, act
as powerful incentives to the ingenuity and enterprise of
the other classes, who never think their fortunes sufficiently
ample, unless they will enable them to emulate the splendour



476


BOOK y. CHAPTER IX. § 2.


of the richest landlords; so that the custom of primoge-
niture seems to render all classes more industrious, and to
augment at the same time, the mass of wealth and the scale
of enjoyment/'*

The portion of truth, I will not say contained in these
observations, but recalled by them, I apprehend to be, that a
state of complete equality of fortunes would not be favourable
to active exertion for the increase of wealth. Speaking of the
mass, it is as true of wealth as of most other distinctions — of
talent, knowledge, virtue — that those who already have, or
think they have, as much of it as their neighbours, will seldom
exert themselves to acquire more. But it is not therefore ne-
cessary that society should provide a set of persons with large
fortunes, to fulfil the social duty of standing to be looked at,
with envy and admiration, by the aspiring poor. The for-
tunes which people have acquired for themselves, answer the
purpose quite as well, indeed much better; since a person is
more powerfully stimulated by the example of somebody who
has earned a fortune, than by the mere sight of somebody
who possesses one; and the former is necessarily an example
of prudence and frugality as well as industry, while the latter
much oftener sets an example of profuse expense, which
spreads, with pernicious effect, to the very class on whom
the sight of riches is supposed to have so beneficial an influ-
ence, namely, those whose weakness of mind, and taste for
ostentation, makes “ the splendour of the richest landlords"
attract them with the most potent spell. In America there
are few or no hereditary fortunes; yet industrial energy, and
the ardour of accumulation, are not supposed to be parti-
cularly backward in that part of the world. When a country
has once fairly entered into the industrial career, which is
the principal occupation of the modern, as war was that of


* Principles of Political Economy, ed. 1843, p. 264. There is much more
to the same effect in the more recent treatise by the same author, “On the
Succession to Property vacant by Death."



INHERITANCE.


477


the ancient and mediaeval world, the desire of acquisition
by industry needs no factitious stimulus: the advantages
naturally inherent in riches, and the character they assume
of a test by which talent and success in life are habitually
measured, are an ample security for their being pursued
with sufficient intensity and zeal. As to the deeper consi-
deration, that the diffusion of wealth, and not its concen-
tration, is desirable, and that the more wholesome state of
society is not that in which immense fortunes are possessed
by a few and coveted by all, but that in which the greatest
possible numbers possess and are contented with a moderate
competency, which all may hope to acquire; I refer to it
in this place, only to show, how widely separated, on social
questions, is the entire mode of thought of the defender of
primogeniture, from that which is partially promulgated in
the present treatise.

The other economical argument in favour of primogeni-
ture, has special reference to landed property. It is con-
tended, that the habit of dividing inheritances equally, or
with an approach to equality, among children, promotes the
subdivision of land into portions too small to admit of
being cultivated in an advantageous manner. This argument,
eternally reproduced, has again and again been refuted by
English and Continental writers. It proceeds on a supposition
entirely at variance with that on which all the theorems of
political economy are grounded. It assumes that mankind
in general will habitually act in a manner opposed to their
immediate and obvious pecuniary interest. For the division
of the inheritance does not necessarily imply division of the
land; which may be held in common, as is not unfrequently
the case in France and Belgium ; or may become the property
of one of the coheirs, being charged with the shares of the
other by the way of mortgage ; or they may sell it outright,
and divide the proceeds. When the division of the land would
diminish its productive power, it is the direct interest of the
heirs to adopt some one of these arrangements. Supposing,



478


BOOK V. CHAPTER IX. § 2.


however, what the argument assumes, that either from legal
difficulties or from their own stupidity and barbarism, they
would not, if left to themselves, obey the dictates of this
obvious interest, but would insist upon cutting up the land
bodily into equal parcels, with the effect of impoverishing
themselves; this would be an objection to a law such as
exists in France, of compulsory division, but can be no
reason why testators should be discouraged from exercising
the right of bequest in general conformity to the rule of
equality, since it would always be in their power to provide
that the division of the inheritance should take place without
dividing the land itself. That the attempts of the advocates
of primogeniture to make out a case by facts against the
custom of equal division, are equally abortive, has been
shown in a former place. In all countries, or parts of coun-
tries, in which the division of inheritances is accompanied
by small holdings, it is because small holdings are the
general system of the country, even on the estates of the
great proprietors.

Unless a strong case of social utility can be made out for
primogeniture, it stands sufficiently condemned by the general
principles of justice ; being a broad distinction in the treatment
of one person and of another, grounded solely on an accident.
There is no need, therefore, to make out any case of econo-
mical evil against primogeniture. Such a case, however, and
a very strong one, may be made. It is a natural effect of
primogeniture to make the landlords a needy class. The
object of the institution, or custom, is to keep the land
together in large masses, and this it commonly accomplishes ;
but the legal proprietor of a large domain is not necessarily
the bond fide owner of the whole income which it yields. It
is usually charged, in each generation, with provisions for the
other children. It is often charged still more heavily by the
imprudent expenditure of the proprietor. Great landowners
are generally improvident in their expenses ; they live up to
their incomes when at the highest, and if any change of



INHERITANCE.


479


'circumstances diminishes their resources, some time elapses
before they make up their minds to retrench. Spendthrifts
in other classes are ruined, and disappear from society; but
the spendthrift landlord usually holds fast to his land, even
when he has become a mere receiver of its rents for the benefit
of creditors. The same desire to keep up the “splendour” of
the family, which gives rise to the custom of primogeniture,
indisposes the owner to sell a part in order to set free the
remainder; their apparent are therefore habitually greater
than their real means, and they are under a perpetual
temptation to proportion their expenditure to the former
rather than to the latter. From such causes as these, in
almost all countries of great landowners, the majority of
landed estates are deeply mortgaged ; and instead of having
capital to spare for improvements, it requires all the increased
value of land, caused by a rapid increase of the wealth and
population of the country, to preserve the class from being
impoverished.

§ 3. To avert this impoverishment, recourse was had to
the contrivance of entails, whereby the order of succession
was irrevocably fixed, and each holder, having only a life
interest, was unable to burthen his successor. The land
thus passing, free from debt, into the possession of the heir,
the family could not be ruined by the improvidence of its
existing representative. The economical evils arising from
this disposition of property were partly of the same kind,
partly different, but on the whole greater, than those arising
from primogeniture alone. The possessor could not now
ruin his successors, but he could still ruin himself : he was
not at all more likely than in the former case to have the
means necessary for improving the property: while, even if
he had, he was still less likely to employ them for that pur-
pose, when the benefit was to accrue to a person whom the
entail made independent of him, while he had probably
younger children to provide for, in whose favour he could



480


BOOK V. CHAPTER XX. § 3.


not now charge the estate. While thus disabled from being
himself an improver, neither could he sell the estate to
somebody who would ; since entail precludes alienation. In
general he has even been unable to grant leases beyond the
term of his own life ; " for,” says Blackstone, “ if such leases
had been valid, then, under cover of long leases, the issue
might have been virtually disinherited;” and it has been
necessary in Great Britain to relax, by statute, the rigour of
entails, in order to allow either of long leases, or of the
execution of improvements at the expense of the estate. It
may be added that the heir of entail, being assured of sue-
ceeding to the family property, however undeserving of it, and
being aware of this from his earliest years, has much more
than the ordinary chances of growing up idle, dissipated, and
profligate.

In England the power of entail is more limited by law,
than in Scotland and in most other countries where it exists.
A landowner can settle his property upon any number of per-
sons successively who are living at the time, and upon one
unborn person, on whose attaining the age of twenty-one, the
entail expires, and the land becomes his absolute property.
An estate may in this manner be transmitted through a son,
or a son and grandson, living when the deed is executed, to
an unborn child of that grandson. It has been maintained
that this power of entail is not sufficiently extensive to do any
mischief : in truth, however, it is much larger than it seems.
Entails very rarely expire ; the first heir of entail, when of
age, joins with the existing possessor in resettling the estate,
so as to prolong the entail for a further term. Large proper-
ties, therefore, are rarely free for any considerable period,
from the restraints of a strict settlement ; and English entails
are not, in point of fact, much less injurious than those of
Other countries.

In an economical point of view, the best system of landed
property is that in which land is most completely an object
of commerce; passing readily from hand to hand when a



INHERITANCE.


481


buyer can be found to whom it is worth while to offer a
greater sum for the land, than the value of the income drawn
from it by its existing possessor. This of course is not meant
of ornamental property, which is a source of expense, not
profit ; but only of land employed for industrial uses, and held
for the sake of the income which it affords. Whatever facili-
tates the sale of land, tends to make it a more productive
instrument for the community at large ; whatever prevents or
restricts its sale, subtracts from its usefulness. Now, not only
has entail this effect, but primogeniture also. The desire to
keep land together in large masses, from other motives than
that of promoting its productiveness, often prevents changes
and alienations which would increase its efficiency as an
instrument.

§ 4. On the other hand, a law which, like the French,
restricts the power of bequest to a narrow compass, and com-
pels the equal division of the whole or the greater part of the
property among the children, seems to me, though on different
grounds, also very seriously objectionable. The only reason
for recognizing in the children any claim at all to more than
a provision, sufficient to launch them into life, and enable
them to find a livelihood, is grounded on the expressed or
presumed wish of the parent; whose claim to dispose of what
is actually his own, cannot be set aside by any preten-
sions of others to receive what is not theirs. To control
the rightful owner's liberty of gift, by creating in the children
a legal right superior to it, is to postpone a real claim to an
imaginary one. To this great and paramount objection to
the law, numerous secondary ones may be added. Desirable
as it is that the parent should treat the children with impar-
tiality, and not make an eldest son or a favourite, impartial
division is not always synonymous with equal division.
Some of the children may, without fault of their own, be
less capable than others of providing for themselves: some
may, by other means than their own exertions, be already

YOL. II. I I



482 BOOK V. CHAPTER IX. § 4 .

provided for: and impartiality may therefore require that
the rule observed should not be one of equality, but of
compensation. Even when equality is the object, there are
sometimes better means of attaining it, than the inflexible
rules by which law must necessarily proceed. If one of the
coheirs, being of a quarrelsome litigious disposition, stands
upon his utmost rights, the law cannot make equitable
adjustments; it cannot apportion the property as seems
best for the collective interest of all concerned; if there
are several parcels of land, and the heirs cannot agree
about their value, the law cannot give a parcel to each, but
every separate parcel must be either put up to sale or
divided : if there is a residence, or a park or pleasure-ground,
which would be destroyed, as such, by subdivision, it must
be sold, perhaps at a great pecuniary sacrifice. But what
the law could not do, the parent could. By means of the
liberty of bequest, all these points might be determined
according to reason and the general interest of the persons
concerned; and the spirit of the principle of equal division
might be the better observed, because the testator was
emancipated from its letter. Finally, it would not then be
necessary, as under the compulsory system it is, that the
law should interfere authoritatively in the concerns of indi-
viduals, not only on the occurrence of a death, but through-
out life, in order to guard against the attempts of parents to
frustrate the legal claims of their heirs, under colour of gifts
and other alienations inter vivos.

In conclusion; all owners of property should, I conceive,
have power to dispose by will of every part of it, but not to
determine the person who should succeed to it after the
death of all who were living when the will was made.
Under what restrictions it should be allowable to bequeath
property to one person for life, with remainder to another
person already in existence, is a question belonging to
general legislation, not to political economy. Such settle-
ments would be no greater hindrance to alienation than any



INHERITANCE.


483


case of joint ownership, since the consent of persons actually
in existence is all that would be necessary for any new
arrangement respecting the property.

§ 5. From the subject of Inheritance I now pass to that
of Contracts, and among these, to the important subject of
the Laws of Partnership. How much of good or evil depends
upon these laws, and how important it is that they should
be the best possible, is evident to all who recognize in the
extension of the co-operative principle the great economical
necessity of modern industry. The progress of the produc-
tive arts requiring that many sorts of industrial occupation
should be carried on by larger and larger capitals, the pro-
ductive power of industry must suffer by whatever impedes
the formation of large capitals through the aggregation of
smaller ones. Capitals of the requisite magnitude, belong-
ing to single owners, do not, in most countries, exist in the
needful abundance, and would be still less numerous if the
laws favoured the diffusion instead of the concentration of
property: while it is most undesirable that all those improved
processes, and those means of efficiency and economy in
production, which depend on the possession of large funds,
should be monopolies in the hands of a few rich individuals,
through the difficulties experienced by persons of moderate
or small means in associating their capital. Finally, I must
repeat my conviction, that the industrial economy which
divides society absolutely into two portions, the payers of
wages and the receivers of them, the first counted by thou-
sands and the last by millions, is neither fit for, nor capable
of, indefinite duration: and the possibility of changing this
system for one of combination without dependence, and unity
of interest instead of organized hostility, depends altogether
upon the future developments of the Partnership principle.

Yet there is scarcely any country whose laws do not
throw great, and in most cases, intentional obstacles in the
way of the formation of any numerous partnership. In

I I 2



484 BOOK V. CHAPTER IX. § 5 .

England it is already a serious discouragement, that differ-
ences among partners are, practically speaking, only capable
of adjudication by the Court of Chancery: which is often
worse than placing such questions out of the pale of all law;
since any one of the disputant parties, who is either dis-
honest or litigious, can involve the others at his pleasure
in the expense, trouble, and anxiety, which are the unavoid-
able accompaniments of a Chancery suit, without their having
the power of freeing themselves from the infliction even by
breaking up the association.* Besides this, it required, until
lately, a separate act of the legislature before any joint-stock
association could legally constitute itself, and be empowered
to act as one body. By a statute passed a few years ago,
this necessity is done away; but the statute in question is
described by competent authorities as a “ mass of confusion,”
of which they say that there “ never was such an infliction”
on persons entering into partnership.! When a number
of persons, whether few or many, freely desire to unite their


* Mr. Cecil Fane, the Commissioner of the Bankruptcy Court, in his
evidence before the Committee on the Law of Partnership, says : 11 1 remember
a short time ago reading a written statement by two eminent solicitors, who
said that they had known many partnership accounts go into Chancery, but
that they never knew one come out. . . . Very few of the persons who

would be disposed to engage in partnerships of this kind ” (co-operative associa-
tions of working men) “ have any idea of the truth, namely, that the decision
of questions arising amongst partners is really impracticable.

“ Do they not know that one partner may rob the other without any possi-
bility of his obtaining redress ? — The fact is so ; but whether they know it or
not, I cannot undertake to say.”

This flagrant injustice is, in Mr. Fane’s opinion, wholly attributable to the
defects of the tribunal. '‘My opinion is, that if there is one thing more easy
than another, it is the settlement of partnership questions, and for the simple
reason, that everything which is done in a partnership is entered in the books ;
the evidence therefore is at hand ; if therefore a rational mode of proceeding
were once adopted, the difficulty would altogether vanish.” — Minutes of Evi-
dence annexed to the Report of the Select Committee on the Law of Part-
nership (1851), pp. 85-7.

t Report, ut supra, p. 107.



INHERITANCE.


485


funds for a common undertaking, not asking any peculiar
privilege, nor the power to dispossess any one of property, the
law can have no good reason for throwing difficulties in the way
of the realization of the project. On compliance with a few
simple conditions of publicity, any body of persons ought to
have the power of constituting themselves into a joint-stock
company, or societe en nom collectif \ without asking leave
either of any public officer or of parliament. As an associa-
tion of many partners must practically be under the manage-
ment of a few, every facility ought to be afforded to the
body for exercising the necessary control and check over
those few, whether they be themselves members of the asso-
ciation, or merely its hired servants: and in this point the
English system is still at a lamentable distance from the
standard of perfection,

§ 6. Whatever facilities, however, English law might
give to associations formed on the principles of ordinary
partnership, there is one sort of joint-stock association which
until the year 1855 it absolutely disallowed, and which could
only be called into existence by a special act either of the
legislature or of the crown. I mean, associations with limited
liability.

Associations with limited liability are of two kinds: in
one, the liability of all the partners is limited, in the other
that of some of them only. The first is the societe anonyms
of the French law, which in England had until lately no
other name than that of “ chartered company :” meaning
thereby a joint-stock company whose shareholders, by a
charter from the crown or a special enactment of the legis-
lature, stood exempted from any liability for the debts of the
concern, beyond the amount of their subscriptions. The
other species of limited partnership is that known to the
French law under the name of commandite; of this, which
in England is still unrecognized and illegal, I shall speak
presently.



486 BOOK V. CHAPTER IX. § 6.

If a number of persons choose to associate for carrying
on any operation of commerce or industry, agreeing among
themselves and announcing to those with whom they deal
that the members of the association do not undertake to be
responsible beyond the amount of the subscribed capital ; is
there any reason that the law should raise objections to this
proceeding, and should impose on them the unlimited
responsibility which they disclaim ? For whose sake ? Not
for that of the partners themselves ; for it is they whom the
limitation of responsibility benefits and protects. It must
therefore be for the sake of third parties ; namely, those who
may have transactions with the association, and to whom it
may run in debt beyond what the subscribed capital suffices
to pay. But nobody is obliged to deal with the association ;
still less is any one obliged to give it unlimited credit. The
class of persons with whom such associations have dealings
are in general perfectly capable of taking care of themselves,
and there seems no reason that the law should be more careful
of their interests than they will themselves be ; provided no
false representation is held out, and they are aware from the
first what they have to trust to. The law is warranted in
requiring from all joint-stock associations with limited respon-
sibility, not only that the amount of" capital on which they
profess to carry on business should either be actually paid
up or security given for it (if, indeed, with complete pub-
licity, such a requirement would be necessary) but also that
such accounts should be kept, accessible to individuals, and
if needful, published to the world, as shall render it possible
to ascertain at any time the existing state of the company's
affairs, and to learn whether the capital which is the sole
security for the engagements into which they enter, still sub-
sist unimpaired : the fidelity of such accounts being guarded
by sufficient penalties. When the law has thus afforded to
individuals all practicable means of knowing the circum-
stances which ought to enter into their prudential calcula-
tions in dealing with the company, there seems no more



INHERITANCE.


487


need for interfering with, individual judgment in this sort of
transactions, than in any other part of the private business
of life.

The reason usually urged for such interference is, that
the managers of an association with limited responsibility,
not risking their whole fortunes in the event of loss, while
in case of gain they might profit largely, are not sufficiently
interested in exercising due circumspection, and are under
the temptation of exposing the funds of the association to
improper hazards. It has however been proved by the
evidence of several experienced witnesses before a late
committee of the House of Commons, that associations with
unlimited responsibility, if they have rich shareholders,
can obtain, even when known to be reckless in their trans-
actions, improper credit to an extent far exceeding what
would be given to companies equally ill conducted whose
creditors had only the subscribed capital to rely on.* To
whichever side the balance of evil inclines, it is a considera-
tion of more importance to the shareholders themselves than
to third parties; since, with proper securities for publicity,
the capital of an association with limited liability could not
be engaged in hazards beyond those ordinarily incident to
the business it carries on, without the facts being known,
and becoming the subject of comments by which the credit
of the body would be likely to be affected in quite as great
a degree as the circumstances would justify. If, under
securities for publicity, it were found in practice that com-
panies, formed on the principle of unlimited responsibility,
were more skilfully and more cautiously managed, companies
with limited liability would be unable to maintain an equal
competition with them; and would therefore rarely be formed,
unless when such limitation was the only condition on which
the necessary amount of capital could be raised : and in that


See the Report already referred to, pp. 145-158.



488 BOOK V. CHAPTER IX. § 6.

case it would be very unreasonable to say that their formation
ought to be prevented.

It may further be remarked, that although, with equality
of capital, a company of limited liability offers a somewhat
less security to those who deal with it, than one in which
every shareholder is responsible with his whole fortune, yet
even the weaker of these two securities is in some respects
stronger than that which an individual capitalist can afford.
In the case of an individual, there is such security as can be
founded on his unlimited liability, but not that derived from
publicity of transactions, or from a known and large amount
of paid-up capital. This topic is well treated in an able
paper by M. Coquelin, published in the Revue des Deux
Mondesfor July 1843*

“While third parties who trade with individuals/' says
this writer, “ scarcely ever know, except by approximation,
and even that most vague and uncertain, what is the amount
of capital responsible for the performance of contracts made
with them, those who trade with a societe anonyme can obtain
full information if they seek it, and perform their operations
with a feeling of confidence that cannot exist in the other
case. Again, nothing is easier than for an individual trader
to conceal the extent of his engagements, as no one can
know it certainly but himself. Even his confidential clerk
may be ignorant of it, as the loans he finds himself compelled
to make may not all be of a character to require that they
be entered in his day-book. It is a secret confined to him-
self; one which transpires rarely, and always slowly; one
which is unveiled only when the catastrophe has occurred.
On the contrary, the societe anonyme neither can nor ought
to borrow, without the fact becoming known to all the world
— directors, clerks, shareholders, and the public. Its opera-
tions partake in some respects, of the nature of those of


* The quotation is from a translation published by Mr. H. C. Carey, in an
American periodical, Hunt’s Merchant’s Magazine, for May and June 1845.



INHERITANCE.


489


governments. The light of day penetrates in every direc-
tion, and there can be no secrets from those who seek for
information. Thus all is fixed, recorded, known, of the
capital and debts in the case of the societe anonyme , while all
is uncertain and unknown in the case of the individual
trader. Which of the two, we would ask the reader, presents
the most favourable aspect, or the surest guarantee, to the
view of those who trade with them ?

" Again, availing himself of the obscurity in which his
affairs are shrouded, and which he desires to increase, the
private trader is enabled, so long as his business appears
prosperous, to produce impressions in regard to his means
far exceeding the reality, and thus to establish a credit not
justified by those means. When losses occur, and he sees
himself threatened with bankruptcy, the world is still igno-
rant of his condition, and he finds himself enabled to con-
tract debts far beyond the possibility of payment. The fatal
day arrives, and the creditors find a debt much greater than
had been anticipated, while the means of payment are as
much less. Even this is not all. The same obscurity which
has served him so well thus far, when desiring to magnify
his capital and increase his credit, now affords him the oppor-
tunity of placing a part of that capital beyond the reach of
his creditors. It becomes diminished, if not annihilated. It
hides itself, and not even legal remedies, nor the activity of
creditors, can bring it forth from the dark corners in which
it is placed. . . . Our readers can readily determine for

themselves if practices of this kind are equally easy in the
case of the societe anonyme. We do not doubt that such
things are possible, but we think that they will agree with
us that from its nature, its organization, and the necessary
publicity that attends all its actions, the liability to such
occurrences is very greatly diminished/'

The laws of most countries, England included, have erred
in a twofold manner with regard to joint-stock companies.^
While they have been most unreasonably jealous of allowing



490 BOOK V. CHAPTER IX. § 7.

such associations to exist, especially with limited responsi-
bility, they have generally neglected the enforcement of pub-
licity; the best security to the public against any danger which
might arise from this description of partnerships; and a secu-
rity quite as much required in the case of those associations of
the kind in question, which, by an exception from their
general practice, they suffered to exist. Even in the instance
of the Bank of England, which holds a monopoly from the
legislature, and has had partial control over a matter of so
much public interest as the state of the circulating medium, it
is only within these few years that any publicity has been
enforced; and the publicity was at first of an extremely in-
complete character, though now, for most practical purposes,
probably at length sufficient.

§ 7. The other kind of limited partnership which de-
mands our attention, is that in which the managing partner
or partners are responsible with their whole fortunes for the
engagements of the concern, but have others associated with
them who contribute only definite sums, and are not liable for
anything beyond, though they participate in the profits ac-
cording to any rule which may be agreed on. This is called
partnership en commandite: and the partners with limited
liability (to whom, by the French law, all interference in the
management of the concern is interdicted) are known by the
name commanditaires. Such partnerships are not allowed
by English law: whoever shares in the profits is liable
for the debts, to as plenary an extent as the managing
partner.

For such prohibition no satisfactory defence has ever, so far
as I am aware, been made. Even the insufficient reason given
against limiting the responsibility of shareholders in a joint-
stock company, does not apply here ; there being no diminu-
tion of the motives to circumspect management, since all who
Jiake any part in the direction of the concern are liable with
their whole fortunes. To third parties, again, the security is



INHERITANCE.


491


improved by the existence of commandite; since the amount
subscribed by commanditaires is all of it available to cre-
ditors, the commanditaires losing their whole investment
before any creditor can lose anything; while, if instead of be-
coming partners to that amount, they had lent the sum at an
interest equal to the profit they derived from it, they would
have shared with the other creditors in the residue of the
estate, diminishing pro rata the dividend obtained by all.
While the practice of commandite thus conduces to the inte-
rest of creditors, it is often highly desirable for the contracting
parties themselves. The managers are enabled to obtain the
aid of a much greater amount of capital than they could
borrow on their own security ; and persons are induced to aid
useful undertakings, by embarking limited portions of capital
in them, when they would not, and often could not pru-
dently, have risked their whole fortunes on the chances of the
enterprise.

It may perhaps be thought that where due facilities are
afforded to joint-stock companies, commandite partnerships are
not required. But there are classes of cases to which the
commandite principle must always be better adapted than the
joint-stock principle. “Suppose,” says M. Coquelin, “an in-
ventor seeking for a capital to carry his invention into prac-
tice. To obtain the aid of capitalists, he must offer them a
share of the anticipated benefit; they must associate them-
selves with him in the chances of its success. In such a case,
which of the forms would he select? Not a common part-
nership, certainly;” for various reasons, and especially the ex-
treme difficulty of finding a partner with capital, willing to
risk his whole fortune on the success of the invention.*


* “ There has been a great deal of commiseration professed,” says Mr.
Duncan, solicitor, “ towards the poor inventor; he has been oppressed by
the high cost of patents; but his chief oppression has been the partnership
law, which prevents his getting any one to help him to develop his invention.
He is a poor man, and therefore cannot give security to a creditor ; no one
will lend him money ; the rate of interest offered, however high it may be, is



492 BOOK V. CHAPTER IX. § 7 .

“ Neither would he select the societe anonyme ” or any other
form of joint-stock company, “ in which he might be super-
seded as manager. He would stand, in such an association,
on no better footing than any other shareholder, and he might
be lost in the crowd; whereas, the association existing, as it
were, by and for him, the management would appear to
belong to him as a matter of right. Cases occur in which a
merchant or a manufacturer, without being precisely an in-
ventor, has undeniable claims to the management of an un-
dertaking, from the possession of qualities peculiarly calculated
to promote its success. So great, indeed/' continues M.
Coquelin, “ is the necessity, in many cases, for the limited
partnership, that it is difficult to conceive how we could dis-
pense with or replace it and in reference to his own country
he is probably in the right.

Where there is so great a readiness as in England, on the
part of the public, to form joint-stock associations, even with-
out the encouragement of a limitation of responsibility; com-
mandite partnership, though its prohibition is in principle


not an attraction. But if by the alteration of the law he could allow capitalists
to take an interest with him and share the profits, while their risk should bo
confined to the capital they embarked, there is very little doubt at all that he
would frequently get assistance from capitalists ; whereas at the present
moment, with the law as it stands, he is completely destroyed, and his inven-
tion is useless to him ; he struggles month after month ; he applies again and
again to the capitalist without avail. I know it practically in two or three
cases of patented inventions ; especially one where parties with capital were
desirous of entering into an undertaking of great moment in Liverpool, but
five or six different gentlemen were deterred from doing so, all feeling the
strongest objection to what each one called the cursed partnership law.”
Report, p. 155.

Mr. Fane says, “In the course of my professional life, as a Commissioner
of the Court of Bankruptcy, I have learned that the most unfortunate man in
the world is an inventor. The difficulty which an inventor finds in getting at
capital, involves him in all sorts of embarrassments, and he ultimately is for
the most part a ruined man, and somebody else gets possession of his inven-
tion.” Ib. p. 82.



INHERITANCE.


493


quite indefensible, cannot be deemed to be, in a merely eco-
nomical point of view, of the imperative necessity which
M. Coquelin ascribes to it. Yet the inconveniences are not
small, which arise indirectly from those provisions of the law
by which every one who shares in the profits of a concern is
subject to the full liabilities of an unlimited partnership. It
is impossible to say how many or what useful modes of com-
bination are rendered impracticable by this state of the law.
It is sufficient for its condemnation that, unless in some
way relaxed, it is inconsistent with the payment of wages
in part by a percentage on profits; in other words, the
association of the operatives as virtual partners with the
capitalist.

It is, above all, with reference to the improvement and
elevation of the working classes that complete freedom in the
conditions of partnership is indispensable. Combinations
such as the associations of workpeople described in a former
chapter, which have been so eminently successful in France,
are the most powerful means of effecting the social emanci-
pation of the labourers through their own moral qualities.
Nor is the liberty of association important solely for its exam-
ples of success, but fully as much so for the sake of attempts
which would not succeed ; but by their failure would give in-
struction more impressive than can be afforded by anything
short of actual experience. Every theory of social improve-
ment, the worth of which is capable of being brought to
an experimental test, should be permitted, and even encou-
raged, to submit itself to that test. From such experiments
the active portion of the working classes would derive
lessons which they would be slow to learn from the teach-
ing of persons supposed to have interests and prejudices ad-
verse to their good; would obtain the means of correcting,
at no cost to society, what is now erroneous in their notions
of the means of establishing their independence; and of
discovering the conditions, moral, intellectual, and industrial,



494 BOOK V. CHAPTER IX. § 7 .

which are indispensably necessary for effecting without injus-
tice, or for effecting at all, the social regeneration they aspire to.*

The French law of partnership is superior to the English
in permitting commandite ; and superior, in having no such
unmanageable instrument as the Court of Chancery, all cases
arising from commercial transactions being adjudicated in a
comparatively cheap and expeditious manner by a tribunal
of merchants. In other respects the French system is far
worse than the English. A joint-stock company with limited
responsibility cannot be formed without the express authori-
zation of the department of government called the Gonseil
d’Etat , a body of administrators, generally entire strangers
to industrial transactions, who have no interest in promoting
enterprises, and are apt to think that the purpose of their
institution is to restrain them; whose consent cannot in any
case be obtained without an amount of time and labour which
is a very serious hindrance to the commencement of an enter-
prise, while the extreme uncertainty of obtaining that consent
at all is a great discouragement to capitalists who would be
willing to subscribe. In regard to joint-stock companies with-
out limitation of responsibility, which in England exist in such
numbers and are formed with such facility, these associations
cannot, in France, exist at all ; for, in cases of unlimited part-
nership, the French law does not permit the division of the
capital into transferable shares.

The best existing laws of partnership appear to be those
of the New England States. According to Mr. Carey, f
“nowhere is association so little trammelled by regulations
as in New England ; the consequence of which is, that it is


* By an act of the year 1852, called the Industrial and Provident Part-
nerships Act, for which the nation is indebted to the public-spirited exertions of
Mr. Slaney, industrial associations of working people are admitted to the
statutory privileges of Friendly Societies. This not only exempts them from the
formalities applicable to joint-stock companies, but provides for the settlement
of disputes among the partners without recourse to the Court of Chancery.

+ In a note appended to his translation of M. Coquelin’s paper.



INHERITANCE.


495


carried to a greater extent there, and particularly in Massa-
chusetts and Rhode Island, than in any other part of the
world. In these states, the soil is covered with compagnies
anonymes — chartered companies — for almost every conceiv-
able purpose. Every town is a corporation for the manage-
ment of its roads, bridges, and schools; which are, therefore,
under the direct control of those who pay for them, and
are consequently well managed. Academies and churches,
lyceums and libraries, saving-fund societies, and trust com-
panies, exist in numbers proportioned to the wants of the
people, and all are corporations. Every district has its local
bank, of a size to suit its wants, the stock of which is owned
by the small capitalists of the neighbourhood, and managed
by themselves; the consequence of which is, that in no part
of the world is the system of banking so perfect — so little
liable to vibration in the amount of loans — the necessary
effect of which is, that in none is the value of property so
little affected by changes in the amount or value of the
currency resulting from the movements of their own banking
institutions. In the two states to which we have particu-
larly referred, they are almost two hundred in number.
Massachusetts, alone, offers to our view fifty-three insurance
offices, of various forms, scattered through the state, and
all incorporated. Factories are incorporated, and are owned
in shares; and every one that has any part in the manage-
ment of their concerns, from the purchase of the raw material
to the sale of the manufactured article, is a part owner;
while every one employed in them has a prospect of be-
coming one, by the use of prudence, exertion, and economy.
Charitable associations exist in large numbers, and all are
incorporated. Fishing vessels are owned in shares by those
who navigate them ; and the sailors of a whaling ship
depend in a great degree, if not altogether, upon the suc-
cess of the voyage for their compensation. Every master
of a vessel trading in the Southern Ocean is a part owner,
and the interest he possesses is a strong inducement to



496


BOOK V. CHAPTER IX. § 8.

exertion and economy, by aid of which the people of New
England are rapidly driving out the competition of other
nations for the trade of that part of the world. Wher-
ever settled, they exhibit the same tendency to combination
of action. In New York they are the chief owners of the
lines of packet ships, which are divided into shares, owned
by the shipbuilders, the merchants, the master, and the
mates; which last generally acquire the means of becoming
themselves masters, and to this is due their great success.
The system is the most perfectly democratic of any in the
world. It affords to every labourer, every sailor, every ope-
rative, male or female, the prospect of advancement ; and its
results are precisely such as we should have reason to expect.
In no part of the world are talent, industry, and prudence,
so certain to be largely rewarded/'

The cases of insolvency and fraud on the part of chartered
companies in America, which have caused so much loss and
so much scandal in Europe, did not occur in the part of the
Union to which this extract refers, but in other States, in
which the right of association is much more fettered by legal
restrictions, and in which, accordingly, joint-stock associations
are not comparable in number or variety to those of New
England. Mr. Carey adds, “ A careful examination of the
systems of the several states, can scarcely, we think, fail to
convince the reader of the advantage resulting from permitting
men to determine among themselves the terms upon which
they will associate, and allowing the associations that may
be formed to contract with the public as to the terms upon
which they will trade together, whether of the limited or
unlimited liability of the partners and I concur in thinking
that to this conclusion, science and legislation must come.

§ 8. I proceed to the subject of Insolvency Laws.

Good laws on this subject are important, first and prin-
cipally, on the score of public morals ; which are on no point
more under the influence of the law, for good and evil, than



INSOLVENCY.


497


in a matter belonging so pre-eminently to the province of
law as the preservation of pecuniary integrity. But the
subject is also, in a merely economical point of view, of great
importance. First, because the economical well-being of a
people, and of mankind, depends in an especial manner upon
their being able to trust each other s engagements. Secondly,
because one of the risks, or expenses, of industrial operations
is the risk or expense of what are commonly called bad debts,
and every saving which can be effected in this liability is a
diminution of cost of production ; by dispensing with an item
of outlay which in no way conduces to the desired end, and
which must be paid for either by the consumer of the com-
modity, or from the general profits of capital, according as the
burthen is peculiar or general.

The laws and practice of nations on this subject have
almost always been in extremes. The ancient laws of most
countries have been all severity to the debtor. They have
invested the creditor with a power of coercion, more or less
tyrannical, which he might use against his insolvent debtor,
either to extort the surrender of hidden property, or to obtain
satisfaction of a vindictive character, which might console him
for the non-payment of the debt. This arbitrary power has
extended, in some countries, to making the insolvent debtor
serve the creditor as his slave : in which plan there were some
grains of common sense, since it might possibly be regarded
as a scheme for making him work out the debt by his labour.
In England, the coercion assumed the milder form of ordinary
imprisonment. The one and the other were the barbarous
expedients of a rude age, repugnant to justice as well as to
humanity. Unfortunately the reform of them, like that of the
criminal law generally, has been taken in hand as an affair of
humanity only, not of justice: and the modish humanity of
the present time, which is essentially a thing of one idea, has
in this as in other cases, gone into a violent reaction against
the ancient severity, and might almost be supposed to see in
the fact of having lost or squandered other people's property,

VOL. II. K K



498


BOOK V. CHAPTER IX. § 8.


a peculiar title to indulgence. Everything in the law which
attached disagreeable consequences to that fact, was gradu-
ally relaxed, or entirely got rid of: until the demoralizing
effects of this laxity became so evident as to determine, by a
recent enactment, a partial but very salutary movement in the
reverse direction.

The indulgence of the laws to those who have made
themselves unable to pay their just debts, is usually de-
fended, on the plea that the sole object of the law should be,
in case of insolvency, not to coerce the person of the debtor,
but to get at his property, and distribute it fairly among the
creditors. Assuming that this is and ought to be the sole
object, the mitigation of the law was in the first instance
carried so far as to sacrifice that object. Imprisonment at the
discretion of a creditor was really a powerful engine for ex-
tracting from the debtor any property which he had concealed
or otherwise made away with : and it remains to be shown by
experience whether, in depriving creditors of this instrument,
the law, even as last amended, has furnished them with a
sufficient equivalent. But the doctrine, that the law has done
all that ought to be expected from it, when it has put the
creditors in possession of the property of an insolvent, is in
itself a totally inadmissible piece of spurious humanity. It
is the business of law to prevent wrong-doing, and not simply
to patch up the consequences of it when it has been com-
mitted. The law is bound to take care that insolvency shall
not be a good pecuniary speculation ; that men shall not have
the privilege of hazarding other people's property without
their knowledge or consent, taking the profits of the enter-
prise if it is successful, and if it fails, throwing the loss upon
the rightful owners; and that they shall not find it answer to
make themselves unable to pay their just debts, by spending
the money of their creditors in personal indulgence. It is
admitted that what is technically called fraudulent bank-
ruptcy, the false pretence of inability to pay, is, when
detected, properly subject to punishment. But does it
follow that insolvency is not the consequence of misconduct



INSOLVENCY.


499


because the inability to pay may be real ? If a man has been
a spendthrift, or a gambler, with property on which his credi-
tors had a prior claim, shall he pass scot-free because the mis-
chief is consummated and the money gone ? Is there any
very material difference in point of morality between this
conduct, and those other kinds of dishonesty which go by the
names of fraud and embezzlement ?

Such cases are not a minority, but a large majority among
insolvencies. The statistics of bankruptcy prove the fact.
“ By far the greater part of all insolvencies arise from noto-
rious misconduct; the proceedings of the Insolvent Debtors
Court and of the Bankruptcy Court will prove it. Excessive
and unjustifiable overtrading, or most absurd speculation in
commodities, merely because the poor speculator ‘thought
they would get up/ but why he thought so he cannot tell;
speculation in hops, in tea, in silk, in com — things with
which he is altogether unacquainted ; wild and absurd invest-
ments in foreign funds, or in joint-stocks; these are among
the most innocent causes of bankruptcy The experienced
and intelligent writer from whom I quote, corroborates his
assertion by the testimony of several of the official assignees
of the Bankruptcy Court. One of them says, “As far as I
can collect from the books and documents furnished by the
bankrupts, it seems to me that" in the whole number of
cases which occurred during a given time in the court to
which he was attached, “ fourteen have been ruined by spe-
culations in things with which they were unacquainted; three
by neglecting book-keeping; ten by trading beyond their
capital and means, and the consequent loss and expense of
accommodation-bills; forty-nine by expending more than
they could reasonably hope their profits would be, though
their business yielded a fair return; none by any general
distress, or the falling off of any particular branch of trade."


* From a volume published in 1845, entitled, “ Credit the Life of Com-
merce,” by Mr. J. H. Elliott.


K K 2



500 BOOK V. CHAPTER IX. § 8.

Another of these officers says, “The new Court has been
open upwards of eighteen months, during which period fifty-
two cases of bankruptcy have come under my care. It is
my opinion that thirty-two of these have arisen from an
imprudent expenditure, and five partly from that cause, and
partly from a pressure on the business in which the bankrupts
were employed. Fifteen I attribute to improvident specu-
lations, combined in many instances with an extravagant
mode of life."

To these citations the author adds the following state-
ments from his personal means of knowledge. “Many
insolvencies are produced by tradesmen's indolence; they
keep no books, or at least imperfect ones, which they never
balance; they never take stock; they employ servants, if
their trade be extensive, whom they are too indolent even to
supervise, and then become insolvent. It is not too much to
say, that one-half of all the persons engaged in trade, even in
London, never take stock at all : they go on year after year
without knowing how their affairs stand, and at last, like the
child at school, they find to their surprise, but one halfpenny
left in their pocket. I will venture to say that not one-fourth
of all the persons in the provinces, either manufacturers,
tradesmen, or farmers, ever take stock ; nor in fact does one-
half of them ever keep account-books, deserving any other
name than memorandum books. I know sufficient of the
concerns of five hundred small tradesmen in the provinces, to
be enabled to say, that not one-fifth of them ever take stock,
or keep even the most ordinary accounts. I am prepared to
say of such tradesmen, from carefully-prepared tables, giving
every advantage where there has been any doubt as to the
causes of their insolvency, that where nine happen from ex-
travagance or dishonesty, one" at most “ may be referred to
misfortune alone."*

Is it rational to expect among the trading classes any


Pp. 50-1.



INSOLVENCY.


501


high sense of justice, honour, or integrity, if the law enables
men who act in this manner to shuffle off the consequences
of their misconduct upon those who have been so unfor-
tunate as to trust them; and practically proclaims that it
looks upon insolvency thus produced, as a “ misfortune/' not
an offence ?

It is, of course, not denied, that insolvencies do arise from
causes beyond the control of the debtor, and that, in many
more cases, his culpability is not of a high order; and the law
ought to make a distinction in favour of such cases, but not
without a searching investigation; nor should the case ever
be let go without having ascertained, in the most complete
manner practicable, not the fact of insolvency only, but the
cause of it. To have been trusted with money or money's
worth, and to have lost or spent it, is primd facie evidence
of something wrong: and it is not for the creditor to prove,
which he cannot do in one case out of ten, that there has been
criminality, but for the debtor to rebut the presumption, by
laying open the whole state of his affairs, and shewing either
that there has been no misconduct, or that the misconduct
has been of an excusable kind. If he fail in this, he ought
never to be dismissed without a punishment proportioned to
the degree of blame which seems justly imputable to him;
which punishment, however, might be shortened or mitigated
in proportion as he appeared likely to exert himself in repairing
the injury done.

It is a common argument with those who approve a re-
laxed system of insolvency laws, that credit, except in the
great operations of commerce, is an evil ; and that to deprive
creditors of legal redress is a judicious means of preventing
credit from being given. That which is given by retail
dealers to unproductive consumers is, no doubt, to the excess
to which it is carried, a considerable evil. This, however,
is only true of large, and especially of long, credits; for
there is credit whenever goods are not paid for before they
quit the shop, or, at least, the custody of the seller; and



502 BOOK V. CHAPTER IX. § 8.

there would be much inconvenience in putting an end to
this sort of credit. But a large proportion of the debts on
which insolvency laws take effect, are those due by small
tradesmen to the dealers who supply them: and on no cla*s
of debts does the demoralization occasioned by a bad state
of the law, operate more perniciously. These are com-
mercial credits, which no one wishes to see curtailed ; their
existence is of great importance to the general industry of
the country, and to numbers of honest, well-conducted persons
of small means, to whom it would be a great injury that
they should be prevented from obtaining the accommodation
they need, and would not abuse, through the omission of the
law to provide just remedies against dishonest or reckless
borrowers.

But though it were granted that retail transactions, on
any footing but that of ready money payment, are an evil,
and their entire suppression a fit object for legislation to aim
at; a worse mode of compassing that object could scarcely
be invented, than to permit those who have been trusted by
others to cheat and rob them with impunity. The law does
not generally select the vices of mankind as the appropriate
instrument for inflicting chastisement on the comparatively
innocent : when it seeks to discourage any course of action,
it does so by applying inducements of its own, not by out-
lawing those who act in the manner it deems objectionable,
and letting loose the predatory instincts of the worthless part
of mankind to feed upon them. If a man has committed
murder, the law condemns him to death; but it does not
promise impunity to anybody who may kill him for the sake
of taking his purse. The offence of believing another's word,
even rashly, is not so heinous that, for the sake of discouraging
it, the spectacle should be brought home to every door, of
triumphant rascality, with the law on its side, mocking the
victims it has made. This pestilent example has been very
widely exhibited since the relaxation of the insolvency laws.
It is idle to expect that, even by absolutely depriving ere-



INSOLVENCY.


503


ditors of all legal redress, the kind of credit which is con-
sidered objectionable would really be very much checked.
Rogues and swindlers are still an exception among mankind,
and people will go on trusting each other’s promises. Large
^dealers, in abundant business, would refuse credit, as many
of them already do : but in the eager competition of a great
town, what can be expected from the tradesman to whom a
single customer is of importance, the beginner, perhaps, who
is striving to get into business? He will take the risk, even
if it were still greater; he is ruined if he cannot sell his
goods, and he can but be ruined if he is defrauded. Nor
does it avail to say, that he ought to make proper inquiries,
and ascertain the character of those to whom he supplies
goods on trust. In some of the most flagrant cases of pro-
fligate debtors which have come before the Bankruptcy Court,
the swindler had been able to give, and had given, excellent
references.*


* The following extracts from the French Code de Commerce, (the trans-
lation is that of Mr. Fane,) show the great extent to which the just distinctions
are made, and the proper investigations provided for, by French law. The
word ba7iqueroute, which can only be translated by bankruptcy, is, however,
confined in France to culpable insolvency, which is distinguished into simple
bankruptcy and fraudulent bankruptcy. The following are cases of simple
bankruptcy : —

“Every insolvent who, in the investigation of his affairs, shall appear
chargeable with one or more of the following offences, shall be proceeded against
as a simple bankrupt.

“If his house expenses, which he is bound to enter regularly in a day-book,
appear excessive.

“If he has spent considerable sums at play, or in operations of pure
hazard.

“ If it shall appear that he has borrowed largely, or resold merchandize at
a loss, or below the current price, after it appeared by his last account- taking
that his debts exceeded his assets by one- half.

“ If he has issued negotiable securities to three times the amount of his
available assets, according to his last account-taking.

“ The following may also be proceeded against as simple bankrupts : —

“ He who has not declared his own insolvency in the manner prescribed
by law : ?



504


BOOK V. CHAPTER IX. § 8.


ft He who has not come in and surrendered within the time limited, having
no legitimate excuse for his absence ;

“He who either produces no books at all, or produces such as have been
irregularly kept, and this although the irregularities may not indicate fraud.”

The penalty for 4 simple bankruptcy’ is imprisonment for a term of not
less than one month, nor more than two years. The following are cases of
fraudulent bankruptcy, of which the punishment is travaux fords , (the galleys)
for a term : —

“ If he has attempted to account for his property by fictitious expenses and
losses, or if he does not fully account for all his receipts :

“ If he has fraudulently concealed any sum of money or any debt due to
him, or any merchandize or other moveables :

“ If he has made fraudulent sales or gifts of his property :

44 If he has allowed fictitious debts to be proved against his estate :

“If he has been entrusted with property, either merely to keep, or with
special directions as to its use, and has nevertheless appropriated it to his own
use (for such acts of peculation by trustees there is generally in England only
a civil remedy, and that too through the Court of Chancery :)

44 If he has purchased real property in a borrowed name :

44 If he has concealed his books.

“ The following may also be proceeded against in a similar way : —

44 He who has not kept books, or whose books shall not exhibit his real
situation as regards his debts and credits.

“He who, having obtained a protection (sauf -conduit), shall not have duly
attended.”

These various provisions relate only to commercial insolvency. The laws in
regard to ordinary debts are considerably more rigorous to the debtor.



CHAPTER X.


OF INTERFERENCES OF GOVERNMENT GROUNDED ON
ERRONEOUS THEORIES.

§ 1. From the necessary functions of government, and
the effects produced on the economical interests of society by
their good or ill discharge, we proceed to the functions which
belong to what I have termed, for want of a better designation,
the optional class; those which are sometimes assumed by
governments and sometimes not, and which it is not unani-
mously admitted that they ought to exercise.

Before entering on the general principles of the question,
it will be advisable to clear from our path all those cases, in
which government interference works ill, because grounded on
false views of the subject interfered with. Such cases have
no connexion with any theory respecting the proper limits of
interference. There are some things with which governments
ought not to meddle, and other things with which they ought;
but whether right or wrong in itself, the interference must
work for ill, if government, not understanding the subject
which it meddles with, meddles to bring about a result which
would be mischievous. We will therefore begin by passing
in review various false theories, which have from time to time
formed the ground of acts of government more or less econo-
mically injurious.

Former writers on political economy have found it needful
to devote much trouble and space to this department of
their subject. It has now happily become possible, at least
in our own country, greatly to abridge this purely negative
part of our discussions. The false theories of political eco-
nomy which have done so much mischief in times past, are
entirely discredited among all who have not lagged behind



506


BOOK V. CHAPTER X. § 1.


the general progress of opinion ; and few of the enactments
which were once grounded on those theories still help to
deform the statute-book. As the principles, on which their
condemnation rests, have been fully set forth in other parts of
this treatise, we may here content ourselves with a few brief
indications.

Of these false theories, the most notable is the doctrine of
Protection to Native Industry; a phrase meaning the prohi-
bition, or the discouragement by heavy duties, of such foreign
commodities as are capable of being produced at home. If
the theory involved in this system had been correct, the prac-
tical conclusions grounded on it would not have been unrea-
sonable. The theory was, that to buy things produced at
home was a national benefit, and the introduction of foreign
commodities, generally a national loss. It being at the same
time evident that the interest of the consumer is to buy
foreign commodities in preference to domestic whenever they
are either cheaper or better, the interest of the consumer ap-
peared in this respect to be contrary to the public interest;
he was certain, if left to his own inclinations, to do what
according to the theory was injurious to the public.

It was shewn, however, in our analysis of the effects of
international trade, as it had been often shewn by former
writers, that the importation of foreign commodities, in the
common course of traffic, never takes place, except when it is,
economically speaking, a national good, by causing the same
amount of commodities to be obtained at a smaller cost of
labour and capital to the country. To prohibit, therefore, this
importation, or impose duties which prevent it, is to render
the labour and capital of the country less efficient in produc-
tion than they would otherwise be ; and compel a waste, of
the difference between the labour and capital necessary for the
home production of the commodity, and that which is required
for producing the things with which it can be purchased
from abroad. The amount of national loss thus occasioned is
measured by the excess of the price at which the commodity



PROTECTIONISM.


507


is produced, over that at which it could be imported. In the
case of manufactured goods, the whole difference between
the two prices is absorbed in indemnifying the producers for
waste of labour, or of the capital which supports that labour.
Those who are supposed to be benefited, namely the makers
of the protected articles, (unless they form an exclusive
company, and have a monopoly against their own country-
men as well as against foreigners,) do not obtain higher
profits than other people. All is sheer loss, to the country
as well as to the consumer. When the protected article is a
product of agriculture — the waste of labour not being incurred
on the whole produce, but only on what may be called the
last instalment of it — the extra price is only in part an in-
demnity for waste, the remainder being a tax paid to the
landlords.

The restrictive and prohibitory policy was originally
grounded on what is called the Mercantile System, which
representing the advantage of foreign trade to consist solely
in bringing money into the country, gave artificial encourage-
ment to exportation of goods, and discountenanced their
importation. The only exceptions to the system were those
required by the system itself. The materials and instruments
of production were the subjects of a contrary policy, directed
however to the same end; they were freely imported, and not
permitted to be exported, in order that manufacturers, being
more cheaply supplied with the requisites of manufacture,
might be able to sell cheaper, and therefore to export more
largely. For a similar reason, importation was allowed and
even favoured, when confined to the productions of countries
which were supposed to take from the country still more than
it took from them, thus enriching it by a favourable balance
of trade. As part of the same system, colonies were founded,
for the supposed advantage of compelling them to buy our
commodities, or at all events not to buy those of any other
country: in return for which restriction, we were generally
willing to come under an equivalent obligation with respect



508 BOOK V. CHAPTER X. § 1.

to the staple productions of the colonists. The consequences
of the theory were pushed so far, that it was not unusual even
to give bounties on exportation, and induce foreigners to buy
from us rather than from other countries, by a cheapness
which we artificially produced, by paying part of the price for
them, out of our own taxes. This is a stretch beyond the
point yet reached by any private tradesman in his compe-
tition for business. No shopkeeper, I should think, ever
made a practice of bribing customers by selling goods to them
at a permanent loss, making it up to himself from other funds
in his possession.

The principle of the Mercantile Theory is now given up
even by writers and governments who still cling to the
restrictive system. Whatever hold that system has over
men's minds, independently of the private interests ex-
posed to real or apprehended loss by its abandonment,
is derived from fallacies other than the old notion of the
benefits of heaping up money in the country. The most
effective of these is the specious plea of employing our own
countrymen and our national industry, instead of feeding
and supporting the industry of foreigners. The answer to
this, from the principles laid down in former chapters, is
evident. Without reverting to the fundamental theorem dis-
cussed in an early part of the present treatise,* respecting the
nature and sources of employment for labour, it is sufficient
to say, what has usually been said by the advocates of free
trade, that the alternative is not between employing our
own people and foreigners, but between employing one
class and another of our own people. The imported com-
modity is always paid for, directly or indirectly; with the
produce of our own industry: that industry being, at the
same time, rendered more productive, since, with the same
labour and outlay, we are enabled to possess ourselves
of a greater quantity of the article. Those who have not


Supra, vol. i. pp. 98 et seqq.



PROTECTIONISM.


509


well considered the subject are apt to suppose that our ex-
porting an equivalent in our own produce, for the foreign
articles we consume, depends on contingencies — on the con-
sent of foreign countries to make some corresponding relaxa-
tion of their own restrictions, or on the question whether
those from whom we buy are induced by that circumstance
to buy more from us; and that, if these things, or things
equivalent to them, do not happen, the payment must be
made in money. Now, in the first place, there is nothing
more objectionable in a money payment than in payment by
any other medium, if the state of the market makes it the
most advantageous remittance; and the money itself was
first acquired, and would again be replenished, by the ex-
port of an equivalent value of our own products. But, in
the next place, a very short interval of paying in money
would so lower prices as either to stop a part of the impor-
tation, or raise up a foreign demand for our produce,
sufficient to pay for the imports. I grant that this disturb-
ance of the equation of international demand would be in
some degree to our disadvantage, in the purchase of other
imported articles; and that a country which prohibits some
foreign commodities, does, cceteris paribus , obtain those which
it does not prohibit, at a less price than it would otherwise
have to pay. To express the same thing in other words; a
country which destroys or prevents altogether certain branches
of foreign trade, thereby annihilating a general gain to the
world, which would be shared in some proportion between
itself and other countries — does, in some circumstances,
draw to itself, at the expense of foreigners, a larger share than
would else belong to it of the gain arising from that portion
of its foreign trade which it suffers to subsist. But even
this it can only be enabled to do, if foreigners do not main-
tain equivalent prohibitions or restrictions against its com-
modities. In any case, the justice or expediency of destroy-
ing one of two gains, in order to engross a rather larger
share of the other, does not require much discussion: the



510 BOOK y. CHAPTER X. § 1 .

gain, too, which is destroyed, being, in proportion to the
magnitude of the transactions, the larger of the two, since it
is the one which capital, left to itself, is supposed to seek by
preference.

Defeated as a general theory, the Protectionist doctrine
finds support in some particular cases, from considerations
which, when really in point, involve greater interests than
mere saving of labour ; the interests of national subsistence
and of national defence. The discussions on the Com Laws
have familiarized everybody with the plea, that we ought to
be independent of foreigners for the food of the people ; and
the Navigation Laws were grounded, in theory and profes-
sion, on the necessity of keeping up a “ nursery of seamen”
for the navy. On this last subject I at once admit, that the
object is worth the sacrifice ; and that a country exposed to
invasion by sea, if it cannot otherwise have sufficient ships
and sailors of its own to secure the means of manning on an
emergency an adequate fleet, is quite right in obtaining those
means, even at an economical sacrifice in point of cheapness
of transport. When the English navigation laws were
enacted, the Dutch, from their maritime skill and their low
rate of profit at home, were able to carry for other nations,
England included, at cheaper rates than those nations could
carry for themselves : which placed all other countries at a
great comparative disadvantage in obtaining experienced
seamen for their ships of war. The Navigation Laws, by
which this deficiency was remedied, and at the same time a
blow struck against the maritime power of a nation with
which England was then frequently engaged in hostilities,
were probably, though economically disadvantageous, politi-
cally expedient. But English ships and sailors can now
navigate as cheaply as those of any other country; main-
taining at least an equal competition with the other maritime
nations even in their own trade. The ends which ma.y once
have justified Navigation Laws, require them no longer, and



PROTECTIONISM.


511


afforded no reason for maintaining this invidious ^exception
to the general rule of free trade.

With regard to subsistence, the plea of the Protectionists
has been so often and so triumphantly met, that it requires
little notice here. That country is the most steadily as well
as the most abundantly supplied with food, which draws its
supplies from the largest surface. It is ridiculous to found a
general system of policy on so improbable a danger as that
of being at war with all the nations of the world at once ; or
to suppose that, even if inferior at sea, a whole country could
be blockaded like a town, or that the growers of food in other
countries would not be as anxious not to lose an advan-
tageous market, as we should be not to be deprived of their
corn. On the subject, however, of subsistence, there is one
point which deserves more especial consideration. In cases
of actual or apprehended scarcity, many countries of Europe
are accustomed to stop the exportation of food. Is this, or
not, sound policy ? There can be no doubt that in the pre-
sent state of international morality, a people cannot, any
more than an individual, be blamed for not starving itself to
feed others. But if the greatest amount of good to man-
kind on the whole, were the end aimed at in the maxims of
international conduct, such collective churlishness would
certainly be condemned by them. Suppose that in ordinary
circumstances the trade in food were perfectly free, so that
the price in one country could not habitually exceed that in
any other by more than the cost of carriage, together with a
moderate profit to the importer. A general scarcity ensues,
affecting all countries, but in unequal degrees. If the price
rose in one country more than in others, it would be a proof
that in that country the scarcity was severest, and that by
permitting food to go freely thither from any other country,
it would be spared from a less urgent necessity to relieve a
greater. When the interests, therefore, of all countries are
considered, free exportation is desirable, To the exporting



512


BOOK V. CHAPTER X. § 1.


country considered separately, it may, at least on the par-
ticular occasion, be an inconvenience : but taking into ac-
count that the country which is now the giver, will in some
future season be the receiver, and the one that is benefited
by the freedom, I cannot but think that even to the appre-
hension of food-rioters it might be made apparent, that in
such cases they should do to others what they would wish
done to themselves.

In countries in which the system of Protection is declin-
ing, but not yet wholly given up, such as the United States,
a doctrine has come into notice which is a sort of compromise
between free trade and restriction, namely, that protection
for protection's sake is improper, but that there is nothing
objectionable in having as much protection as may incident-
ally result from a tariff framed solely for revenue. Even in
England, regret is sometimes expressed that a “moderate
fixed duty" was not preserved on corn, on account of the
revenue it would yield. Independently, however, of the
general impolicy of taxes on the necessaries of life, this
doctrine overlooks the fact, that revenue is received only on
the quantity imported, but that the tax is paid on the entire
quantity consumed. To make the public pay much that the
treasury may receive a little, is no eligible mode of obtaining
a revenue. In the case of manufactured articles the doctrine
involves a palpable inconsistency. The object of the duty
as a means of revenue, is inconsistent with its affording, even
incidentally, any protection. It can only operate as protection
in so far as it prevents importation ; and to whatever degree
it prevents importation, it affords no revenue.

The only case in which, on mere principles of political
economy, protecting duties can be defensible, is when they
are imposed temporarily (especially in a young and rising
nation) in hopes of naturalizing a foreign industry, in itself
perfectly suitable to the circumstances of the country. The
superiority of one country over another in a branch of pro-
duction, often arises only from having begun it sooner.



PROTECTIONISM.


513


There may be no inherent advantage on one part, or dis-
advantage on the other, but only a present superiority of
acquired skill and experience. A country which has this
skill and experience yet to acquire, may in other respects be
better adapted to the production than those which were earlier
in the field: and besides, it is a just remark, that nothing has
a greater tendency to promote improvements in any branch of
production, than its trial under a new set of conditions. But
it cannot be expected that individuals should, at their own
risk, or rather to their certain loss, introduce a new manu-
facture, and bear the burden of carrying it on, until the pro-
ducers have been educated up to the level of those with
whom the processes are traditional. A protecting duty, con-
tinued for a reasonable time, will sometimes be the least
inconvenient mode in which the nation can tax itself for the
support of such an experiment. But the protection should be
confined to cases in which there is good ground of assurance
that the industry which it fosters will after a time be able to
dispense with it; nor should the domestic producers ever be
allowed to expect that it will be continued to them beyond
the time necessary for a fair trial of what they are capable of
accomplishing.

There is only one part of the Protectionist scheme which
requires any further notice : its policy towards colonies, and
foreign dependencies; that of compelling them to trade
exclusively with the dominant country. A country which
thus secures to itself an extra foreign demand for its commo-
dities, undoubtedly gives itself some advantage in the distri-
bution of the general gains of the commercial world. Since,
however, it causes the industry and capital of the colony to
be diverted from channels, which are proved to be the most
productive, inasmuch as they are those into which industry
and capital spontaneously tend to flow; there is a loss, on the
whole, to the productive powers of the world, and the mother
country does not gain so much as she makes the colony lose.
If, therefore, the mother country refuses to acknowledge any

VOL. II. L L



514


BOOK V. CHAPTER X. § 2.

reciprocity of obligation, she imposes a tribute on the colony
in an indirect mode, greatly more oppressive and injurious
than the direct. But if, with a more equitable spirit, she
submits herself to corresponding restrictions for the benefit of
the colony, the result of the whole transaction is the ridiculous
one, that each party loses much, in order that the other may
gain a little.

§ 2. Next to the system of Protection, among mis-
chievous interferences with the spontaneous course of indus-
trial transactions, may be noticed certain interferences with
contracts. One instance is that of the Usury Laws. These
originated in a religious prejudice against receiving interest
on money, derived from that fruitful source of mischief in
modern Europe, the attempted adaptation to Christianity of
doctrines and precepts drawn from the Jewish law. In
Mahomedan nations the receiving of interest is formally
interdicted, and rigidly abstained from ; and Sismondi has
noticed, as one among the causes of the industrial inferiority
of the Catholic, compared with the Protestant parts of
Europe, that the Catholic church in the middle ages gave
its sanction to the same prejudice; which subsists, impaired
but not destroyed, wherever that religion is acknowledged.
Where law or conscientious scruples prevent lending at in-
terest, the capital which belongs to persons not in business
is lost to productive purposes, or can be applied to them
only in peculiar circumstances of personal connexion, or by a
subterfuge. Industry is thus limited to the capital of the
undertakers, and to what they can borrow from persons not
bound by the same laws or religion as themselves. In
Mussulman countries the bankers and money dealers are
either Hindoos, Armenians, or Jews.

In more improved countries, legislation no longer dis-
countenances the receipt of an equivalent for money lent; but
it has everywhere interfered with the free agency of the lender
and borrower, by fixing a legal limit to the rate of interest,



USURY LAWS.


515


and making the receipt of more than the appointed maximum
a penal offence. This restriction, though approved by Adam
Smith, has been condemned by all enlightened persons since
the triumphant onslaught made upon it by Bentham in his
“ Letters on Usury ” which may still be referred to as the best
extant writing on the subject.

Legislators may enact and maintain Usury Laws from
one of two motives: ideas of public policy, or concern for the
interest of the parties in the contract; in this case, of one
party only, the borrower. As a matter of policy, the notion
may possibly be, that it is for the general good that interest
should be low. It is however a misapprehension of the
causes which influence commercial transactions, to suppose
that the rate of interest is really made lower by law, than it
would be made by the spontaneous play of supply and demand.
If the competition of borrowers, left unrestrained, would raise
the rate of interest to six per cent, this proves that at five
there would be a greater demand for loans, than there is
capital in the market to supply. If the law in these circum-
stances permits no interest beyond five per cent, there will be
some lenders, who not choosing to disobey the law, and not
being in a condition to employ their capital otherwise, will
content themselves with the legal rate: but others, finding
that in a season of pressing demand, more may be made of
their capital by other means than they are permitted to make
by lending it, will not lend it at all ; and the loanable capital,
already too small for the demand, will be still further dimi-
nished. Of the disappointed candidates there will be many
at such periods, who must have their necessities supplied at
any price, and these will readily find a third section of lenders,
who will not be averse to join in a violation of the law, either
by circuitous transactions partaking of the nature of fraud,
or by relying on the honour of the borrower. The extra
expense of the roundabout mode of proceeding, and an equi-
valent for the risk of non-payment and of legal penalties,
must be paid by the borrower, over and above the extra

L L 2



510 BOOK V. CHAPTER X. § 2 .

interest which would have been required of him by the
general state of the market. The laws which were intended
to lower the price paid by him for pecuniary accommodation,
end thus in greatly increasing it. These laws have also a
directly demoralizing tendency. Knowing the difficulty of
detecting an illegal pecuniary transaction between two persons,
in which no third person is involved, so long as it is the
interest of both to keep the secret, legislators have adopted the
expedient of tempting the borrower to become the informer,
by making the annulment of the debt a part of the penalty
for the offence ; thus rewarding men for obtaining the property
of others by false promises, and then not only refusing pay-
ment, but invoking legal penalties on those who have helped
them in their need. The moral sense of mankind very rightly
infamizes those who resist an otherwise just claim on the
ground of usury, and tolerates such a plea only when resorted
to as the best legal defence available against an attempt really
considered as partaking of fraud or extortion. But this very
severity of public opinion renders the enforcement of the laws
so difficult, and the infliction of the penalties so rare, that
when it does occur it merely victimizes an individual, and has
no effect on general practice.

In so far as the motive of the restriction may be supposed
to be, not public policy, but regard for the interest of the
borrower, it would be difficult to point out any case in which
such tenderness on the legislators part is more misplaced.
A person of sane mind, and of the age at which persons are
legally competent to conduct their own concerns, must be
presumed to be a sufficient guardian of his pecuniary interests.
If he may sell an estate, or grant a release, or assign away all
his property, without control from the law, it seems very unne-
cessary that the only bargain which he cannot make without
its intermeddling, should be a loan of money. The law seems
to presume that the money-lender, dealing with necessitous
persons, can take advantage of their necessities, and exact
conditions limited only by his own pleasure. It might be so



USURY LAWS.


517


if there were only one money-lender within reach. But
when there is the whole monied capital of a wealthy com-
munity to resort to, no borrower is placed under any disad-
vantage in the market merely by the urgency of his need. If
he cannot borrow at the interest paid by other people, it must
be because he cannot give such good security: and compe-
tition will limit the extra demand to a fair equivalent for the
risk of his proving insolvent. Though the law intends favour
to the borrower, it is to him above all that injustice is, in this
case, done by it. What can be more unjust than that a person
who cannot give perfectly good security, should be prevented
from borrowing of persons who are willing to lend money to
him, by their not being permitted to receive the rate of
interest which would be a just equivalent for their risk?
Through the mistaken kindness of the law, he must either go
without the money which is perhaps necessary to save him
from much greater losses, or be driven to expedients of a far
more ruinous description, which the law either has not found
it possible, or has not happened, to interdict.

Adam Smith rather hastily expressed the opinion, that
only two kinds of persons, “ prodigals and projectors/' could
require to borrow money at more than the market rate of
interest. He should have included all persons who are in
any pecuniary difficulties, however temporary their necessities
may be. It may happen to any person in business, to be
disappointed of the resources on which he had calculated
for meeting some engagement, the non-fulfiment of which on
a fixed day would be bankruptcy. In periods of commercial
difficulty, this is the condition of many prosperous mercantile
firms, who become competitors for the small amount of dis-
posable capital which, in a time of general distrust, the
owners are willing to part with. Up to the relaxation of
the usury laws a few years ago, the limitations imposed by
those laws were felt as a most serious aggravation of every
commercial crisis. Merchants who could have obtained the
aid they required at an interest of seven or eight per cent



518


BOOK V. CHAPTER X. § 2.


for short periods, were obliged to give 20 or 30 per cent, or
to resort to forced sales of goods at a still greater loss-
Experience having obtruded these evils on the notice of Par-
liament, the sort of compromise took place, of which English
legislation affords so many instances, and which helps to make
our laws and policy the mass of inconsistency that they are.
The law was reformed as a person reforms a tight shoe, who
cuts a hole in it where it pinches hardest, and continues to
wear it. Retaining the erroneous principle as a general rule,
Parliament allowed an exception in the case in which the
practical mischief was most flagrant. It left the usury laws
unrepealed, but exempted bills of exchange, of not more than
three months date, from their operation. Some years after-
wards the laws were repealed in regard to all other contracts,
but left in force as to all those which relate to land. Not a
particle of reason could be given for making this extraordinary
distinction ; but the “ agricultural mind” was of opinion that
the interest on mortgages, though it hardly ever comes up to
the permitted point, would come up to a still higher point ;
and the usury laws were maintained that the landlords might,
as they thought, be enabled to borrow below the market rate, as
the corn-laws were kept up that the same class might be able
to sell corn above the market rate. The modesty of the pre-
tension was quite worthy of the intelligence which could think
that the end aimed at was in any way forwarded by the means
used.

With regard to the “ prodigals and projectors” spoken of
by Adam Smith; no law can prevent a prodigal from ruining
himself, unless it lays him or his property under actual re-
straint, according to the unjustifiable practice of the Roman
Law and some of the Continental systems founded on it.
The only effect of usury laws upon a prodigal, is to make his
ruin rather more expeditious, by driving him to a disreputable
class of money-dealers, and rendering the conditions more
onerous by the extra risk created by the law. As for pro-
jectors, a term, in its unfavourable sense, rather unfairly ap-



REGULATION OF THE PRICE OF FOOD.


519


plied to every person who has a project; such laws may put
a veto upon the prosecution of the most promising enterprize,
when planned, as it generally is, by a person who does not
possess capital adequate to its successful completion. Many
of the greatest improvements were at first looked shily on
by capitalists, and had to wait long before they found
one sufficiently adventurous to be the first in a new
path: many years elapsed before Stephenson could con-
vince even the enterprizing mercantile public of Liver-
pool and Manchester, of the advantage of substituting rail-
ways for turnpike-roads; and plans on which great labour
and large sums have been expended with little visible
result, (the epoch in their progress when predictions of
failure are most rife,) may be indefinitely suspended, or
altogether dropped, and the outlay all lost, if, when the
original funds are exhausted, the law will not allow more
to be raised on the terms on which people are willing to
expose it to the chances of an enterprize not yet secure of
success.


§ 3. Loans are not the only kind of contract, of which
governments have thought themselves qualified to regulate the
conditions better than the persons interested. There is
scarcely any commodity which they have not, at some place
or time, endeavoured to make either dearer or cheaper than it
would be if left to itself. The most plausible case for artifi-
cially cheapening a commodity, is that of food. The desira-
bleness of the object is in this case undeniable. But since the
average price of food, like that of other things, conforms to
the cost of production with the addition of the usual profit;
if this price is not expected by the farmer, he will, unless
compelled by law, produce no more than he requires for his
own consumption : and the law therefore, if absolutely deter-
mined to have food cheaper, must substitute, for the ordinary
motives to cultivation, a system of penalties. If it shrinks
from doing this, it has no resource but that of taxing the



520 BOOK V. CHAPTER X. § 3.

whole nation, to give a bounty or premium to the grower or
importer of corn, thus giving everybody cheap bread at the
expense of all: in reality a largess to those who do not pay
taxes, at the expense of those who do ; one of the forms of a
practice essentially bad, that of converting the working classes
into un working classes by making them a present of subsis-
tence.

It is not however so much the general or average price of
food, as its occasional high price in times of emergency, which
governments have studied to reduce. In some cases, as for
example the famous “ maximum” of the revolutionary go-
vernment of 1793, the compulsory regulation was an attempt
by the ruling powers to counteract the necessary consequences
of their own acts; to scatter an indefinite abundance of the
circulating medium with one hand, and keep down prices
with the other; a thing manifestly impossible under any
regime except one of unmitigated terror. In case of actual
scarcity, governments are often urged, as they were in the
Irish emergency of 1 847, to take measures of some sort for
moderating the price of food. But the price of a thing can-
not be raised by deficiency of supply, beyond what is suffi-
cient to make a corresponding reduction of the consumption ;
and if a government prevents this reduction from being
brought about by a rise of price, there remains no mode of
effecting it unless by taking possession of all the food, and
serving it out in rations, as in a besieged town. In a real
scarcity, nothing can afford general relief, except a determina-
tion by the richer classes to diminish their own consumption.
If they buy and consume their usual quantity of food, and
content themselves with giving money, they do no good. The
price is forced up until the poorest competitors have no longer
the means of competing, and the privation of food is thrown
exclusively upon the indigent, the other classes being only
affected pecuniarily. When the supply is insufficient, some-
body must consume less, and if every rich person is deter-
mined not to be that somebody, all they do by subsidizing



MONOPOLIES.


521


their poorer competitors is to force up the price so much the
higher, with no effect but to enrich the corn-dealers, the very
reverse of what is desired by those who recommend such
measures. All that governments can do in these emergencies,
is to counsel a general moderation in consumption, and to
interdict such kinds of it as are not of primary importance.
Direct measures at the cost of the state, to procure food
from a distance, are expedient when from peculiar reasons
the thing is not likely to be done by private speculation.
In any other case they are a great error. Private speculators
will not, in such cases, venture to compete with the govern-
ment; and though a government can do more than any
one merchant, it cannot do nearly so much as all mer-
chants.


§ 4. Governments, however, are oftener chargeable with
having attempted, too successfully, to make things dear, than
with having aimed by wrong means at making them cheap.
The usual instrument for producing artificial dearness is
monopoly. To confer a monopoly upon a producer or dealer,
or upon a set of producers or dealers not too numerous to
combine, is to give them the power of levying any amount of
taxation on the public, for their individual benefit, which will
not make the public forego the use of the commodity.
When the sharers in the monopoly are so numerous and so
widely scattered that they are prevented from combining, the
evil is considerably less : but even then the competition is not
so active among a limited, as among an unlimited number.
Those who feel assured of a fair average proportion in the
general business, are seldom eager to get a larger share, by
foregoing a portion of their profits. A limitation of com-
petition, however partial, may have mischievous effects quite
disproportioned to the apparent cause. The mere exclusion
of foreigners, from a branch of industry open to the free
competition of every native, has been known, even in Eng-
land, to render that branch a conspicuous exception to the



522


BOOK V. CHAPTER X. § 4.

general industrial energy of the country. The silk manu-
facture of England remained far behind that of other coun-
tries of Europe, so long as the foreign fabrics were pro-
hibited. In addition to the tax levied for the profit, real or
imaginary, of the monopolists, the consumer thus pays an
additional tax for their laziness and incapacity. When
relieved from the immediate stimulus of competition, pro-
ducers and dealers grow indifferent to the dictates of their
ultimate pecuniary interest; preferring to the most hopeful
prospects, the present ease of adhering to routime. A person
who is already thriving, seldom puts himself out of his way to
commence even a lucrative improvement, unless urged by the
additional motive of fear lest some rival should supplant him
by getting possession of it before him.

The condemnation of monopolies ought not to extend to
patents, by which the originator of an improved process is
allowed to enjoy, for a limited period, the exclusive privi-
lege of using his own improvement. This is not making
the commodity dear for his benefit, but merely postponing a
part of the increased cheapness which the public owe to the
inventor, in order to compensate and reward him for the
service. That he ought to be both compensated and rewarded
for it, will not be denied, and also that if all were at once
allowed to avail themselves of his ingenuit}^, without having
shared the labours or the expenses which he had to incur in
bringing his idea into a practical shape, either such expenses
and labours would be undergone by nobody, except very
opulent and very public-spirited persons, or the state must
put a value on the service rendered by an inventor, and make
him a pecuniary grant. This has been done in some in-
stances, and may be done without inconvenience in cases of
very conspicuous public benefit ; but in general an exclusive
privilege, of temporary duration, is preferable; because it
leaves nothing to any one's discretion; because the reward
conferred by it depends upon the invention's being found
useful, and the greater the usefulness the greater the reward;



COMBINATION LAWS.


523


and because it is paid by the very persons to whom the ser-
vice is rendered, the consumers of the commodity. So deci-
sive, indeed, are these considerations, that if the system of
patents were abandoned for that of rewards by the state, the
best shape which these could assume would be that of a small
temporary tax, imposed for the inventor's benefit, on all per-
sons making use of the invention.

§ 5. I pass to another kind of government interference,
in which the end and the means are alike odious, but which
existed in England until not so much as a generation
ago, and is in full vigour at this day in some other coun-
tries. I mean the laws against combinations of workmen
to raise wages ; laws enacted and maintained for the declared
purpose of keeping wages low, as the famous Statute of
Labourers was passed by a legislature of employers, to pre-
vent the labouring class, when its numbers had been thinned
by a pestilence, from taking advantage of the diminished
competition to obtain higher wages. Such laws exhibit
the infernal spirit of the slave master, when to retain the
working classes in avowed slavery has ceased to be practi-
cable.

If it were possible for the working classes, by combining
among themselves, to raise or keep up the general rate of
wages, it needs hardly be said that this would be a thing not
to be punished, but to be welcomed and rejoiced at. Unfor-
tunately the effect is quite beyond attainment by such means.
The multitudes who compose the working class are too
numerous, and too widely scattered, to combine at all, much
more to combine effectually. If they could do so, they might
doubtless succeed in diminishing the hours of labour,, and ob-
taining the same wages for less work. But if they aimed at
obtaining actually higher wages than the rate fixed by demand
and supply — the rate which distributes the whole circulating
capital of the country among the entire working population —
this could only be accomplished by keeping a part of their



524 BOOK y. CHAPTER X. § 5 .

number permanently out of employment. As support from
public charity would of course be refused to those who could
get work and would not accept it, they would be thrown for
support upon the trades union of which they were members;
and the workpeople collectively would be no better off than
before, having to support the same numbers out of the
same aggregate wages. In this way, however, the class
would have its attention forcibly drawn to the fact of a
superfluity of numbers, and to the necessity, if they would
have high wages, of proportioning the supply of labour to the
demand.

Combinations to keep up wages are sometimes successful,
in trades where the workpeople are few in number, and col*
lected in a small number of local centres. It is questionable
if combinations ever had the smallest effect on the permanent
remuneration of spinners or weavers; but the journeymen
type-founders, by a close combination, are able, it is said, to
keep up a rate of wages much beyond that which is usual in
employments of equal hardness and skill ; and even the tailors,
a much more numerous class, are understood to have had, to
some extent, a similar success. A rise of wages, thus confined
to particular employments, is not (like a rise of general wages)
defrayed from profits, but raises the value and price of the
particular article, and falls on the consumer; the capitalist
who produces the commodity being only injured in so far as
the high price tends to narrow the market; and not even
then, unless it does so in a greater ratio than that of the
rise of price: for though, at higher wages, he employs,
with a given capital, fewer workpeople, and obtains less
of the commodity, yet, if he can sell the whole of this dimi-
nished quantity at the higher price, his profits are as great as
before.

This partial rise of wages, if not gained at the expense of
the remainder of the working class, ought not to be regarded
as an evil. The consumer, indeed, must pay for it; but
cheapness of goods is desirable only when the cause of it is



COMBINATION LAWS.


525


that their production costs little labour, and not when occa-
sioned by that labour’s being ill remunerated. It may appear,
however, at first sight, that the high wages of the type-founders
(for example) are obtained at the general cost of the labouring
glass. This high remuneration either causes fewer persons to
find employment in the trade, or, if not, must lead to the in-
vestment of more capital in it, at the expense of other trades :
in the first case, it throws an additional number of labourers
on the general market; in the second, it withdraws from that
market a portion of the demand: effects, both of which are
injurious to the working classes. Such, indeed, would really
be the result of a successful combination in a particular trade
or trades, for some time after its formation ; but when it is a
permanent thing, the principles so often insisted upon in this
treatise, show that it can have no such effect. The habitual
earnings of the working classes at large can be affected by
nothing but the habitual requirements of the labouring
people: these indeed may be altered, but while they remain
the same, wages never fall permanently below the standard of
these requirements, and do not long remain above that stan-
dard. If there had been no combinations in particular trades,
and the wages of those trades had never been kept above the
universal level, there is no reason to suppose that the universal
level would have been at all higher than it now is. There
would merely have been a greater number of people altogether,
and a smaller number of exceptions to the ordinary low rate
of wages.

If, therefore, no improvement were to be hoped for in
the general circumstances of the working classes, the success
of a portion of them, however small, in keeping their wages
by combination above the market rate, would be wholly a
matter of satisfaction. But when the elevation of the cha-
racter and condition of the entire body has at last become a
thing not beyond the reach of rational effort, it is time that
the better paid classes of skilled artisans should seek their
own advantage in common with, and not by the exclusion of,



526 BOOK V. CHAPTER X. § 5 .

their fellow labourers. While they continue to fix their
hopes on hedging themselves in against competition, and
protecting their own wages by shutting out others from access
to their employment, nothing better can be expected from
them than that total absence of any large and generous aims,
that almost open disregard of all other objects than high
wages and little work for their own small body, which were
so deplorably evident in the proceedings and manifestoes of
the Amalgamated Society of Engineers during their late
quarrel with their employers. Success, even if attainable,
in raising up a protected class of working people, would now
be a hindrance, instead of a help, to the emancipation of the
working classes at large.

But though combinations to keep up wages are seldom
effectual, and when effectual, are, for the reasons which I
have assigned, seldom desirable, the right of making the
attempt is one which cannot be refused to any portion of the
working population without great injustice, or without the
probability of fatally misleading them respecting the circum-
stances which determine their condition. So long as com-
binations to raise wages were prohibited by law, the law
appeared to the operatives to be the real cause of the low
wages which there was no denying that it had done its best
to produce. Experience of strikes has been the best teacher
of the labouring classes on the subject of the relation between
wages and the demand and supply of labour : and it is most
important that this course of instruction should not be dis-
turbed. It is, however, an indispensable condition of tole-
rating combinations, that they should be voluntary. No
severity, necessary to the purpose, is too great to be em-
ployed against attempts to compel workmen to join a union,
or take part in a strike, by threats or violence. Mere moral
compulsion, by the expression of opinion, the law ought not
to interfere with ; it belongs to more enlightened opinion to
restrain it, by rectifying the moral sentiments of the people.
Other questions arise when the combination, being voluntary,



RESTRAINTS ON OPINION.


527


proposes to itself objects really contrary to the public good.
High wages and short hours are generally good objects, or,
at all events, may be so: but in many trades unions, it is
among the rules that there shall be no task work, or no
difference of pay between the most expert workmen and the
most unskilful, or that no member of the union shall earn
more than a certain sum per week, in order that there may
be more employment for the rest ; and the abolition of piece
work, under more or less of modification, held a conspicuous
place among the demands of the Amalgamated Society.
These are combinations to effect objects which are pernicious.
Their success, even when only partial, is a public mischief ;
and were it complete, would be equal in magnitude to
almost any of the evils arising from bad economical legis-
lation. Hardly anything worse can be said of the worst
laws on the subject of industry and its remuneration, con-
sistent with the personal freedom of the labourer, than that
they place the energetic and the idle, the skilful and the
incompetent, on a level : and this it is the avowed object of
the regulations of these unions to do. It does not, however,
follow as a consequence that the law would be warranted
in making the formation of such associations illegal and
punishable. Independently of all considerations of consti-
tutional liberty, the best interests of the human race impera-
tively require that all economical experiments, voluntarily
undertaken, should have the fullest license, and that force
and fraud should be the only means of attempting to benefit
themselves, which are interdicted to the less fortunate classes
of the community.

§ 6. Among the modes of undue exercise of the power
of government, on which I have commented in this chapter,
I have included only such as rest on theories which have still
more or less of footing in the most enlightened countries. I
have not spoken of some which have done still greater mis-
chief in times not long past, but which are now generally



528


BOOK V. CHAPTER X. § 6.

given lip, at least in theory, though enough of them still
remains in practice to make it impossible as yet to class them
among exploded errors.

The notion, for example, that a government should choose
opinions for the people, and should not suffer any doctrines
in politics, morals, law, or religion, but such as it approves,
to be printed or publicly professed, may be said to be alto-
gether abandoned as a general thesis. It is now well under-
stood that a regime of this sort is fatal to all prosperity, even
of an economical kind : that the human mind, when pre-
vented either by fear of the law or by fear of opinion from
exercising its faculties freely on the most important subjects,
acquires a general torpidity and imbecility, by which, when
they reach a certain point, it is disqualified from making
any considerable advances even in the common affairs of life,
and which, when greater still, make it gradually lose even its
previous attainments. There cannot be a more decisive
example than Spain and Portugal, from the Reformation
to the present time. The decline of those countries in
national greatness and even in material civilization, while
almost all the other nations of Europe were uninterruptedly
advancing, has been ascribed to various causes, but there is
one which lies at the foundation of them all : the Holy
Inquisition, and the system of mental slavery of which it is
the symbol.

Yet although these truths are very widely recognized, and
freedom both of opinion and of discussion is admitted as an
axiom in all free countries, this apparent liberality and tole-
rance has acquired so little of the authority of a principle,
that it is always ready to give way to the dread or horror
inspired by some particular sort of opinions. Within the last
eight or ten years several individuals have suffered imprison-
ment, for the public profession, sometimes in a very temperate
manner, of disbelief in religion ; and it is probable that both
the public and the government, at the first panic which arises
on the subject of Chartism or Communism, will fly to similar



RESTRAINTS ON OPINION.


529


means for checking the propagation of democratic or anti-
property doctrines. In this country, however, the effective
restraints on mental freedom proceed much less from the law
or the government, than from the intolerant temper of the
national mind ; arising no longer from even as respectable a
source as bigotry or fanaticism, but rather from the general
habit, both in opinion and conduct, of making adherence to
custom the rule of life, and enforcing it, by social penalties,
against all persons who, without a party to back them, assert
their individual independence.


VOL. II,


M M



CHAPTER XI.


OF THE GROUNDS AND LIMITS OF THE LAISSER-FAIRE
OR NON-INTERFERENCE PRINCIPLE.

§ 1. We have now reached the last part of our under-
taking; the discussion, so far as suited to this treatise (that
is, so far as it is a question of principle, not detail) of the
limits of the province of government; the question, to what
objects governmental intervention in the affairs of society
may or should extend, over and above those which necessarily
appertain to it. No subject has been more keenly contested
in the present age: the contest, however, has chiefly taken
place round certain select points, with only flying excur-
sions into the rest of the field. Those indeed who have
discussed any particular question of government interference,
such as state education (spiritual or secular), regulation of
hours of labour, a public provision for the poor, &c. have
often dealt largely in general arguments, far outstretching
the special application made of them, and have shown a suffi-
ciently strong bias either in favour of letting things alone, or
in favour of meddling ; but have seldom declared, or appa-
rently decided in their own minds, how far they would
carry either principle. The supporters of interference have
been content with asserting a general right and duty on the
part of government to intervene, wherever its intervention
would be useful : and when those who have been called the
laUser-faire school have attempted any definite limitation of
the province of government, they have usually restricted it to
the protection of person and property against force and
fraud; a definition to which neither they nor any one else can
deliberately adhere, since it excludes, as has been shown in a



LIMITS OF THE PROVINCE OF GOVERNMENT. 531

preceding chapter,* some of the most indispensable and
unanimously recognized of the duties of government.

Without professing entirely to supply this deficiency of a
general theory, on a question which does not, as I conceive,
admit of any universal solution, I shall attempt to afford some
little aid towards the resolution of this class of questions as
they arise, by examining, in the most general point of view
in which the subject can be considered, what are the advan-
tages, and what the evils or inconveniences, of government
interference.

We must set out by distinguishing between two kinds of
intervention by the government, which, though they may
relate to the same subject, differ widely in their nature and
effects, and require, for their justification, motives of a veiy
different degree of urgency. The intervention may extend
to controlling the free agency of individuals. Government
may interdict all persons from doing certain things; or from
doing them without its authorization; or may prescribe to
them certain things to be done, or a certain manner of doing
things which it is left optional with them to do or to abstain
from. This is the authoritative interference of government.
There is another kind of intervention which is not authori-
tative: when a government, instead of issuing a command
and enforcing it by penalties, adopts the course so seldom
resorted to by governments, and of which such important
use might be made, that of giving advice, and promulgating
information; or when, leaving individuals free to use their
own means of pursuing any object of general interest, the
government, not meddling with them, but not trusting the
object solely to their care, establishes, side by side with their
arrangements, an agency of its own for a like puipose. Thus,
it is one thing to maintain a Church Establishment, and
another -to refuse toleration to other religions, or to persons
professing no religion. It is one thing to provide schools or


* Supra* book v. cb. L.

mm2



832 BOOK V. CHAPTER XI. § 2 .

colleges, and another to require that no person shall act as an
instructor of youth without a government license. There
might be a national bank, or a government manufactory,
without any monopoly against private banks and manufac-
tories. There might be a post-office, without penalties
against the conveyance of letters by other means. There
may be a corps of government engineers for civil pur-
poses, while the profession of a civil engineer is free to
be adopted by every one. There may be public hospitals,
without any restriction upon private medical or surgical
practice.

§ 2. It is evident, even at first sight, that the autho-
ritative form of government intervention has a much more
limited sphere of legitimate action than the other. It
requires a much stronger necessity to justify it in any case;
while there are large departments of human life from which
it must be unreservedly and imperiously excluded. What-
ever theory we adopt respecting the foundation of the social
union, and under whatever political institutions we live,
there is a circle around every individual human being, which
no government, be it that of one, of a few, or of the many,
ought to be permitted to overstep: there is a part of the life
of every person who has come to years of discretion, within
which the individuality of that person ought to reign uncon-
trolled either by any other individual or by the public col-
lectively. That there is, or ought to be, some space in human
existence thus entrenched around, and sacred from authori-
tative intrusion, no one who professes the smallest regard to
human freedom or dignity will call in question : the point to
be determined is, where the limit should be placed; how
large a province of human life this reserved territory should
include. I apprehend that it ought to include all that part
which concerns only the life, whether inward or outward, of
the individual, and does not affect the interests of others, or
affects them only through the moral influence of example.



LIMITS OF THE PROVINCE OF GOVERNMENT. 533

With respect^o the domain of the inward consciousness, the
thoughts and feelings, and as much of external conduct as is
personal only, involving no consequences, none at least of a
painful or injurious kind, to other people; I hold that it is
allowable in all, and in the more thoughtful and cultivated
often a duty, to assert and promulgate, with all the force
they are capable of, their opinion of what is good or bad,
admirable or contemptible, but not to compel others to con-
form to that opinion ; whether the force used is that of extra-
legal coercion, or exerts itself by means of the law.

Even in those portions of conduct which do affect the
interest of others, the onus of making out a case always lies
on the defenders of legal prohibitions. It is not a merely
constructive or presumptive injury to others, which will
justify the interference of law with individual freedom. To
be prevented from doing what one is inclined to, or from
acting according to ones own judgment of what is desirable,
is not only always irksome, but always tends, pro tanto, to
starve the development of some portion of the bodily or mental
faculties, either sensitive or active ; and unless the conscience
of the individual goes freely with the legal restraint, it par-
takes, either in a great or in a small degree, of the degradation
of slavery. Scarcely any degree of utility, short of absolute
necessity, will justify a prohibitory regulation, unless it can
also be made to recommend itself to the general conscience;
unless persons of ordinary good intentions either believe
already, or can be induced to believe, that the thing prohibited
is a thing which they ought not to wish to do.

It is otherwise with governmental interferences which do
not restrain individual free agency. When a government
provides means for fulfilling a certain end, leaving individuals
free to avail themselves of different means if in their opinion
preferable, there is no infringement of liberty, no irksome or
degrading restraint. One of the principal objections to
government interference is then absent. There is, however #
in almost all forms of government agency, one thing which



534 BOOK V. CHAPTEB XI. § 8.

is compulsory; the provision of the pecuniary ifceans. These
are derived from taxation ; or, if existing in the form of an
endowment derived from public property, they are still the
cause of as much compulsory taxation as the sale or the
annual proceeds of the property would enable to be dispensed
with.* And the objection necessarily attaching to compulsory
contributions, is almost always greatly aggravated by the ex-
pensive precautions and onerous restrictions, which are indis-
pensable to prevent evasion of a compulsory tax.

§ 3. A second general objection to government agency, is
that every increase of the functions devolving on the govern-
ment is an increase of its power, both in the form of autho-
rity, and still more, in the indirect form of influence. The
importance of this consideration, in respect to political free-
dom, has in general been quite sufficiently recognized, at least
in England; but many, in latter times, have been prone to
think that limitation of the powers of the government is only
essential when the government itself is badly constituted;
when it does not represent the people, but is the organ of a
class, or coalition of classes : and that a government of suffi-
ciently popular constitution might be trusted with any amount
of power over the nation, since its power would be only that
of the nation over itself. This might be true, if the nation, in
such cases, did not practically mean a mere majority of the
nation, and if minorities were only capable of oppressing, but
not of being oppressed. Experience, however, proves that the
depositaries of power who are mere delegates of the people,
that is, of a majority, are quite as ready (when they think


* The only cases in which government agency involves nothing of a com-
pulsory nature, are the rare cases in which, without any artificial monopoly, it
pays its own expenses. A bridge built with public money, on which tolls are
collected, sufficient to pay not only all current expenses, but the interest of the
original outlay, is one case in point. The government railways in Belgium and
Germany are another example. The Post Office, if its monopoly were abolished,
and it still paid its own expenses, would be another.



LIMITS OF THE PROVINCE OF GOVERNMENT. 535


they can count on popular support) as any organs of oligarchy,
to assume arbitrary power, and encroach unduly on the liberty
of private life. The public collectively is abundantly ready to
impose, not only its generally narrow views of its interests,
but its abstract opinions, and even its tastes, as laws binding
upon individuals. And the present civilization tends so
strongly to make the power of persons acting in masses the
only substantial power in society, that there never was more
necessity for surrounding individual independence of thought,
speech, and conduct, with the most powerful defences, in
order to maintain that originality of mind and individuality
of character, which are the only source of any real progress,
and of most of the qualities which make the human race
much superior to any herd of animals. Hence it is no less
important in a democratic than in any other government, that
all tendency on the part of public authorities to # stretch their
interference, and assume a power of any sort which can
easily be dispensed with, should be regarded with unre-
mitting jealousy. Perhaps this is even more important in
a democracy than in any other form of political society;
because, where public opinion is sovereign, an individual who
is oppressed by the sovereign does not, as in most other
states of things, find a rival power to which he can appeal
for relief.


§4. A third general objection to government agency,
rests on the principle of the division of labour. Every addi-
tional function undertaken by the government, is a fresh
occupation imposed upon a body already overcharged with
duties. A natural consequence is that most things are ill
done; much not done at all, because the government is not
able to do it without delays which are fatal to its purpose ;
that the more troublesome, and less showy, of the functions
undertaken, are postponed or neglected, and an excuse is
always ready for the neglect; while the heads of the admi-
nistration have their minds so fully taken up with official



536


BOOK V. CHAPTER XI. § 4>.


details, in however perfunctory a manner superintended, that
they have no time or thought to spare for the great interests
of the state, and the preparation of enlarged measures of
social improvement.

But these inconveniences, though real and serious, result
much more from the bad organization of governments, than
from the extent or variety of the duties undertaken by them.
Government is not a name for some one functionary, or defi-
nite number of functionaries : there may be almost any
amount of division of labour within the administrative body
itself. The evil in question is felt in great magnitude under
some of the governments of the Continent, where six or eight
men, living at the capital and known by the name of minis-
ters, demand that the whole public business of the country
shall pass, or be supposed to pass, under their individual eye.
But the inconvenience would be reduced to a very manageable
compass, in a country in which there was a proper distribution
of functions between the central and local officers of govern-
ment, and in which - the central body was divided into a suffi-
cient number of departments. When Parliament thought it
expedient to confer on the government an inspecting and par-
tially controlling authority over railways, it did not add rail-
ways to the department of the Home Minister, but created a
Railway Board. When it determined to have a central
superintending authority for pauper administration, it esta-
blished the Poor Law Commission. There are few countries
in which a greater number of functions are discharged by
public officers, than in some states of the American Union,
particularly the New England States: but the division of
labour in public business is extreme; most of these officers
being not even amenable to any common superior, but per-
forming their duties freely, under the double check of election
by their townsmen, and civil as well as criminal responsibility
to the tribunals.

It is, no doubt, indispensable to good government that the



LIMITS OF THE PROVINCE OF GOVERNMENT. 537


chiefs of the administration, whether permanent or tem-
porary, should extend a commanding, though general, view
over the ensemble of all the interests confided, in any degree,
to the responsibility of the central power. But with a skilful
internal organization of the administrative machine, leaving to
subordinates, and as far as possible to local subordinates, not
only the execution, but to a great degree the control, of
details ; holding them accountable for the results of their acts
rather than for the acts themselves, except where these come
within the cognizance of the tribunals; taking the most
effectual securities for honest and capable appointments;
opening a broad path to promotion from the inferior degrees
of the administrative scale to the superior; leaving, at each
step, to the functionary, a wider range in the origination of
measures, so that, in the highest grade of all, deliberation might
be concentrated on the great collective interests of the country
in each department; if all this were done, the government
would not probably be overburthened by any business, in
other respects fit to be undertaken by it ; though the over-
burthening would remain as a serious addition to the
inconveniences incurred by its undertaking any which was
unfit.


§ 5. But though a better organization of governments
would greatly diminish the force of the objection to the mere
multiplication of their duties, it would still remain true that
in all the more advanced communities, the great majority of
things are worse done by the intervention of government, than
the individuals most interested in the matter would do them,
or cause them to be done, if left to themselves. The grounds
of this truth are expressed with tolerable exactness in the
popular dictum, that people understand their own business
and their own interests better, and care for them more, than
the government does, or can be expected to do. This maxim
holds true throughout the greatest part of the business



638


BOOK V. CHAPTER XT. § 5.


of life, and wherever it is true we ought to condemn every
kind of government intervention that conflicts with it.
The inferiority of government agency, for example, in any of
the common operations of industry or commerce, is proved by
the fact, that it is hardly ever able to maintain itself in equal
competition with individual agency, where the individuals
possess the requisite degree of industrial enterprise, and can
command the necessary assemblage of means. All the facili*
ties which a government enjoys of access to information; all
the means which it possesses of remunerating, and therefore
of commanding, the best available talent in the market — are
not an equivalent for the one great disadvantage of an inferior
interest in the result.

It must be remembered, besides, that even if a govern-
ment were superior in intelligence and knowledge to any
single individual in the nation, it must be inferior to all the
individuals of the nation taken together. It can neither
possess in itself, nor enlist in its service, more than a portion
of the acquirements and capacities which the country con-
tains, applicable to any given purpose. There must be
many persons equally qualified for the work with those
whom the government employs, even if it selects its instru-
ments with no reference to any consideration but their fit-
ness. Now these are the very persons into whose hands, in
the cases of most common occurrence, a system of individual
agency naturally tends to throw the work, because they are
capable of doing it better and on cheaper terms than any
other persons. So far as this is the case, it is evident that
government, by excluding or even by superseding individual
agency, either substitutes a less qualified instrumentality for
one better qualified, or at any rate substitutes its own mode
of accomplishing the work, for all the variety of modes which
would be tried by a number of equally qualified persons
aiming at the same end; a competition by many degrees
more propitious to the progress of improvement, than any
uniformity of system.



LIMITS OF THE PROVINCE OF GOVERNMENT. 539


§ 6. I have reserved for the last place one of the strongest
of the reasons against the extension of government agency.
Even if the government could comprehend within itself, in
-each department, all the most eminent intellectual capacity
and active talent of the nation, it would not be the less
desirable that the conduct of a large portion of the affairs of
society should be left in the hands of the persons immedi-
ately interested in them. The business of life is an essential
part of the practical education of a people; without which,
book and school instruction, though most necessary and
salutary, does not suffice to qualify them for conduct, and
for the adaptation of means to ends. Instruction is only one
of the desiderata of mental improvement; another, almost as
indispensable, is a vigorous exercise of the active energies;
labour, contrivance, judgment, self-control: and the natural
stimulus to these is the difficulties of life. This doctrine is
not to be confounded with the complacent optimism, which
represents the evils of life as desirable things, because they
call forth qualities adapted to combat with evils. It is only
because the difficulties exist, that the qualities which combat
with them are of any value. As practical beings it is our
business to free human life from as many as possible of its
difficulties, and not to keep up a stock of them as hunters
preserve game, for the exercise of pursuing it. But since the
need of active talent and practical judgment in the affairs of
life can only be diminished, and not, even on the most favour-
able supposition, done away with, it is important that those
endowments should be cultivated not merely in a select few,
but in all, and that the cultivation should be more varied and
complete than most persons are able to find in the narrow
sphere of their merely individual interests. A people among
whom there is no habit of spontaneous action for a collective
interest — who look habitually to their government to com-
mand or prompt them in all matters of joint concern — who
expect to have everything done for them, except what can be
made an affair of mere habit and routine — have their faculties



540


BOOK V. CHAPTER XL § 6

only half developed ; their education is defective in one of its
most important branches.

Not only is the cultivation of the active faculties by exer-
cise, diffused through the whole community, in itself one of
the most valuable of national possessions : it is rendered, not
less, but more, necessary, when a high degree of that indis-
pensable culture is systematically kept up in the chiefs and
functionaries of the state. There cannot be a combination of
circumstances more dangerous to human welfare, than that in
which intelligence and talent are maintained at a high stan-
dard within a governing corporation, but starved and dis-
couraged outside the pale. Such a system, more completely
than any other, embodies the idea of despotism, by arming
with intellectual superiority as an additional weapon, those
who have already the legal power. It approaches as nearly
as the organic difference between human beings and other
animals admits, to the government of sheep by their shepherd,
without anything like so strong an interest as the shepherd
has in the thriving condition of the flock. The only security
against political slavery, is the check maintained over governors,
by the diffusion of intelligence, activity, and public spirit
among the governed. Experience proves the extreme diffi-
culty of permanently keeping up a sufficiently high standard
of those qualities; a difficulty which increases, as the advance
of civilization and security removes one after another of the
hardships, embarrassments, and dangers against which indivi-
duals had formerly no resource but in their own strength,
skill, and courage. It is therefore of supreme importance
that all classes of the community, down to the lowest, should
have much to do for themselves; that as great a demand
should be made upon their intelligence and virtue as it is in
any respect equal to; that the government should not only
leave as far as possible to their own faculties the conduct
of whatever concerns themselves alone, but should suffer them,
or rather encourage them, to manage as many as possible of



LIMITS OF THE PROVINCE OF GOVERNMENT, 541

their joint concerns by voluntary co-operation : since the dis-
cussion and management of collective interests is the great
school of that public spirit, and the great source of that intel-
ligence of public affairs, which are always regarded as the
distinctive character of the public of free countries.

A democratic constitution, not supported by democratic
institutions in detail, but confined to the central government,
not only is not political freedom, but often creates a spirit
precisely the reverse, carrying down to the lowest grade in
society the desire and ambition of political domination. In
some countries the desire of the people is for not being
tyrannized over, but in others it is merely for an equal chance
to everybody of tyrannizing. Unhappily this last state of the
desires is fully as natural to mankind as the former, and in
many of the conditions even of civilized humanity, is far more
largely exemplified. In proportion as the people are accus-
tomed to manage their affairs by their own active interven-
tion, instead of leaving them to the government, their desires
will turn to repelling tyranny, rather than to tyrannizing :
while in proportion as all real initiative and direction resides
in the government, and individuals habitually feel and act
as under its perpetual tutelage, popular institutions deve-
lope in them not the desire of freedom, but an unmeasured
appetite for place and power; diverting the intelligence and
activity of the country from its principal business, to a
wretched competition for the selfish prizes and the petty
vanities of office.

§ 7. The preceding are the principal reasons, of a ge-
neral character, in favour of restricting to the narrowest
compass the intervention of a public authority in the business
of the community: and few will dispute the more than suffi-
ciency of these reasons, to throw, in every instance, the
burthen of making out a strong case, not on those who resist,
but on those who recommend, government interference.



542 BOOK V. CHAPTER XI. § 7.

Laisser-faire, in short, should be the general practice: every
departure from it, unless required by some great good, is a
certain evil.

The degree in which the maxim, even in the cases to
which it is most manifestly applicable, has heretofore been
infringed by governments, future ages will probably have
difficulty in crediting. Some idea may be formed of it from
the description by M. Dunoyer* of the restraints imposed
on the operations of manufacture under the old government
of France, by the meddling and regulating spirit of legisla-
tion.

“ La socidtd exer<;ait sur la fabrication la juridiction la
plus illimitde et la plus arbitraire : elle disposait sans scru-
pule des facultds des fabricants ; elle ddcidait qui pourrait
travailler, quelle chose on pourrait faire, quels matdriaux on
devrait employer, quels procddds il faudrait suivre, quelles
formes on donnerait aux produits, etc. II ne suffisait pas de
faire bien, de faire mieux, il fallait faire suivant les regies.
Qui ne connait ce rhglement de 1670, qui prdscrivait de saisir
et de clouer au poteau, avec le. nom des auteurs, les mar-
chandises non con formes aux rfegles tracdes, et qui, k la se-
conde rdcidive, voulait que les fabricants y fussent attaches
eux-memes? Il ne s'agissait pas de consulter le goflt des
consommateurs, mais de se conformer aux volontes de la loi.
Des legions d'inspecteurs, de commissaires, de contrfileurs,
de jurds, de gardes, dtaient charges de les faire executer ; on
brisait les metiers, on brftlait les produits qui n'y dtaient pas
conformes: les ameliorations dtaient punies; on mettait les
inventeurs k Tamende. On soumettait k des r&gles diffd-
rentes la fabrication des objets destines k la consommation
intdrieure et celle des produits destines au commerce Stranger.
Un artisan n'dtait pas le maitre de choisir le lieu de son
dtablissement, ni de travailler en toute saison, ni de travailler
pour tout le monde. Il existe un ddcret du 30 Mars 1700,


De la LibertS du Travail , voL ii. pp. 358 — 4.


LIMITS OF THE PROVINCE OF GOVERNMENT. 543


qui borne k dix-huit villes le nombre des lieux oil Ton pourra
faire des bas au mdtier; un arret du 18 Juin 1723 enjoint
aux fabricants de Rouen de suspendre leurs travaux du l # er
Juillet au 15 Septembre, afin de faciliter ceux de la rdcolte ;
Louis XIV., quand il voulut entreprendre la colonnade du
Louvre, defendit aux particulars d 'em pi oyer des ouvriers
sans sa permission, sous peine de 10,000 livres d'amende; et
aux ouvriers de travailler pour les particulars, sous peine,
pour la premiere fois, de la prison, et pour la seconde, des
galferes ”

That these and similar regulations were not a dead letter,
and that the officious and vexatious meddling was prolonged
down to the French Revolution, we have the testimony of
Roland, the Girondist minister.* “ I have seen/' says he,
“ eighty, ninety, a hundred pieces of cotton or woollen stuff
cut up, and completely destroyed. I have witnessed similar
scenes every week for a number of years. I have seen manu-
factured goods confiscated ; heavy fines laid on the manufac-
turers ; some pieces of fabric were burnt in public places, and
at the hours of market : others were fixed to the pillory, with
the name of the manufacturer inscribed upon them, and he
himself was threatened with the pillory, in case of a second
offence. All this was done under my eyes, at Rouen, in
conformity with existing regulations, or ministerial orders.
What crime deserved so cruel a punishment ? Some defects
in the materials employed, or in the texture of the fabric, or
even in some of the threads of the warp.

“ I have frequently seen manufacturers visited by a band
of satellites who put all in confusion in their establishments,
spread terror in their families, cut the stuffs from the frames,
tore off the warp from the looms, and carried them away as
proofs of infringement; the manufacturers were summoned,
tried, and condemned : their goods confiscated ; copies of

* I quote at second hand, from Mr. Carey’s Essay on the Rate of Waget,
pp. 195 — 6.



644 BOOK V. CHAPTER XI, § 7 ,

their judgment of confiscation posted up in every public
place ; fortune, reputation, credit, all was lost and destroyed.
Apd for what offence ? Because they had made of worsted,
a kind of cloth called shag, such as the English used to
manufacture, and even sell in France, while the French regu-
lations stated that that kind of cloth should be made with
mohair. I have seen other manufacturers treated in the
same way, because they had made camlets of a particular
width, used in England and Germany, for which there was
a great demand from Spain, Portugal, and other countries,
and from several parts of France, while the French regula-
tions prescribed other widths for camlets/'

The time is gone by, when such applications as these of
the principle of “ paternal government” would be attempted,
in even the least enlightened country of the European com-
monwealth of nations. In such cases as those cited, all the
general objections to government interference are valid, and
several of them in nearly their highest degree. But we must
now turn to the second part of our task, and direct our
attention to cases, in which some of those general objections
are altogether absent, while those which can never be got rid
of entirely, are overruled by counter-considerations of still
greater importance.

We have observed that, as a general rule, the business of
life is better performed when those who have an immediate
interest in it are left to take their own course, uncontrolled
either by the mandate of the law or by the meddling of any
public functionary. The persons, or some of the persons, who
do the work, are likely to be better judges than the govern-
ment, of the means of attaining the particular end at which
they aim. Were we to suppose, what is not very probable,
that the government has possessed itself of the best knowledge
which had been acquired up to a given time by the persons
most skilled in the occupation; even then, the individual
agents have so much stronger and more direct an interest in
the result, that the means are far more likely to be improved



LIMITS OP THE PROVINCE OF GOVERNMENT. 545

and perfected if left to their uncontrolled choice. But if the
workman is generally the best selector of means, can it be
affirmed with the same universality, that the consumer, or
person served, is the most competent judge of the end ? Is
the buyer always qualified to judge of the commodity? If
not, the presumption in favour of the competition of the
market does not apply to the case ; and if the commodity be
one, in the quality of which society has much at stake, the
balance of advantages may be in favour of some mode and
degree of intervention, by the authorized representatives of
the collective interest of the state.

§ 8. Now, the proposition that the consumer is a com-
petent judge of the commodity, can be admitted only with
numerous abatements and exceptions. He is generally the
best judge (though even this is not true universally) of the
material objects produced for his use. These are destined to
supply some physical want, or gratify some taste or inclina-
tion, respecting which wants or inclinations there is no appeal
from the person who feels them ; or they are the means and
appliances of some occupation, for the use of the persons
engaged in it, who may be presumed to be judges of the
things required in their own habitual employment. But there
are other things, of the worth of which the demand of the
market is by no means a test ; things of which the utility
does not consist in ministering to inclinations, nor in serving
the daily uses of life, and the want of which is least felt
where the need is greatest. This is peculiarly true of those
things which are chiefly useful as tending to raise the cha-
racter of human beings. The uncultivated cannot be com-
petent judges of cultivation. Those who most need to be
made wiser and better, usually desire it least, and if they
desired it, would be incapable of finding the way to it by
their own lights. It will continually happen, on the voluntary
system, that, the end not being desired, the means will not
be provided at all, or that, the persons requiring improve-

VOL. II. N N



546


BOOK V. CHAPTER XI. § 8.

ment having an imperfect or altogether erroneous conception
of what they want, the supply called forth by the demand of
the market will be anything but what is really required.
Now any well-intentioned and tolerably civilized government
may think without presumption that it does or ought to
possess a degree of cultivation above the average of the com-
munity which it rules, and that it should therefore be capable
of offering better education and better instruction to the
people, than the greater number of them would spontane-
ously demand. Education, therefore, is one of those things
which it is admissible in principle that a government should
provide for the people. The case is one to which the reasons
of the non-interference principle do not necessarily or univer-
sally extend.*


* In opposition to these opinions, a writer, with whom on many points I
agree, but whose hostility to government intervention seems to me too indis-
criminate and unqualified, M. Dunoyer, observes, that instruction, however
good in itself, can only be useful to the public in so far as they are willing to
receive it, and that the best proof that the instruction is suitable to their wants,
is its success as a pecuniary enterprise. This argument Beems no more con-
clusive respecting instruction for the mind, than it would be respecting medi-
cine for the body. No medicine will do the patient any good if he cannot be
induced to take it ; but we are not bound to admit as a corollary from this,
that the patient will select the right medicine without assistance. Is it not
possible that a recommendation, from any quarter which he respects, may
induce him to accept a better medicine than he would spontaneously have
chosen ? This is, in respect to education, the very point in debate. Without
doubt, instruction which is so far in advance of the people that they cannot be
induced to avail themselves of it, is to them of no more worth than if it did
not exist. But between what they spontaneously choose, and what they will
refuse to accept when offered, there is a breadth of interval proportioned to
their deference for the recommender. Besides, a thiDg of which the public
are bad judges, may require to be shown to them and pressed on their attention
for a long time, and to prove its advantages by long experience, before they
learn to appreciate it, yet they may learn at last ; which they might never have
done, if the thing had not been thus obtruded upon them in act, but only
recommended in theory. Now, a pecuniary speculation cannot wait years,
or perhaps generations, for success ; it must succeed rapidly, or not at all.
Another consideration which M. Dunoyer seems to have overlooked, is, that
institutions and modes of tuition which never could be made sufficiently popular



LIMITS OF THE PROVINCE OF GOVERNMENT. 547

With regard to elementary education, the exception to
ordinary rules may, I conceive, justifiably be carried still
further. There are certain primary elements and means of
knowledge, which it is in the highest degree desirable that
all human beings born into the community should acquire
during childhood. If their parents, or those on whom they
depend, have the power of obtaining for them this instruction,
and fail to doit, they commit a double breach of duty: towards
the children themselves, and towards the members of the
community generally, who are all liable to suffer seriously
from the consequences of ignorance and want of education
in their fellow-citizens. It is therefore an allowable exercise
of the powers of government, to impose on parents the legal
obligation of giving elementary instruction to children. This
however cannot fairly be done, without taking measures to
ensure that such instruction shall be always accessible to
them, either gratuitously or at a trifling expense.

It may indeed be objected that the education of children
is one of those expenses which parents, even of the labouring
class, ought to defray ; that it is desirable that they should
feel it incumbent on them to provide by their own means for
the fulfilment of their duties, and that by giving education
at the cost of others, just as much as by giving subsistence,
the standard of necessary wages is proportionally lowered,
and the springs of exertion and self-restraint in so much
relaxed. This argument could, at best, be only valid if the
question were that of substituting a public provision for what
individuals would otherwise do for themselves; if all parents
in the labouring class recognized and practised the duty of
giving instruction to their children at their own expense. But
inasmuch as parents do not practise this duty, and do not
include education among those necessary expenses which

to repay, with a profit, the expenses incurred on them, may be invaluable to the
many by giving the highest quality of education to the few, and keeping up the
perpetual succession of superior minds, by whom knowledge is advanced, and
the community urged forward in civilization.

N N 2



548


BOOK V. CHAPTER XI. § 8.

their wages must provide for, therefore the general rate of
wages is not high enough to bear those expenses, and they
must be borne from some other source. And this is not one
of the cases in which the tender of help perpetuates the state
of things which renders help necessary. Instruction, when it
is really such, does not enervate, but strengthens as well as
enlarges the active faculties: in whatever manner acquired,
its effect on the mind is favourable to the spirit of indepen-
dence: and when, unless had gratuitously, it would not be
had at all, help in this form has the opposite tendency to that
which in so many other cases makes it objectionable; it is
help towards doing without help.

In England, and most European countries, elementary
instruction cannot be paid for, at its full cost, from the com-
mon wages of unskilled labour, and would not if it could.
The alternative therefore is not between government and
private speculation, but between a government provision and
voluntary charity: between interference by government, and
interference by associations of individuals, subscribing their
own money for the purpose, like the two great School
Societies. It is, of course, not desirable that anything should
be done by funds derived from compulsory taxation, which is
already sufficiently well done by individual liberality. How
far this is the case with school instruction, is, in each parti-
cular instance, a question of fact. The education provided in
this country on the voluntary principle has of late been so
much discussed, that it is needless in this place to criticise it
minutely, and I shall merely express my conviction, that even
in quantity it is, and is likely to remain, altogether insuffi-
cient, while in quality, though with some slight tendency to
improvement, it is never good except by some rare accident,
and generally so bad as to be little more than nominal. I hold
it therefore the duty of the government to supply the defect
by giving pecuniary support to elementary schools, such as to
render them accessible to all the children of the poor, either
freely, or for a payment too inconsiderable to be sensibly felt.



LIMITS OF THE PROVINCE OF GOVERNMENT. 649


One thing must be strenuously insisted on; that the
government must claim no monopoly for its education, either
in the lower or in the higher branches ; must exert neither
authority nor influence to induce the people to resort to its
teachers in preference to others, and must confer no peculiar
advantages on those who have been instructed by them.
Though the government teachers will probably be superior
to the average of private instructors, they will not embody
all the knowledge and sagacity to be found in all instructors
taken together, and it is desirable to leave open as many
roads as possible to the desired end. Nor is it to be
endured that a government should, either de jure or de
facto , have a complete control over the education of the
people. To possess such a control, and actually exert it, is
to be despotic. A government which, can mould the opinions
and sentiments of the people from their youth upwards, can
do with them whatever it pleases. Though a government,
therefore, may, and in many cases ought to, establish schools
and colleges, it must neither compel nor bribe any person to
come to them; nor ought the power of individuals to set up
rival establishments, to depend in any degree upon its autho-
rization. It would be justified in requiring from all the people
that they shall possess instruction in certain things, but
not in prescribing to them how or from whom they shall
obtain it.


§ 9. In the matter of education, the intervention of
government is justifiable, because the case is not one in which
the interest and judgment of the consumer are a sufficient
security for the goodness of the commodity. Let us now
consider another class of cases, where there is no person in
the situation of a consumer, and where the interest and judg-
ment to be relied on are those of the agent himself ; as in the
conduct of any business in which he is exclusively interested,
or in entering into any contract or engagement by which he
himself is to be bound.



550 BOOK V. CHAPTER XI. § 9 .

The ground of the practical principle of non-interference
must here be, that most persons take a juster and more intel-
ligent view of their own interest, and of the means of pro-
moting it, than can either be prescribed to them by a general
enactment of the legislature, or pointed out in the particular
case by a public functionary. The maxim is unquestionably
sound as a general rule ; but there is no difficulty in perceiving
some very large and conspicuous exceptions to it. These may
be classed under several heads.

First: — The individual who is presumed to be the best
judge of his own interests may be incapable of judging or
acting for himself; may be a lunatic, an idiot, an infant: or
though not wholly incapable, may be of immature years and
judgment. In this case the foundation of the laisser-faire
principle breaks down entirely. The person most interested
is not the best judge of the matter, nor a competent judge
at all. Insane persons are everywhere regarded as proper
objects of the care of the state.* In the case of children and


* The practice of the English law with respect to insane persons, especially
on the all-important point of the ascertainment of insanity, most urgently
demands reform. At present no persons, whose property is worth coveting,
and whose nearest relations are unscrupulous, or on bad terms with them, are
secure against a commission of lunacy. At the instance of the persons who
would profit by their being declared insane, a jury may be impannelled and an
investigation held at the expense of the property, in which all their personal
peculiarities, with all the additions made by the lying gossip of low servants,
are poured into the credulous ears of twelve petty shopkeepers, ignorant
of all ways of life except those of their own class, and regarding every
trait of individuality in character or taste as eccentricity, and all eccentricity
as either insanity or wickedness. If this sapient tribunal gives the desired
verdict, the property is handed over to perhaps the last persons whom the
rightful owner would have desired or suffered to possess it. Some recent
instances of this kind of investigation have been a scandal to the administra-
tion of justice. Whatever other changes in this branch of law may be made,
two at least are imperative : first, that, as in other legal proceedings, the
expenses should not be borne by the person on trial, but by the promoters of
the inquiry, subject to recovery of costs in case of success : and secondly, that
the property of a person declared insane, should in no case be made over to
heirs while the proprietor is alive, but should be managed by a public officer
until his death or recovery.



LIMITS OF THE PROVINCE OF GOVERNMENT. 551

young persons, it is common to say, that though they cannot
judge for themselves, they have their parents or other
relatives to judge for them. But this removes the question
into a different category; making it no longer a question
whether the government should interfere with individuals
in the direction of their own conduct and interests, but
whether it should leave absolutely in their power the conduct
and interests of somebody else. Parental power is as sus-
ceptible of abuse as any other power, and is, as a matter of
fact, constantly abused. If laws do not succeed in preventing
parents from brutally ill-treating, and even from murdering
their children, far less ought it to be presumed that the
interests of children will never be sacrificed, in more common-
place and less revolting ways, to the selfishness or the mistakes
of their parents. Whatever it can be clearly seen that parents
ought to do or forbear for the interest of children, the law is
warranted, if it is able, in compelling to be done or forborne,
and is generally bound to do so. To take an example from
the peculiar province of political economy; it is right that
children, and young persons not yet arrived at maturity,
should be protected, so far as the eye and hand of the state
can reach, from being over-worked. Labouring for too many
hours in the day, or on work beyond their strength, should not
be permitted to them, for if permitted it may always be com-
pelled. Freedom of contract, in the case of children, is but
another word for freedom of coercion. Education also, the
best which circumstances admit of their receiving, is not a
thing which parents or relatives, from indifference, jealousy, or
avarice, should have it in their power to withhold.

The reasons for legal intervention in favour of children,
apply not less strongly to the case of those unfortunate
slaves and victims of the most brutal part of mankind, the
lower animals. It is by the grossest misunderstanding of the
principles of liberty, that the infliction of exemplary punish-
ment on ruffianism practised towards these defenceless crea-
tures, has been treated as a meddling by government with



552 BOOK V. CHAPTER XI. § 9 .

things beyond its province; an interference with domestic life.
The domestic life of domestic tyrants is one of the things
which it is the most imperative on the law to interfere with ;
and it is to be regretted that metaphysical scruples respecting
the nature and source of the authority of government, should
induce many warm supporters of laws against cruelty to
animals, to seek for a justification of such laws in the inci-
dental consequences of the indulgence of ferocious habits, to
the interests of human beings, rather than in the intrinsic
merits of the case itself. What it would be the duty of a
human being, possessed of the requisite physical strength, to
prevent by force if attempted in his presence, it cannot be
less incumbent on society generally to repress. The existing
laws of England on the subject are chiefly defective in
the trifling, often almost nominal, maximum, to which the
penalty even in the worst cases is limited.

Among those members of the community whose freedom
of contract ought to be controlled by the legislature for their
own protection, on account (it is said) of their dependent
position, it is frequently proposed to include women : and in
the recent Factory Act, their labour, in common with that of
young persons, has been placed under peculiar restrictions.
But the classing together, for this and other purposes, of
women and children, appears to me both indefensible in prin-
ciple and mischievous in practice. Children below a certain
age cannot judge or act for themselves; up to a considerably
greater age they are inevitably more or less disqualified for
doing so; but women are as capable as men of appreciating
and managing their own concerns, and the only hindrance to
their doing so arises from the injustice of their present social
position. So long as the law makes everything which the wife
acquires, the property of the husband, while by compelling
her to live with him it forces her to submit to almost any
amount of moral and even physical tyranny which he may
choose to inflict, there is some ground for regarding every act
done by her as done under coercion: but it is the great error



LIMITS OP THE PROVINCE OF GOVERNMENT. 558


of reformers and philanthropists in our time, to nibble at the
consequences of unjust power, instead of redressing the in-
justice itself. If women had as absolute a control as men
have, over their own persons and their own patrimony or
acquisitions, there would be no plea for limiting their hours
of labouring for themselves, in order that they might have
time to labour for the husband, in what is called, by the advo-
cates of restriction, his home. Women employed in factories
are the only women in the labouring rank of life whose posi-
tion is not that of slaves and drudges ; precisely because they
cannot easily be compelled to work and earn wages in fac-
tories against their will. For improving the condition of
women, it should, on the contrary, be an object to give them
the readiest access to independent industrial employment,
instead of closing, either entirely or partially, that which is
already open to them.

§ 1 0. A second exception to the doctrine that individuals
are the best judges of their own interest, is when an in-
dividual attempts to decide irrevocably now, what will be
best for his interest at some future and distant time. The
presumption in favour of individual judgment is only legi-
timate, where the judgment is grounded on actual, and
especially on present, personal experience; not where it is
formed antecedently to experience, and not suffered to be
reversed even after experience has condemned it. When
persons have bound themselves by a contract, not simply to
do some one thing, but to continue doing something for ever
or for a prolonged period, without any power of revoking the
engagement, the presumption which their perseverance in
that course of conduct would otherwise raise in favour of its
being advantageous to them, does not exist; and any such
presumption which can be grounded on their having volun-
tarily entered into the contract, perhaps at an early age, and
without any real knowledge of what they undertook, is com-
monly next to null. The practical maxim of leaving con-



554


BOOK V. CHAPTER XI. § 11.


tracts free, is not applicable without great limitations in case
of engagements in perpetuity; and the law should be
extremely jealous of such engagements; should refuse its
sanction to them, when the obligations they impose are such
as the contracting party cannot be a competent judge of; if
it ever does sanction them, it should take every possible secu-
rity for their being contracted with foresight and deliberation ;
and in compensation for not permitting the parties themselves
to revoke their engagement, should grant them a release from
it, on a sufficient case being made out before an impartial
authority. These considerations are eminently applicable to
marriage, the most important of all cases of engagement for life.

§ 11. The third exception which I shall notice, to the
doctrine that government cannot manage the affairs of indi-
viduals as well as the individuals themselves, has reference to
the great class of cases in which the individuals can only
manage the concern by delegated agency, and in which the
so-called private management is, in point of fact, hardly better
entitled to be called management by the persons interested,
than administration by a public officer. Whatever, if left to
spontaneous agency, can only be done by joint-stock associa-
tions, will often be as well, and sometimes better done, as far
as the actual work is concerned, by the state. Government
management is, indeed, proverbially jobbing, careless, and
ineffective, but so likewise has generally been joint-stock
management. The directors of a joint-stock company, it is
true, are always shareholders; but also the members of a
government are invariably taxpayers; and in the case of
directors, no more than in that of governments, is their pro-
portional share of the benefits of good management, equal to
the interest they may possibly have in mismanagement, even
without reckoning the interest of their ease. It may be
objected, that the shareholders, in their collective character,
exercise a certain control over the directors, and have almost
always full power to remove them from office. Practically,



LIMITS OF THE PROVINCE OF GOVERNMENT. 555

however, the difficulty of exercising this power is found to be
so great, that it is hardly ever exercised except in cases of such
flagrantly unskilful, or, at least, unsuccessful management, as
would generally produce the ejection from office of managers
appointed by the government. Against the security afforded
by meetings of shareholders, and by their individual inspection
and enquiries, may be placed the greater publicity and more
active discussion and comment, to be expected in free coun-
tries with regard to affairs in which the general government
takes part. The defects, therefore, of government manage-
ment, do not seem to be necessarily much greater, if neces-
sarily greater at all, than those of management by joint-
stock.

The true reasons in favour of leaving to voluntary asso-
ciations all such things as they are competent to perform,
would exist in equal strength if it were certain that the work
itself would be as well or better done by public officers.
These reasons have been already pointed out: the mischief of
overloading the chief functionaries of government with
demands on their attention, and diverting them from duties
which they alone can discharge, to objects which can be suf-
ficiently well attained without them; the danger of unneces-
sarily swelling the direct power and indirect influence of
government, and multiplying occasions of collision between its
agents and private citizens; and the inexpediency of concen-
trating in a dominant bureaucracy, all the skill and expe-
rience in the management of large interests, and all the
power of organized action, existing in the community; a
practice which keeps the citizens in a relation to the govern-
ment like that of children to their guardians, and is a main
cause of the inferior capacity for political life which has
hitherto characterized the over-governed countries of the
Continent, whether with or without the forms of representa-
tive government.*

* A parallel case may be found in the distaste for politics, and absence of
public spirit, by which women, as a class, are characterized in the present



556 BOOK V. CHAPTER XI. § 11 .

But although, for these reasons, most things which are
likely to be even tolerably done by voluntary associations,
should, generally speaking, be left to them; it does not follow
that the manner in which those associations perform their
work should be entirely uncontrolled by the government.
There are many cases in which the agency, of whatever
nature, by which a service is performed, is certain, from the
nature of the case, to be virtually single ; in which a practical
monopoly, with all the power it confers of taxing the com-
munity, cannot be prevented from existing. I have already
more than once adverted to the case of the gas and water
companies, among which, though perfect freedom is allowed to
competition, none really takes place, and practically they are
found to be even more irresponsible, and unapproachable by
individual complaints, than the government. There are the
expenses without the advantages of plurality of agency; and
the charge made for services which cannot be dispensed with,
is, in substance, quite as much compulsory taxation as if
imposed by law: there are few householders who make any
distinction/ between their “ water rate” and their other local
taxes. In the case of these particular services, the reasons
preponderate in favour of their being performed, like the
paving and cleansing of the streets, not certainly by the
general government of the state, but by the municipal autho-
rities of the town, and the expense defrayed, as even now it in
fact is, by a local rate. But in the many analogous cases which


state of society, and which is often felt and complained of by political reformers,
without, in general, making them willing to recognize, or desirous to remove,
its cause. It obviously arises from their being taught, both by institutions and
by the whole of their education, to regard themselves as entirely apart from
politics. Wherever they have been politicians, they have shown as great
interest in the subject, and as great aptitude for it, according to the spirit of
their time, as the men with whom they were cotemporaries : in that period of
history (for example) in which Isabella of Castile and Elizabeth of England
were, not rare exceptions, but merely brilliant examples of a spirit and capa-
city very largely diffused among women of high station and cultivation in
Europe.



Limits op the province of government. 557


it is best to resign to voluntary agency, the community needs
some other security for the fit performance of the service
than the interest of the managers; and it is the part of
government, either to subject the business to reasonable con-
ditions for the general advantage, or to retain such power
over it, that the profits of the monopoly may at least be
obtained for the public. This applies to the case of a road,
a canal, or a railway. These are always, in a great degree,
practical monopolies ; and a government which concedes such
monopoly unreservedly to a private company, does much the
same thing as if it allowed an individual or an association to
levy any tax they chose, for their own benefit, on all the
malt produced in the country, or on all the cotton imported
into it. To make the concession for a limited time is gene-
rally justifiable, on the principle which justifies patents for
inventions: but the state should either reserve to itself a
reversionary property in such public works, or should retain,
and freely exercise, the right of fixing a maximum of fares
and charges, and, from time to time, varying that maximum.
It is perhaps necessary to remark, that the state may be the
proprietor of canals or railways without itself working them;
and that they will almost always be better worked by means
of a company, renting the railway or canal for a limited period
from the state.

§ 12. To a fourth case of exception I must request par-
ticular attention, it being one to which, as it appears to me,
the attention of political economists has not yet been suffi-
ciently drawn. There are matters in which the interference
of law is required, not to overrule the judgment of indivi-
duals respecting their own interest, but to give effect to that
judgment ; they being unable to give effect to it except by
concert, which concert again cannot be effectual unless it
receives validity and sanction from the law. For illustration,
and without prejudging the particular point, I may advert
to the question of diminishing the hours of labour. Let us



558


BOOK V. CHAPTER XI. § 12.

suppose, what is at least supposable, whether it be the fact or
not — that a general reduction of the hours of factory labour
from twelve to ten, would be for the advantage of the work-
people : that they would receive as high wages, or nearly as
high, for ten hours labour as they receive for twelve. If this
would be the result, and if the operatives generally are con-
vinced that it would, the limitation, some may say, will be
adopted spontaneously, and there cannot be any need for
enforcing it by legal prohibition. I answer, that it will not
be adopted unless the body of operatives bind themselves to
one another to abide by it. A workman who refused to work
more than ten hours while there were others who worked
twelve, would either not be employed at all, or if employed,
must submit to lose one-sixth of his wages. However con-
vinced, therefore, he may be that it is the interest of the class
to work short time, it is contrary to his own interest to set
the example, unless he is well assured that all or most others
will follow it. But suppose a general agreement of the whole
class: might not this be effectual without the sanction of
law? Not unless enforced by opinion with a rigour practically
equal to that of law. For however beneficial the observance
of the regulation might be to the class collectively, the im-
mediate interest of every individual would lie in violating it:
and the more numerous those were who adhered to the rule,
the more would individuals gain by departing from it. If
nearly all restricted themselves to ten hours, those who chose
to work for twelve would gain all the advantage of the restric-
tion, together with the profit of infringing it ; they would get
twelve hours wages for ten hours work, and two hours wages
besides. I grant that if a large majority adhered to the ten
hours, there would be no harm done : the benefit would be, in
the main, secured to the class, while those individuals who
preferred to work harder and earn more, would have an oppor-
tunity of doing so. This certainly would be the state of things
to be wished for; and assuming that a reduction of hours
without any diminution of wages could take place without



LIMITS OF THE PROVINCE OF GOVERNMENT. 559


expelling the commodity from some of its markets — which is
in every particular instance a question of fact, not of prin-
ciple — the manner in which it would be most desirable that
this effect should be brought about, would be by a quiet
change in the general custom of the trade; short hours be-
coming, by spontaneous choice, the general practice, but those
who chose to deviate from it having the fullest liberty to do
so. Probably, however, so many would prefer the twelve
hours work on the improved terms, that the limitation could
not be maintained as a general practice : what some did from
choice, others would soon be obliged to do from necessity, and
those who had chosen long hours for the sake of increased
wages, would be forced in the end to work long hours for no
greater wages than before. Assuming then that it really
would be the interest of each to work only ten hours if he
could be assured that all others would do the same, there
might be no means of their attaining this object but by con-
verting their supposed mutual agreement into an engagement
under penalty, by consenting to have it enforced by law. I
do not mean to express an opinion in favour of such an
enactment, but it serves to exemplify the manner in which
classes of persons may need the assistance of law, to give effect
to their deliberate collective opinion of their own interest, by
affording to every individual a guarantee that his competitors
will pursue the same course, without which he cannot safely
adopt it himself.

Another exemplification of the same principle is afforded
by what is known as the Wakefield system of colonization.
This system is grounded on the important principle, that
the degree of productiveness of land and labour depends
on their being in a due proportion to one another; that
if a few persons in a newly-settled country attempt to
occupy and appropriate a large district, or if each labourer
becomes too soon an occupier and cultivator of land, there
is a loss of productive power, and a great retardation of
the progress of the colony in wealth and civilization: that



560 BOOK V. CHAPTER XI. § 12 .

nevertheless the instinct (if such it may be called) of appro-
priation, and the feelings associated in old countries with
landed proprietorship, induce almost every emigrant to take
possession of as much land as he has the means of ac-
quiring, and every labourer to become at once a proprietor,
cultivating his own land with no other aid than that of his
family. If this propensity to the immediate possession of
land could be in some degree restrained, and each labourer
induced to work a certain number of years on hire before
he became a landed proprietor, a perpetual stock of hired
labourers could be maintained, available for roads, canals,
works of irrigation, &c., and for the establishment and carry-
ing on of the different branches of town industry; whereby
the labourer, when he did at last become a landed proprietor,
would find his land much more valuable, through access to
markets, and facility of obtaining hired labour. Mr. Wake-
field therefore proposed to check the premature occupation of
land, and dispersion of the people, by putting upon all unap-
propriated lands a rather high price, the proceeds of which
were to be expended in conveying emigrant labourers from
the mother country.

This salutary provision, however, has been objected to, in
the name and on the authority of what was represented as the
great principle of political economy, that individuals are the
best judges of their own interest. It was said, that when
things are left to themselves, land is appropriated and occu-
pied by the spontaneous choice of individuals, in the quan-
tities and at the times most advantageous to each person, and
therefore to the community generally; and that to interpose
artificial obstacles to their obtaining land, is to prevent them
from adopting the course which in their own judgment is
most beneficial to them, from a self-conceited notion of the
legislator, that he knows what is most for their interest, better
than they do themselves. Now this is a complete misunder-
standing, either of the system itself, or of the principle with
which it is alleged to conflict. The oversight is similar to



LIMITS OF THE PROVINCE OF GOVERNMENT. 561

that which we have just seen exemplified on the subject of
hours of labour. However beneficial it might be to the
colony in the aggregate, and to each individual composing it,
that no one should occupy more land than he can properly
cultivate, nor become a proprietor until there are other
labourers ready.to take his place in working for hire ; it can
never be the interest of an individual to exercise this for-
bearance, unless he is assured that others will do so too.
Surrounded by settlers who have each their thousand acres,
how is he benefited by restricting himself to fifty ? or what
does a labourer gain by deferring the acquisition^altogeth er
for a few years, if all other labourers rush to convert their
first earnings into estates in the wilderness, several miles
apart from one another ? If they, by seizing on land, pre-
vent the formation of a class of labourers for wages, he will
not, by postponing the time of his becoming a proprietor,
be enabled to employ the land with any greater advantage
when he does obtain it ; to what end therefore should he
place himself in what will appear to him and others a posi-
tion of inferiority, by remaining a hired labourer when all
around him are proprietors? It is the interest of each to
do what is good for all, but only if others will do likewise.

The principle that each is the best judge of his own in-
terest, understood as these objectors understand it, would
prove that governments ought not to fulfil any of their
acknowledged duties — ought not, in fact, to exist at all. It
is greatly the interest of the community, collectively and
individually, not to rob or defraud one another : but there is
not the less necessity for laws to punish robbery and fraud ;
because, though it is the interest of each that nobody should
rob or cheat, it is not any one's interest to refrain from robbing
and cheating others when all others are permitted to rob and
cheat him. Penal laws exist at all, chiefly for this reason, be-
cause even an unanimous opinion that a certain line of conduct
is for the general interest, does not always make it people's
individual interest to adhere to that line of conduct.

o o


VOL. II.



562


BOOK V. CHAPTER XI. § IS.

§ 13. Fifthly; the argument against government in-
terference, grounded on the maxim that individuals are
the best judges of their own interest, cannot apply to the
very large class of cases, in which those acts of individuals
over which the government claims control, are not done by
those individuals for their own interest, but for the interest
of other people. This includes, among other things, the
important and much agitated subject of public charity.
Though individuals should, in general, be left to do for
themselves whatever it can reasonably be expected that they
should be capable of doing, yet when they are at any rate
not to be left to themselves, but to be helped by other
people, the question arises whether it is better that they
should receive this help exclusively from individuals, and
therefore uncertainly and casually, or by systematic ar-
rangements, in which society acts through its organ, the
state.

This brings us to the subject of Poor Laws ; a subject
which would be of very minor importance if the habits of all
classes of the people were temperate and prudent, and the
diffusion of property satisfactory ; but of the greatest moment
in a state of things so much the reverse of this, in both points,
as that which the British islands present.

Apart from any metaphysical considerations respecting
the foundation of morals or of the social union, it will be
admitted to be right that human beings should help one an-
other ; and the more so, in proportion to the urgency of the
need : and none needs help so urgently as one who is starving.
The claim to help, therefore, created by destitution, is one of
the strongest which can exist; and there is primd fdcie the
amplest reason for making the relief of so extreme an exigency
as certain to those who require it, as by any arrangements of
society it can be made.

On the other hand, in all cases of helping, there are two
sets of consequences to be considered ; the consequences of
the assistance itself, and the consequences of relying on the



LIMITS OF THE PROVINCE OF GOVERNMENT. 563

assistance. The former are generally beneficial, but the latter,
for the most part, injurious; so much so, in many cases, as
greatly to outweigh the value of the benefit. And this is
never more likely to happen than in the very cases where the
need of help is the most intense. There are few things for
which it is more mischievous that people should rely on the
habitual aid of others, than for the means of subsistence, and
unhappily there is no lesson which they more easily learn.
The problem to be solved is therefore one of peculiar nicety
as well as importance; how to give the greatest amount of
needful help, with the smallest encouragement to undue reli-
ance on it.

Energy and self-dependence are, however, liable to be
impaired by the absence of help, as well as by its excess. It
is even more fatal to exertion to have no hope of succeeding
by it, than to be assured of succeeding without it. When
the condition of any one is so disastrous that his energies
are paralyzed by discouragement, assistance is a tonic, not a
sedative: it braces instead of relaxing the active faculties:
always provided that the assistance is not such as to dispense
with self-help, by substituting itself for the person's own
labour, skill, and prudence, but is limited to affording him a
better hope of attaining success by those legitimate means.
This accordingly is a test to which all plans of philanthropy
and benevolence should be brought, whether intended for the
benefit of individuals or of classes, and whether conducted on
the voluntary or on the government principle.

In so far as the subject admits of any general doctrine
or maxim, it would appear to be this — that if assistance is
given in such a manner that the condition of the person
helped is as desirable as that of the person who succeeds
in doing the same thing without help, the assistance, if ca-
pable of being previously calculated on, is mischievous: but
if, while available to everybody, it leaves to every one a
strong motive to do without it if he can, it is then for the
most part beneficial. This principle, applied to a system.

o 0 2



564


BOOK V. CHAPTER XI. § 18.

of public charity, is that of the Poor Law of 1 834. If the
condition of a person receiving relief is made as eligible as
that of the labourer who supports himself by his own exer-
tions, the system strikes at the root of all individual industry
and self-government; and, if fully acted up to, would re-
quire as its supplement an organized system of compulsion,
for governing and setting to work like cattle, those who had
been removed from the influence of the motives that act on
human beings. But if, consistently with guaranteeing all
persons against absolute want, the condition of those who
are supported by legal charity can be kept considerably less
desirable than the condition of those who find support for
themselves, none but beneficial consequences can arise from
a law which renders it impossible for any person, except by
his own choice, to die from insufficiency of food. That in
England at least this supposition can be realized, is proved
by the experience of a long period preceding the close of
the last century, as well as by that of many highly pauperized
districts in more recent times, which have been dispauperized
by adopting strict rules of poor-law administration, to the
great and permanent benefit of the whole labouring class.
There is probably no country in which, by varying the means
suitably to the character of the people, a legal provision for
the destitute might not be made compatible with the obser-
vance of the conditions necessary to its being innocuous.

Subject to these conditions, I conceive it to be highly
desirable, that the certainty of subsistence should be held
out by law to the destitute able-bodied, rather than that their
relief should depend on voluntary charity. In the first place,
charity almost always does too much or too little : it lavishes
its bounty in one place, and leaves people to starve in an-
other. Secondly, since the state must necessarily provide
subsistence for the criminal poor while undergoing punish-
ment*, not to do the same for the poor who have not offended
is to give a premium on crime. And lastly, if the poor are
left to individual charity, a vast amount of mendicity is



LIMITS OF THE PROVINCE OF GOVERNMENT* 565

inevitable. What the state may and should abandon to
private charity, is the task of distinguishing between one
case of real necessity and another. Private charity can
give more to the more deserving. The state must act by
general rules. It cannot undertake to discriminate between
the deserving and the undeserving indigent. It owes no
more than subsistence to the first, and can give no less to
the last. What is said about the injustice of a law which
has no better treatment for the merely unfortunate poor than
for the ill-conducted, is founded on a misconception of the
province of law and public authority. The dispensers of
public relief have no business to be inquisitors. Guardians
and overseers are not fit to be trusted to give or withhold
other people's money according to their verdict on the mora-
lity of the person soliciting it; and it would show much
ignorance of the ways of mankind to suppose that such per-
sons, even in the almost impossible case of their being qua-
lified, will take the trouble of ascertaining and sifting the past
conduct of a person in distress, so as to form a rational judg-
ment on it. Private charity can make these distinctions;
and in bestowing its own money, is entitled to do so accord-
ing to its own judgment. It should understand that this is
its peculiar and appropriate province, and that it is com-
mendable or the contrary, as it exercises the function with
more or with less discernment. But the administrators of a
public fund ought not to be required to do more for anybody,
than that minimum which is due even to the worst. If they
are, the indulgence very speedily becomes the rule, and re-
fusal the more or less capricious or tyrannical exception.

§ 14. Another class of cases which fall within the [same
general principle as the case of public charity, are those
in which the acts done by individuals, though intended
solely for their own benefit, involve consequences extending
indefinitely beyond them, to interests of the nation or of
posterity, for which society in its collective capacity is alone



566


BOOK V. CHAPTER XL § 14.


able, and alone bound, to provide. One of these cases is
that of Colonization. If it is desirable, as no one will deny
it to be, that the planting of colonies should be conducted,
not with an exclusive view to the private interests of the first
founders, but with a deliberate regard to the permanent
welfare of the nations afterwards to arise from these small
beginnings; such regard can only be secured by placing
the enterprise, from its commencement, under regulations
constructed with the foresight and enlarged views of philo-
sophical legislators ; and the government alone has power
either to frame such regulations, or to enforce their obser-
vance.

The question of government intervention in the work of
Colonization involves the future and permanent interests of
civilization itself, and far outstretches the comparatively
narrow limits of purely economical considerations. But even
with a view to those considerations alone, the removal of
population from the overcrowded to the unoccupied parts of
the earth's surface is one of those works of eminent social
usefulness, which most require, and which at the same time
best repay, the intervention of government.

To appreciate the benefits of colonization, it should be
considered in its relation, not to a single country, but to the
collective economical interests of the human race. The
question is in general treated too exclusively as one of dis-
tribution; of relieving one labour-market and supplying
another. It is this, but it is also a question of production,
and of the most efficient employment of the productive
resources of the world. Much has been said of the good
economy of importing commodities from the place where they
can be bought cheapest ; while the good economy of produc-
ing them where they can be produced cheapest, is compara-
tively little thought of. If to carry consumable goods from
the places where they are superabundant to those where they
are scarce, is a good pecuniary speculation, is it not an equally
good speculation to do the same thing with regard to labour



LIMITS OF THE PROVINCE OF GOVERNMENT. 567

and instruments? The exportation of labourers and capital
from old to new countries, from a place where their produc-
tive power is less, to a place where it is greater, increases by
so much the aggregate produce of the labour and capital of
the world. It adds to the joint wealth of the old and the
new country, what amounts in a short period to many times
the mere cost of effecting the transport. There needs be no
hesitation in affirming that Colonization, in the present state
of the world, is the best affair of business, in which the capital
of an old and wealthy country can engage.

It is equally obvious, however, that Colonization on a
great scale can be undertaken, as an affair of business, only
by the government, or by some combination of individuals in
complete understanding with the government. Emigration
on the voluntary principle rarely has any material influence
in lightening the pressure of population in the old country,
though as far as it goes it is doubtless a benefit to the colony.
Those labouring persons who voluntarily emigrate are seldom
the very poor ; they are small farmers with some little capital,
or labourers who have saved something, and who, in removing
only their own labour from the crowded labour-market, with-
draw from the capital of the country a fund which maintained
and employed more labourers than themselves. Besides,
this portion of the community is so limited in number, that
it might be removed entirely, without making any sensible
impression upon the numbers of the population, or even upon
the annual increase. Any considerable emigration of labour
is only practicable, when its cost is defrayed, or at least
advanced, by others than the labourers themselves. Who
then is to advance it ? Naturally, it may be said, the capi-
talists of the colony, who require the labour, and who intend
to employ it. But to this there is the obstacle, that a capi-
talist, after going to the expense of carrying out labourers,
has no security that he shall be the person to derive any
benefit from them. If all the capitalists of the colony were
to combine, and bear the expense by subscription, they



568


BOOK V. CHAPTER XT. § 14.

would still have no security that the labourers, when there,
would continue to work for them. After working for a short
time and earning a few pounds, they always, unless prevented
by the government, squat on unoccupied land, and work only
for themselves. The experiment has been repeatedly tried .
whether it was possible to enforce contracts for labour, or the
repayment of the passage-money of emigrants to those who
advanced it, and the trouble and expense have always ex-
ceeded the advantage. The only other resource is the volun-
tary contributions of parishes or individuals, to rid themselves
of surplus labourers who are already, or who are likely to
become, locally chargeable on the poor-rate. Were this specu-
lation to become general, it might produce a sufficient amount
of emigration to clear off the existing unemployed population,
but not to raise the wages of the employed : and the same
thing would require to be done over again in less than another
generation.

One of the principal reasons why Colonization should be
a national undertaking, is that in this manner alone, save in
highly exceptional cases, can emigration be self-supporting.
The exportation of capital and labour to a new country being,
as before observed, one of the best of all affairs of business, it
is absurd that it should not, like other affairs of business,
repay its own expenses. Of the great addition which it makes
to the produce of the world, there can be no reason why a
sufficient portion should not be intercepted, and employed in
reimbursing the outlay incurred in effecting it. For reasons
already given, no individual, or body of individuals, can reim-
burse themselves for the expense ; the government, however,
can. It can take from the annual increase of wealth, caused
by the emigration, the fraction which suffices to repay with
interest what the emigration has cost. The expenses of
emigration to a colony ought to be borne by the colony; and
this, in general, is only possible when they are borne by the
colonial government.

Of the modes in which a fund for the support of coloni-



LIMITS OF THE PROVINCE OF GOVERNMENT. 569

zation can be raised in the colony, none is comparable in
advantage to that which was first suggested, and has since
been so ably and perseveringly advocated, by Mr. Wakefield:
the plan of putting a price on all unoccupied land, and devoting
the proceeds to emigration. The unfounded and pedantic
objections to this plan have been answered in a former part of
this chapter : we have now to speak of its advantages. First,
it avoids the difficulties and discontents incident to raising a
large annual amount by taxation; a thing which it is almost
useless to attempt with a scattered population of settlers in
the wilderness, who, as experience proves, can seldom be com-
pelled to pay direct taxes, except at a cost exceeding their
amount; while in an infant community indirect taxation soon
reaches its limit. The sale of lands is thus by far the easiest
mode of raising the requisite funds. But it has other and still
greater recommendations. It is a beneficial check upon the
tendency of a population of colonists to adopt the tastes and
inclinations of savage life, and to disperse so widely as to lose
all the advantages of commerce, of markets, of separation of
employments, and combination of labour. By making it
necessary for those who emigrate at the expense of the fund,
to earn a considerable sum before they can become landed
proprietors, it keeps up a perpetual succession of labourers for
hire, who in every country are a most important auxiliary even
to peasant proprietors: and by diminishing the eagerness of
agricultural speculators to add to their domain, it keeps the
settlers within reach of each other for purposes of co-operation,
arranges a numerous body of them within easy distance of
oach centre of foreign commerce and non-agnculturalindustry,
and ensures the formation and rapid growth of towns and town
products. This concentration, compared with the dispersion
which u nif ormly occurs when unoccupied land can be had for
nothing, greatly accelerates the attainment of prosperity, and
enlarges the fund which may be drawn upon for further
emigration. Before the adoption of the Wakefield system,
the early years of all new colonies were full of hardship and



570 BOOK V, CHAPTER XI. § 14 .

difficulty: the last colony founded on the old principle, the
Swan River settlement, being one of the most characteristic
instances. In all subsequent colonization, the Wakefield
principle has been acted upon, though imperfectly, a part
only of the proceeds of the sale of land being devoted to
emigration : yet wherever it has been introduced at all, as in
South Australia, Port Philip, and New Zealand, the restraint
put upon the dispersion of the settlers, and the influx of
capital caused by the assurance of being able to obtain hired
labour, has, in spite of many difficulties and much mismanage-
ment, produced a suddenness and rapidity of prosperity more
like fable than reality.*

The self-supporting system of colonization, once esta-
blished, would increase in efficiency every year; its effect
would tend to increase in geometrical progression: for since
every able-bodied emigrant, until the country is fully peopled,
adds in a very short time to its wealth, over and above his
own consumption, as much as would defray the expense of
bringing out another emigrant, it follows that the greater the
number already sent, the greater number might continue to
be sent, each emigrant laying the foundation of a succession
of other emigrants at short intervals without fresh expense,
until the colony is filled up. It would therefore be worth
while, to the mother country, to accelerate the early stages of
this progression, by loans to the colonies for the purpose of
emigration, repayable from the fund formed by the sales of
land. In thus advancing the means of accomplishing a large
immediate emigration, it would be investing that amount of


* The objections which have been made, with so much virulence, in some of
these colonies, to the Wakefield system, apply, in so far as they have any
validity, not to the principle, but to some provisions which are no part of the
system, and have been most unnecessarily and improperly engrafted on it;
such as the offering only a limited quantity of laud for sale, and that by
auction, and in lots of not less than 640 acres, instead of selling all land which
is asked for, and allowing to the buyer unlimited freedom of choice, both as to
quantity and situation, at a fixed price.



LIMITS OP THE PROVINCE OP GOVERNMENT. 571

capital in the mode, of all others, most beneficial to the
colony; and the labour and savings of these emigrants would
hasten the period at which a large sum would be available
from sales of land. It would be necessary, in order not to
overstock the labour-market, to act in concert with the
persons disposed to remove their own capital to the colony.
The knowledge that a large amount of hired labour would be
available, in so productive a field of employment, would
ensure a large emigration of capital from a country, like
England, of low profits and rapid accumulation : and it would
only be necessary not to send out a greater number of
labourers at one time, than this capital could absorb and
employ at high wages.

Inasmuch as, on this system, any given amount of expen-
diture, once incurred, would provide not merely a single
emigration, but a perpetually flowing stream of emigrants,
which would increase in breadth and depth as it flowed on;
this mode of relieving overpopulation has a recommendation,
not possessed by any other plan ever proposed for making
head against the consequences of increase without restraining
the increase itself : there is an element of indefiniteness in
it ; no one can perfectly foresee how far its influence, as a vent
for surplus population, might possibly reach. There is hence
the strongest obligation on the government of a country like
our own, with a crowded population, and unoccupied conti-
nents under its command, to build, as it were, and keep open,
a bridge from the mother country to those continents, by esta-
blishing the self-supporting system of colonization on such a
scale, that as great an amount of emigration as the colonies
can at the time accommodate, may at all times be able to
take place without cost to the emigrants themselves.

The importance of these considerations, as regards the
British islands, has been of late considerably diminished by the
unparalleled amount of spontaneous emigration from Ireland;
an emigration not solely of small farmers, but of the poorest
class of agricultural labourers, and which is at once voluntary



572


BOOK V. CHAPTER XI. § 15.


and self-supporting, the succession of emigrants being kept up
by funds contributed from the earnings of their relatives and
connexions who had gone before. To this has been added a
large amount of voluntary emigration to the seats of the gold
discoveries, which has partly supplied the wants of our most
distant colonies, where, both for local and national interests,
it was most of all required. But the stream of both these
emigrations has already considerably slackened, and there are
indications that the aid of government in a systematic form,
and on the self-supporting principle, is again becoming neces-
sary to keep the communication open between the hands
needing work in England, and the work which needs hands
elsewhere.

§ 15. The same principle which points out colonization,
and the relief of the indigent, as cases to which the prin-
cipal objection to government interference does not apply,
extends also to a variety of cases, in which important
public services are to be performed, while yet there is no
individual specially interested in performing them, nor
would any adequate remuneration naturally or spontaneously
attend their performance. Take for instance a voyage of
geographical or scientific exploration. Tbe information sought
may be of great public value, yet no individual would
derive any benefit from it which would repay the expense of
fitting out the expedition ; and there is no mode of intercept-
ing the benefit on its way to those who profit by it, in order
to levy a toll for the remuneration of its authors. Such
voyages are, or might be, undertaken by private subscription;
but this is a rare and precarious resource. Instances are more
frequent in which the expense has been borne by public
companies or philanthropic associations ; but in general such
enterprises have been conducted at the expense of govern-
ment, which is thus enabled to entrust them to the persons
in its judgment best qualified for the task. Again, it is a
proper office of government to build and maintain lighthouses,



LIMITS OP THE PROVINCE OF GOVERNMENT. 573


establish buoys, &c., for the security of navigation : for since
it is impossible that the ships at sea which are benefited by
a lighthouse, should be made to pay a toll on the occasion
of its use, no one would build lighthouses from motives of
personal interest, unless indemnified and rewarded from a
compulsory levy made by the state. There are many scientific
researches, of great value to a nation and to mankind, requir-
ing assiduous devotion of time and labour, and not unfre-
quently great expense, by persons who can obtain a high
price for their services in other ways. If the government
had no power to grant indemnity for expense, and remunera-
tion for time and labour thus employed, such researches
could only be undertaken by the very few persons who, with
an independent fortune, unite technical knowledge, laborious
habits, and either great public spirit, or an ardent desire of
scientific celebrity.*


* Connected with this subject is the question of providing, by means of
endowments or salaries, for the maintenance of what has been called a learned
class. The cultivation of speculative knowledge, though one of the most useful
of all employments, is a service rendered to a community collectively, not
individually, and one consequently for which it is, primd facie, reasonable that
the community collectively should pay ; since it gives no claim on any indi-
vidual for a pecuniary remuneration : and unless a provision is made for such
services from some public fund, there is not only no encouragement to them,
but there is as much discouragement as is implied in the impossibility of gain-
ing a living by such pursuits, and the necessity consequently imposed on most
of those who would.be capable of them, to employ the greatest part of their
time in gaining a subsistence. The evil, however, is greater in appearance
than in reality. The greatest things, it has been said, have generally been
done by those who had the least time at their disposal ; and the occupation of
some hours every day in a routine employment, has often been found com-
patible with the most brilliant achievements in literature and philosophy. Yet
there are investigations and experiments which require not only a long but a
continuous devotion of time and attention : there are also occupations which so
engross and fatigue the mental faculties, as to be inconsistent with any vigorous
employment of them upon other subjects, even in intervals of leisure. It is
highly desirable, therefore, that there should be a mode of ensuring to the
public the services of scientific discoverers, and perhaps of some other classes
of savans, by affording them the means of support consistently with devoting
a sufficient portion of time to their peculiar pursuits. The fellowships of the



574


BOOK V. CHAPTER XI. § 16.

It may be said generally, that anything which it is
desirable should be done for the general interests of man-
kind or of future generations, or for the present interests
of those members of the community who require external
aid, but which is not of a nature to remunerate individuals
or associations for undertaking it, is in itself a suitable
thing to be undertaken by government : though, before mak-
ing the work their own, governments ought always to con-
sider if there be any rational probability of its being done
on what is called the voluntary principle, and if so, whether
it is likely to be done in a better or more effectual manner
by government agency, than by the zeal and liberality of
individuals.

§ 16. The preceding heads comprise, to the best of my
judgment, the whole of the exceptions to the practical maxim,
that the business of society can be best performed by private
and voluntary agency. It is, however, necessary to add, that


Universities are an institution excellently adapted for such a purpose ; but are
hardly ever applied to it, being bestowed, at the best, as a reward for past
proficiency, in committing to memory what has been done by others, and not
as the salary of future labours in the advancement of knowledge. In some
countries, Academies of science, antiquities, history, &c., have been formed,
with emoluments annexed. The most effectual plan, and at the same time the
least liable to abuse, seems to be that of conferring Professorships, with duties
of instruction attached to them. The occupation of teaching a branch of
knowledge, at least in its higher departments, is a help rather than an impedi-
ment to the systematic cultivation of the subject itself. The duties of a pro-
fessorship almost always leave much time for original researches, and the
greatest advances which have been made in the various sciences, both moral
and physical, have originated with those who were public teachers of them ;
from Plato and Aristotle to the great names of the Scotch, French, and
German Universities. I do not mention the English, because their professorships
have been, as is well known, little more than nominal. In the case, too, of a
lecturer in a great institution of education, the public at large has the means
of judging, if not the quality of the teaching, at least the talents and industry
of the teacher ; and it is more difficult to misemploy the power of appointment
to such an office, than to job in pensions and salaries to persons not so directly
before the public eye.



LIMITS OF THE PROVINCE OF GOVERNMENT. 575

the intervention of government cannot always practically stop
short at the limit which defines the cases intrinsically suitable
for it. In the particular circumstances of a given age or
nation, there is scarcely anything, really important to the
general interest, which it may not be desirable, or even
necessary, that the government should take upon itself, not
because private individuals cannot effectually perform it, but
because they will not. At some times and places there will
be no roads, docks, harbours, canals, works of irrigation, hos-
pitals, schools, colleges, printing presses, unless the govern-
ment establishes them; the public being either too poor to
command the necessary resources, or too little advanced in
intelligence to appreciate the ends, or not sufficiently practised
in conjoint action to be capable of the means. This is true,
more or less, of all countries inured to despotism, and parti-
cularly of those in which there is a very wide distance in
civilization between the people and the government: as in
those which have been conquered and are retained in subjec-
tion by a more energetic and more cultivated people. In
many parts of the world, the people can do nothing for them-
selves which requires large means and combined action; all
such things are left undone, unless done by the state. In
these cases, the mode in which the government can most
surely demonstrate the sincerity with which it intends the
greatest good of its subjects, is by doing the things which are
made incumbent on it by the helplessness of the public, in
such a manner as shall tend not to increase and perpetuate
but to correct that helplessness. A good government will give
all its aid in such a shape, as to encourage and nurture any
rudiments it may find of a spirit of individual exertion. It
will be assiduous in removing obstacles and discouragements
to voluntary enterprize, and in giving whatever facilities and
whatever direction and guidance may be necessary : its pecu-
niary means will be applied, when practicable, in aid of pri-
vate efforts rather than in supersession of them, and it will
call into play its machinery of rewards and honours to elicit



576 BOOK y. CHAPTER XI. § 16 .

such efforts. Government aid, when given merely in default
of private enterprise, should be so given as to be as far as
possible a course of education for the people in the art of
accomplishing great objects by individual energy and voluntary
co-operation.

I have not thought it necessary here to insist on that part
of the functions of government which all admit to be indis-
pensable, the function of prohibiting and punishing such
conduct on the part of individuals in the exercise of their
freedom, as is clearly injurious to other persons, whether the
case be one of force, fraud, or negligence. Even in the best
state which society has yet reached, it is lamentable to think
how great a proportion of all the efforts and talents in the
world are employed in merely neutralizing one another. It is
the proper end of government to reduce this wretched waste
to the smallest possible amount, by taking such measures as
shall cause the energies now spent by mankind in injuring one
another, or in protecting themselves against injury, to be
turned to the legitimate employment of the human faculties,
that of compelling the powers of nature to be more and more
subservient to physical and moral good.



APPENDIX.


Latest Information on the French Industrial Asso-
ciations. (From “Nouveau Traite (TEconomie Politique,”
by M. Villiaum^. Paris, 1857.)

1. Associations between the labourers and tbe employer.

“ En Mars 1847, M. Paul Dupont, gerant d’une imprimerie de
Paris, eut l’idee d’associer ses ouvriers en leur promettant le
dixieme des benefices. II en emploie habituellement trois cents,
dont deux cents travaillent aux pieces et cent k la journee. II
emploie, en outre, cent auxiliaires, qui no font j>as partie de l’asso-
ciation.

“ La part de benefice avenant aux ouvriers ne leur vaut gufcre,
en moyenne, qu’une quinzaine de jours de travail; mais ils re-
9oivent leur salaire ordinaire suivant le tarif etabli dans toutes les
grandes imprimeries de Paris ; et, de plus, ils ont l’avantage d’etre
soignes dans leurs maladies aux frais de la communaute, et de re-
cevoir 1 fr. 50 cent, de salaire par jour d’incapacite de travail. Les
ouvriers ne peuvent retirer leur part dans les benefices que quand ils
sortent de l’association. Chaque annee, cette part, qui est repre-
sent6e tant en materiel qu’en rentes sur l’Etat, s’augmente par la
capitalisation des interets, et cree ainsi une reserve a l’ouvrier.

“ M. Dupont et les capitalistes, ses commanditaires, trouvent
dans cette association un profit bien superieur aceluiqu’ils auraient;
les ouvriers, de leur cote, se felicitent chaque jour de l’beureuse idee
de leur patron. Plusieurs d’entre eux, encourages a la reussite de
l’etablissement, lui ont fait obtenir une medaille d’or en 1849, une
medaille d’honneur k l’Exposition Universelle de 1855 ; et quelques-
uns m6me ont re 9 u personellement la recompense de leurs decou-
vertes et de leurs travaux. Chez un patron ordinaire, ces braves
gens n’ auraient pas eu le loisir de poursuivre leurs inventions, k
moins que d’en laisser tout l’honneur k celui qui n*en etait pas

VOL. II. P P



578


APPENDIX.


l’auteur ; tandis qu’6tant associes, si le patron efit 6te injuste, deux
cents hommes eussent fait redresser ses torts.

“ J’ai visite moi-m^me cet etablissement, et j’ai pu m’assurer du
perfectionnement que cette association apporte aux habitudes des
ouvriers.

“ M. Gisquet, ancien prefet de police, est proprietaire depuis
long-temps d’une fabrique d’huile a Saint-Denis, qui est la plus
importante de France, apres celle de M. Darblay, de Corbeil.
Lorsqu’en 1848 il prit le parti de la diriger lui-meme, il rencontra
des ouvriers habitues a s’enivrer plusieurs fois par semaine, et qui,
pendant le travail, chantaient, fumaient, et quelquefois se dispu-
taient. On avait maintes fois essaye sans succes de changer cet
etat de choses ; il y parvint par la prohibition faite a tous ses
ouvriers de s’enivrer les jours de travail, sous peine d’exclusion, et
par la promesse de partager entre eux, a titre de gratification
annuelle, 5 p. 100 de ses benefices nets, au prorata des salaires, qui,
du reste, sont fixes aux prix courants. Depuis ce moment, la
reforme a et6 complete ; il se voit entoure d’une centaine d’ouvriers
pleins de zele et de devouement. Leur bien-etre s’est accru de tout
ce qu’ils ne depensent pas en boissons, et de ce qu’ils gagnent par
leur exactitude au travail. La gratification que M. Gisquet leur
accorde, leur a valu, en moyenne, chaque annee, l’equivalent de leur
salaire pendant six semaines.

“ L’un des patrons qui comprirent le mieux l’association avec
les ouvriers est M. Leclaire, entrepreneur de peinture en batiments,
a Paris. Des 1842, sur les conseils de quelques economistes, il
associa ses deux cents ouvriers, en leur promettant la moitil du
benefice net outre leur salaire, qui etait toujours au moins egal au
taux courant. Une amelioration extraordinaire se manifesta tout a
coup dans les habitudes de ses ouvriers, qui devinrent des modeles
d’exactitude et de probite. M. Leclaire introduisit l’usage du blanc
de zinc au lieu du blanc de ceruse, qui etait souvent mortel pour les
ouvriers. Les immenses travaux que lui necessita cette heureuse
innovation l’ont tellement fatigue, qu’il se vit force de s’adjoindre
deux associ6s en titre, qu’il choisit parmi ses anciens ouvriers ; et
depuis 1853, la part du benefice partag£e entre les ouvriers n’est
plus que du quart, ce dont ceux-ci sont encore satisfaits. Quant a
M. Leclaire, quoiqu’il ait toujours banni la fraude, qui n’est que



appendix.


579


trop frequente dans sa profession, il a toujours pu soutenir la con-
currence et acqu6rir une belle aisance, malgre l’abandon d’une si
large part de ses profits. Assurement, il n’y eat parvenu que pare©
que 1 activite inusitee de ses ouvriers, et la surveillance qu’ils exer-
^aient les un3 sur les autres dans les liombreux chantiers, avaient
compens£ la diminution de ses profits personnels.”

“ M. Beslay, ancien depute de 1830 a 1839, et representant du
peuple a l’Assemblee constituante, a fonde un atelier important de
machines a vapeur a Paris, dans le faubourg du Temple. Il cut
l’idee d’associer dans ce dernier etablissement ses ouvriers, des lo
commencement de 1817. Jetranscris ici cetacte dissociation, que
1 on peut regarder comme Tun des plus complets de tous ceux faits
entre patrons et ouvriers.”

2. Associations of labourers among themselves.

“Des 1851, il existait h Paris environ cent cinquante associa-
tions d’ouvriers qui avaient reus si, la plupart meme sans aucun
secours. Les evenements politiques de la fin de cette annee, et les
rivalites de patrons jaloux, en firent dissoudre leplus grand nombre.
L’on n’en compte plus en 1857 que vingt-trois& Paris, qui, presque
toutes, prosperent. Je vais brievement examiner la situation de
quelques-unes.

“ Apres les journees de juin 1848, le travail etait suspendu dans
le faubourg Saint- Antoine, occupe surtout, comme on le sait, par
les fabricants de meubles. Quelques menuisiers en fauteuils firent
un appel a ceux qui seraient disposes a travailler ensemble. Sur
six k sept cents de cette profession, quatre cents se firent inscrire.
Mais comme le capital manquait, neuf hommes des plus zeles com-
mencerent rassociation avec tout ce qu’ils poss6daient ; savoir, une
valeur de 369 francs en outils, et 135 francs 20 centimes en argent.

“ Leur bon gout, leur loyaute et l’exactitude de leurs fournitures
augmentant leurs debouches, les associes furent bientot au nombre
de cent huit. Ils re^rent de l’Etat une avance de 25 mille francs,
remboursables en quatorze ans par annuite, & raison de 3 fr. 75 c.
pour cent d’interet.

“ En 1857, le nombre des associes est de soixante-cinq, celui des
auxiliaires de cent en moyenne. Tous les associes votent pour
1’ election d’un conseil d’administration de huit membres, et d’uu



580


APPENDIX.


gerant, dont le nom represente la raison sociale. La distribution et
la surveillance du travail dans les ateliers sont confines k des contre-
maitres choisis par le gerant et le conseil. II y a un contre-maitre
pour vingt ou vingt-cinq hommes.

“ Le travail est paye aux pieces, suivant les tarifs arretes en
assemble gen6rale. Le salaire peut varier entre 3 et 7 francs par
jour, selon le zele et l’habilete de l’ouvrier. La moyenne est de
50 francs par quinzaine. Ceux qui gagnent le moins touchent pres
de 40 francs par quinzaine. Un grand nombre gagnent 80 francs.
Des sculpteurs et mouluriers gagnent jusqu’k 100 francs, soit 200
francs par mois. Chacun s’engage it fournir cent-vingt heures
par quinzaine, soit dix heures par jour. Aux termes du rSglement
chaque heure de deficit soumet le delinquant k une amende de 10
centimes par heure en-de 9 a de trente heures, et de 15 centimes au-
delk. Cette disposition avait pour objet d’abolir l’habitude du lundi,
et elle a produit son effet. Depuis deux ans, le systeme des amendes
est tombe en desuetude, it cause de la bonne conduite des associes.

“ Quoique l’apport des associds n’ait ete que de 369 francs, le
materiel d’exploitation appartenant k l’etablissement* s’elevait
ddjk, en 1851, k 5713 francs, et l’avoir social, y compris les creances,
k 24,000 francs. Depuis lors cette association est devenue plus
florissante, ayant resiste k tous les obstacles qui lui ont ete suscites.
Cette maison est la plus forte de Paris dans son genre, et la plus
consideree. Elle fait des affaires pour 400 mille francs par an.
Void son inventaire de ddcembre 1855.


Actif.

Espbces 445 70

Marchandises 82,930 ,, fait d’avance, ce qui empdche le

chOmage.

Salaires payds d’avance . . 2421 70

Matdriel 20,891 35

Portefeuille 9711 75

Meubles consignds ... 211 ,,

Loyer d’avance .... 4933 10

Ddbiteurs divers . . . . 48,286 95

.169,831 55


* II est situd dans la rue de Chavonne, cour Saint- Joseph, au faubourg
Saint- Antoine.



APPENDIX.


581


Pass if.


Effete k payer 8655

Fonds d’association 133

100 fr. & chacun 7600 ne la doivent qu’a eux-m6mes.

Fonds de retenue indivisible . . 9205 84 pourl’Etat, quiprendlO p. 100

par an sur les bdndfices, le
tout payable au bout de 14 ans.

Caisse de secours 1544 30 ne la doivent qu’k eux-m6mes.

Pr6t de l’Etat, principal et int^rdt 27, 053 „

Crdanciers divers 12,559 51


66,752 65


Difference active .

100,398 90. La socidte possbde en rdalitd 123,000 fr.

“ L’association des ma^ns fut fondee le 10 aout 1848. Elle a
son si6ge rue Saint-Victor, 155. Le nombre de ses membres est
de 85, et celui de ses auxiliaires de trois a quatre cents. Elle a
deux gerants k sa tete ; l’un, charge specialement des constructions ;
l’autre, de l’administration. Les deux gerants passent pour les
plus habiles entrepreneurs de ma 9 onnerie de Paris, et ils se con-
tentent d’un modeste traitement. Cette association vient de con-
struire trois ou quatre des plus remarquables hotels de la capitale.
Bien qu’elle travaille avec plus d’economie que les entrepreneurs
ordinaires, comme on ne la rembourse qu’& des termes eloigncs,
c’est surtout pour elle qu’une banque serait necessaire, car elle a
des avances considerables k faire. Neanrnoins elle prospere, et la
preuve en est dans le dividende de 5G pour 100 qu’a produit cette
annee son propre capital, et qu’elle a paye aux citoyens qui se sont
associSs k ses operations.

“ Cette association est form^e d’ouvriers qui n’apportent que
leur travail ; d’autres qui apportent leur travail et un capital quel-
conque ; enfin de citoyens qui ne travaillent point, mais qui se sont
associes en fournissant un capital.”

“ Les ma 9 ons se livrent le soir a un enseignement mutuel. Chez
eux, comme chez les fabricants de fauteuils, le malade est soign6 aux
frais de la societe, et repoit en outre im salaire durant sa maladie.



582


APPENDIX.


Chacun est protege par l’association dans tous les actes de sa vie. lies
fabricants de fauteuils auront bientdt chacun un capital de deux
ou trois mille francs a leur disposition, soit pour doter leurs filles,
soit pour commencer une reserve pour l’avenir. Quant aux
ma^ns, quelques-uns possedent deja 4000 francs d’Spargnes qui
restent au fonds social.

“ Avant qu’ils fussent associes, ces ouvriers 6taient pauvrement
vetus de la veste et de la blouse ; parce que, faute de prevoyance, et
surtout a cause du chomage, ils n’avaient jamais une somme dis-
ponible de 60 francs pour acheter une redingote. Aujourd’hui, la
plupart sont vetus aussi bien que les bourgeois ; quelquefois meme
avec plus de gout. Cela tient a ce que l’ouvrier, ayant un credit
dans son association, trouve partout ce dont il a besoin sur un bon
qu’il souscrit ; et la caisse retient chaque quinzaine une partie de
la somme h. eteindre. De la sorte, l’epargne se fait, pour ainsi dire,
malgre Fouvrier. Plusieurs meme, n’ ay ant plus de dettes, se sou-
scrivent a eux-memes des bons de 100 francs payables en cinq mois,
afin de resister a la tentation des depenses inutiles. On leur
retient 10 francs par quinzaine ; et au bout des cinq mois, bon gre,
mal gre, ils trouvent ce petit capital epargne.”

“ J’ai pu me convaincre par moi-meme de Thabilete du choix
des g6rants et des conseils d’ administration des associations ou-
vrieres. Ces gerants sont bien sup6rieurs pour rintelligence,le zele,et
m^ffie pour la politesse, a la plupart des patrons ou entrepreneurs
particuliers. Et chez les ouvriers associes, les funestes habitudes
d ’intemperance disparaissent peu k peu, avec la grossierete et la
rudesse qui sont la consequence de la trop incomplete education de
leur classe.’*


THE END.


