Evidence from Scripture and History of the Second Coming of Christ (William Miller, 1836)
==========================================================
Miller's 1836 Evidence — the Baptist farmer's biblical case for Christ's return about 1843; the book that launched Adventism and the Great Disappointment. Public domain. Source: Internet Archive.

i


4H


(fffffll


&mm


m


(iff


in


K


fl  f


LYRASIS  members  and  Sloan  Foundation


EVIDENCE


SCRIPTURE    AND    HISTORY


SECOND  COMING  OF  CHRIST,


THE   YEAR    1843;


EXHIBITED


IN   A   COURSE    OF    LECTURES


By  WILLIAM   MfLLER.


BOSTON:

PUBLISHED  BY   JOSHUA  V.  HIMES,
14    Devonshire   Street.

1842.


TO     ALL     THEM

WHO  ARE  LOOKING  FOR  THE  BLESSED  HOPE

AND    GLORIOUS    APPEARING    OF    THE

GREAT   GOD,  AND   OUR   SAVIOR

JESUS  CHRIST  AT  HAND,

THIS   WORK

IS   RESPECTFULLY  DEDICATED

BY     THE     EDITOR.


INTRODUCTION


Iff  presenting  these  Lectures  to  the  public,  the  writer  is  only
complying  with  the  solicitations  of  some  of  his  friends,  who  have
requested  that  his  views  on  the  Prophecies  of  Daniel  and  John
might  be  made  public.  The  reader  is  therefore  requested  to  give
the  subject  a  careful  and  candid  perusal,  and  compare  every  part
with  the  standard  of  Divine  Truth ;  for  if  the  explanation  the  writer
has  given  to  the  scriptures  under  consideration  should  prove  correct,
the  reader  will  readily  perceive  that  it  concerns  us  all,  and  becomes
doubly  important  to  us,  because  we  live  on  the  eve  of  one  of  the
most  important  events  ever  revealed  to  man  by  the  wisdom  of  God
—  the  judgment  of  the  great  day

In  order  that  the  reader  may  have  an  understanding  of  my  man-
ner of  studying  the  Prophecies,  by  which  I  have  come  to  the  fol-
lowing result,  I  have  thought  proper  to  give  some  of  the  rules  of
interpretation  which  I  have  adopted  to  understand  prophecy.

Prophetical  scripture  is  very  much  of  it  communicated  to  us  by
figures  and  highly  and  richly  adorned  metaphors  5  by  which  I  mean
that  figures  such  as  beasts,  birds,  air  or  wind,  tvater,jire,  candlesticks,
lamps,  mountains,  islands,  &c,  are  used  to  represent  things  proph-
esied of — such  as  kingdoms,  warriors,  principles,  people,  judg-
ments, churches,  word  of  God,  large  and  smaller  governments.  It  is
metaphorical  also,  showing  some  peculiar  quality  of  the  thing  proph-
esied of,  by  the  most  prominent  feature  or  quality  of  the  figure  used,
as  beasts  —  if  a  lion,  power  and  rule  5  if  a  leopard,  celerity ;  if  a
bear,  voracious ;  an  ox,  submissive  3  a  man,  proud  and  independent.
Fire  denotes  justice  and  judgment  in  its  figure  ;  in  the  metaphor,
denotes  the  purifying  or  consuming  up  the  dross  or  wickedness;  as
fire  has  a  cleansing  quality,  so  will  the  justice  or  judgments  of  God.
tL  For  when  thy  judgments  are  in  the  earth,  the  inhabitants  of  the
world  vvill  learn  righteousness."     Therefore  almost  ail  the  figures


4  INTRODUCTION.

used  in  prophecy  have  their  literal  and  metaphorical  meaning  j  as
beasts  denote,  literally,  a  kingdom,  so  metaphorically  good  or  bad,
as  the  case  may  be,  to  be  understood  by  the  subject  in  connection.

To  understand  the  literal  meaning  of  figures  used  in  prophecy,  I
have  pursued  the  following  method:  —  I  find  the  word  "  beast "
used  in  a  figurative  sense ;  I  take  my  concordance,  trace  the  word,
and  in  Daniel  vii.  17,  it  is  explained  to  mean  "  kings  or  kingdoms."
Again,  I  come  across  the  words  "  bird  or  /owl/'  and  in  Isa.  xlvi.
11,  it  is  used,  meaning  a  conqueror  or  warrior,.— Cyrus.  Also,  in
Ezekiel  xxxix.  4 — 9,  denotes  armies  or  conquerors.  Again,  the
words  "  air  or  wind,"  as  used  in  Rev.  ix.  2,  and  16,  17,  to  under-
stand which  I  turn  to  Eph.  ii.  2,  and  4—14,  and  there  learn  that  it
is  used  as  a  figure  to  denote  the  theories  of  worldly  men  or  vain
philosophy.  Again,  "water  or  rivers"  are  used  as  figures  in
Rev.  xvii.  15,  it  is  explained  to  mean  "people  or  nations."
"  Rivers  "  of  course  mean  the  nation  or  people  living  on  the  river
mentioned,  as  in  Rev.  xvi.  12.  "  Fire  "  is  often  used  in  a  figurative
sense  ;  explained  in  Num.  xxi.  27 — 28,  Deut.  xxxii.  22,  Psal.  lxxviii.
21,  Heb.  xii.  29,  to  mean  justice  and  judgment.

As  prophecy  is  a  language  somewhat  different  from  other  parts
of  Scripture,  owing  to  its  having  been  revealed  in  vision,  and  that
highly  figurative,  yet  God  in  his  wisdom  has  so  interwoven  the
several  prophecies,  that  the  events  foretold  are  not  all  told  by  one
prophet,  and  although  they  lived  and  prophesied  in  different  ages  of
the  world,  yet  they  tell  us  the  same  things  ;  so  you  take  away  one,
and  a  link  will  be  wanting.  There  is  a  general  connection  through
the  whole ;  like  a  well-regulated  community  they  all  move  in  uni-
son, speaking  the  same  things,  observing  the  same  rules,  so  that  a
Bible  reader  may  almost  with  propriety  suppose,  let  him  read  in
what  prophecy  he  may,  that  he  is  reading  the  same  prophet,  the
same  author.  This  will  appear  evident  to  any  one  who  will  com-
pare scripture  with  scripture.  For  example,  see  Dan.  xii.  1,  Matt.
xxiv.  21,  Isa.  xlvii.  8,  Zeph.  ii.  15,  Rev.  xviii.  7.  There  never  was
a  book  written  that  has  a  better  connection  and  harmony  than  the
Bible,  and  yet  it  has  the  appearance  of  a  great  store-house  full  of
all  the  precious  commodities  heart  could  desire,  thrown  in  promis-
cuously ;  therefore,  the  biblical  student  must  select  and  bring  to-
gether every  part  of  the  subject  he  wishes  to  investigate,  from  every
part  of  the  Bible  ;  then  let  every  word  have  its  own  Scripture  mean-
ing, every  sentence  its  proper  bearing,  and  have  no  contradiction,
and  your  theory  will  and  must  of  necessity  be  correct.    Truth  is


INTRODUCTION,  5

one  undeviating  path,  that  grows  brighter  and  brighter  the  more  it
is  trodden ;  it  needs  no  plausible  arguments  nor  pompous  dress  to
make  it  more  bright,  for  the  more  naked  and  simple  the  fact,  the
stronger  the  truth  appears.

Let  it  be  noticed  that  God  has  revealed  to  his  prophets  the  same
events  in  divers  figures  and  at  different  times,  as  he  has  to  Daniel
in  the  second,  seventh,  and  eighth  chapters  concerning  the  four
kingdoms;  or  to  Peter,  (see  Acts  x.  16;)  also  Isaiah  and  John.
Then,  to  get  the  whole  truth,  all  those  visions  or  prophecies  must
be  concentrated  and  brought  together,  that  have  reference  to  the
subject  which  we  wish  to  investigate  ;  and  when  combined,  let  every
word  and  sentence  have  its  proper  bearing  and  force  in  the  grand
whole,  and  the  theory  or  system,  as  1  have  before  shown,  must  be
correct.  I  have  likewise  noticed  that  in  those  events,  visions,  and
prophecies  which  have  had  their  fulfilment,  every  word  and  every
particular  has  had  an  exact  and  literal  accomplishment,  and  that
no  two  events  have  ever  happened,  that  I  can  learn,  which  will  ex-
actly apply  or  fulfil  the  same  prophecy.  Take,  for  instance,  the
prophecies  concerning  the  birth,  life,  and  crucifixion  of  our  Savior,
and  in  his  history  we  find  a  literal  fulfilment ;  yet  in  the  birth,  life,
or  death  of  any  other  individual  it  would  be  in  vain  to  find  a  paral-
lel. Again,  take  the  prophecies  which  have  been  admitted,  by
Protestants  at  least,  to  apply  to  Cyrus,  Alexander,  Julius  Caesar,
destruction  of  Jerusalem,  and  the  church  of  Rome,  and  I  have  never
been  able  to  trace  even  a  resemblance  to  the  prophecies  in  question
in  any  historical  events  except  the  true  ones.  If  this  is  true,  may
we  not  suppose  that  the  unfulfilled  prophecies  in  their  accomplish-
ments will  be  equally  as  evident  and  literal  1

There  are  two  important  points  to  which  all  prophecy  seems  to
centre,  like  a  cluster  of  grapes  upon  its  stem  —  the  first  and  second
coming  of  Christ;  the  first  coming  to  proclaim  the  gospel,  set  up
his  kingdom,  suffer  for  sinners,  and  bring  in  an  everlasting  right-
eousness. His  second  coming,  to  which  the  ardent  faith  and  pious
hope  of  the  tried  and  tempted  child  of  God  centres,  is  for  complete
redemption  from  sin,  for  the  justification  and  glorification  promised
to  all  those  who  look  for  his  appearing,  the  destruction  of  the  wicked
and  mystical  Babylon,  the  abomination  of  the  whole  earth.

His  first  coming  was  as  a  man,  his  human  nature  being  only  visible,

his  Godhead  known  only  in  his  miracles.     His  second  coming  will

be  as  God,  his  divine  Godhead  and  power  being  most  visible.     He

comes  first,  like  the  '''first  man   of  the  earth,  earthv  ;  "  his  second

1*


6  INTRODUCTION.

coming1  is  "  the  Lord  from  heaven."  His  first  coming  was  literally
according  to  the  prophecies.  And  so  we  may  safely  infer  will  be
his  second  appearance,  according  to  the  Scriptures.  At  his  advent,
his  forerunner  was  spoken  of —  "  one  crying  in  the  wilderness  j "  the
manner  of  his  birth  —  "a  child  born  of  a  virgin ;  "  the  place  where
—  '*  Bethlehem  of  Judea  ;  "  the  time  of  his  death  —  "  when  seventy
weeks  should  be  fulfilled  3  "  for  what  he  should  suffer —  "  to  make
an  end  of  sins,  to  make  reconciliation  for  iniquity,  and  to  bring  in
everlasting  righteousness,  to  seal  up  the  vision  and  prophecy,  and
to  anoint  the  Most  Holy."  The  star  that  appeared,  the  stripes  he
received,  the  miracles  he  performed,  the  tauntings  of  his  foes  —  all
were  literally  fulfilled.  Then,  why  not  suppose  that  all  the  prophe-
cies concerning  his  second  coming  will  be  as  literally  accomplished
as  the  former  ?  Can  any  man  show  a  single  reason  why  it  will
not  ?  If  this  be  true,  we  can  obtain  much  light  by  reading  the
Scriptures.  We  are  there  informed  of  the  manner  of  his  second
coming  —  "  suddenly,  in  the  clouds,  in  like  manner  as  he  ascend-
ed ;  V  the  majesty  of  his  coming —  "  on  a  great  white  throne,  with
power  and  great  glory,  and  all  his  saints  with  him  ;  "  the  object  of
his  coming  —  "  as  the  Ancient  of  Days,  to  send  his  angels  into  the
four  winds  of  heaven,  gather  his  elect,  raise  the  righteous  dead,
change  the  righteous  living,  chain  Satan,  destroy  anti-Christ,  the
wicked,  and  all  those  who  destroy  the  earth,  judge,  justify  and
glorify  his  people,  cleanse  his  church,  present  her  to  his  Father,  live
and  reign  with  her  on  the  new  heavens  and  new  earth,"  the  form  of
the  old  having  passed  away.

The  time  when  these  things  shall  take  place  is  also  specified,  by
some  of  the  prophets,  unto  2300  days,  (meaning  years  ;)  then  shall
the  sanctuary  be  cleansed,  after  the  anti-Christian  beast  has  reigned
her  "  time,  times,  and  a  half  5 "  after  the  two  witnesses  have
prophesied  "  a  thousand  two  hundred  and  threescore  days,  clothed
in  sackcloth  3 "  after  the  church  captivity  in  the  wilderness,  "  forty-
two  months  $  '  after  the  "  gospel  should  be  preached  in  all  the
world  for  a  witness,  then  shall  the  end  come."  The  signs  of  the
times  are  also  given,  when  we  may  know,  he  is  near,  even  at  the
door.  When  theie  are  many  "  lo  here's  and  lo  there's  ; "  when  the
way  of  truth  is  evil  spoken  of ;  when  many  seducers  are  abroad  in
the  land ;  when  scoffers  disbelieve  in  his  coming,  and  say, "  Where
is  the  promise  of  his  coming ;  "  when  the  wise  and  foolish  virgins
are  called  to  trim  their  lamps,  and  the  voice  of  the  friend  of  the
bridegroom  is, "  Behold,  he  cometh  j "  when  the  city  of  the  nations


INTRODUCTION.  7

is  divided  into  three  parts ;  when  the  power  of  the  holy  people  is
scattered,  and  the  kings  of  the  east  come  up  to  battle  3  when  there
is  a  time  of  trouble,  such  as  never  was  before,  and  the  church  in
her  Laodicean  state  ;  when  the  seventh  seal  opens,  the  seventh  vial
is  poured  out,  the  last  woe  pronounced  by  the  angel  flying  through
the  midst  of  heaven,  and  the  seventh  and  last  trumpet  sounds;  —
then  will  the  mystery  of  God  be  finished,  and  the  door  of  mercy  be
closed  forever;  then  shall  we  be  brought  to  the  last  point,  his  sec-
ond coming.

Again,  prophecy  is  sometimes  typical ;  that  is,  partly  fulfilled  in
the  type,  but  completely  only  in  the  antitype.  Such  was  the
prophecy  concerning  Isaac,  partly  fulfilled  in  him,  wholly  so  in
Christ;  likewise  concerning  Israel,  partly  fulfilled  in  them  as  a  na-
tion, but  never  fully  accomplished  until  the  final  redemption  of
spiritual  Israel.  Likewise  the  prophecies  concerning  the  Jewish
captivity  in  Babylon,  and  their  return,  are  only  partly  accomplished
in  the  history  of  past  events.  The  description  of  those  things  in
the  prophets  is  so  august  and  magnificent,  that  if  only  applicable
to  the  literal  captivity  of  the  Jews  and  their  return,  the  exposition
would  be  weak  and  barren ;  therefore  I  humbly  believe  that  the
exact  fulfilment  can  only  be  looked  for  in  the  captivity  of  the  church
in  the  wilderness,  under  the  anti-Christian  beast,  destruction  of
mystical  Babylon,  and  glorification  of  the  saints  in  the  New  Jeru-
salem state.

There  are  also  in  the  24th  chapter  of  Matthew  many  things  proph-
esied of,  which  were  not  fulfilled  at  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem ;
such  as  the  coming  of  the  Son  of  Man  in  the  clouds,  the  gathering
his  elect  from  the  four  winds  of  heaven,  his  taking  one  and  leaving
another.  This  shows  a  typical  meaning  in  this  prophecy,  and  that
it  will  not  all  be  fulfilled  until  the  end  of  the  world.  Also,  the
transfiguration  of  Christ  on  the  mount,  prophesied  of  by  himself
eight  days  before,  is  noticed  by  Peter,  2d  Epistle,  i.  16 — 18,  as
being  a  type  or  figure  of  his  second  coming.

Who,  that  has  read  the  prophecies  with  any  degree  of  attention,
will  not  acknowledge  the  great  agreement  between  the  Old  Testa-
ment prophecies  and  the  New  1  Almost  every  prophecy  given
by  Christ  and  his  apostles  may  be  found,  in  the  Old  Testament
prophets,  represented  by  figures,  which  were  familiar  to  the  writers
and  readers  of  those  times.  The  foregoing  rules  are  some  of  the
principal  ones  which  I  have  observed  in  attempting  to  explain  the
prophecies  of  Daniel  and  John,  and  to  give  the  time  when  the


8


INTRODUCTION.


mystery  of  God  will  be  finished,  as  I  humbly  believe  it  is  revealed
to  the  prophets.

If  I  have  erred  in  my  exposition  of  the  prophecies,  the  time,  being
so  near  at  hand,  will  soon  expose  my  folly  ;  but  if  I  have  the  truth
on  the  subjects  treated  on  in  these  pages,  how  important  the  era  in
which  we  live !  What  vast  and  important  events  must  soon  be
realized !  and  how  necessary  that  every  individual  be  prepared,
that  that  day  may  not  come  upon  them  unawares,  while  they  are
surfeited  with  the  cares  and  riches  of  this  life,  and  the  day  overtake
them  as  a  thief!  "  But  ye,  brethren,  are  not  in  darkness,  that  that
day  should  overtake  you  as  a  thief,"  1  Thess.  v.  4.  In  studying
the?e  prophecies,  I  have  endeavored  to  divest  myself  of  all  pre-
possessed opinions,  not  warranted  by  the  word  of  God,  and  to
weigh  Well  all  the  objections  that  might  be  raised  from  the  Scrip-
tures ;  and  after  fourteen  years'  study  of  the  prophecies  and  other
parts  of  the  Bible,  I  have  come  to  the  following  conclusions,  and
do  now  commit  myself  into  the  hands  of  God  as  my  Judge,  in
giving  publicity  to  the  sentiments  herein  contained,  conscientiously
desiring  that  this  little  book  may  be  the  means  to  incite  others  to
study  the  Scriptures,  and  to  see  whether  these  things  be  so,  and  that
some  minds  may  be  led  to  believe  in  the  word  of  God,  and  find  an
interest  in  the  offering'  and  sacrifice  of  the  Lamb  of  God,  that  their
sins  might  be  forgiven  them  through  the  blood  of  the  atonement,
"  when  the  refreshing  shall  come  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord,
and  from  the  glory  of  his  power,"  "  when  he  comes  to  be  admired
in  all  them  that  believe  in  that  day."

And  now,  my  dear  readers,  I  beg  of  you  to  lay  aside  prejudice  j
examine  this  subject  candidly  and  carefully  for  3'ourselves.  Your
belief  or  unbelief  will  not  affect  the  truth.  If  it  is  so,  whatever  you
may  think  or  do  will  not  alter  the  revealed  purposes  of  God.  '*  Not
one  jot  or  tittle  of  his  word  will  fail  5  "  but  you  may,  by  your  obe-
dience in  the  faith,  secure  you  an  interest  in  the  first  resurrection,
and  a  glorious  admittance  into  the  New  Jerusalem,  and  an  inher-
itance among  the  justified  in  glory,  and  you  may  sit  down  with
Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob  in  the  kingdom  of  God.  May  this  be
your  lot  —  is  the  prayer  of  your  servant,

WE  MILLER.

Hampton,.  Washington  County,  JV.  Y.


INDEX.


Introduction 3

LECTURE  I.
The   Second    Appearing   of    Christ.     Titus  ii.  13.  —  Looking  for
that  blessed  hope,  and  glorious  appearing  of  the  great  God,  and  our
Savior  Jesus  Christ 11

LECTURE  II.

The  First  Resurrection.    Rev.  xx.  6.  —  Blessed  and  holy  is  he  that

hath  part  in  the  first  resurrection :  on  such  the  second  death  hath

no  power — shall  reign  with  him  a  thousand  years 28

LECTURE  III.
The   Two    Thousand   Three   Hundred   Days.      Dan.  viii.  13,  14.
—  And  he  said  unto  me,  Unto  two  thousand  three  hundred  days:
then  shall  the  sanctuary  be  cleansed 39

LECTURE  IV.
Daniel  lx.  24. —  Seventy  weeks  are  determined  upon  thy  people,  and
upon  thy  holy  city,  to  finish  the  transgression,  and  to  make  an  end
of  sins,  and  to  make  reconciliation  for  iniquity,  and  to  bring  in
everlasting  righteousness,  and  to  seal  up  the  vision  and  prophecy,
and  to  anoint  the  Most  Holy .....59

LECTURE  V.

Pagan  Rome  numbered.      Rev.  xiii.  18.  —  And  his  number  is  six

hundred  threescore  and  six , 76

LECTURE  VI.

Daniel's  Vision  of  the  Latter  Days  ;  or,  An  Exposition  of  the

Eleventh  Chapter  of  Daniel.     Dan.  x.  14. —  Now  I  am  come

to  make  thee  understand  what  shall  befall  thy  people  in  the  latter

days 86

LECTURE   VII.

Daniel's  1260,   1290,  and  1335  Days   explained.     Daniel  xii.  8. —

And  I  heard,  but  I  understood  not:  then  said  I,  O  my  Lord,  what

shall  be  the  end  of  these  things? 100

LECTURE   VIII.
The  Three  Woe  Trumpets.     Rev.  viii.  13.  —  Woe,  woe,  woe,  to
the  inhabitants  of  the  earth  by  reason  of  the  other  voices  of  the
trumpet  of  the  three  angels  which  are  yet  to  sound......... 115


10  INDEX.

LECTURE  IX.  and  X.
The  Epistles  to  the  Seven   Churches   of   Asia,  considered  as
applying   to    Seven   Periods    of    the    Goji  el   Church.     Rev.
i.  20 127,145

LECTURE  XI.
The  New  Song.    Rev.  v.  9.  —  And  they  sung  a  new  song,  saying,
Thou  art  worthy  to  take  the  book,  and  to  open  the  seals  thereof;  for
thou  wast  slain,  and  hast  redeemed  us  to  God,  &c 161

LECTURE  XII.

The  Seven  Seals,  as  representing  Events  to  the  End  of  Time.
Rev.  v.  5.  —  Behold,  the  Lion  of  the  tribe  of  Judah  hath  prevailed
to  open  the  book,  and  to  loose  the  seven  seals  thereof. 176

LECTURE  XIII.
The   Two  Witnesses,   as   having    been    slain    in    the   French
Revolution.    Rev.  xi.  3.  —  And  I  will  give  power  unto  my  two
witnesses,  and  they  shall  prophesy  1260  days,  clothed  in  sack-
cloth  190

LECTURE  XIV.
The  Woman  in  the  Wilderness.    Rev.  xii.  6.  —  And  the  woman
fled  into  the  wilderness,  where  she  hath  a  place  prepared  of  God,  that
they  should  feed  her  there  1260  days 204

LECTURE   XV.

The  Seven  Last  Plagues,  or  Seven  Vials.     Rev.  xvi.  17.  —  And

the  seventh  angel  poured  out  his  vial  into  the  air ;  and  there  eame  a

great  voice  out  of  the  temple  of  heaven,  from  the  throne,  saying,

It  is  done 219

LECTURE  XVI.
The  Parable  of  the  Ten  Virgins.     Matt.  xxv.  1.  —  Thenshallthe
kingdom  of  heaven  be  likened  unto  ten  virgins,  which  took  their
lamps,  and  went  forth  to  meet  the  bridegroom 233

LECTURE  XVII.

On   the   Punishment    of  the  People   of  God  Seven  Times  for

their  Sins.    Lev.  xxvi.  23,  24 250

LECTURE  XVIII.
Solomon's  Song,  viii.  5.  —  Who  is  this  that  cometh  up  from  the  wil-
derness, leaning  upon  her  beloved  ? , 264

LECTURE  XIX.

Signs  of  the  Present   Times.      Matt.   xxvi.  3. —  But  can  ye   not

discern  the  signs  of  the  times? 283


LECTURE    I


TITUS   n.  13.


Looking  for  that  blessed  hope,  and    glorious    appearing  of   the
great  God;  and  our  Savior  Jesus  Christ.

When  we  take  a  view  of  the  trials,  pains,  afflictions,
persecutions,  poverty,  and  distress,  which  the  people  of
God  suffer  in  this  worlds  we  are  almost  led  to  exclaim
with  the  apostle,  "  If  in  this  life  only  we  have  hope,  we
are  of  all  men  most  miserable."  But  no ;  we  will  not
complain ;  for  to  suffer  the  short  period  of  threescore
years  and  ten,  at  most,  will  only  give  a  greater  zest  to
the  glory  which  shall  follow  at  the  appearing  of  our
Lord  and  Savior  the  great  God  and  Jesus  Christ.  1
knoAv  the  world  are  taunting  us  with  the  inquiry,
"  Where  is  the  promise  of  his  coming  ?  for,  since  the
fathers  fell  asleep,  all  things  remain  as  they  were,  even
from  the  creation  of  the  world ; "  for  they  will  pretend
to  be  ignorant  (as  the  apostle  Peter  expresses  himself
of  the  deluge)  that  the  world  that  then  was,  being  over-
flowed with  water,  perished ;  and  still  more  do  they  pre-
tend to  be  ignorant,  that  the  same  earth  is  in  like  man-
ner to  be  destroyed  by  fire,  "  reserved  unto  fire  against
the  day  of  judgment  and  perdition  of  ungodly  men."  2
Peter  iii.  7.  Also,  my  brethren,  there  are  some  even
among  us,  who  "are  spots  in  your  feasts  of  charity,
feeding  themselves  without  fear ;  clouds  without  water,
carried  about  of  winds ;  trees  whose  fruit  withereth ;
twice  dead,  plucked  up  by  the  roots ;  raging  waves  of
the    sea,  foaming  out  their   own   shame;    wandering"


12  LECTURE   I.

stars,  to  whom  is  reserved  the  blackness  of  darkness
forever.  And  Enoch  also,  the  seventh  from  Adam,
prophesied  of  these,  saying,  Behold,  the  Lord  cometh
with  ten  thousand  of  his  saints,  to  execute  judgment
upon  all ;  and  to  convince  all  that  are  ungodly  among
them  of  all  their  ungodly  deeds  which  they  have  un-
godly committed,  and  of  all  their  hard  speeches  which
they  have  spoken  against  him.  These  are  murmurers,
complainers,  walking  after  their  own  lusts;  and  their
mouth  speaking  great  swelling  words,  having  men's
persons  in  admiration,  because  of  advantage.  But,
beloved,  remember  ye  the  words  which  were  spoken
before  of  the  apostles  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  how
that  they  told  you  there  should  be  mockers  in  the  last
time,  who  should  walk  after  their  own  ungodly  lusts.
These  be  they  who  separate  themselves,  sensual,  having
not  the  Spirit.  But  ye,  beloved,  building  up  yourselves
on  your  most  holy  faith,  praying  in  the  Holy  Ghost,
keep  yourselves  in  the  love  of  God,  looking  for  the
mercy  (or  glorious  appearing)  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ
unto  eternal  life."  Jude  12 — 21.  Or,  as  Peter  says,
2  Pet  iii.  12,  "Looking  for  and  hasting  unto  the  coming
of  the  day  of  God."  And  again,  Paul  says,  in  Heb.
ix.  28,  "And  unto  them  that  look  for  him  shall  he
appear  the  second  time  without  sin  unto  salvation."
And  Paul  further  saith,  to  his  Philippian  brethren,  "  For
our  conversation  is  in  heaven ;  from  whence  also  we
look  for  the  Savior,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  shall
change  our  vile  body,  that  it  may  be  fashioned  like
unto  his  glorious  body."

Having  thus  proved  that  the  apostles  directed  our
hope  to  the  coming  of  Christ  for  the  fulfilment  of  all
our  trials  and  persecutions,  and  the  completion  of  our
faith,  1  shall  now  take  up  our  subject  in  the  following
order:  —  I.  I  shall  endeavor  to  prove  that  it  is  yet
future ;  viz.,  the  coming  of  Christ,  spoken  of  in  the  text
II.  The  certainty  of  his  coming.  III.  The  object  of
his  coming.

I.  We  are,  according  to  our  design,  to  show  that
the  appearing  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  spoken  of  in
the  text,  is  yet  future.


Christ's  second  coming.  13

Some  teach  us  that  he  came  at  the  destruction  of
Jerusalem,  and  quote  to  the  24th  chapter  of  Matthew
as  proof.  Let  us  examine  their  evidence.  As  Jesus
went  out  of  the  temple,  his  disciples  came  to  him  for
to  show  him  the  buildings  of  the  temple,  where  Christ
delivered  his  memorable  prophecy,  which  was  exactly-
fulfilled  in  little  more  than  thirty-six  years  afterwards,
"  There  shall  not  be  left  here  one  stone  upon  another
that  shall  not  be  thrown  down."

And  it  appears  that,  afterwards,  as  Jesus  sat  upon  the
Mount  of  Olives,  the  disciples  came  to  him  privately,
having-,  as  may  reasonably  be  supposed,  been  rumi-
nating- in  their  minds,  or  conversing-  among-  themselves,
on  the  prophecy,  and  had,  perhaps,  supposed  that  no
power  on  earth  could  destroy  those  strong-  buildings,
and  concluded  that,  when  this  was  accomplished,  it
would  be  the  judgment-day.  They  therefore  inquire
of  him,  "saying,  Tell  us,  when  shall  these  things  be  ?"
that  is,  what  he  had  prophesied  of;  "and  what  shall
be  the  sign  of  thy  coming,  and  of  the  end  of  the
world  ? "  They  might  not  have  intended  to  ask  more
than  one  question ;  yet  they  did  ask  three,  and  Christ
answered  them  accordingly.  He  had  before  told  them
of  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem,  4th,  5th,  and  6th
verses ;  he  cautions  them  against  being  deceived  with
false  Christs,  and  not  to  be  troubled  at  wars  and  rumors
of  wars,  —  and  yet  Jerusalem  was  destroyed  in  the
first  war  of  any  note  after  this  prophecy,  —  and  then
says  plainly,  "  The  end  is  not  yet"  Now,  if  this  end
was  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem,  then  where  are  those
wars,  spoken  of  by  Christ?  This  cannot  mean  any
thing  less  than  the  end  of  the  world.  From  the  7th
to  the  14th  verse,  inclusive,  he  gives  a  prophetic  history
of  the  trials,  afflictions,  and  persecutions  of  his  people,
and  also  of  the  success  of  the  gospel  immediately
previous  to  the  end,  and  says,  "Then  shall  the  end
come."

Now,  it  must  be  evident  that  this  cannot  mean  the

end  of  Jerusalem,  because,  if  bo,  he  that  endured  unto

the  end  was  to  be  saved  from  all  the  troubles  which

Christ  had  been  speaking  of;  and  it  was  not  true  that

2


14  LECTURE    I.

the  disciples  of  Christ  did  not  suffer  afterwards  the
same  things  which  Christ  said  they  would.  From  the
15th  to  the  28th  verse,  Christ  instructs  his  disciples
into  their  duty  during  the  siege  of  Jerusalem,  and  also
down  to  the  coming  of  the  Son  of  Man.  This,  you
will  see,  must  mean  Christ  in  person ;  because  neither
the  Holy  Spirit  nor  Father  is  any  where  called  Son
of  Man.  He  likewise  speaks  of  the  signs  which  should
follow  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem.  From  the  29th
to  the  35th  verse,  inclusive,  Christ  explains  the  signs
in  the  heavens  and  on  the  earth  immediately  after  the
tribulation  of  the  people  of  God,  which  had  been
spoken  of  as  the  common  lot  of  all  his  followers,  and
which  he  had  promised  to  shorten  for  the  elect's  sake,
and  of  his  coming  in  the  clouds  with  power  and  great
glory  ;  the  gathering  of  his  elect  from  the  four  winds  of
heaven  ;  gives  his  disciples  the  parable  of  the  fig  tree,
as  an  illustration  of  the  end ;  and  then  says  to  his  disci-
ples, "  Verily,  1  say  unto  you,  This  generation  shall  not
pass  till  all  these  things  be  fulfilled;  heaven  and  earth
shall  pass  away,  but  my  words  shall  not  pass  away."

Here  is  the  great  stumbling-Mock  to  many.  Christ
is  talking  about  his  elect,  his  children,  and  his  gene-
ration ;  and  not,  as  some  will  have  it,  about  the  genera-
tions that  then  lived  on  the  earth ;  for  they  did  un-
doubtedly pass  oft",  a  large  share  of  them ;  for  it  was
about  thirty-six  years  before  the  destruction  of  Jeru-
salem. But  his  kingdom  has  never  been  taken  from
the  earth.  Although  they  have  been  hunted  from  one
part  of  the  earth  to  another ;  although  they  have  been
driven  into  caves  and  dens  of  mountains ;  have  been
slain,  burnt,  sawn  asunder ;  have  wandered  as  pilgrims
and  strangers  on  the  earth;  —  yet  the  "blood  of  the
martyrs  has  been  the  seed  of  the  church ; "  and  Christ
has  had,  and  will  have,  a  people  on  the  earth,  until  his
second  coming.  1  Peter  ii.  9 :  "  But  ye  are  a  chosen
generation,  a  royal  priesthood,  a  holy  nation,  a  peculiar
people,"  &,c.  The  Psalmist  says,  "  A  seed  shall  serve
him ;  it  shall  be  accounted  to  the  Lord  for  a  genera-
tion." Psalm  xxii.  30.  I  humbly  believe  that  Christ
has  quoted  the  sentiment  contained  in  the  102d  Psalm,


Christ's  second  -coming.  15

25th  to  last  verse :  "  Of  old  hast  thou  laid  the  founda-
tion of  the  earth ;  and  the  heavens  are  the  work  of
thine  hands.  They  shall  perish,  hut  thou  shalt  endure ;
yea,  all  of  them  shall  wax  old  like  a  garment ;  as  a
vesture  shalt  thou  change  them,  and  they  shall  be
changed ;  but  thou  art  the  same,  and  thy  years  shall
have  no  end.  The  children  of  thy  servants  shall  con-
tinue, and  their  seed  shall  be  established  before  thee."
Here  we  see  the  Psalmist  has  expressed  the  same
sentiment  that  I  understand  Christ  to  have  given
in  these  two  verses,  which  I  conclude  is  the  prop-
er explanation.  And  then  the  parables  which  fol-
low in  the  remainder  of  the  24th  and  25th  chap-
ters, are  easily  understood  as  having  reference  to
the  end  of  the  world ;  and  in  that  way  will  exactly
compare.  See  the  31st  verse  of  the  25th  chapter:
"  When  the  Son  of  Man  shall  come  in  his  glory,  and
all  the  holy  angels  with  him,  then  shall  he  sit  upon  the
throne  of  his  glory ;  and  before  him  shall  be  gathered
all  nations,"  &c.  This  verse  was  not  fulfilled  at  the
destruction  of  Jerusalem,  for  the  "  Son  of  Man "  was
not  seen  in  the  clouds  with  power  and  great  glory ;
and  yet  the  words  are,  "  every  eye  shall  see  him  ; "  and
as  sudden  and  as  visible  "  as  the  lightning,  that  shineth
from  the  east  even  unto  the  west,  so  shall  the  coming
of  the  Son  of  Man  be."  Can  this  have  passed,  and  the
history  of  the  world  have  been  silent  ?  No.  Could  all
nations  be  gathered  before  him,  and  there  be  divided,
the  righteous  from  the  wicked,  and  the  one  part  sent  to
everlasting  punishment,  while  the  other  is  received  to
life  eternal,  and  none  know  it  ?  No.  Were  the  elect
gathered  from  the  four  winds  of  heaven  at  the  destruc-
tion of  Jerusalem?  No;  they  were  commanded  to
tlee  to  the  mountains ;  and  history  says  they  did  leave
that  devoted  city  when  the  Romans  encompassed  it  with
their  armies.  Then,  could  the  prophecies  contained  in
these  chapters  have  been  fulfilled,  and  the  world  remain
ignorant  of  some  of  the  most  important  events  ?  I
answer,  No.  Then  the  "  Son  of  Man  "  did  not  come  to
the  destruction  of  Jerusalem.  If  he  did,  where  is  the
evidence  ?    None,  none,  not  a  particle.     But  if  he  did


16  LECTURE    I.

come  to  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem,  then  it  must  have
been  his  second  coming- ;  for  Paul  says,  Heb.  ix.  28,
"And  unto  them  that  look  for  him  shall  he  appear  the
second  time  without  sin  unto  salvation."  Can  this  be
true  if  he  came  to  Jerusalem ?  The  passage  certainly
implies  that  his  people  would  have  no  more  sin,  or
afterwards  would  be  "without  sin."  Experience  teaches
us  to  the  contrary.  Again  it  is  said,  1  Thes.  iv.  16,  17,
u  For  the  Lord  himself  shall  descend  from  heaven  with
a  shout,  with  the  voice  of  the  archangel,  and  with  the
trump  of  God ;  and  the  dead  in  Christ  shall  arise  first ;
then  we,  which  are  alive  and  remain,  shall  be  caught  up
together  with  them  in  the  clouds  to  meet  the  Lord  in
the  air ;  and  so  shall  we  ever  be  with  the  Lord."  Who
saw  this  great  transaction  at  Jerusalem  ?  Were  there
no  witnesses  ?  Yes,  the  apostle  John  lived  many  years
after  this,  and  wrote  his  Gospel,  his  Epistles,  and  his
Revelation,  long  after  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem.
And  what  does  he  testify  ?  In  his  Gospel,  14th  chapter,
3d  verse,  "  And  if  I  go  and  prepare  a  place  for  you,  I
will  come  and  receive  you  to  myself,  that  where  I  am
there  ye  may  be  also."  Again,  28th  and  29th  verses,
"  Ye  have  heard  how  I  said  unto  you,  I  go  away,  and
come  again  unto  you.  If  ye  loved  me,  ye  would  re-
joice, because  I  said,  I  go  unto  the  Father;  for  my
Father  is  greater  than  I.  And  now  I  have  told  you
before  it  come  to  pass,  that  when  it  is  come  to  pass,  ye
might  believe."  Again,  1  John  ii.  28,  "  And  now,  little
children,  abide  in  him,  that,  when  he  shall  appear,  we
may  have  confidence,  and  not  be  ashamed  before  him
at  his  coming."  And  iii.  2,  "  Beloved,  now  are  we  the
sons  of  God,  and  it  doth  not  yet  appear  what  we  shall
be  ;  but  we  know  that  when  he  shall  appear,  we  shall
be  like  him;  for  we  shall  see  him  as  he  is."  And,
again,  in  Rev.  i.  7,  "  Behold,  he  cometh  with  clouds,
and  every  eye  shall  see  him ;  and  they  also  which
pierced  him,  and  all  kindreds  of  the  earth,  shall  wail
because  of  him."  Many  more  places  might  be  men-
tioned in  John's  testimony,  but  not  one  word  that  he  had
already  come  again,  as  some  supposed.  Let  this,  then,
suffice  to  prove,  that  the  "glorious  appearing"  spoken
of  in  our  text,  is  still  future.


Christ's  second  coming.  17

And  now  we  will  examine  some  of  the  evidence  of
the  certainty  of  his  coming,  which  is  our  second
proposition.

II.   The  certainty  of  it :

1st.  Because  the  ancient  prophets  all  spake  of  it
Jude  tells  us  that  Enoch,  the  seventh  from  Adam,
prophesied,  saying,  Behold  the  Lord  cometh,  with  ten
thousands  of  his  saints,  &c.  Balaam  was  constrained
to  admit,  "  Out  of  Jacob  shall  come  he  that  shall  have
dominion,  and  shall  destroy  him  that  remaineth  of  the
city,"  plainly  referring  to  the  judgment-day ;  for  he
says,  "Alas!  who  shall  live  when  God  doth  this?"
See  Numbers  xxiv.  17 — 23.  And  Moses  as  plainly
refers  to  this  day  in  Deut.  xxxii.  43,  "  Rejoice,  O  ye
nations,  with  his  people,  for  he  will  avenge  the  blood  of
his  servants,  and  will  render  vengeance  to  his  adversa-
ries, and  will  be  merciful  to  his  land  and  to  his  people."
David  says,  Psalm  1.  3,  4,  "Our  God  shall  come,  and
shall  not  keep  silence ;  a  fire  shall  devour  before  him,
and  it  shall  be  veiy  tempestuous  round  about  him ;  he
shall  call  to  the  heavens  from  above,  and  to  the  earth,
(that  he  may  judge  his  people."  )  And  Isa.  xl.  5,  "  And
the  glory  of  the  Lord  shall  be  revealed,  and  all  flesh
shall  see  it  together ;  for  the  mouth  of  the  Lord  hath
spoken  it."  In  the  39th  chapter  of  Ezekiei,  you  will
see  the  same  day  of  judgment  prophesied  of  in  a  clear
and  plain  manner.  In  Dan.  vii.  9,  10,  "  I  beheld  till  the
thrones  were  cast  down,  and  the  Ancient  of  days  did
sit,  whose  garment  was  white  as  snow,  and  the  hair  of
his  head  like  the  pure  wool :  his  throne  was  like  the
fiery  flame,  and  his  wheels  as  burning  fire.  A  fiery
stream  issued  and  came  forth  before  him :  thousand
thousands  ministered  unto  him,  and  ten  thousand  times
ten  thousand  stood  before  him:  the  judgment  was  set,
and  the  books  were  opened."  Joel  iii.  14, "  Multitudes,
multitudes  in  the  valley  of  decision,  for  the  day  of  the
Lord  is  near  in  the  valley  of  decision."  Zeph.  i.  14,
"  The  great  day  of  the  Lord  is  near ;  it  is  near,  and
hasteth  greatly,  even  the  voice  of  the  day  of  the  Lord ;
the  mighty  men  shall  cry  there  bitterly."  Zech.  xiv.  5,
a  And  the  Lord  thy  God  shall  come,  and  all  the  saints


18  LECTURE     I.

with  thee."  Mai.  iv.  %  "  But  unto  you  that  fear  my  name
shall  the  Sun  of  Righteousness  arise  with  healing  in  his
wings,  and  ye  shall  go  forth,  and  grow  up  as  calves  in
the  stall."  And  Christ  himself  says,  in  Matt.  xvi.  27,
"For  the  Son  of  Man  shall  come  in  the  glory  of  his
Father,  with  his  angels ;  and  then  shall  he  reward  every
man  according  to  his  works."  The  angels  that  stood
by  the  disciples  at  the  time  Jesus  ascended  up,  and  a
cloud  received  him  out  of  their  sight,  said,  "  Ye  men  of
Galilee,  why  stand  ye  gazing  up  into  heaven?  This
same  Jesus,  which  is  taken  up  from  you  into  heaven,
shall  so  come  in  like  manner  as  ye  have  seen  him  go
into  heaven."  Let  us  take  particular  notice  of  the
phrase  this  same  Jesus,  and  compare  with  other  parallel
passages,  as,  our  God  shall  come,  and  it  will  prove
to  our  satisfaction  that  Jesus  Christ  is  God,  as  well  as
man,  and  we  may  have  strong  consolation  for  our  hope
in  his  appearing,  for  his  promises  can  never  fail.
"Heaven  and  earth  may  pass  away,  but  not  one  jot
or  tittle  of  his  word  shall  fail."  Also  take  notice  of
the  words  "  like  manner,"  which  agree  with  the  often
expressed  sentence,  "  He  shall  come  in  the  clouds  »f
heaven."  We  shall  be  led  to  admire  the  general  har-
mony of  the  Scriptures,  and  the  agreement  of  the
prophets  in  their  descriptions  of  future  events.  Again,
Christ  says  to  the  church  of  Philadelphia,  Rev.  iii.  11,
"  Behold,  I  come  quickly :  hold  that  fast  thou  hast,  that
no  man  take  thy  crown."  "  For  yet  a  little  while  and
he  that  shall  come  will  come,  and  will  not  tarry,"  Heb,
x.  37.  And  will  not  the  evidence  I  have  brought  from
the  word  of  God  be  sufficient  to  prove  the  certainty  of
his  future  coming  ?  And  if  I  should  argue  the  tradition
of  nations  that  never  saw  the  word  of  God,  the  convic-
tion on  the  mind  of  men  generally,  that  there  must  be
a  day  of  retribution ;  could  I  open  the  breast  of  the
reader,  and  show  the  thundering  of  your  conscience ;
yes,  could  I  see  and  expose  the  tremblings  and  failings
of  heart,  which  you  have  had,  while  you  have  been
looking  with  fear  for  those  things  that  are  coming  on
the  earth  —  of  what  use  would  it  be  ?  Would  you  be-
lieve it  if  I  could  raise  a  dead  friend  who  would  tell


Christ's    second   coming.  19

you  to  prepare  to  meet  your  God?  No.  If  they  be-
lieve not  Moses  and  the  prophets,  neither  would  they
though  one  rose  from  the  dead.  How  foolish,  then,
would  it  be  for  me  to  try  to  prove  in  any  other  manner
what  God  has  revealed  or  promised,  than  by  the  means
which  God  has  appointed.  By  his  word  you  will  be
judged ;  and  if  this  condemns  you  now,  (unless  you  be-
come reconciled,)  it  will  condemn  you  hereafter.

III.   The  object  of  his  coming.

1st  He  comes  to  raise  and  gather  his  saints  to  him
in  the  air.  "  x4lS  in  Adam  all  die,  so  in  Christ  shall  all
be  made  alive ;  but  every  man  in  his  own  order  —  Christ
the  first  fruit,  afterwards  they  that  are  Christ's  at  his
coming,"  1  Cor.  xv.  22,  23.  Again,  "For  if  we  be-
lieve that  Jesus  died  and  rose  again,  even  so  them  also
which  sleep  in  Jesus  will  God  bring  with  him.  For
this  we  say  unto  you  by  the  word  of  the  Lord,  that  we
which  are  alive,  and  remain  unto  the  coming  of  the
Lord,  shall  not  prevent  them  that  are  asleep.  For  the
Lord  himself  shall  descend  from  heaven  with  a  shout,
with  the  voice  of  the  archangel,  and  with  the  trump  of
God,  and  the  dead  in  Christ  shall  rise  first.  Then  we,
which  are  alive  and  remain,  shall  be  caught  up  together
with  them  in  the  clouds  to  meet  the  Lord  in  the  air ;
and  so  shall  we  ever  be  with  the  Lord,"  1  Thess.  iv.
14 — 17.  "Now  we  beseech  you,  brethren,  by  the
coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  by  our  gathering
together  unto  him,"  2  Thess.  ii.  1.  "  Blessed  and  holy
is  he  that  hath  part  in  the  first  resurrection:  on  such  the
second  death  shall  have  no  power,"  Rev.  xx.  6.  In
Psalms  we  have  the  same  account  of  the  gathering  of
his  people.  "  Gather  my  saints  together  unto  me,  those
who  have  made  a  covenant  with  me  by  sacrifice,"
Psalm  1.  5.  Again,  see  Isaiah  Ixvi.  18,  "It  shall  come
that  I  will  gather  all  nations  and  tongues ;  and  they  shall
come  and  see  my  glory."  «  For  thus  saith  the  Lord  God,
Behold,  I,  even  I,  will  both  search  my  sheep  and  seek
them  out.  As  a  shepherd  seeketh  out  his  flock  in  the
day  that  he  is  among  his  sheep  that  are  scattered  ;  so  will
I  seek  out  my  sheep,  and  will  deliver  them  out  of  all
places  where  they  have  been  scattered  in  the  cloudy  and
dark  day,"  Ezekiel  xxxiv.  1 1,  12.


20  LECTURE    I.

And  now  I  refer  you  to  one  more  passage,  and  then
pass  on.  "Behold,  I  show  you  a  mystery;  we  shall  not
all  sleep,  (that  is,  die,)  but  we  shall  all  be  changed,  in
a  moment,  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye,  at  the  last  trump ;
for  the  trumpet  shall  sound,  and  the  dead  shall  be  raised
incorruptible,  and  we  shall  be  changed.  For  this  cor-
ruptible must  put  on  incorruption,  and  this  mortal  must
put  on  immortality.  So  when  this  mortal  shall  put  on
immortality,  then  shall  be  brought  to  pass  the  saying
that  is  written,  Death  is  swallowed  up  in  victory."  These
texts,  to  which  I  have  called  your  attention,  will  apply
only  to  the  people  of  God,  or  those  who  are  in  Christ
Jesus.  I  have,  therefore,  only  been  proving  to  you  the
object  of  Christ's  coming,  as  it  respects  his  people.  And
I  think  I  have  plainly  proved  that  when  Christ  shall  ap-
pear in  the  clouds  of  heaven  with  power  and  great
glory,  he  will  raise  the  righteous  dead,  change  the
righteous  living,  gather  them  from  among  all  nations,
where  they  have  been  scattered  during  the  ages  of  per-
secution and  trial,  "  in  the  dark  and  cloudy  day,"  and
receive  them  unto  himself  in  the  air,  when  they  will  ever
be  with  the  Lord.  —  I  will,

2dly,  Show  that  the  wicked  will  be  destroyed  from
the  earth  by  fire,  and  the  Avorld  cleansed  from  the  curse
of  sin  by  the  same  means,  and  prepared  for  the  recep-
tion of  the  New  Jerusalem  state,  or  the  glorious  reign
of  Christ  with  his  people.  That  the  wicked  will  be  de-
stroyed by  fire,  at  his  appearing,  we  prove  by  the  follow-
ing texts :  Deut.  xxxii.  22,  "  For  a  fire  is  kindled  in
mine  anger,  and  shall  burn  unto  the  lowest  hell,  and  shall
consume  the  earth,  with  her  increase,  and  set  on  fire  the
foundations  of  the  mountains."  2  Samuel  xxii.  9,  10,  13,
"  There  went  up  a  smoke  out  of  his  nostrils,  and  fire  out
of  his  mouth  devoured :  coals  were  kindled  by  it.  He
bowed  the  heavens  and  came  down,  and  darkness  was
under  his  feet.  Through  the  brightness  before  him
were  coals  of  fire  kindled."  Psalm  xcvii.  2,  3,  "  Clouds
and  darkness  are  round  about  him,  righteousness  and
judgment  are  the  habitation  of  his  throne.  A  fire  goeth
before  him,  and  burneth  up  his  enemies  round  about"
Isa. -Ixvi.  15,  16,  "For,  behold,  the  Lord  will  come  with


Christ's  second  coming.  21

fire,  and  with  his  chariots  like  a  whirlwind,  to  render  hia
anger  with  fury,  and  his  rebuke  with  flames  of  fire.
For  by  fire  and  by  his  sword  will  the  Lord  plead  with
all  flesh;  and  the  slain  of  the  Lord  shall  be  many."
Dan.  vii.  11,  "I  beheld  then,  because  of  the  voice  of  the
great  words  which  the  horn  spake ;  I  beheld  even  till
the  beast  was  slain,  and  his  body  destroyed,  and  given  to
the  burning  flame."  Again,  Nahum  i.  5,  "  The  moun-
tains quake  at  him,  and  the  hills  melt,  and  the  earth  is
burnt  at  his  presence  ;  yea,  the  world  and  all  that  dwell
therein."  Habakkuk  iii.  3  —  5,"  God  came  from  Teman,
(south)  and  the  Holy  One  from  Mount  Paran,  (from
glory.)  Selah.  His  glory  covered  the  heavens,  and  the
earth  was  full  of  his  praise :  and  his  brightness  was  as
the  light;  he  had  horns  coming  out  of  his  hand;  and
there  was  the  hiding  of  his  power.  Before  him  went
the  pestilence,  and  burning  coals  went  forth  at  his  feet.
He  stood  and  measured  the  earth  ;  he  beheld  and  drove
asunder  the  nations,  and  the  everlasting  mountains  were
scattered,  the  perpetual  hills  did  bow:  his  ways  are  ever-
lasting." Also,  Malachi  iv.  1, "  For,  behold,  the  day  com-
eth  that  shall  burn  as  an  oven  ;  and  all  the  proud,  yea,
and  all  that  do  wickedly,  shall  be  stubble ;  and  the  day
that  cometh  shall  burn  them  up,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,
that  it  shall  leave  them  neither  root  nor  branch."  Matt,
iii.  12,  "  Whose  fan  is  in  his  hand,  and  he  will  thor-
oughly purge  his  floor,  and  gather  his  wheat  into  the
garner;  but  he  will  burn  up  the  chaff  with  unquenchable
fire."  Matt.  xiii.  30,  "  Gather  ye  together  first  the  tares,
and  bind  them  in  bundles  to  burn  them  ;  but  gather  the
wheat  into  my  barn."  40,  "As  therefore  the  tares  are
gathered  and  burnt,  so  shall  it  be  in  the  end  of  the
world."  49th  verse,  "  So  shall  it  be  in  the  end  of  the
world:  the  angels  shall  come  forth,  and  sever  the  wicked
from  among  the  just."  Again^  Paul  to  the  church  of  the
Thessalonians  writes,  "And  to  you  who  are  troubled,
rest  with  us;  when  the  Lord  Jesus  shall  be  revealed
from  heaven  with  his  mighty  angels,  in  flaming  fire,  tak-
ing vengeance  on  them  that  know  not  God,  and  that
obey  not  the  gospel  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ;  who  shall
be  punished  with  everlasting  destruction  from  the  pres


22  LECTURE   I.

ence  of  the  Lord,  and  from  the  glory  of  his  power."
2  Peter  iii.  10,  "  But  the  day  of  the  Lord  will  come  as  a
thief  in  the  night,  in  the  which  the  heavens  shall  pass
away  with  a  great  noise,  and  the  elements  shall  melt
with  fervent  heat ;  the  earth  also,  and  the  works  that  are
therein,  shall  be  burned  up."  Rev.  xviii.  8,  "Therefore
shall  her  plagues  come  in  one  day  —  death,  and  mourn-
ing, and  famine ;  and  she  shall  be  utterly  burned  with  fire ;
for  strong  is  the  Lord  God  who  judgeth  her."  These
passages  are  but  a  part  of  the  word  of  God  which  prove
the  destruction  of  the  wicked — of  the  anti-Christian
beast  —  and  the  cleansing  of  the  world  by  fire.  Yet  if
Scripture  proof  can  be  sufficient,  surely  I  have  brought
enough  ;  and  where  that  can  have  no  bearing  on  the
mind  of  men,  how  vain  should  I  be  to  search  the  ar-
chives of  natural  philosophy  to  give  you  more  evi-
dence !  for  He  who  hath  all  wisdom  in  heaven  and  in
earth,  and  who  knows  what  is  in  the  mind  of  man,  hath
used  the  best  arguments,  the  most  persuasive  means  (1
had  like  to  have  said)  in  the  power  of  a  God  to  use  ;  and
indeed  he  says,  "What  could  I  have  done  more  than  I
have  done  for  my  vineyard."  He  has  taught  us  by  his
own  word,  by  the  mouth  of  his  prophets,  and  -by  exam-
ples :  witness  his  word  on  Mount  Sinai,  where  the  peo-
ple heard  his  voice  and  saw  the  fire  ;  witness  all  the  dec-
larations of  the  prophets  which  I  have  read;  witness
Jesus  Christ  himself,  in  the  parable  of  the  tares  and
wheat,  and  the  harvest ;  witness,  also,  the  destruction  of
the  old  world  by  water,  and  Sodom  and  Gomorrah  by
fire ;  Jerusalem  by  famine,  sword,  and  fire.  These  are  all
set  forth  as  samples  to  warn  us  of  the  approaching  judg-
ment. And  yet  who  believes  the  report  ?  Who  is  witl-
ing to  examine  the  evidences — to  reason  candidly  and
to  reflect  seriously  on  these  things  ?  Who  among  us
puts  implicit  confidence  in  the  word  of  God,  especially
in  that  which  is  unfulfilled  ?  Any  may  believe  in  so
much  as  has  been  accomplished ;  but  where  is  the  virtue
in  such  faith  ?  Where  is  the  blessedness  of  our  hope
in  the  glorious  appearing  of  Jesus  Christ?  If  we  are
"looking  for  that  blessed  hope,  and  the  glorious  appear-
ing of  the  great  God  and  our  Savior  Jesus  Christ,"  we


Christ's  second  coming.  23

Bhall  examine  the  word  of  God  faithfully;  we  shall
compare  scripture  with  scripture  ;  we  shall  take  notice
of  the  signs  which  Christ  has  given  us  of  his  coming.
That  the  day  may  not  overtake  us  as  a  thief,  we  should
live  with  a  steady  reference  to  that  day,  and  rejoice
more  and  more  as  we  see  the  day  approaching.

3d.  I  will  now  give  some  of  the  evidences  concerning
the  glorious  reign  which  must  follow  his  coming.  The
earth,  being  cleansed  by  fire,  will,  like  the  phoenix,  be
revived  from  its  own  ashes.  The  destruction  of  the
wicked,  the  end  of  death,  sin  banished,  it  will  lighten
the  world  of  a  load  of  crime  which  has  made  it  reel  to
and  fro  like  a  drunkard;  the  internal  fires  will  have
spent  their  force  on  aH  combustible  matter,  and  have
gone  out ;  volcanoes  will  cease ;  earthquakes,  tornadoes,
and  whirlwinds  can  no  more  be  experienced  or  needed,
for  the  cause  is  gone ;  the  earth  or  the  heavens  can
no  more  be  shaken,  "  that  those  things  that  cannot  be
shaken  may  remain.  Wherefore  we  receiving  a  king-
dom which  cannot  be  moved,  let  us  have  grace,  whereby
we  may  serve  God  acceptably,  with  reverence  and
godly  fear;  for  our  God  is  a  consuming  fire,"  Heb.  xii.
27 — 29.  Then,  when  this  earth  shall  become  new,  by
being  cleansed  and  purified,  the  New  Jerusalem  will
"  come  down  from  God  out  of  heaven,  prepared  as  a
bride  adorned  for  her  husband.  And  I  heard  a  great
voice  out  of  heaven,  saying,  Behold,  the  tabernacle  of
God  is  with  men,  and  he  will  dwell  with  them,  and  they
shall  be  his  people,  and  God  himself  shall  be  with  them
and  be  their  God,"  Rev.  xxi.  2,  3.  "  And  he  carried
me  away  in  the  spirit  to  a  great  and  high  mountain,  and
showed  me  that  great  city,  the  Holy  Jerusalem,  descend-
ing out  of  heaven  from  God,  having  the  glory  of  God,"
10th  verse.  "  And  the  city  had  no  need  of  the  sun,
neither  of  the  moon,  to  shine  in  it,  for  the  glory  of  God
did  lighten  it,  and  the  Lamb  is  the  light  thereof."
"  And  I  saw  thrones  and  they  that  sat  upon  them,  and
judgment  was  given  unto  them ;  and  I  saw  the  souls  of
them  that  were  beheaded  for  the  witness  of  Jesus,  and
for  the  word  of  God,  and  which  had  not  worshipped  the
beast,  neither  his  image,  neither  had  received  his  mark


24  LECTURE    I.

in  their  foreheads,  or  in  their  hands ;  and  they  lived
and  reigned  with  Christ  a  thousand  years ;  but  the  rest
of  the  dead  lived  not  again  until  the  thousand  years
were  finished.1'

Much  more  evidence  might  be  brought  to  prove  the
personal  reign  of  Jesus  Christ  with  his  people  ;  but  this
is  enough  to  prove  the  glorious  and  personal  reign  after
the  resurrection ;  but  few  dispute  it  But,  say  some,  do
you  not  believe  in  a  spiritual  reign  of  a  thousand  years
before  the  resurrection  ?  I  answer,  I  believe  in  a  reign
of  grace,  by  the  influence  of  the  divine  Spirit,  for  more
than  1800  years  past ;  but  when  you  speak  of  a  thou-
sand years,  I  suppose  you  mean  the  same  time  that  1
call  the  glorious  reign  after  the  resurrection  of  the
righteous,  and  before  the  resurrection  of  the  wicked.  1
know  of  no  spiritual  reign,  mentioned  in  the  word  of
God,  and  especially  of  that  duration.  We  argue  that
there  cannot  be  a  reign  of  peace  and  glory  until  the
world  is  cleansed  from  all  wickedness,  Satan  is  chained,
and  righteousness  fill  our  world ;  nor  until "  the  glorious
appearing  of  the  great  God  and  our  Savior  Jesus  Christ,"
even  the  anti-Christian  beast  will  not  be  destroyed,  (ac-
cording to  the  texts  we  have  already  quoted,)  until  they
are  destroyed  by  "  the  brightness  of  his  appearing."  All
those  passages  which  speak  of  this  happy  period  of  rest
to  the  people  of  God,  or  which  in  any  manner  allude  to
it,  describe  it  as  being  after  the  resurrection  of  the
saints,  or  after  righteousness  fills  the  earth,  and  after  the
anti-Christian  beast  is  destroyed.  And  even  our  text
more  than  implies  that  we  shall  not  realize  any  great  or
glorious  results  from  our  hope,  or  collectively  in  a  body
the  church  will  not  receive  any  important  deliverance
until  the  "  glorious  appearing  of  the  great  God  and  our
Savior  Jesus  Christ."  Is  this  true  ?  I  say  the  passages
of  Scripture  already  named  fix  it  beyond  a  doubt
And  any  one  who  will  examine  the  scripture  for  himself,
will  find  that  the  second  coming  of  Christ  is  the  point
to  which  Jesus  Christ,  the  prophets,  and  the  apostles  di-
rected their  disciples,  as  the  termination  of  their  trials,
persecutions,  and  afflictions ;  and  Jesus  Christ  says,  "  In
the  world  ye  shall  have  tribulation."    I  say,  I  can  find


Christ's  second  coming.  25

nothing  in  the  word  of  God  to  warrant  me  to  believe
that  we  ought  to  look  for  or  expect  a  happier  period
than  we  now  enjoy,  until  he  who  has  promised  to  come
shall  come  the  second  time  without  sin  unto  salvation,
and  cleanse  us,  the  world,  and  make  all  things  new.
These  things  are  abundantly  proved  in  the  unerring
word  of  God.  And  now,  Christians,  if  these  things  are
so,  what  manner  of  persons  ought  we  to  be  in  all  holy
conversation  and  godliness,  looking  for  and  hasting  unto
the  day  of  God,  "  looking  for  that  blessed  hope  and  the
glorious  appearing  of  the  great  God  and  our  Savior
Jesus  Christ "  ?  Then  let  our  conversation  be  in  heaven,
from  whence  we  expect  our  Savior,  and  stir  up  each
other's  pure  minds  by  way  of  remembrance  of  these
things  ;  for  the  time  of  the  promise  draweth  nigh,  when
he  will  come  and  receive  us  to  himself,  that  we  may  be
with  him.  How  necessary,  my  brethren,  we  should
examine  the  word  of  God  diligently ;  see  if  it  does  not
give  some  indications,  some  signs,  by  which  we  may
know  the  "  Son  of  Man  is  near,  even  at  the  door,"  and
our  "  blessed  hope "  is  about  to  be  realized  in  the
"  glorious  appearing  of  the  great  God  and  our  Savior
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  If  he  comes  and  finds  us,  or
some  of  us,  in  this  lukewarm  state,  hardly  having  looked
into  his  word,  and,  making  our  want  of  talents  an  excuse,
have  neglected  to  trim  our  lamps,  and  have  been  very
spare  in  holy  conversation,  and  are  crying  peace  and
safety  when  sudden  destruction  cometh,  and  perhaps
have  sneeringly  mocked  and  laughingly  ridiculed  the
idea  of  Christ  being  near  at  the  door,  and  perhaps
have  joined  the  infidel  and  unbeliever  in  their  unholy
remarks  on  this  subject,  and  although  we  have  heard
the  midnight  cry,  "  Behold,  the  bridegroom  cometh,"  yet
we  treat  it  with  neglect  or  disdain,  or  some  of  us,  per-
haps, with  reproach,  —  I  ask,  if  the  Lord  of  such  servants
come  and  find  us  so  doing,  what  will  he  do  with  us  ?
He  will  come  in  an  hour  that  we  think  not,  and  cut  us
off,  and  appoint  our  portion  among  hypocrites  and  un-
believers, where  shall  be  weeping,  wailing,  and  gnashing
of  teeth.  But  we  will  suppose  that  he  will  not  come  ia
so  short  a  time  as  your  speaker  believes ;  still  what  do  I
3


26  LECTURE     I.

ask  of  you,  my  brethren?  Nothing  but  what  Jesus
Christ  and  the  apostles  required  1800  years  ago.  I  ask
you  to  compare  these  views  with  the  Bible.  Is  this
wrong?  No.  I  ask  you  for  holy  conversation.  Is
this  wrong  ?  No.  I  ask  you  for  heavenly-mindedness.
Is  this  wrong?  No,  no.  I  ask  you  to  stir  up  each
other's  pure  minds,  to  make  improvement  on  your  one
talent  if  no  more ;  to  come  out  of  this  cold  and  lukewarm
state ;  to  trim  your  lamps  and  be  ready.  Are  these  re-
quirements wrong  ?  Certainly  not ;  no,  no.  I  ask  you
again  to  compare  scripture  with  scripture ;  to  read  the
prophets ;  to  stop  your  revilings ;  to  take  warning  by  the
old  world ;  to  flee  from  sin  and  the  wrath  which  is  to
come ;  to  hide  yourselves  in  Christ,  until  the  indignation
be  over  and  past ;  to  look  "  for  that  blessed  hope  and  the

florious  appeamig  of  the  great   God    and   our   Savior
esus  Christ."  T.s  this  wrong  ?     Then  be  the  wrong  on
my  head.

And  now,  my  impenitent  friends,  what  say  you  ?  "  We
say,  '  You  know  nothing  about  it' "  Do  you  believe  the
old  world  was  deluged  ?  "  Why,  yes."  What  makes  you
believe  it?  "Because  our  philosophers  tell  us  there  are
a  great  many  signs  remaining  of  the  flood,  and  we  can
believe  them."  And  are  there  no  signs  of  the  near  ap-
proach of  the  Judgment  Day  ?  What  say  the  prophets,
apostles,  and  Jesus  Christ  ?  Are  they  not  equal  to  your
philosophers  ?  Examine  your  Bibles,  and  see ;  weigh
well  the  evidence ;  your  eternal  happiness,  the  salvation
of  your  immortal  souls,  may  depend  on  your  decision.
But  what  say  you  more  ?  "  We  say,  '  You  were  very  un-
wise to  fix  on  the  year  1843,  or  sooner,  for  this  day  to
come ;  for  it  will  not  come ;  and  then  you  will  be
ashamed."  And  I  hope  I  may  be  able,  by  the  grace  of
God,  to  repent.  But  what  if  it  does  come  ?  You  can-
not with  any  propriety  say  positively  it  will  not  come,
for  you  make  no  pretence  to  divination.  But  I  say,
What  if  it  does  come  ?  Where  will  you  be  ?  No  space
then  for  repentance.  No,  no — too  late,  too  late;  the
harvest  is  over  and  past,  the  summer  is  gone,  the  door
is  shut,  and  your  soul  is  not  saved.  Therefore  it  can  do
you  no  harm  to  hear,  and  believe,  and  do  those  things


Christ's  second  coming.  27

which  God  requires  of  you,  and  which  you  think  you
would  do,  if  you  knew  he  would  appear.  First,  I  ask  you
to  repent  of  your  sins.  Would  this  be  right?  Yes.
Next,  I  ask  you  to  believe  in  God.  Is  this  right?  Yes.
And  I  ask  you  to  be  reconciled  to  his  will,  love  his  law,
forsake  sin,  love  holiness,  practise  his  precepts,  obey  his
commands.  Would  these  things  be  right?  Yes,  yes.
And  last  of  all,  and  not  least,  I  ask  you  to  I  look  for  that
Dlessed  hope  and  the  glorious  appearing  of  the  great
God  and  our  Savior  Jesus  Christ."    Amen.


LECTURE    II.


REV.  xx.  6.


Blessed  and  holy  is  he  that  hath  part  in  the  first  resurrection  ;  on
such  the  second  death  hath  no  power ;  but  they  shall  be  priests
of  God  and  of  Christ,  and  shall  reign  with  him  a  thousand  years.

The  term  "blessed  and  holy"  is  often  used  in  Scrip-
ture, and  in  many  places  is  applied  to  man ;  but  in  no
place  without  giving  some  characteristic  mark  of  his
being  born  of  God,  or  inheriting  the  fruits  of  the  divine
Spirit;  and  very  often  the  word  blessed  is  used  standing
m  immediate  connection  with  the  resurrection  and
coming  of  Christ,  either  expressed  or  implied,  as  in  Isa.
Ixii.  11,  12,  "  Behold,  the  Lord  hath  proclaimed  unto  the
end  of  the  world,  Say  ye  to  the  daughter  of  Zion,  Behold,
thy  salvation  cometh;  behold,  his  reward  is  with  him,
and  his  work  before  him.  And  they  shall  call  them  The
holy  people,  The  redeemed  of  the  Lord ;  and  thou  shalt
be  called,  Sought  out,  A  city  not  forsaken."  Isa.  xxx.
18,  "  And  therefore  will  the  Lord  wait,  that  he  may  be
gracious  unto  you,  and  therefore  will  he  be  exalted,  that
he  may  have  mercy  upon  you ;  for  the  Lord  is  a  God  of
j u  dgment.  Blessed  are  all  they  that  wait  for  him."  Dan-
iel says,  xii.  12,  "  Blessed  is  he  that  waiteth,  and  cometh  to
the  1335  days."  John  says,  Rev.  xiv.  13,  "  Blessed  are
the  dead  which  die  in  the  Lord."  "  Write,  Blessed  are
they  which  are  called  to  the  marriage  supper  of  the
Lamb."  "Behold,  I  come  quickly;  blessed  is  he  that
keepeth  the  sayings  of  the  prophecy  of  this  book."
"  Blessed  are  they  that  do  his  commandments,  that  they


Christ's  second  coming.  29

may  have  right  to  the  tree  of  life,  and  may  enter  in
through  the  gates  into  the  city."  By  these  passages  I
show  you  that  all  the  children  of  God  are  included  in
this  blessing,  and  not  the  martyrs  only,  as  some  will
have  it.  The  next  thing  which  will  claim  our  attention
will  be  to  explain  the  resurrection  spoken  of  in  our
text,  called  the  first  resurrection.  The  word  resurrection
signifies  to  revive,  or  resuscitate,  or  bring  to  life  again,
one  now  dead,  who  was  once  alive.  It  nowhere  in  the
word  of  God  conveys  an  idea  of  a  new  creation,  and
the  word  is  nowhere  used  in  the  Bible  expressing  any
thing  less  or  more  than  a  union  of  soul  and  body,  and
deliverance  from  natural  death.  The  word  resurrection
is  nowhere  used  in  a  figurative  sense ;  it  in  all  places
has  its  own  simple  meaning,  unless  our  text  is  an  ex-
ception. And  without  the  objector  can  show  some  rule
of  interpretation  by  which  we  shall  be  warranted  to
understand  the  word  in  a  different  sense,  we  must  beg
leave  to  attach  to  it  the  simple  meaning,  coming  to  life
from  the  grave.  I  know  some  have  supposed  that  regen-
eration is  resurrection ;  but  I  cannot  believe  this  unless
they  show  some  rule.  I  know  some  pretend  to  show  us,
in  John  v.  25,  "  Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto  you,  The  hour
is  coming,  and  now  is,  when  the  dead  shall  hear  the
voice  of  the  Son  of  God,  and  they  that  hear  shall  live,"
as  a  rule  ;  but  in  order  to  make  this  a  rule,  they  must
prove  that  Christ  meant  regeneration ;  until  this  is  shown,
we  cannot  admit  it  as  any  proof.

We  shall,  therefore,  consider  the  word  resurrection
as  coming  up  out  of  the  grave,  and  pass  to  the  word
first.  "  The  first  resurrection."  The  resurrection  of  the
saints  is  first  as  it  respects  order  and  time.  Wherever
the  word  resurrection  is  used  ja  connection  with  life  or
damnation,  the  one  unto  life  always  comes  first ;  as  in
Daniel  xii.  2,  "  Some  to  evemHting  life,  and  some  to
shame  and  everlasting  contempt ; "  John  v.  29,  "  They
that  have  done  good,  unto  the  resurrection  of  life  ;  and
they  that  have  done  evil,  unto  the  resurrection  of
damnation."  Here  are  two  samples  as  it  respects  order.
One  or  two  as  it  respects  time :  1  Cor.  xv.  23,  "  Christ
the  first  fruits,  then  after  ward  thev  that  are  Christ's  at
3*


30  LECTURE   II.

his  coming.  Then  cometh  the  end."  And  again,
1  Thess.  iv.  16,  "  For  the  Lord  himself  shall  descend
from  heaven  with  a  shout,  with  the  voice  of  the  arch-
angel and  the  trump  of  God ;  and  the  dead  in  Christ
shall  rise  first."  And  then  our  context  and  text  shows
that  the  blessed  and  holy  are  raised  a  thousand  years
before  the  rest  of  the  dead.  If  we  are  correct,  then,
Christ  will  come  before  the  millennium  instead  of  after-
wards, as  some  believe ;  and  the  millennium  is  a  state  of
personal,  and  glorious,  and  immortal  reign  on  the  new
earth,  or  this  earth  cleansed  by  fire,  as  it  was  once
by  water;  and  it  will  be  a  new  dispensation,  new
heavens,  and  new  earth.  This  will  be  our  next  propo-
sition to  prove.  And,  first,  we  will  examine  the  20th
chapter  of  Revelation,  1st  verse:  "And  I  saiv  an
angel  come  doion  from  heaven;"  —  this  angel  I  consider
no  less  a  being  than  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  for  it  only
can  be  said  of  him ;  —  "  having  the  key  of  the  bottomless
pit  and  a  great  chain  in  his  hand."  See  Rev.  i.  18  :
"I  am  he  that  liveth  and  was  dead;  and  behold,  I  am
alive  for  evermore,  amen,  and  have  the  keys  of  hell  and
of  death."  And  Christ  only  has  power  to  bind  Satan.
"That  he  might  destroy  him  that  had  the  power  of
death,  that  is,  the  devil,"  Heb.  ii.  14.  2d  verse  :  "And
he  laid  hold  on  the  dragon,  that  old  serpent,  which  is  the
devil,  and  Satan,  and  bound  him  a  thousand  years"  I
suppose  this  verse  needs  no  explanation.  It  can  only
be  understood  in  a  literal  sense,  for  it  explains  itself  in
the  figures  used ;  as  dragon  and  serpent,  often  used
as  figures,  are  explained  to  mean  the  devil  and  Satan.
If  the  thousand  years  had  been  used,  in  this  chapter,
or  any  where  else  in  the  word  of  God,  in  a  mystical
or  figurative  sense,  it  would  have  been  somewhere  ex-
plained ;  but,  as  it  ijlftot,  I  consider  we  are  to  place
upon  it  the  most  siinprc  construction,  and  I  shall  there-
fore understand  it  literally.  3d  verse :  "  And  cast  him
into  the  bottomless  pit;"  —  by  bottomless  pit,  I  have
shown,  by  the  proof  on  our  first  vei-se,  that  it  is  hell ;
see  Rev.  i.  18  ',—  "and  shut  him  up  and  set  a  seal  upon
him,  that  he  should  deceive  the  nations  no  more,  till  the
thousand  years  should  be  fulfilled ;  and  after  that  he  must


Christ's  second  coming.  31

be  loosed  a  little  season."  This  passage  must  be  under-
stood in  its  simple,  plain  meaning ;  no  mystery  in  this.
4th  verse :  "  And  I  saw  thrones,  and  they  sat  on  them,
and  judgment  was  given  unto  them ; "  —  here  we  have
a  prophecy  of  the  fulfilment  of  a  promise  that  Christ
made  to  his  disciples,  in  Matt  xix.  28:  "And  Jesus
said  unto  them,  Verily,  I  say  unto  you,  that  ye  which
have  followed  me  in  the  regeneration,  when  the  Son
of  Man  shall  sit  in  the  throne  of  his  glory,  ye  also
shall  sit  upon  twelve  thrones,  judging  the  twelve  tribes
of  Israel ; "  — "  and  I  saw  the  souls  of  them  that  were
beheaded  for  the  icitness  of  Jesus,  and  for  the  word  of
God,  and  which  had  not  worshipped  the  beast,  neither  his
image,  neither  had  received  his  mark  upon  their  foreheads,
or  in  their  hands  ;  and  they  lived  and  reigned  with  Christ
a  thousand  years"  In  this  description  we  have  the
whole  family  of  the  redeemed;  for  all  that  had  not
worshipped  the  beast  or  his  image,  or  received  a  mark,
and,  in  one  word,  all  that  were  not  the  servants  of  Satan
or  sin,  lived  and  reigned  with  Christ  a  thousand  years.
5th  verse :  "  But  the  rest  of  the  dead  lived  not  again
U7itil  the  thousand  years  were  finished.  This  is  the  first
resurrection"  The  rest  of  the  dead  means  the  wicked
dead,  who  do  not  have  part  in  the  first  resurrection ;
lived  not  again,  showing  conclusively  that  it  is  a  natural
life  and  death  spoken  of.  The  first  resurrection  is  the
resurrection  of  the  saints  at  his  coming.  Then  cornea
in  our  text,  which  has  and  will  be  explained  in  the
lecture.  7th  verse  :  "  And  when  the  thousand  years  are
expired,  Satan  shall  be  loosed  out  of  his  prison."  We
may  reasonably  expect  that,  when  Satan  is  let  loose,
all  the  damned  spirits  are  let  loose  with  him ;  and  it
has  been  strongly  implied  they  were  to  live  again  in
the  body,  at  the  end  of  the  thousand  years.  8th  verse :
"And  shall  go  out"  —  that  is,  Satan  —  "to  deceive  the
nations  ivhich  are  in  the  four  quarters  of  the  earth "  —
"  ashes  under  the  feet  of  the  saints,"  as  Malachi  tells
us :  "  And  ye  shall  tread  down  the  wicked ;  for  they
shall  be  ashes  under  the  soles  of  your  feet  in  the  day
that  I  shall  do  this,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts  "  —  "  Gog
and  Magog"  —  the    armies  of  the  wicked  that  were


32  LECTURE    II.

slain  at  the  commencing1  of  the  thousand  years,  or
coming  of  Christ,  at  the  supper  of  the  great  God,  and
battle  of  Armageddon  ;  see  Ezekiel  xxxviii.,  xxxix.  —
"  to  gather  them  together  to  battle  ; "  —  this  is  their
design,  but  there  is  no  battle,  for  God  himself  is  with
his  people  to  defend  them  ;  and  he  destroys  the  wicked
host,  "  the  number  of  whom  is  as  the  sand  of  the  sea  ; "
evidently  including  the  whole  number  of  the  wicked ;
for  the  figure,  sand  of  the  sea,  is  never  used,  only  to
express  the  whole  class  of  the  people  named ;  as,  the
children  of  Israel,  the  whole  host  of  Jacob.  9th  verse :
"  And  they  went  up  on  the  breadth  of  the  earth ; "  —  that
is,  this  army  of  Gog  and  Magog  were  raised  up  out
of  the  surface  of  the  earth,  that  only  being  the  breadth
of  a  globular  body  ;  —  "  and  compassed  the  camp  of  the
saints  about,  and  the  beloved  city  ; "  —  plainly  showing
that  the  New  Jerusalem,  the  beloved  city,  is  on  the
earth  during  the  thousand  years,  or  how  could  this
wicked  host  encompass  it  about?  they  have  not  climbed
the  celestial  walls  of  heaven  —  no;  for  it  says,  "and
fire  came  down  from  God  out  of  heaven  and  devoured
them."  This  is  the  second  death,  represented  under
the  figure  of  fire  coming  down  from  God  out  of  heaven ;
not  the  conflagration  of  the  world,  —  for  that  was  in
the  commencing  of  the  thousand  years,  when  Christ
came  and  cleansed  the  world  from  all  the  wicked,  and
the  works  of  wicked  men,  —  but  the  justice  of  God,
under  the  figure  of  fire  ;  "  for  our  God  is  a  consuming
fire."  Heb.  xii.  29.  10th  verse  :  "  And  the  devil  that
deceived  them  was  cast  into  the  lake  of  fire  and  brimstone,
where  the  beast  and  false  prophet  are,  and  shall  be  tor-
mented day  and  night  forever  and  ever."  In  this  verse,
the  final  condemnation  of  the  wicked,  soul  and  body,
is  given ;  and  the  last  that  God  has  seen  fit  to  reveal
concerning  them  to  us  is,  that  they  are  cast  into  ever-
lasting torment.  In  the  next  verse,  John  has  another
vision  of  the  same  things  which  he  had  before  told  us,
only  in  a  different  point  of  view,  or  some  circumstance
not  before  clearly  described.  And  I  saw  always  im-
plies a  new  view,  or  another  vision.  11th  verse :  "  Ana,
I  saw  a  great  white  throne,  and  him  that  sat  on  it;  from


Christ's  second  coming.  33

whose  face  the  heavens  and  earth  fled  away ;  and  there
was  no  place  found  for  them"  This  is  the  same  throne
that  Daniel  saw,  vii.  9 — 14 :  "  I  beheld  till  the  thrones
were  cast  down  and  the  Ancient  of  days  did  sit,  whose
garment  was  white  as  snow,  and  the  hair  of  his  head
like  the  pure  wool :  his  throne  was  like  the  fiery  flame,
and  his  wheels  as  burning  fire."  12th  verse :  "  Ana
I  saw  the  dead,  small  and  great,  stand  before  God ;  ana
the  books  were  opened;  and  another  book  ivas  opened,
which  is  the  book  of  life ;  and  the  dead  were  judged  out
of  those  things  which  were  written  in  the  books,  according
to  their  works."  This  is  the  same  as  Daniel  saw,  vii.
10  :  "A  fiery  stream  issued  and  came  forth  from  before
him ;  thousand  thousands  ministered  unto  him,  and  ten
thousand  times  ten  thousand  stood  before  him.  The
judgment  was  set,  and  the  books  were  opened."  It  is
very  evident  that  this  is  the  beginning  of  the  judgment,
when  Christ  comes  in  the  clouds  of  heaven,  with  power
and  great  glory,  to  raise  and  judge  his  saints,  and  to
reward  every  man  as  his  work  shall  be.  1st,  because
it  is  when  the  judgment  first  sets ;  2d,  because,  the  book
of  life  is  there,  and  open;  and,  3d,  because  it  was  at
the  time  or  before  antichrist  was  destroyed ;  and  no
one  can  believe  that  the  antichristian  beast  can  be  on
the  earth  during  or  in  the  millennium.  13th  verse:
u  And  the  sea  gave  up  the  dead  ivhieh  were  in  it;  ana
death  and  hell  delivered  up  the  dead  ivhich  were  in  them.n
I  conclude  the  apostle,  after  he  had  seen  the  righteous
dead  raised,  small  and  great,  and  stand  before  God,
and  saw  the  book  of  life  open  to  justify  them,  and  saw
them  judged  and  rewarded,  he  then  glides  down  to  the
end  of  the  thousand  years,  and  beheld  the  wicked  dead
given  up  by  those  elements  and  places  wherein  they
had  been  confined  during  the  millennial  period,  to  be
judged  in  the  flesh,  every  man  according  to  his  works.

This  only  can  reconcile  some  of  those  conflicting
passages  (or  seemingly  so  to  us)  concerning  the  resur-
rection ;  and  I  cannot  see  any  impropriety  in  thus  under-
standing these  prophecies ;  for  it  is  the  common  manner
of  the  prophets,  a  little  here  and  a  little  there.  In  all
the  descriptions  of  the  resurrection  of  the  righteous


34  LECTURE   II.

dead,  they  are  represented  as  being-  gathered  by  the
angels  of  God,  from  the  four  winds  of  heaven,  when  the
seventh  or  last  trump  shall  sound ;  and  it  is  equally  as
evident  that  their  works  are  brought  into  judgment.
Although  they  may  not  be  justified  by  their  works,  but
out  of  the  book  of  life,  yet  the  apostle  Paul  says,  speak-
ing of  his  brethren,  "  We  must  all  stand  before  the
judgment  seat  of  Christ."  Rom.  xiv.  10.  And  again,
2  Cor.  v.  10,  "  For  we  must  all  stand  before  the  judg-
ment seat  of  Christ ;  that  every  one  may  receive  the
things  done  in  his  body,  according  to  that  he  hath  done,
whether  it  be  good  or  bad."  And,  1  Cor.  iii.  13 — 15,
"Every  man's  work  shall  be  made  manifest;  for  the
day  shall  declare  it,  because  it  shall  be  revealed  by
fire ;  and  the  fire  shall  try  every  man's  work,  of  what
sort  it  is.  If  any  man's  work  abide  which  he  hath
built  thereupon,  he  shall  receive  a  reward.  If  any
man's  work  shall  be  burned,  he  shall  suffer  loss:  yet
he  himself  shall  be  saved,  so  as  by  fire."  We  see,  by
these  texts,  that  the  books  of  every  man's  works  will
be  open,  as  well  as  the  book  of  life,  in  the  first  resur-
rection; but,  in  the  second  resurrection,  there  is  no
book  of  life  open  in  that  part  of  the  judgment,  neither
are  they  gathered  by  the  angels  of  God ;  but  the  sea,
death,  and  hell,  delivered  up  the  dead  which  were  in
them,  and  they  were  judged  every  n\an  according  to
their  works ;  and  Satan  is  the  means  of  gathering  them
around  the  beloved  city,  where  they  are  judged  in  the
flesh.  By  the  sea,  death,  and  hell,  I  understand  the  sea,
grave,  and  place  of  punishment  The  sea  and  the
grave  would  give  up  the  dissolved  particles  of  the  body,
and  hell  (or  Hades)  would  give  up  their  departed
sp  jits ;  this  would  constitute  the  second  resurrection.
"And  they  were  judged  every  man  according  to  their
works.17  They  had  chosen,  in  this  life,  to  stand  on  their
works ;  they  had  refused  to  believe  in  a  Mediator ;  they
had  not  followed  his  commands,  neither  had  they  pro
fessed  his  name  before  men,  or  suffered  persecution
for  the  sake  of  his  testimony.  They  had  treated  his
word  with  total  neglect,  or  called  his  grace  tyranny.
They  had  said  he  was  a  hard  master,  and  buried  their


chrt-st's  second  coming.  35

talent  in  the  earth.  They  had  placed  their  supreme
affections  on  the  world,  and  made  fine  gold  their  trust.
They  had  persecuted  the  children  of  God  in  this  world,
and  showed  that  they  were  the  children  of  that  wicked
one  who  slew  his  brother.  They  had  prostituted  their
bodies  to  whoredom,  and  sacrificed  to  Bacchus  and
Venus  their  first-fruits.  They  had  professed  damna-
ble heresies,  and  filled  the  world  with  their  delusive
schemes  and  sects.  They  had  worshipped  the  creature,
and  neglected  prayer  to  the  Creator.  They  had  filled
the  world  with  their  lies  and  abominations,  and  gloried
in  their  shame.  14th  verse  :  "  And  death  and  hell  were
cast  into  the  lake  of  fire.  This  is  the  second  death."  By
death  and  hell  I  understand  the  body  and  spirit.  15th
verse :  "  And  whosoever  was  not  found  ivritten  in  the
Lamb's  book  of  life,  was  cast  into  the  lake  of  fire."  "  But
the  fearful  and  unbelieving,  and  the  abominable,  and
murderers,  and  whoremongers,  and  sorcerers,  and  idol-
aters, and  all  liars,  shall  have  their  part  in  the  lake
which  burnetii  with  fire  and  brimstone,  which  is  the
second  death."  Rev.  xxi.  8.  "Blessed  are  they  that
do  his  commandments,  that  they  may  have  right  to  the
tree  of  life,  and  may  enter  in  through  the  gates  into  the
city.  For  without  are  dogs,  and  sorcerers,  and  whore-
mongers, and  murderers,  and  idolaters,  and  whosoever
loveth  and  makefh  a  lie,"  Rev.  xxii.  14,  15.  Then  our
text  says,  "Blessed  and  holy  is  he  that  hath  part  in  the
first  resurrection."  This  we  have  proved  is  the  resur-
rection of  the  righteous  dead,  who  died  in  faith  in
Jesus  Christ,  and  who  should  live  with  him  at  his
coming;  on  them  the  second  death  should  have  no
power,  "  but  they  shall  be  priests  of  God  and  of  Christ,
and  shall  reign  with  him  a  thousand  years."

To  be  priests  unto  God  and  unto  Christ,  is  to  be  holy ;
to  be  a  kingdom  of  priests  of  a  peculiar  people,  that
should  show  forth  his  praises  by  declaring  to  the  uni-
verse that  out  of  nature's  darkness  they  had  been  re-
deemed by  his  blood,  called  by  his  grace  unto  his
glorious,  happy,  and  holy  kingdom,  and  that  they
should  dwell  on  the  earth.  See  Rev.  v.  9,  10,  "  And
they  sung  a  new  song,  saying,  Thou  art  worthy  to  take


36  LECTURE   II.

the  book  and  to  open  the  seals  thereof;  for  thou  wast
slain,  and  hast  redeemed  us  to  God  by  thy  blood,  out
of  every  kindred,  and  tongue,  and  people,  and  nation;
and  hast  made  us  unto  our  God  kings  and  priests,  and
we  shall  reign  on  the  earth."  See,  also,  Rev.  i.  6,  "And
hath  made  us  kings  and  priests  unto  God,  and  his
Father."  Again,  1  Pet.  ii.  5,  9,  "Ye  also,  as  lively
stones,  are  built  up  a  spiritual  house,  a  holy  priest-
hood." "But  ye  are  a  chosen  generation,  a  royal
priesthood,  a  holy  nation,  a  peculiar  people."  The
passages  to  which  I  have  cited  your  minds,  prove,  be-
yond a  reasonable  doubt,  that  the  thousand  years  spo-
ken of  in  the  text  is  between  the  two  resurrections  ■  i
state  of  happiness,  of  glory,  of  holiness,  and  that  it
shall  be  on  the  earth.  It  is  a  state  of  immortality,  as
abundant  scriptures  evidently  prove.  Where,  then,  you
may  inquire,  is  the  spiritual  millennium  which  our  theo-
rists, in  the  present  age,  are  teaching  us  to  expect  ?  1
answer,  There  is  not  a  thousand  years  spoken  of  in
Scripture,  except  in  2  Pet,  3d  chapter,  and  in  which  the
judgment  day  is  the  subject  of  discussion,  and  in  the
chapter  of  which  our  text  is  a  part ;  and  in  neither  of
these  places  is  any  thing  said  about  spiritual  reign;
neither  can  we  find  any  thing  in  the  word  of  God  by
which  we  could  fairly  draw  the  conclusion  of  such  a
reign ;  and  as  it  is  not  proper  for  me  to  show  the  neg-
ative, I  call  on  all  of  you  to  show  where  we  may  find
the  evidence,  that  is,  all  of  you  who  believe  in  a
spiritual  reign.  If  there  is  such  a  reign,  it  must  be
before  the  second  coming  of  Christ ;  for  when  he  comes,
he  will  receive  us  to  himself,  that  where  he  is  there  we
may  be  also;  no  more  away  from  his  people,  for  he
says  he  will  be  with  them,  and  make  his  abode  with
them,  and  he  will  be  their  light,  and  will  dwell  with
them,  and  make  his  abode  with  them,  and  they  shall
dwell  on  the  earth.  Where,  when,  or  how  the  idea  of
a  spiritual  reign  of  a  thousand  years  should  or  could
obtain  a  place  in  our  faith,  having  the  word  of  God
as  our  evidence,  I  cannot  tell.  Some  say  that  the
prophets  speak  often  of  times  or  things  which  have  not
keen  fulfilled  in  our  day,  or  under  the  present  dispensa-


Christ's  second   coming,  37

tion,  and  which  would  be  too  gross  to  be  admitted  into
a  state  of  immortality.  There  may  be  such  —  yet  I
find  no  difficulty  in  understanding  all  those  passages
which  have  been  presented,  or  come  under  my  con-
sideration, to  refer  to  the  gospel  day.  But  how  long  do
the  prophets  say  that  time  shall  he  ?  Do  they  designate
any  time?  No;  neither  one,  ten,  one  hundred,  or  one
thousand  years  are  mentioned  in  any  of  those  passages-
Why  then  call  it  a  millennium  ?  Because  Peter  and
John  have  mentioned  a  thousand  years.  This  cannot
be  admitted  to  mean  any  state  this  side  of  the  state  of
immortality  ;  for  Peter  says  plainly,  "  Yet,  nevertheless,
we  look  for  a  new  heaven  and  a  new  earth,  wherein
dwelletii  righteousness."  This  would  be  a  new  state,
surely — nothing  gross  or  vile  in  this  kingdom,  whoever
may  be  king;  and  John  expressly  says,  "They  lived  and
reigned  with  Christ  a  thousand  years,"  and  says,  "  This
•is  the  first  resurrection."  Now,  admit  there  is  such  a
time,  how  or  by  what  rule  shall  we  call  it  a  thousand
years  ?

Again,  where,  in  all  the  prophecies,  can  any  one  show
me  that  the  church  will  be  blessed  and  holy,  or  happy
and  righteous,  as  it  may  be  rendered,  until  he  comes,
that  is,  at  Christ's  second  appearance  ?  And  where  in
the  word  are  we  to  learn  that  the  kingdoms  of  this  world
are  to  be  destroyed  before  the  coming  of  the  Ancient  of
days  ?  Do  we  believe  that  the  anti-Christian  beast,  or
mystical  Babylon,  will  be  on  the  earth  during  this  mil-
lennial reign  ?  No,  it  cannot  be  ;  yet  all  must  acknowl-
edge that  she  is  only  destroyed  by  the  brightness  of
his  coming.  Who  can  read  the  19th  chapter  of  Rev-
elation, without  being  convinced  that  the  marriage  sup-
per of  the  Lamb,  the  treading  of  the  wine-press  of  the
fierceness  and  wrath  of  Almighty  God,  and  the  supper
of  the  great  God,  are  events  which  must  take  place
before  the  millennium  ?  And  if  so,  who  can  believe  that
after  the  marriage  of  the  Lamb  to  the  bride  ;  after  she
is  arrayed  in  linen  clean  and  white,  which  is  the
righteousness  of  the  saints  ;  after  they  have  received  a
crown  of  righteousness,  which  the  righteous  Judge  shall
give  to  all  them  who  love  his  appearing  in  that  chy5-"»
4


38  LECTURE    II.

Christ  will  not  be  with  her  in  person?  None.  But
our  text  tells  us  he  will  live  and  reign  with  them,  and
they  shall  be  priests  to  God.

Again :  while  in  this  state  of  mortality  and  trial,  we
are  called  the  servants  and  ministers  of  Christ ;  but
then,  in  the  millennial  blessedness,  we  shall  be  called
priests  of  God  and  of  Christ.  You  may  ask,  "  Why  this
distinction  in  the  language?"  I  answer,  There  is  a
great  difference  between  the  kingdom  of  Christ,  as  it
was  established  when  Christ  was  here  on  earth,  and  the
kingdom  given  up  to  God,  even  the  Father.  The  subjects
of  Christ's  kingdom,  in  this  state  of  things,  may  be,  and
in  fact  are,  imperfect.  Hypocrites  and  false  professors
may  and  do  obtain  an  entrance  into  it;  for  an  enemy
hath  sown  tares.  But  the  kingdom  of  God,  no  man,
says  Christ,  can  see,  or  enter,  without  being  born  of
God.  Here  they  may  deceive  the  sentinels  which
guard  the  kingdom  of  Christ ;  but  in  the  kingdom  of
God  "  there  shall  in  no  wise  enter  into  it  any  thing  that
defileth,  neither  whatsoever  worketh  abomination  or
maketh  a  lie ;  but  they  which  are  written  in  the  Lamb's
book  of  life."  Here  the  children  of  the  kingdom  are
persecuted,  tormented,  perplexed,  cast  down ;  but  in  the
kingdom  of  God  their  enemies  are  all  slain ;  they  are
comforted,  glorified,  justified,  exalted ;  and  not  a  dog  to
move  his  tongue.  Here  they  weep,  but  there  will  re-
joice :  here  they  sin  and  repent;  they  there  will  be  holy
without  fault  before  his  throne.  "  Blessed  and  holy  is
he  that  hath  part  in  the  first  resurrection."    Amen.


LECTURE   III.


DANIEL  vni.  13,  14.


'•'Then  I  heard  one  saint  speaking,  and  another  saint  said  unto  that
certain  saint  which  spake,  How  long  shall  be  the  vision  concern-
ing the  daily  sacrifice,  and  the  transgression  of  desolation,  to
give  both  the  sanctuary  and  the  host  to  be  trodden  under  foot  ?
And  he  said  unto  me,  Unto  two  thousand  three  hundred  days  :
Ihen  shall  the  sanctuary  be  cleansed  ;  "  or  justified,  as  it  might
have  been  translated.


The  hearer  will,  at  the  first  view  of  our  text,  perceive
that  there  is  something  very  important  communicated  in
the  question  and  answer  given  ;  or  why  are  saints  com-
missioned (as  we  may  reasonably  suppose)  from  the
courts  of  heaven,  to  ask  and  answer  the  question  con-
tained in  the  text,  in  presence  of  the  prophet  ?  And
that  it  concerned  Daniel,  and  us  for  whom  the  prophet
wrote  his  prophecy,  to  understand,  is  evident  from  the  an-
swer being-  given  to  Daniel  —  "  and  he  said  unto  me"  —
instead  of  being  given  to  the  "  saint,"  who  made  the  in-
quiry. Then  we  are  not  treading  on  forbidden  ground,
my  dear  hearer,  to  search'to  understand  the  meaning  and
truth  of  our  subject.

I  shall  then  treat  our  subject  in  the  following  manner:

I.  Explain  some  of  the  figures  and  expressions  used
in  the  text.

II.  Show  what  the  "daily  sacrifice  vision"  is,  and,

III.  The  time  or  length  of  the  vision  "  unto  two  thou-
sand three  hundred  days:  then  shall  the  sanctuary  be
cleansed."

I.  I  am  to  explain  some  of  the  figures  used  in  the
text;  and,


40  LECTURE    III.

1st,  the  "  daily  sacrifice?  This  may  be  understood^
hy  some,  to  mean  the  Jewish  rites  and  ceremonies  ;  and
by  others,  the  Pagan  rites  and  sacrifices.  As  both  Jews
and  Pagans  had  their  rites  and  sacrifices  both  morning
and  evening,  and  their  altars  were  kept  smoking  with
their  victims  of  beasts,  and  their  holy  fire  was  preserved
in  their  national  altars  and  temples  devoted  to  their  sev-
eral deities  or  gods,  we  might  be  at  a  loss  to  know  which
of  these  to  apply  this  figurative  expression  to,  did  not  our
text  and  context  explain  the  meaning.  It  is  very  evi-
dent, when  we  carefully  examine  our  text,  that  it  is  to
be  understood  as  referring  to  Pagan  and  Papal  rites,  for
it  stands  coupled  with  "the  abomination  of  desolation,"
and  performs  the  same  acts,  such  as  are  ascribed  to  the
Papal  abomination,  u  to  give  both  the  sanctuary  and
host  to  be  trodden  under  foot."  See,  also,  Rev.  xi.  2,
u  But  the  court  which  is  without  the  temple  leave  out,
and  measure  it  not ;  for  it  is  given  unto  the  Gentiles ;
and  the  holy  city  shall  they  tread  under  foot  forty  and
two  months."  This  last  text  only  has  reference  to  the
Papal  beast,  which  was  the  image  of  the  Pagan  ;  but  the
text  in  consideration  has  reference  to  both  Pagan  and
Papal.  That  is,  How  long  shall  the  Pagan  transgression
and  the  Papal  transgression  tread  under  foot  the  sanc-
tuary and  host  ?  This  must  be  the  true  and  literal  mean-
ing of  our  text;  it  could  not  mean  the  anti-Christian
abomination  alone,  for  they  never  desolated  the  Jewish
church;  neither  could  it  mean  Antiochus,  the  Syrian
king;  for  he  and  his  kingdom  were  made  desolate  and
destroyed  before  Christ ;  and  it  is  evident  that  Christ
had  an  allusion  to  this  very  power,  when  he  told  his
disciples,  Matt.  xxiv.  15,  "  When  ye  therefore  shall  see
the  abomination  of  desolation,  spoken  of  by  Daniel  the
prophet,  stand  in  the  holy  place."  I  believe  all  com-
mentators agree  that  Christ  meant  the  Roman  power  —
if  so,  then  Daniel  has  the  same  meaning  ;  for  this  is  the
very  passage  to  which  Christ  alluded.  Then  the  "  daily
sacrifice"  means  Pagan  rites  and  sacrifices,  and  the
transgression  of  desolation,  the  Papal ;  and  both  together
shall  tread  under  foot  the  "  sanctuary  and  host,"  which
brings  me  to  show  what  may  be  understood  by  "  sane-


Christ's  second  coming.  4l

tuary  and  host"  By  sandum-y,  we  must  understand  the
temple  at  Jerusalem,  and  those  who  worship  therein,
which  was  trodden  under  foot  by  the  Pagan  kingdoms
of  the  world,  since  the  days  of  Daniel,  the  writer  of
our  text;  then  by  the  Chaldeans;  afterwards  by  the
Medes  and  Persians  ;  next  by  the  Grecians ;  and  lastly
by  the  Romans,  who  destroyed  the  city  and  sanctuary,  lev-
elled the  temple  with  the  ground,  and  caused  the  plough
to  pass  over  the  place.  The  people  of  the  Jews,  too,
were  led  into  captivity  and  persecuted  by  all  these  king-
doms successively,  and  finally  by  the  Romans  were  ta-
ken away  and  destroyed  as  a  nation.  And  as  the  proph-
et Isaiah,  Ixiii.  18,  says,  "The  people  of  thy  holiness
have  possessed  it  but  a  little  while  :  our  adversaries  have
trodden  down  thy  sanctuary."  Jeremiah,  also,  in  Lam.
i.  10,  "  The  adversary  hath  spread  out  his  hand  upon  all
her  pleasant  things  ;  for  she  hath  seen  that  the  heathen
entered  into  her  sanctuary,  whom  thou  didst  command  that
they  should  not  enter  into  thy  congregation."  The  word
host  is  applied  to  the  people  who  worship  in  the  outer
court,  and  fitly  represents  the  Christian  church,  who  are
said  to  be  strangers  and  pilgrims  on  the  earth,  having  no
continuing  places,  but  looking  for  a  city  whose  builder
and  maker  is  God.  Jeremiah,  speaking  of  the  gospel
church,  says,  iii.  19,  "  But  I  said,  How  shall  I  put  thee
among  the  children,  and  give  thee  a  pleasant  land,  a
goodly  heritage  of  the  host  of  nations  ?  "  evidently  mean-
ing the  church  from  the  Gentiles.  "Then  shall  the
sanctuary  be  cleansed  or  justified,"  means  the  true  sanc-
tuary which  God  has  built  of  lively  stones  to  his  own  ac-
ceptance, through  Christ,  of  which  the  temple  at  Jeru-
salem was  but  a  type,  the  shadows  having  long  since
fled  away,  and  that  temple  and  people  now  destroyed,
and  all  included  in  unbelief.  So  whosoever  looks  for
the  worldly  sanctuary  to  be  built  again,  will  find  them-
selves as  much  mistaken  as  the  unbelieving  Jews  were,
when  they  looked  for  a  temporal  prince  in  the  Messiah.
For  there  is  not  a  word  in  the  prophets  or  apostles,  after
Zerubbabel  built  the  second  temple,  that  a  third  one
w-ould  ever  be  built;  except  the  one  which  cometh  down
from  heaven,  which  is  a  spiritual  one,  and  which  is  the
4*


42  LECTURE    III.

mother  of  us  all,  (Jew  and  Gentile,)  and  which  is  free
and  when  that  New  Jerusalem  is  perfected,  then  shall
we  be  cleansed  and  justified ;  for  Paul  says  to  the
Phillippians,  iii.  20,  21,  "For  our  conversation  is  in
heaven ;  from  whence  also  we  look  for  the  Savior,  the
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  shall  change  our  vile  body,  that
it  may  be  fashioned  like  unto  his  glorious  body,  accord-
ing to  the  working  whereby  he  is  able  to  subdue  all
things  to  himself; "  that  is,  "  they  that  are  his  at  his
coming."  We  see  by  these  texts  —  and  many  more
might  be  quoted  —  that  the  spiritual  sanctuary  will  not
be  cleansed  until  Christ's  second  coming ;  and  then
all  Israel  shall  be  raised,  judged,  and  justified  in  his
sight

II.  We  shall  now  try  to  understand  what  is  meant  by
the  " vision"  in  the  text.

The  vision,  spoken  of  in  the  text,  alludes  to  three
separate  times  in  which  God  revealed  unto  Daniel  all
that  may  be  considered  a  prophecy  in  the  book  of  Dan-
iel, which  vision  was  explained  to  Daniel  by  a  heavenly
messenger,  called  Gabriel,  at  three  separate  times,  the
last  of  which  closes  the  book  of  Daniel ;  which  last
instruction  will  be  the  subject  of  a  future  lecture.

Daniel's  first  vision  was  the  dream  which  Nebuchad-
nezzar had,  and  which  troubled  him ;  but  when  he
awoke,  the  dream  was  gone  from  him.  He  then  called
for  the  magicians,  astrologers,  sorcerers,  and  wise  men
of  Chaldea,  to  show  him  his  dream,  and  the  interpreta-
tion thereof;  but  they  could  not.  The  king,  being
angry,  commanded  that  all  the  wise  men  of  Babylon
should  be  destroyed.  Then  Arioch,  the  captain  of  the
king's  guard,  went  forth  to  execute  the  king's  decree ;
and  among  the  rest  he  sought  for  Daniel  and  his  three
friends,  young  captive  Jews,  to  execute  the  purpose  of
king  Nebuchadnezzar  upon  them  also.  Daniel  then,  for
the  first  time,  being  made  acquainted  with  the  decree,
went  in  unto  the  king,  and  desired  time,  and  promised
that  he  would  make  known  the  dream,  and  the  interpre-
tation thereof.  Time  being  granted,  he  and  his  three
Hebrew  friends  held  a  prayer-meeting,  (not  a  cold  and
formal  one,  as  we  may  reasonably  suppose,)  for  their


CHRIST'S    SECOND    COMING  43

lives  and  the  lives  of  their  fellow-creatures  were  in
danger.  They  cried  for  mercies  from  the  God  of  heaven.
God  heard  and  answered  their  prayers,  and  revealed  to
Daniel  the  dream  and  interpretation.  After  rendering
suitable  thanksgiving,  Daniel  went  in  unto  the  king  and
told  the  dream  and  visions  of  the  king.  "  As  for  thee,  O
king,  thy  thoughts  came  into  thy  mind  upon  thy  bed,
what  should  come  to  pass  hereafter ;  and  he  that  reveal-
eth  secrets  maketh  known  to  thee  what  should  come  to
pass  ;  but  as  for  me,  this  secret  is  not  revealed  to  me  for
any  wisdom  that  1  have  more  than  any  living,  but  for
the  intent  that  the  interpretation  may  be  made  known
to  the  king,  and  that  thou  mightest  know  the  thoughts
of  thy  heart.  Thou,  O  king,  sawest,  and  behold,  a  great
image.  This  great  image,  whose  brightness  was  ex-
cellent, stood  before  thee,  and  the  form  thereof  was
terrible.  This  image's  head  was  of  fine  gold,  his  breast
and  his  arms  of  silver,  his  belly  and  his  thighs  of  brass,
his  legs  of  iron,  his  feet  part  of  iron  and  part  of  clay.
Thou  sawest  till  that  a  stone  was  cut  out  without  hands,
which  smote  the  image  upon  his  feet  that,  were  of  iron
and  clay,  and  brake  them  to  pieces.  Then  was  the  iron,
the  clay,  the  brass,  the  silver,  and  the  gold,  broken  to
pieces  together,  and  became  like  the  chaff  of  the  sum-
mer threshing-floors,  and  the  wind  carried  them  away,
that  no  place  was  found  for  them ;  and  the  stone  that
smote  the  image  became  a  great  mountain,  and  filled  the
whole  earth,"  Daniel  ii.  29 — 35.

This  was  the  dream,  and  the  interpretation  was  clear
as  given  by  Daniel ;  and  the  history  of  the  worid  proves
it  to  be  true,  a  large  share  having  already  been  fulfilled.
All  that  remains  to  be  accomplished  is  for  the  stone  to
smite  the  image  upon  his  feet,  and  to  become  a  great
mountain,  and  fill  the  whole  earth.  "  The  head  of  gold  "
represented  the  Chaldean  kingdom ;  "  the  breast  and
arms  of  silver "  represented  the  Medes  and  Persians ;
"  the  belly  and  thighs  of  brass,  which  were  to  bear  rule
over  all  the  earth,"  the  Grecian.  Alexander,  a  Grecian
king,  conquered  the  world  ;  the  legs  of  iron,  and  the  feet
part  of  iron  and  part  of  clay,"  fitly  represent  the  Roman
kingdom,  which  still  exists,  although  in  a  broken  state,


44  LECTURE    III.

like  iron  and  clay.  This  kingdom  has  been  divided  be-
tween Pagan  Rome,  the  head  wounded  to  death,  and
Papal  Rome,  the  deadly  wound  healed,  both  "  mixing
themselves  with  the  seed  of  men,"  that  is,  uniting  church
and  state,  ecclesiastical  and  civil,  in  the  government.
The  stone  denotes  Christ,  the  God  of  heaven ;  and  the
mountain  the  kingdom  of  God.  His  breaking  the  image
to  pieces,  shows  that  all  the  kingdoms  of  this  world  are
to  be  utterly  destroyed  and  carried  away,  so  that  no
place  can  be  found  for  them.  And  the  kingdom  of  God
filling  the  whole  earth  teaches  us  that  the  beloved  city,
the  New  Jerusalem,  will  fill  the  world,  and  God  will
dwell  with  his  people  on  the  earth.  Read  Dan.  ii.  37 —
45.  This  dream  was  in  the  second  year  of  Nebuchad-
nezzar's reign,  603  B.  C.  Forty-eight  years  afterwards,
in  the  first  year  of  Belshazzar's  reign  and  555  B.  C,
Daniel  had  another  dream,  yet  the  same  in  substance.
"  Daniel  spake  and  said,  I  saw  in  my  vision  by  night,  and
behold,  the  four  winds  of  heaven  strove  upon  the  great
sea,  and  four  great  beasts  came  up  from  the  sea,  diverse
one  from  another.  The  first  was  like  a  lion,  and  had  ea-
gles' wings  ;  I  beheld  till  the  wings  thereof  were  plucked,
and  it  was  lifted  up  from  the  earth,  and  made  to  stand
upon  the  feet  as  a  man,  and  a  man's  heart  was  given  to
it.  And  behold,  another  beast,  a  second,  like  unto  a
bear,  and  it  raised  up  itself  on  one  side,  and  it  had  three
ribs  in  the  mouth  of  it  between  the  teeth  of  it ;  and  they
said  thus  unto  it,  Arise,  devour  much  flesh.  After  this  1
beheld,  and  lo,  another  like  a  leopard,  which  had  upon
the  back  of  it  four  wings  of  a  fowl ;  the  beast  had  also
four  heads,  and  dominion  was  given  to  it.  After  this  I
saw  in  the  night  visions,  and  behold,  a  fourth  beast,
dreadful,  and  terrible,  and  strong  exceedingly,  and  it  had
great  iron  teeth  ;  it  devoured  and  brake  in  pieces,  and
stamped  the  residue  with  the  feet  of  it ;  and  it  was  di-
verse from  all  the  beasts  that  were  before  it,  and  it  had
ten  horns.  I  considered  the  horns,  and  behold,  there
came  up  among  them  another  little  horn,  before  whom
there  were  three  of  the  first  horns  plucked  up  by  the
roots  ;  and  behold,  in  this  horn  were  eyes  like  the  eyes
of  man,  and  a  mouth  speaking  great  things.    I  beheld


Christ's  second  coming.  45

till  the  thrones  were  cast  down,  and  the  Ancient  of  days
did  sit,  whose  garment  was  white  as  snow,  and  the  hair
of  his  head  like  the  pure  wool ;  his  throne  was  like  the
fiery  flame,  and  his  wheels  as  burning-  fire.  A  fiery
stream  issued  and  came  forth  from  before  him;  thousand
thousands  ministered  unto  him,  and  ten  thousand  times
ten  thousand  stood  before  him:  the  judgment  was  set,
and  the  books  were  opened  I  beheld,  then,  because  of
the  voice  of  the  great  words  which  the  horn  spake.  I
beheld,  even  till  the  beast  was  slain,  and  his  body  de-
stroyed and  given  to  the  burning  flame.  As  concerning
the  rest  of  the  beasts,  they  had  their  dominion  taken
away,  yet  their  lives  were  prolonged  for  a  season  and
time.  I  saw  in  the  night  visions,  and  behold,  one  like
the  Son  of  Man  came  with  the  clouds  of  heaven,  and
came  to  the  Ancient  of  days,  and  they  brought  him  near
before  him.  And  there  was  given  him  dominion  and  glo-
ry, and  a  kingdom,  that  all  people,  nations,  and  languages
should  serve  him;  his  dominion  is  an  everlasting  do-
minion, which  shall  not  pass  away,  and  his  kingdom
that  which  shall  not  be  destroyed,"  Daniel  vii.  1 — 14.
This  ends  Daniel's  night  vision,  except  the  instruction
he  received  from  some  one  standing  by.  "  So  he  told
me,  and  made  me  know  'the  truth  of  all  this,'  or  the
interpretation  of  the  things.  These  great  beasts,  which
are  four,  are  four  kings  which  shall  arise  out  of  the
earth.  But  the  saints  of  the  most  high  shall  take  the
kingdom,  and  possess  the  kingdom  forever,  even  forever
and  ever."  We  see  in  this  instruction  that  this  vision
and  Nebuchadnezzar's  dream  agree  in  the  most  prom-
inent parts ;  the  four  beasts  representing  the  four  king-
doms, and  the  saints  possessing  the  kingdom,  the  same
as  the  stone  becoming  a  great  mountain  and  filling  the
whole  earth ;  "  forever  and  ever"  shows  us  that  it  is  an
immortal  state  in  everlasting  life  ;  "the  saints"  evidently
includes  all  saints,  "  for  they  shall  live  and  reign  with
him  on  the  earth,"  Revelation  v.  10,  20.  iv.  6.  "  Then,"
Daniel  says,  vii.  19,  20,  "  I  would  know  the  truth  of  the
fourth  beast,  which  was  diverse  from  all  the  others,
exceeding  dreadful,  whose  teeth  were  of  iron,  and  his
nails  of  brass,  which  devoured,  brake  in  pieces,  and


46  LECTURE    III.

stamped  the  residue  with  his  feet;  and  of  the  ten  horns
that  were  in  his  head,  and  of  the  other  which  came  up,
and  before  whom  three  fell,  even  of  that  horn  that  had
eyes,  and  a  mouth  that  spake  very  great  things,  wnose
look  was  more  stout  than  his  fellows."

In  these  verses  we  learn  that  the  fourth  beast  would
be  diverse  from  the  others.  This  was  true  with  Rome ;
that  kingdom  first  rose  from  a  small  colony  of  adven-
turers settled  in  Italy.  Rome,  also,  had  seven  different
forms  of  government,  while  the  others  had  but  one.
We  learn  that  this  kingdom  would  devour,  break  in
pieces,  harass  and  perplex  the  people  of  God,  whether
Jew  or  Gentile  ;  that  it  would  be  divided  into  ten  king-
doms, and  afterwards  there  would  arise  another  power
which  would  swallow  up  three  of  the  ten  kingdoms.
This  was  all  true  with  the  Roman  government.  In  A.  D.
476,  the  Western  Empire  fell,  and  was  divided  into  ten
kingdoms  by  the  Goths,  Huns,  and  Vandals,  —  "France,
Britain,  Spain,  Portugal,  Naples,  Tuscany,  Austria,
Lombardy,  Rome,  and  Ravenna.  The  three  last  were
absorbed  in  the  territory  of  Rome,"  (E.  Irwin,)  and  be-
came the  States  of  the  Church,  governed  by  the  Papal
chair,  the  little  horn  that  had  eyes  and  a  mouth  that
spake  very  great  things,  whose  look  was  more  stout  than
his  fellows.  This  description  cannot  apply  to  any  other
power  but  the  church  of  Rome.  "Had  eyes,"  showing
that  they  made  pretence  at  least  to  be  the  household
of  faith;  "eyes"  meaning  faith,  and  "mouth  that  spake
very  great  things,"  showing  that  the  church  would  claim
infallibility;  "whose  look  would  be  more  stout  than  his
fellows,"  showing  that  he  would  claim  authority  over  all
other  churches,  or  even  the  kings,  the  other  horns.  See
Rev.  xvii.  18 :  "  And  the  woman  which  thou  sawest  is
that  great  city  which  reigneth  over  the  kings  of  the
earth."  That  the  little  horn  is  a  part  of  the  fourth
kingdom  is  evident,  for  it  was  to  come  up  among  the  ten
horns  which  were  upon  the  head  of  the  beast ;  and  there
cannot  be  a  shadow  of  a  doubt,  even  in  Scripture  itself.
but  that  Rome  is  meant  by  this  fourth  beast;  for  wha
power  but  the  Roman  will  answer  the  description  here
end  elsewhere  given  in  Daniel  ?    "I  beheld,  and  the


Christ's  second  coming.  47

same  horn  made   war  with  the  saints,  and  prevailed
against  them,  until  the  Ancient  of  days  came,  and  judg-
ment was  given  to  the  saints  of  the  Most  High  j  and  the
time   came   that  the    saints   possessed  the   kingdom."
Daniel  vii.  21,  22.     In  these  verses  we  are  taught  clearly
that  anti-Christ  will  prevail  over  the  church  of  Christ
until  the  first  resurrection  and  the  first  judgment,  when
the  saints  are  raised  and  judged,  which  utterly  destroys
the  modern  idea  of  a  temporal  millennium,  a  thousand
years  before  the  dead  are  raised  and  judged.     This  also
agrees  with  the  whole  tenor  of  Scripture  ;  as,  "judgment
must  first  begin  at  the  house  of  God,"  and  "  whom  he
shall  destroy  with  the  brightness  of  his  coming;"  when
the  Ancient  of  days  shall  come  in  the  clouds  of  heaven
with  power  and  great  glory,  "  to  give  reward  to  his  ser-
vants, the  prophets,  and  them  that  fear  his  name,  small
and   great,  and   destroy  them  who   destroy  the  earth,"
described  next  verse,  23.     "  Thus  he  said,  The  fourth
beast  shall  be  the  fourth  kingdom  upon  earth,  which
shall  be  diverse  from'  all  kingdoms,  and  shall  devour  the
whole  earth,  and  shall  tread  it   down   and  break  it  in
pieces.     And  the  ten  horns  out  of  this  kingdom  are  ten
kings  that  shall  arise  ;  and  another  shall  arise  after  them,
and  he  shall  be  diverse  from  the  first,  and  he  shall  sub-
due  three   kings.      And  lie   shall   speak   great  words
against  the  Most  High,  and  shall  wear  out  the  saints  of
the  Most  High,  and  think  to  change  times  and- laws  ;  and
they  shall  be  given  into  his  hand  until  a  time  and  times,,
and  the  dividing  of  time.     But  the  judgment  shall  sit,
and  they  shall  take  away  his  dominion  to-  consume  and
to  destroy  it  unto  the  end,"  24 — 26.     In  these  verses
we  have  the  history  of  the  fourth  beast,  or  Roman  power,
during  1260  years  of  the  close  of  this  kingdom,  which  1
shall,  in  some  future  lecture,  show  is  the  meaning  of
time,  times,  and  a  half.     We  have  also  another  clear  de-
scription of  the  Papal  power:   "He  shall  speak   great
words,"  &c.  —  the  blasphemies  against  God,  in  the  pre-
tensions  of  the  Roman  clergy  to  divine  power,  work-
ing of  miracles,  canonizing  departed  votaries,  changing
ordinances  and  laws  of  God's  house,  worshipping  saints
and  images,  and  performing  rites  and  ceremonies  too


48  LECTURE    III.

foolish  and  ridiculous  to  be  for  a  moment  indulged  in,
and  which  any  unprejudiced  mind  cannot  for  a  moment
believe  to  be  warranted  by  divine  rule,  or  example  of
Christ  or  his  apostles.  And  we  are  again  brought  down
to  the  time  when  the  judgment  shall  sit:  "And  the
kingdom,  and  the  dominion,  and  the  greatness  of  the
kingdom  under  the  whole  heaven,  shall  be  given  to  the
people  of  the  Most  High,  whose  kingdom  is  an  everlast-
ing kingdom,  (not  temporal,  as  some  say,  or  a  thousand
years,  but  an  immortal  and  eternal,)  and  all  dominions
shall  serve  and  obey  him."  It  is  very  evident  that  this
verse  brings  us  down  to  the  time  when  the  kingdom  of
Christ  will  be  complete  "in  the  greatness  of  the  king-
dom." Every  word  in  Scripture  has  a  meaning,  and  its
own  proper  meaning,  unless  used  figuratively,  and  then
explained  by  Scripture  itself.  "Hitherto  is  the  end  of
the  matter.  As  for  me  Daniel,  my  cogitations  mucfe.
troubled  me,  and  my  countenance  changed  in  me ;  but  .
kept  the  matter  in  my  heart"

This  ends  Daniel's  night  vision.  Two  years  after-
wards, in  the  year  553  before  Christ,  Daniel  vii.,  he  had
another  vision  in  the  day-time,  at  the  palace  of  Shushan,
like  the  one  which  we  have  just  described,  and  Nebu-
chadnezzar's dream.

"  Then  I  lifted  up  mine  eyes  and  saw,  and  behold,
there  stood  before  the  river  a  ram  which  had  two  horns,
and  the  two  horns  were  high ;  but  one  was  higher  than
the  other,  and  the  higher  came  up  last  I  saw  the  ram
pushing  westward,  and  northward,  and  southward,  so  that
no  beast  might  stand  before  him,  neither  was  there  any
that  could  deliver  out  of  his  hand;  but  he  did  according
to  his  will,  and  became  great."  In  the  20th  verse,  the
angel  Gabriel  explains  to  Daniel  what  kingdom  was  rep-
resented by  the  "  ram  with  two  horns,"  and  says,  "  The
ram  which  thou  sawest,  having  two  horns,  are  the  kings  i>
Media  and  Persia."  We  see  by  this  that  the  Chaldean
kingdom  is  left  out,  for  the  reason  that  that  kingdom  was
then  crumbling  to  ruin,  and  the  glory  of  the  Babylonish
kingdom  had  faded  :  therefore  he  now  begins  his  vision
with  the  Mede  and  Persian  kingdom,  and  that,  too,  when
at  the  height  of  their  power  and  conquests.    The  higher


Christ's  second  coming.  49

horn  denoted  the  Persian  line  of  kings,  under  and  follow-
ing- the  reign  of  Cyrus,  the  Persian,  son-in-law  to  Darius
the  Mede.     "  And  as  I  was  considering,  behold,  a  he-
goat  came  from  the  west,  on  the  face  of  the  whole  earth,
and  touched  not  the  ground ;  and  the  goat  had  a  nota-
ble horn  between  his  eyes."     In  the  21st  verse  the  an-
gel says,  "And  the  rough  goat  is  the  king  of  Grecia :
and  the  great  horn  that  is  between  his  eyes  is  the  first
king."     This  king  was  Alexander,  that  conquered  the
Persians.     He  was  not  the  first  king  of  Macedonia,  but
the  first  that  had  all  Grecia  under  his  control,  and  that
conquered  the  world.     "  And  he  came  to  the  ram  that
had  two  horns,  which  I  had  seen  standing  before  the
river,  and  ran  unto  him  in  the  fury  of  his  power.     And
I  saw  him  come  close  unto  the  ram,  and  he  was  moved
with  choler  against  him,  and  smote  the  ram,  and  brake
his  two  horns  ;   and  there  was  no  power  in  the  ram  to
stand  before  him,  but  he  cast  him  down  to  the  ground,
and  stamped  upon  him,  and  there  was  none  that  could
deliver  the  ram  out  of  his  hand.     Therefore  the  he-goat
waxed  very  great ;  and  when  he  was  strong,  the  great
horn  was  broken,  and  for  it  came  up  four  notable  ones,
towards  the  four  winds  of  heaven."     We  have  in  these
verses  a  plain  description  of  Alexander's  life,  conquests,
death,  and  division  of  his  kingdom  into  four  parts,  to-
wards the  four  points  of  heaven — Persia  in  the  east,  Syria
in  the  north,  Macedon  and  Europe  in  the  west,  Egypt
and  Africa  in  the  south.     And  the  angel,  when  he  gives
Daniel  instruction,  says,  22d  verse,  "Now  that  being
broken,  whereas  four  stood  up  for  it,  four  kingdoms  shall
stand  up  out  of  the  nation,  but  not  in  his  power."     Then
the  vision  seems  to  slide  down  to  the  little  horn.     "And
out  of  one  of  them  (that  is,  out  of  Europe)  came  forth  a  lit-
tle horn,  which  waxed  exceeding  great,  toward  the  south,
and  toward  the  east,  and  toward  the  pleasant  land.     And
it  waxed  great  even  to  the  host  of  heaven ;  and  it  cast
down  some  of  the  host  and  of  the  stars  to  the  ground,
and  stamped  upon  them.     Yea,  he  magnified  himself
even  to  the  prince  of  the  host,  and  by  him  the  daily  sac-
rifice was  taken  away,  and  the  place  of  his  sanctuary
was  cast  down,  and  a  host  was  given  him  against  the


50  LECTURE    III.

daily  sacrifice  by  reason  of  transgression,  and  it  cast
down  the  truth  to  the  ground,  and  it  practised  and  pros-
pered." Two  or  three  things  in  the  above  description
clearly  show  that,  by  the  little  horn,  in  this  passage,  we
are  to  understand  the  Roman  power,  viz.,  Its  conquering
to  the  south,  and  east,  and  pleasant  lands,  stamping  on
the  host,  magnifying  himself  against  Christ,  and  destroy-
ing Jerusalem,  the  place  of  his  sanctuary,  and  his  prac-
tising and  prospering.  All  this  description  agrees  with
the  history  of  Rome,  and  cannot  apply  to  Antiochus,  as
some  writers  have  supposed.  But  let  us  see  what  Ga-
briel says,  23:  "And  in  the  latter  time  of  their  kingdom,
(that  is,  the  four  kingdoms,)  when  the  transgressors  are
come  to  the  full,  a  king  of  fierce  countenance,  and  under-
standing dark  sentences,  shall  stand  up,  and  his  power
shall  be  mighty,  but  not  by  his  own  power ;  and  he  shall
destroy  wonderfully,  and  shall  prosper  and  practise,
and  shall  destroy  the  mighty  and  the  holy  people.  And
through  his  policy,  also,  he  shall  cause  craft  to  prosper  in
his  hand ;  and  he  shall  magnify  himself  in  his  heart,  and
by  peace  shall  destroy  many;  he  shall  also  stand  up
against  the  Prince  of  princes;  but  he  shall  be  broken
without  hand.  And  the  vision  of  the  evening  (in  the  first
year  of  Belshazzar,  Daniel  vii.)  and  the  morning  (in  the
third  year  of  Belshazzar,  Daniel  viii.)  which  was  told,  is
true ;  wherefore  shut  thou  up  the  vision,  for  it  shall  be
for  many  days."  How  many  days?  Our  text  answers,
"  Unto  two  thousand  three  hundred  days  ;  then  shall  the
sanctuary  be  cleansed.  And  it  came  to  pass,  when  I,
even  I,  Daniel,  had  seen  the  vision,  and  sought  for  the
meaning,  then,  behold,  there  stood  before  me  as  the  ap-
pearance of  a  man.  And  I  heard  a  man's  voice  between
the  banks  of  Ulai,  which  called  and  said,  Gabriel,  make
this  man  to  understand  the  vision.  So  he  came  near
where  1  stood,  and  when  he  came,  I  was  afraid,  and  fell
upon  my  face ;  but  he  said  unto  me,  Understand,  O  son
of  man,  for  at  the  time  of  the  end  shall  be  the  vision.
Now,  as  he  was  speaking  with  me,  I  was  in  a  deep  sleep
on  my  face  toward  the  ground ;  but  he  touched  me,  and
set  me  upright.  And  he  said,  behold,  I  will  make  thee
know  what  shall  be  in  the  last  end  of  the  indignation ;
for  at  the  time  appointed  the  end  shall  be."


Christ's  second  coming.  51

Then  comes  the  instruction  of  Gabriel,  which  we  have
before  given.

III.    Tlve  time  or  length  of  the  vision  —  the  2,300  days.

What  must  we  understand  by  days'?  In  the  prophecy
of  Daniel  it  is  invariably  to  be  reckoned  years  ;  for  God
hath  so  ordered  the  prophets  to  reckon  days.  Numb,
xiv.  34,  "  After  the  number  of  days  in  which  ye  searched
the  land,  even  forty  days,  each  day  for  a  year,  shall  you
bear  your  iniquities,  even  forty  years."  Ezek.  iv.  5, 6, "  For
I  have  laid  upon  thee  the  years  of  their  iniquity,  accord-
ing to  the  number  of  the  days,  three  hundred  and  ninety
days ;  so  shalt  thou  bear  the  iniquity  of  the  house  of  Is-
rael. And  when  thou  hast  accomplished  them,  lie  again
on  thy  right  side,  and  thou  shalt  bear  the  iniquity  of  the
house  of  Judah  forty  days;  I  have  appointed  thee  each
day  for  a  year."  In  these  passages  we  prove  the  com-
mand of  God.  We  will  also  show  that  it  was  so  called
in  the  days  of  Jacob,  when  he  served  for  Rachel,  Gen.
xxix.  27:  "Fulfil  her  week  (seven  days)  and  we  will  give
thee  this  also,  for  the  service  which  thou  shalt  serve  with
me  yet  other  seven  years."

Nothing  now  remains  to  make  it  certain  that  our  vis-
ion is  to  be  so  understood,  but  to  prove  that  Daniel  has
followed  this  rule.  This  we  will  do,  if  your  patience
will  hold  out,  and  God  permit

Now  turn  your  attention  to  the  ninth  chapter  of  Dan-
iel, and  you  will  there  learn  that  fifteen  years  after  Dan-
iel had  his  last  vision,  and  sixty-five  years  after  Daniel
explained  Nebuchadnezzar's  dream,  and  538  years  B.  C,
Daniel  set  his  face  unto  the  Lord  God  by  supplication  and
prayer ;  and  by  confession  of  his  own  sins,  and  the  sins
of  the  people  of  Israel,  he  sought  God  for  mercy,  for  him-
self and  all  Israel.  And  while  he  was  speaking  and
praying,  as  he  tells  us,  Daniel  ix.  21,  "  Yea,  while  I  was
speaking  in  prayer,  even  the  man  Gabriel,  Avhom  I  had
seen  in  the  vision  at  the  beginning,  Daniel  viii.  16,  17,
being  caused  to  fly  swiftly,  touched  me  about  the  time
of  the  evening  oblation.  And  he  informed  me  and  talked
with  me,  and  said,  O  Daniel,  1  am  now  come  forth  to  give
thee  skill  and  understanding.  At  the  beginning  of  thy
supplication  the  commandment  came  forth,  and  I  am


52  LECTURE    III.

come  to  show  thee  ;  for  thou  art  greatly  beloved  ;  there*
fore  understand  the  matter,  and  consider  the  vision*
Seventy  weeks  are  determined  upon  thy  people,  and
upon  thy  holy  city,  to  finish  the  transgression,  and  to
make  an  end  of  sins,  and  to  make  reconciliation  for  ini-
quity, and  to  bring  in  everlasting  righteousness,  and  to
seal  up  the  vision  and  prophecy,  and  to  anoint  the  Most
Holy.  Know,  therefore,  and  understand,  that  from  the
going  forth  of  the  commandment  to  restore  and  build
Jerusalem  unto  the  Messiah,  the  Prince,  shall  be  seven
weeks,  and  threescore  and  two  weeks;  the  street  shall
be  built  again,  and  the  wall,  even  in  troublous  times.
And  after  threescore  and  two  weeks  shall  Messiah  be
cut  off,  but  not  for  himself;  and  the  people  of  the  Prince
that  shall  come  shall  destroy  the  city  and  the  sanctuary ;
and  the  end  thereof  shall  be  with  a  flood,  and  unto  the
end  of  the  war  desolations  are  determined.  And  he  shall
confirm  the  covenant  with  many  for  one  week;  and  in
the  midst  of  the  week,  (or  last  half,  as  it  might  have
been  rendered,)  he  shall  cause  the  sacrifice  and  the  ob-
lation to  cease,  and  for  the  overspreading  of  abomination,
he  shall  make  it  desolate,  even  until  the  consummation,
and  that  determined  shall  be  poured  upon  the  desolate."
What  do  we  learn  from  the  above  passage  ?  We
learn  our  duty  in  prayer,  and  God's  goodness  in  an-
swering. We  learn  that  the  angel  Gabriel  was  sent  to
instruct  Daniel,  and  make  him  understand  the  vision.
You  may  inquire  what  vision  ?  I  answer,  The  one  Dan-
iel had  in  the  beginning,  for  he  has  had  no  other.  We
also  learn  that  seventy  weeks,  which  is  490  days,  (or
years,  as  we  shall  show,)  from  the  going  forth  of  a  certain
decree  to  build  the  streets  and  walls  of  Jerusalem  in
troublous  times,  to  the  crucifixion  of  the  Messiah  should
be  accomplished.  We  also  learn  that  this  seventy
weeks  is  divided  into  three  parts ;  seven  weeks  being
employed  in  building  the  streets  and  walls  in  troublous
times,  which  is  forty-nine  years,  sixty-two  weeks,  or
four  hundred  and  thirty-four  years  to  the  preaching  of
John  in  the  wilderness,  which  two,  put  together,  make
sixty-nine  weeks,  or  four  hundred  and  eighty-three
years,  and  one  week  the  gospel  was  preached ;  John


Christ's  second  coming.  53

three  and  a  half  years,  and  Christ  three  and  a  half
years,  which  makes  the  seventy  weeks,  or  four  hundred
and  ninety  years  ;  which,  when  accomplished,  would  seal
up  the  vision,  and  make  the  prophecy  true.  We  also
learn  that,  after  the  crucifixion  of  Christ,  the  Romans
would  come  and  destroy  the  city  and  sanctuary,  and
that  wars  will  not  cease  until  the  consummation  or  end
of  the  world.  "All  that  may  be  true,"  says  the  objector;
"but  where  have  you  proved  that  the  seventy  weeks
were  four  hundred  and  ninety  years  ?  "  I  agree  I  have
not  yet  proved  it,  but  will  now  do  it.

We  shall  again  turn  your  attention  to  the  Bible.
Look  at  Ezra  vii.  11 — 13  :  "Now  this  is  the  copy  of  the
letter  that  the  king-,  Artaxerxes,  gave  unto  Ezra,  the
priest,  the  scribe,  a  scribe  of  the  law  of  God :  perfect
peace,  and  at  such  a  time.  I  make  a  decree  that  all  they
of  the  people  of  Israel,  and  of  his  priests  and  Levites
in  my  realm,  which  are  minded  of  their  own  free  will
to  go  up  to  Jerusalem,  go  with  thee."  This  is  the
decree  given  when  the  walls  of  Jerusalem  were  built  in
troublous  times.  See,  also,  Neh.  iv.  17 — 23.  Ezra  and
Nehemiah  being  contemporary,  see  Neh.  viii.  1.  The
decree  to  Ezra  was  given  in  the  seventh  year  of  Ar-
taxerxes' reign,  Ezra  vii.  7,  and  that  to  Nehemiah  in  the
twentieth  year,  Neh.  ii.  1.  Let  any  one  examine  the
chronology,  as  given  by  Rollin  or  Josephus,  from  the
seventh  year  of  Artaxerxes  to  the  twenty-second  year
of  Tiberius  Cesar,  which  was  the  year  our  Lord
was  crucified,  and  he  will  find  it  was  four  hun-
dred and  ninety  years.  The  Bible  chronology  says
that  Ezra  started  to  go  up  to  Jerusalem  on  the  12th
day  of  the  first  month,  (see  Ezra  viii.  31,)  457  years
before  the  birth  of  Christ ;  he  being  33  when  he  died,
added  to  457,  will  make  490  years.  Three  of  the
evangelists  tell  us  he  was  betrayed  two  days  before  the
feast  of  the  passover,  and  of  course  was  the  same  day
crucified.  The  passover  was  always  kept  on  the  14th
day  of  the  fi*st  month  forever,  and  Christ  being  crucified
two  day3  before,  would  make  it  on  the  12th  day,  490
years  from  the  time  Ezra  left  the  river  Ahava  to  go
unto  Jerusalem.

5*


54  LECTURE     III.

If  this  calculation  is  correct,  —  and  I  think  no  one
can  doubt  it,  —  then  the  seventy  weeks  was  fulfilled  to  a
day  when  our  Savior  suffered  on  the  cross.  Is  not  the
seventy  weeks  fairly  proved  to  have  been  fulfilled  by
years  ?  And  does  not  this  prove  that  our  vision  and  the
2300  days  ought  to  be  so  reckoned  ?  Yes,  if  these  seventy
weeks  are  a  part  of  the  vision.  Does  not  the  angel  say
plainly,  I  have  come  to  show  thee ;  therefore  understand
the  matter,  and  consider  the  vision  ?  Yes.  Well,  what
can  a  man  ask  for  more  than  plain  positive  testimony,
and  a  cloud  of  circumstances  agreeing  with  it  ?

But  one  thing  still  remains  to  be  proved.  When  did
the  2300  years  begin  ?  Did  it  begin  with  Nebuchad-
nezzar's dream  ?  No.  For  if  it  had,  it  must  have  been
fulfilled  in  the  year  A.  D.  1697.  Well,  then,  did  it  be-
gin when  the  angel  Gabriel  came  to  instruct  Daniel
into  the  70  weeks  ?  No,  for  if  then,  it  would  have
been  finished  in  the  year  A.  D.  1762.  Let  us  begin  it
where  the  angel  told  us,  from  the  going  forth  of  the
decree  to  build  the  walls  of  Jerusalem  in  troublous
times,  457  years  before  Christ ;  take  457  from  2300,  and
it  will  leave  A.  D.  1843 ;  or  take  70  weeks  of  years,
being  490  years,  from  2300  years,  and  it  will  leave  1810
after  Christ's  death.  Add  his  life,  (because  we  begin
to  reckon  our  time  at  his  birth,)  which  is  33  years,  and
we  come  to  the  same  A.  D.  1843.

Now  let  us  examine  our  subject,  and  see  what  we
^have  learned  by  it  thus  far.     And,

I.  We  learn  that  there  are  two  abominations  spoken
of  by  Daniel.  The  first  is  the  Pagan  mode  of  worship,
which  was  performed  by  the  sacrificing  of  beasts  upon
altars,  similar  to  the  Jewish  rites,  and  by  which  means
the  nations  around  Jerusalem  drew  away  many  of  the
Jews  into  idolatry,  and  brought  down  the  heavy  judg-
ments of  God  upon  idolatrous  Israel ;  and  God  permit-
ted his  people  to  be  led  into  captivity,  and  persecuted  by
the  very  nations  that  they,  the  Jews,  had  been  so  fond  of
copying  after  in  their  mode  of  worship.  Therefore  were
the  sanctuary  and  place  of  worship  at  Jerusalem  trod-
den down  by  Pagan  worshippers  ;  and  the  altars,  erected
by  the  command  of  God,  and  according  to  the  pattern


Christ's  second  coming.  55

and  form  which  God  had  prescribed,  were  broken  down
and  more  fashionable  altars  of  the  heathen  erected  in
their  room.  Thus  were  the  commands  of  God  diso-
beyed, his  laws  perverted,  his  people  enslaved,  the
sanctuary  trodden  down,  and  the  temple  polluted,  until
at  last  God  took  away  the  Jewish  rites  and  ceremonies,
instituted  new  forms,  new  laws,  and  set  up  the  gospel
kingdom  in  the  world.

This,  for  a  season,  was  kept  pure  from  the  worldly
sanctuaries  and  policy  of  Satan.  But  Satan,  an  arch
enemy,  found  his  Pagan  abominations  could  have  but
little  or  no  effect  to  draw  the  followers  of  Christ  into
idolatry,  for  they  believed  the  bloody  rites  and  sac-
rifices had  their  fulfilment  in  Christ.  Therefore,  in
order  to  carry  the  war  into  the  Christian  camp,  he  suffers
the  daily  sacrifice  abomination  to  be  taken  out  of  the
way,  and  sets  up  Papacy,  which  is  more  congenial  to
the  Christian  mode  of  worship  in  its  outside  forms  and
ceremonies,  but  retaining  all  the  hateful  qualities  of
the  former.  He  persuades  them  to  erect  images  to
some  or  all  of  the  dear  apostles ;  and  even  to  Christ,
and  Mary,  the  "  Mother  of  God."  He  then  flatters  them
that  the  church  is  infallible.  (Here  was  a  strong  cord
by  which  he  could  punish  all  disputers.)  He  likewise
gives  them  the  keys  of  heaven,  (or  Peter,  as  they  call
it.)  This  will  secure  all  authority.  He  then  clothes
them  with  power  to  make  laws,  and  to  dispense  with
those  which  God  had  made.  This  capped  the  climax.
In  this  he  would  fasten  many  thousands  who  might
protest  against  some  of  his  more  vile  abominations  ;  yet
habit  and  custom  might  secure  them  to  a  willing  obe-
dience to  his  laws,  and  to  a  total  neglect  of  the  laws  of
God.  This  was  Satan's  masterpiece  ;  and,  as  Daniel  says,
"  he  would  think  to  change  times  and  laws,  and  they  should
be  given  into  his  hand  for  a  time,  times,  and  a  half;  but
they  shall  take  away  his  dominion  to  consume  and  de-
stroy it  unto  the  end."  Therefore,  when  this  last  abom-
ination of  desolation  shall  be  taken  away,  then  shall  the
sanctuary  be  cleansed.

II.  We  learn  that  the  vision  which  Daniel  saw  was
revealed  at  three  separate  times  —  1st.  In  Nebuchad-


56  LECTURE    III.

nezzar's  dream,  which  carried  us  down  through  four
great  kingdoms,  until  they  should  all  be  swept  away
like  the  chaff  of  the  summer  threshing-floor  before  the
wind,  and  no  place  found  for  them,  and  the  glorious  and
everlasting  kingdom  of  Christ  fill  the  whole  earth.  The
next  vision  Daniel  saw  was  similar  to  this ;  he  saw  four
great  beasts,  representing  four  great  kingdoms,  as  before
and  he  saw  the  fourth  beast  to  be  diverse  from  all  the
others,  dreadful  and  terrible,  and  exceedingly  strong ;
he  had  great  iron  teeth,  and  nails  of  brass,  which  de-
voured, brake  in  pieces,  and  stamped  the  people  of  God
and  the  whole  earth  under  foot.  This  beast  contained
the  two  abominations  which  we  have  before  spoken  of;
the  last,  under  the  figure  of  a  little  horn,  he  saw  until  all
these  thrones  were  cast  down,  till  the  little  horn  was
destroyed,  and  his  body  given  to  the  burning  flame.
Daniel  saw  until  the  Ancient  of  days  did  sit.  The  Son
of  Man  came  in  the  clouds  of  heaven,  and  came  to  the
Ancient  of  days.  He  saw  thousand  thousands  minis-
tering unto  him,  and  ten  thousand  times  ten  thousand
stood  before  him  ;  the  judgment  was  set,  and  the  books
were  opened.  He  saw  the  dominion,  and  glory,  and  king-
dom given  to  the  Son  of  Man,  and  to  the  people  of  the
saints  of  the  Most  High,  whose  kingdom  is  an  everlast-
ing kingdom.  In  the  third  vision,  which  Daniel  has
coupled  with  the  former,  by  saying  that  it  was  after  (or
like)  the  one  which  appeared  unto  him  at  the  first,  he
saw  the  three  last  kingdoms  ;  gave  a  particular  description
of  the  two  first,  even  naming  them  —  the  Medes  and
Persians,  and  the  Grecian.  He  then  gives  a  short
account  of  the  little  horn,  (having  given  a  more  general
view  of  the  fourth  kingdom  in  the  other  vision,)  how  he
would  cast  down  the  host  of  heaven,  and  the  stars,  and
stamp  upon  them ;  also  that  he  would  magnify  himself
against  the  Prince  of  the  host,  Jesus  Christ,  and  cast
down  the  place  of  his  sanctuary,  and  practise  and
prosper,  but  shall  be  broken  without  hands,  showing
that  the  stone  cut  out  without  hand  should  break  him  to
pieces.  Daniel,  then,  in  the  26th  verse,  couples  the
two  visions,  the  one  in  the  evening,  7th  chapter,  and
the  one  in  the  morning,  8th  chapter,  and  says,  "The


Christ's  second  coming.  57

vision  of  the  evening  and  morning,  which  was  told,  is
true."

III.  We  learn  that  this  vision  is  two  thousand  three
hundred  days  long;  that  days  are  to  be  reckoned  years
—  1st,  By  the  command  of  God  ;  2d,  By  the  example  of
Jacob  ;  and  3d,  By  the  fulfilment  of  the  seventy  weeks
of  this  vision,  at  the  crucifixion  of  the  Messiah.  We
learn  by  the  instruction  of  Gabriel  that  the  seventy
weeks  were  a  part  of  the  vision,  and  that  Daniel  was
commanded  to  begin  the  seventy  weeks  at  the  going
forth  of  the  decree,  to  build  the  streets  and  walls  of
Jerusalem  in  troublous  times ;  that  this  decree,  given  to
Ezra,  was  exactly  490  years,  to  a  day,  before  the  cruci-
fixion of  Christ ;  and  that  there  is  no  account,  by  Bible
or  any  historian,  that  there  was  ever  any  other  decree
to  build  the  streets  or  walls  of  Jerusalem.  We  think
the  proof  is  strong,  that  the  vision  of  Daniel  begins  457
years  before  Christ;  take  which  from 2300,  leaves  1843,
after  Christ,  when  the  vision  must  be  finished.  But  the
objector  may  say,  "  Perhaps  your  vision  does  not  begin
with  the  seventy  weeks."  Let  me  ask  two  or  three
questions.  Does  not  the  angel  say  to  Daniel,  ix.  23,
"  Therefore  understand  the  matter,  and  consider  the  vis-
ion "  ?  "  Yes."  Does  not  the  angel  then  go  on  and  give
his  instruction  concerning  the  seventy  weeks  ?  "  Yes."
Do  you  believe  the  Bible  is  true  ?  "  We  do."  Then  if
the  Bible  is  true,  Daniel's  70  weeks  are  a  part  of  the
vision,  and  490  years  were  accomplished  when  the
Mesiah  was  cut  off,  and  not  for  himself.  Then  1810
years  afterwards  the  vision  is  completed  ;  and  we  now
live  about  1803  years  after;  of  course  it  must  have
begun  within  seven  years  of  that  date.  But  it  is  very
reasonable  to  suppose  it  began  with  the  seventy  weeks ;
for  the  angel  said  it  would  establish  the  vision,  that  is,
make  it  sure ;  for  if  the  70  weeks  were  exactly  fulfilled
at  the  death  of  Christ,  then  would  the  remainder  be  in
1810  years  after,  which  would  be  fulfilled  A.  D.  1843,
as  we  have  before  shown.

And  now,  my  dear  hearer,  are  you  prepared  for  this
great  and  important  event?  Are  you  ready  for  the
judgment  to  set,  and  the  books  to  be  opened?   Let  this


58  LECTUTE     III.

subject  sink  deep  into  your  hearts ;  let  it  follow  you  to
your  bed-chambers,  to  your  fields,  or  your  shops.  Not
one  jot  or  tittle  of  the  word  of  God  shall  fail.  If  he
has  spoken,  it  will  come,  however  inconsistent  it  may
look  to  us.  Be  admonished,  then,  and  see  to  it  that  you
are  prepared.  Compare  the  vision  with  the  history  of
the  kingdom,  and  where  can  you  find  a  failure?  Not
one.  Then,  surely,  here  is  evidence  strong  that  the  re-
mainder will  be  accomplished  in  its  time,  and  that  time
but  seven  years.  Think,  sinner,  how  good  God  is  to
give  you  notice,  and  prove  it  a  thousand  fold.  Remem-
ber the  old  world ;  they  thought  Noah  was  a  maniac ;
but  the  flood  came,  and  they  were  reserved  in  chains
of  darkness  unto  the  judgment  of  the  great  day.  Re-
member the  cities  of  the  plain.  Lot  was  unto  them
like  one  that  mocked  ;  but  the  same  day  God  rained  fire
and  brimstone  upon  them,  and  they  are  suffering  the
vengeance  of  eternal  fire.  Be  warned,  then ;  fly  to  the
ark,  Christ  Jesus,  before  the  door  is  shut ;  escape  to  the
mountain  of  the  house  of  the  Lord  before  the  Lord
shall  rise  up  to  the  prey,  and  you  be  driven  away  in
your  wickedness.    Amen.


LECTURE    IV.


DANIEL  ix.  24.


Seventy  weeks  ore  determined  upon  thy  people,  and  upon  thy
holy  city,  to  finish  the  transgression,  ana  to  make  an  end  of
sins,  and  to  make  reconciliation  for  iniquity,  and  to  bring-  in
everlasting  righteousness,  and  to  seal  up  the  vision  and  prophe-
cy, and  to  anoint  the  Most  Holy.

Our  text  is  one  of  the  many  found  in  the  word  of
God,  which  prove  the  authenticity  of  the  Scriptures,
gives  us  a  powerful  weapon  against  Judaizing  teachers,
and  meets  the  infidel  on  his  own  ground  — the  history  of
the  world.

It  sets  a  seal  to  prophecy  that  it  is  true,  and  shows
that  the  prophets  were  inspired.

It  gives  incontestable  evidence  against  the  Jew,  and
proves  that  Jesus  of  Nazareth  was  the  true  Messiah.

It  unlocks  the  wonderful  vision  of  Daniel's  four  king-
doms ;  also  the  vision  of  the  ram,  the  he-goat,  and  the
little  horn.

It  brings  to  view  the  great  blessings  of  the  sacrifice
of  Jesus  Christ,  reveals  the  exact  time  of  its  accom-
plishment, and  shows  the  source  of  the  gospel,  pro-
claiming good  news  to  lost  man,  even  in  anticipation  of
that  important  era  when  the  Gentiles  should  be  fellow-
heirs  with  the  Jews  in  faith.

It  establishes  the  wavering,  and  gives  hope  and  con-
fidence to  the  tried  and  tempted  child  of  God,  that  he
will  fulfil  all  his  promises,  according  to  the  letter  and
spirit  of  his  word.

This  text  furnished  Simeon,  Anna,  Nathaniel,  and


60  LECTURE    IV.

others,  with  a  strong  faith  that  they  should  see  the  coil
solation  of  Israel.

By  this  text  the  high  priest  convinced  the  council
of  the  necessity  of  putting  to  death  Jesus.  "  Then
gathered  the  chief  priests  and  Pharisees  a  council,
and  said,  What  do  we  ?  for  this  man  doth  many  mira-
cles. If  we  let  him  thus  alone,  all  men  will  believe  on
him ;  and  the  Romans  will  come,  and  take  away  both
our  place  and  nation."

"And  one  of  them,  named  Caiaphas,  being  high  priest
that  same  year,  said  unto  them,  Ye  know  nothing  at  all,
nor  consider  that  it  is  expedient  for  us  that  one  man
should  die  for  the  people,  and  that  the  whole  nation  per-
ish not.  And  this  spake  he  not  of  himself,  (not  his  own
prophecy  ;)  but,  being  high  priest  that  year,  he  prophe-
sied (from  Daniel's  seventy  weeks  ;  for  there  is  not
another  prophecy  in  the  Old  Testament  which  shows
what  year  Christ  should  suffer)  that  Jesus  should  die
for  that  nation  ;  and  not  for  that  nation  only,  but  that,
also,  he  should  gather  together  in  one  the  children  of
God,  that  were  scattered  abroad,"  John  xi.  47 — 53.

The  high  priest  argues  that  Jesus  must  die  for  the
people.

The  seventy  weeks  shows  that  the  Messiah  must  be
cut  off  at  the  close  of  the  last  week,  and  not  for  himself.
Also  Peter  had  occasion  to  say  in  his  epistle, "  Of  which
salvation  the  prophets  have  inquired  and  searched  dili-
gently, who  prophesied  of  the  grace  that  should  come
unto  you,  searching  what,  or  what  manner  of  time,  the
spirit  of  Christ,  which  was  in  them,  did  signify,  when  it
testified  beforehand  the  sufferings  of  Christ  and  the
glory  that  should  follow,"  1  Peter  i.  10,  11.

Where  was  the  exact  time  of  Christ's  sufferings
prophesied  of  but  in  Daniel's  seventy  weeks  ?  Again,
to  this  Christ  alludes  when  he  says, "  My  time  is  not  yet
fully  come  ;"  and,  "Then  they  sought  to  take  him,  but
no  man  laid  hands  on  him,  because  his  hour  was  not  yet
come : "  that  is,  the  seventy  weeks  were  not  yet  ful-
filled, John  vii.  8,  30.  Mark  tells  us,  xiv.  41,  "The
hour  is  come ;  behold,  the  Son  of  Man  is  betrayed
into  the  hands  of  sinners."


Christ's  second  coming.  61

The  seventy  weeks  were  now  being1  fulfilled.  And
then,  at  last,  when  Jesus  had  completed  his  work,  when
the  fulness  of  time  had  come,  he  finished  transgression,
and  made  an  end  of  sin :  he  then  cried,  "  It  is  finished,
and  gave  up  the  ghost."  The  seventy  weeks  ended,  our
text  was  fulfilled ;  Christ  had  now  become  the  end  of
the  law  for  righteousness,  to  every  one  that  believeth ;
he  that  knew  no  sin  had  become  sin  for  us,  and  Death
had  struck  his  last  blow  that  he  would  ever  be  able  to
give  the  Son  of  God.  Daniel's  vision  is  now  made
sure  —  the  Messiah  cut  off,  the  time  proved  true,  as  given
by  the  prophet  Daniel.

Now,  ye  infidels,  can  this  be  priestcraft?  And,  ye
Judaizing  teachers,  is  not  this  the  Christ  ?  Why  look
ye  for  another  ?

I  shall  now  take  up  the  text  in  the  following  manner :

I.   I  shall  show  what  is  to  be  done  in  seventy  weeks.

TI.  When  the  seventy  weeks  began,  and  when  they
ended.

I.  The  text  tells  us,  "  Seventy  /weeks  are  determined
upon  thy  peoj)le  and  upon  thy  holy  city ; "  that  is,  upon
the  Jews,  who  then  were  the  people  of  Daniel,  and  also
in  Jerusalem,  which  then  was  called  the  "  holy  city."
The  first  question  which  would  naturally  arise  on  the
mind,  would  be,  What  for  to  do  ?  The  text  and  its  con-
text must  tell  us.

1st.  "  To  finish  the  transgression."  When  was  trans-
gression finished  ?  1  answer,  At  the  death  of  Christ,
See  Heb.  ix.  15,  "And  for  this  cause  he  is  the  Mediator
of  the  new  testament,  that  by  means  of  death,  for  the
redemption  of  the  transgressions  that  were  under  the
first  testament,  they  which  are  called  might  receive  the
promise  of  eternal  inheritance."  Isaiah  liii.  3,  "  For  he
was  cut  off  out  of  the  land  of  the  living ;  for  the  trans-
gression of  my  people  was  he  stricken."

2d.  "And  to  make  an  end  of  sins"  This  was  also
performed  at  his  death.  See  Heb.  ix.  26,  "But  now
once  in  the  end  of  the  world  hath  he  appeared,  to  put
away  sin  by  the  sacrifice  of  himself."  And  1  John  iii.
5,  "  Ye  know  that  he  (Christ)  was  manifested  to  take
away  our  sins."
6


62  LECTURE    IV.

3d.  "  And  to  make  reconciliation  for  iniquity"  Was
this  also  performed  at  his  death?  Yes.  See  Col.  i.
20,  "  And  having  made  peace  through  the  blood  of  his
cross,  by  him  to  reconcile  all  things  to  himself."  Heb.
ii.  17,  "  Wherefore  in  all  things  it  behooved  him  to  be
made  like  unto  his  brethren ;  that  he  might  be  a  mer-
ciful and  faithful  high  priest  in  things  pertaining  to  God,
to  make  reconciliation  for  the  sins  of  the  people."

4th.  "And  to  bring  in  everlasting  righteousness."
"  This  must  be  by  Christ's  obedience,"  says  the  objector,
"  and  cannot  be  at  his  death."  Not  so  fast,  dear  sir ;  let  us
hear  the  testimony.  Romans  v.  21,  "  That  as  sin  hath
reigned  unto  death,  even  so  might  grace  reign  through
righteousness  unto  eternal  life,  by  Jesus  Christ  our
Lord."  And,  "By  the  obedience  of  one  shall  many  be
made  righteous."  Again,  see  Phil.  ii.  8,  "  And  being
found  in  fashion  as  a  man,  he  humbled  himself  and  be-
came obedient  unto  death,  even  the  death  of  the  cross."
Paul  says,  "  I  do  not  frustrate  the  grace  of  God ;  for  if
righteousness  came  by  the  law,  then  Christ  is  dead  in
vain;"  evidently  showing,  that  by  Christ's  obedience
unto  death,  he  brought  in  everlasting  righteousness.

5th.  "  To  seal  up  the  vision  and  prophecy."  What
does  "  to  seal  up  "  mean  ?  I  answer,  It  means  to  make
sure,  certain,  unalterable.  Consult  Esther  iii.  12,  viii.
8.  Solomon  says,  "  Set  me  as  a  seal  upon  thine  heart,
as  a  seal  upon  thine  arm ; "  that  is,  make  me  sure  in
thy  love,  and  certain  by  thy  power.  John  says," "He
that  hath  received  his  testimony  hath  set  to  his  seal  that
God  is  true."  John  iii.  33.  Paul  to  Rome,  xv.  28,
"  When  I  have  performed  this,  and  sealed  to  them  this
fruit ; "  that  is,  made  sure  the  contributions.  Again,
to  Timothy,  2  Epistle,  ii.  19,  "  Nevertheless,  the  founda-
tion of  God  standeth  sure,  having  this  seal,  The  Lord
knoweth  them  that  are  his."  Therefore  the  death  of
Christ  would  make  Daniel's  vision  sure ;  for  if  a  part  of
the  vision  should  be  exactly  fulfilled,  as  to  time  and
manner,  then  the  remainder  of  the  vision  would  be  ac-
complished in  manner  and  time,  as  literally  as  the
seventy  weeks  had  been.

6th.  «  And  anoint  the  Most  Holy."     The  Most  Holy,


Christ's  second  coming.  63

in  this  passage,  must  mean  Christ ;  for  no  human  being
can,  or  ought  to  claim  this  appellation,  save  him  whom
God  hath  anointed  to  be  a  Savior  in  Israel,  and  a  King-
in  Zion.  See  Acts  x.  38,  "  How  God  anointed  Jesus
of  Nazareth  with  the  Holy  Ghost  and  with  power."
Also,  Acts  iv.  27,  "  For  of  a  truth  against  thy  holy  child
Jesus,  whom  thou  hast  anointed,  both  Herod  and  Pon-
tius Pilate,  with  the  Gentiles,  and  the  people  of  Israel,
were  gathered  together,  for  to  do  whatsoever  thy
hand  and  thy  counsel  determined  before  to  be  done."
Heb.  i.  9,  "  Therefore  God,  even  thy  God,  hath  anointed
thee  with  the  oil  of  gladness  above  thy  fellows."

It  will  next  be  requisite  to  inquire,  When  was  Christ
anointed  ?

I  answer,  When  the  Holy  Ghost  descended  upon  him,
and  when  he  was  endued  with  power  from  on  high  to
work  miracles.  See  Isa.  lxi.  1,  "The  Spirit  of  the  Lord
God  is  upon  me ;  because  the  Lord  hath  anointed  me  to
preach  good  tidings  unto  the  meek :  he  hath  sent  me  to
bind  up  the  broken-hearted,  to  proclaim  liberty  to  the
captives,  and  the  opening  of  the  prison  to  them  that  are
bound."

After  Christ  was  baptized  by  John,  and  after  being
tempted  of  the  devil  forty  days  in  the  wilderness,  he
went  in  the  spirit  into  Galilee,  and  on  the  Sabbath  day
he  went  into  the  synagogue,  as  his  custom  was,  and  he
stood  up  to  read.  They  gave  him  the  book  of  Isaiah.
When  he  opened  the  book  he  found  the  passage  which
I  have  just  quoted.  After  reading  it  he  shut  up  the
book  and  sat  down.  He  then  began  to  say  unto  them,
"  This  day  is  this  scripture  fulfilled  in  your  ears,"  Luke
iv.  1 — 21.  This  passage  plainly  proves  that  Christ  was
anointed  on  or  before  this  day.

Other  things  were  to  be  done  in  the  seventy  weeks,
such  as,  The  cutting  off  of  the  Messiah,  but  not  for
himself.  This  can  mean  nothing  less  than  the  cruci-
fixion of  Christ.  See  Luke  xxiv.  26,  46,  "  Ought  not
Christ  to  have  suffered  these  things,  and  to  enter  into
his  glory  ?  "  "  Thus  it  is  written,  and  thus  it  behooved
Christ  to  suffer,  and  to  rise  from  the  dead  the  third  day."
Rom.  v.  6,  "  For  when  we  were  without  strength,  in  due


04  LECTURE     IV.

time  (or  according  to  the  time  of  seventy  weeks)  Christ
died  for  us."

"  And  he  (Messiah)  shall  confirm  the  covenant  with
many  for  one  week."  What  covenant  is  this  to  be  con-
firmed? I  answer,  It  cannot  be  the  Jewish  covenant,
for  that  was  confirmed  by  Moses  many  hundred  years
before  Daniel  lived.  There  being  but  two  covenants,
it  must  of  necessity  be  the  new  covenant  of  which
Christ  is  the  Mediator ;  Moses  having  been  the  media-
tor of  the  old,  and  Christ  afterwards  of  the  new.  If
these  things  are  so,  and  the  gospel  covenant  is  meant
by  Daniel,  then  the  time  the  gospel  was  preached  by
John  and  Christ  is  here  called  a  week ;  for  Christ  him-
self preached  more  than  seven  days.  Christ  kept  three
passovers  with  the  Jews  after  he  began  his  ministry,
and  oefore  he  nailed  the  ceremonial  law  to  his  cross.
This  is  strong  evidence  that  a  week  is  seven  years,  and
that  Daniel's  70  weeks  are  to  be  understood  as  meaning
490  years.  *

Again,  "  In  the  midst  of  the  week  he  should  cause
the  sacrifice  and  oblation  to  cease,"  or,  as  all  Hebrew
scholars  agree,  "  In  the  last  half  of  the  week,"  &c,  is
the  more  proper  translation ;  and  it  is  evident  that  this
translation  would  harmonize  with  the  other  parts  of  the
passage,  "  the  sacrifice  and  oblation  to  cease."

What  sacrifice  and  offering  is  this,  which  the  Messiah
was  to  cause  to  cease  ?  I  answer,  It  must  of  course  be
that  one  offering  and  sacrifice  for  sin  of  which  all  other
offerings  and  sacrifices  were  but  types.  It  could  not
be  the  Jewish  sacrifices  and  offerings,  for  two  good
reasons.

1st.  This  is  but  one  sacrifice,  and  the  Jews  had  many.
It  does  not  say  sacrifices ;  therefore  it  cannot  mean
Jewish  sacrifices,  nor  offerings.

2d  reason.  The  Jewish  sacrifices  and  offerings  did  not
cease  in,  nor  even  very  nigh,  the  last  half  of  the  week
in  which  the  Messiah  confirmed  the  covenant  with  many;
and,  even  to  the  present  day,  they  make  oblations,  if  not
sacrifices.  It  must  mean  that  sacrifice  and  oblation
which  the  Messiah  was  to  make  to  God  for  sin,  once  for
all.    It  must  mean  that  sacrifice  which  is  the  antetypo


Christ's  second  coming.  G5

of  all  the  legal  sacrifices  from  the  days  of  Abel  to  the
days  of  the  Messiah.  Let  us  hear  what  Paul  says,  Heb.
vii.  27,  "  Who  needeth  not  daily,  as  those  high  priests,
to  offer  up  sacrifice,  first  for  his  own  sins,  and  then  for
the  people's ;  for  this  he  did  once  when  he  offered  up
himself."

See  also  Heb.  x.  11,  12.  "  And  every  priest  standeth
daily  ministering,  and  offering  oftentimes  the  same  sacri-
fices, which  can  never  take  away  sins ;  but  tliis  man,
after  he  had  offered  one  sacrifice  for  sins,  forever  sat
down  on  the  right  hand  of  God."  Many  more  passages
might  be  brought  to  show  that  all  sacrifices  and  obla-
tions which  could  take  away  sin,  or  in  which  God  the
Father  could  be  well  pleased,  ceased  in  Christ's  one
sacrifice  aud  oblation.  But  I  have  given  enough  to  sat-
isfy every  candid,  unprejudiced  mind ;  therefore  I  shall,

II.  Try  to  prove  when  the  seventy  weeks  began,  and
when  they  ended.

yiie  angel  Gabriel  tells  Daniel,  ix.  25,  "  Know,  there-
fore, and  understand,  that,  from  the  going  forth  of  the
commandment  to  restore  and  to  build  Jerusalem,  unto
the  Messiah,  the  Prince,  shall  be  seven  weeks,  and  three-
score and  two  weeks ;  the  street  shall  be  built  again,
and  the  wall,  even  in  troublous  times."

In  this  passage  we  have  a  plain  declaration  when  the
seventy  weeks  began :  "  from  the  going  forth  of  the
commandment."  But  what  commandment  ?  we  may
inquire.  I  answer,  A  command  that  will  finally  restore
the  Jews  from  their  captivity  under  which  they  then
were  held  in  bondage  ;  also  to  prepare  the  way  for  them
to  rebuild  their  city,  repeople  the  same,  and  raise  up
the  decayed  walls,  settle  the  streets,  and  cleanse  the
city  of  Jerusalem;  and  these  things  would  be  done  in
troublous  times.  So  much  is  expressed  or  implied  in
the  declaration  of  Gabriel,  which  I  have  just  quoted.

Who  would  give  the  command  ?  i3  the  next  question.
I  answer,  It  must  be  a  king  who  had  power  over  the
Jews  to  release  and  restore  them.  It  must  of  necessity
be  a  king  over  the  Medes  and  Persians,  or  it  would  not
be  in  agreement  with  the  vision  in  the  8th  chapter  of
Daniel ;  for  he  is  expressly  told  by  Gabriel  that  the  ram
6*


66  LECTURE    IV.

he  saw,  and  which  was  the  first  thing  he  did  see  in  the
vision,  were  the  kings  of  Media  and  Persia.  And  now
this  same  angel  Gabriel  has  come  the  second  time,  and
tells  Daniel,  plainly  and  distinctly,  that  he  has  come  to
make  him  "  understand  the  vision."  What  vision  ?  The
one  Daniel  had  in  the  beginning,  in  the  8th  chapter.
See  Daniel  ix.  21—23.

Then  Gabriel  begins  his  instructions  by  giving  him
seventy  Aveeks  of  the  vision,  and  then  shoAvs  him,  verse
24,  when  his  seventy  weeks  begin  ;  or,  which  is  the
same  thing,  "  the  vision.'1''  To  read  and  understand  the
matter  thus  far,  infidelity  itself  must  blush  to  deny  the
premises.

Then,  if  we  have  settled  this  question,  the  next  ques
tion  would  be,  Which  king  of  Persia,  and  what  com-
mandment ?  I  answer,  It  must  be  the  fifth  king  of  Persia
noted  in  the  Scripture  of  truth ;  for  the  angel  Gabriel,
the  third  time  he  visited  Daniel  to  give  him  skill  and
understanding  into  "  tlie  vision,"  says,  "  But  I  will  show
thee  that  which  is  noted  in  the  scripture  of  truth,"  Dan.
x.  2.1.  This  shows  that  he  was  instructing  Daniel  into
a  vision  which  he  before  had  seen,  and  written  in  the
Scriptures.  See  Dan.  vii.  1,  "  Then  he  wrote  the
dream,  and  told  the  sum  of  the  matters."  Dan.  x.  14,
"  Now  I  am  come  to  make  thee  understand  what  shall
befall  thy  people  in  the  latter  days ;  for  yet  the  vision  is
for  many  days."  What  vision  ?  The  one  noted  in  the
Scripture  of  truth,  says  Gabriel.  Then,  in  Dan.  xi.  2,
he  begins  his  instruction  to  him  of  the  vision,  which  he
was  commanded  by  the  voice  between  the  banks  of  Ulai
to  make  him  understand,  by  saying,  "  And  now  will  I
show  thee  the  truth.  Behold,  there  shall  stand  up  yet
three  kings  in  Persia ;  and  the  fourth  shall  be  far  richer
than  they  all,"  This  fourth  king  was  the  ram  pushing,
and  was  the  fifth  king  of  Persia,  being  the  fourth  from
Cyrus,  who  was  then  standing  up.     See  Dan.  x.  1.

The  kings,  as  Ezra  has  named  them  in  his  4th  chap-
ter and  7th  chapter,  were,  1st,  Cyrus;  2d,  Ahasuerus;
3d,  Artaxerxes,  (the  first ;)  4th,  Darius  ;  5th,  Artaxerxes
(Longimanus ;)  this  last  being  the  king  who  gave  a  com-
mandment to  Ezra  to  restore  all  the  captive  Jews  who
were  willing  to  go  to  Jerusalem.


Christ's  second  coming.  67

What  commandment  ?  is  our  next  question  to  answer.
The  decree  given  by  Cyrus  (see  Ezra  i.  1 — 11)  cannot
be  the  decree  meant  by  the  angel,  for  the  four  following
reasons : —

1st.  Cyrus  was  the  first  king  of  Persia,  and  of  course
cannot  be  the  fifth  king,  as  we  have  already  shown.

2d  reason.  The  decree  of  Cyrus  was  two  years  be-
fore the  angel  gave  his  last  instruction  to  Daniel,  and
he  would  not  have  spoken  of  it  as  being  future,  if  it  had
already  passed :  "  There  shall  yet  stand  up  three  kings,"
&c.

3d  reason.  Cyrus's  decree  was  not  given  to  build
Jerusalem,  but  "  the  house  of  God  which  was  at  Jerusa-
lem ; "  neither  were  the  walls  built  in  troublous  times,
under  the  decree  by  Cyrus.

4th  reason.  This  decree  by  Cyrus  was  given  536
years  before  the  birth  of  Christ,  or  569  years  before  his
death.  Therefore  no  rules  of  interpretation  given  in
the  Scriptures  could  possibly  show  how  those  tilings
were  accomplished  in  seventy  weeks,  which  Gabriel
has  shown,  in  our  text  and  context,  were  determined  to
be  done.  This,  then,  cannot  be  the  commandment,  and
harmonize  with  either  Bible  or  facts.

Again:  the  decree  given  by  Darius,  Ezra  vi.  1 — 14,
cannot  be  the  commandment  to  which  the  angel  alluded,
for  the  same  reasons  we  have  shown  that  Cyrus's  decree
could  not  be  the  one  ;  for  this  was  only  a  renewal  of  the
former,  and  this  decree  was  issued  552  years  before
Christ's  death.

The  next  decree  or  command  of  any  king  of  Persia
we  find  in  the  seventh  year  of  Artaxerxes  (Longima-
nus.)  See  Ezra  vii.  6 — 28.  In  this  decree  we  find  the
last  command  of  any  king  of  Persia  to  restore  the  cap-
tive Jews.  We  learn  that,  in  this  decree,  the  king  fur-
nished them  with  money  and  means  to  beautify  and
adorn  the  temple  which  had  been  built  by  Darius's  crder
a  number  of  years  before.  We  find  that  the  interdict,
Ezra  iv.  21,  in  which  the  Jews  were  commanded  not  to
build  Jerusalem,  is  now  removed  by  its  own  limitation,
"  until  another  commandment  be  given  from  me."  *]  rrs
decree,  therefore,  took  off  this  command.     We  learr  cy


tJ9  LECTURE    IV.

Ezra's  prayer,  ix.  9,  that  Ezra  understood  that  the  decree
to  which  we  allude  did  give  them  the  privilege  of  build-
ing, in  Judah  and  Jerusalem,  the  wall  which  had  been
broken  down.  After  Ezra  had  been  high  priest  and
governor  in  Jerusalem  thirteen  years,  Nehemiah  was
permitted  to  go  up  to  assist  Ezra  in  building  Jerusalem
and  repairing  the  walls ;  which  was  done  in  troublous
times,  under  Nehemiah's  administration,  which  lasted  in
all  39  years.  See  Nehemiah,  4th  to  the  7th  chapter
Ezra  and  Nehemiah,  both  of  them  having  served  as  gov-
ernors 49  years.

Here,  then,  we  find  the  fulfilment  of  what  the  angel
told  Daniel  would  be  done  under  the  command  that
would  begin  the  seventy  weeks,  and  which  is  the  same
thing  —  " the  vision"  This  decree  was  given  457  years
before  Christ:  the  seventy  weeks  began,  and  if  they
ended  at  the  death  of  Christ,  which  we  have  proved  did
end  them,  then  the  seventy  weeks  ended  after  Christ  33
years,  making,  in  all,  490  years,  which  is  70  weeks  of
years.

But  it  is  evident  that  Gabriel  has  divided  the  seventy
weeks  into  three  parts,  and  I  think  clearly  explains  the
use  of  this  division.

"  Shall  be  seven  weeks,  and  threescore  and  two
weeks."  Then,  as  if  you  should  inquire,  What  is  seven
weeks  for  ?  he  explains,  "  The  street  shall  be  built
again,  and  the  wall,  even  in  troublous  times."  Ezra  and
Nehemiah  were  49  years,  or  seven  weeks  of  years,  per-
forming these  very  things,  which  ended  before  Christ
408.  See  large  edition  of  Polyglot  Bible.  What  is
sixty-two  weeks  for  ?  The  angel  has  already  told  us,
°  Unto  the  Messiah,  the  Prince ; "  that  is,  to  the  time
Christ  was  anointed  to  preach,  the  meaning  of  Messiah.
Sixty-two  weeks  are  434  days ;  or  weeks  of  years  would
be  434  years,  which,  beginning  where  the  seven  weeks
ended,  408,  would  end  26  years  after  Christ,  the  year
John  began  to  preach  as  forerunner  of  Christ.  Then
"  he  shall  confirm  the  covenant  with  many  for  one  week,"
making  in  all  the  seventy  weeks.  Thus  the  seven
weeks  ended  with  the  administration  of  Nehemiah,  B.
C.  408.    Then  the  sixty-two  weeks  ended  when  John


Christ's  second  coming.  €3

began  to  preach  the  gospel,  A.  D.  26;  and  the  one
week  was  fulfilled  in  A.  D.  33,  when  Christ  offered  him-
self upon  the  cross,  as  an  offering  and  sacrifice  for  sin^
"by  which  offering  we  are  sanctified  once  for  all."  For
he  need  not  offer  himself  often,  as  the  high  priest  did,
under  the  law.  "  But  now,  once  in  the  end  of  the  world,
hath  he  appeared  to  put  away  sin  by  the  sacrifice  of  him-
self." Heb.  ix.  26,  Therefore,  "  he  shall  cause  the  sac-
rifice and  oblation  to  cease."  That  is  the  only  and  last
sacrifice  and  oblation  that  will  be  ever  offered  in  our
world,  which  can  take  away  sin;  "for  there  remaineth,"
says  the  apostle,  "  no  more  sacrifice  for  sin."  Then  let
rne  inquire,  What  is  the  sum  of  the  instruction  of  the  an-
gel to  Daniel?  I  will  sum  it  up  in  as  few  words  as
I  can.

After  Daniel  had  a  certain  vision,  commonly  called
"  the  vision  of  the  ram,  the  he-goat,  and  the  little  horn,"
Daniel  heard  one  saint  inquire  of  another,  how  long  that
vision  should  be.  The  answer  was  given  Daniel,  that
it  should  be  unto  2300  days,  when  the  sanctuary  should  be
cleansed  or  justified.  Daniel  then  heard  a  man's  voico
between  the  banks  of  Ulai,  which  called  and  said,  Ga-
briel, make  this  man  to  understand  the  vision.  Accord-
ingly, Gabriel  came  to  Daniel,  and  informed  him  that  at
the  end  of  the  world,  or  time  appointed  of  God,  the  vis-
ion should  be  fulfilled.  He  then  tells  him  that  the  ram
represented  the  Mede  and  Persian  kingdom  ;  and  that
the  rough  goat  represented  the  Grecian  kingdom  ;  gives
a  short  history  of  that  kingdom,  and  its  four  divisions ;
then  shows,  at  the  close  of  these  kingdoms,  that  another
king  would  arise,  (meaning  the  kingdom  of  the  little
horn,  or  Roman,)  describing  him  exactly  as  Moses  had
described  the  Romans  many  centuries  before.  See  Deu-
teronomy xxviii.  49,  50.  "The  Lord  shall  bring  a  na-
tion against  thee  from  far,  from  the  end  of  the  earth,  as
swift  as  the  eagle  flieth ;  a  nation  whose  tongue  thou
shalt  not  understand ;  a  nation  of  fierce  countenance."
This,  no  person  will  dispute,  means  the  Romans.  Theo
why  not  a  similar  description  in  Daniel,  viii.  23  ?  "  When
the  transgressors  (meaning  the  Jews)  are  come  to  the
full,  a  king  of  fierce  countenance,  and  understanding


70  LECTURE    IV.

dark  sentences,  shall  stand  up,  and  his  power  shall  be
mighty,  but  not  by  his  own  power;  and  he  shall  destroy
wonderfully,  and  shall  prosper  and  practise,  and  shall
destroy  the  mighty  and  the  holy  people."

I  think  the  reader,  divested  of  prejudice,  cannot  ap-
ply the  description  given  in  the  above  quotation  to  any
other  nation  but  the  ftomans.  "  And  through  his  policy,
lie  shall  cause  craft  to  prosper  in  his  hand."  This  de-
scription agrees  with  Paul'  s  man  of  sin,  the  mystery  of
iniquity  which  worked  in  his  day,  and  which  would  be
destroyed  by  the  brightness  of  Christ's  coming.  See  2
Thess.  ii.  3—8.  "  So  that  he,  as  God,  sitteth  in  the
temple  of  God,  showing  himself  that  he  is  God."  Ga-
briel says,  "  And  he  shall  magnify  himself  in  his  heart,
and  by  peace  shall  destroy  many ;  he  shall  also  stand  up
against  the  Prince  of  princes ; "  that  is,  against  God ;
the  very  same  character  which  Paul  has  described.  "  But
he  shall  be  broken  without  hand,"  that  is,  "by  the  bright-
ness of  his  (Christ's)  coming,"  as  says  Paul.  But  as  Dan-
iel has  said,  "  By  the  stone  cut  out  of  the  mountain  with-
out hand ;"  or,  as  he  says,  Daniel  vii.  21,  22,  "I  beheld,
and  the  same  horn  made  war  with  the  saints,  and  pre-
vailed over  them,  until  the  Ancient  of  days  came,  and
judgment  was  given  to  the  saints  of  the  Most  High ;  and
the  time  came  that  the  saints  possessed  the  kingdom."

After  Gabriel  had  instructed  Daniel  thus  far,  he  left
him.  Sixteen  years  afterwards,  Gabriel  came  again  to
Daniel,  and  informed  him  that  he  had  come  to  instruct
him,  and  give  him  skill  and  understanding  into  the  vis-
ion, of  which  we  have  been  speaking.  He  then  gives
him  the  seventy  weeks,  shows  what  would  be  accom-
plished in  that  time,  the  cutting  off  of  the  Messiah,  and
the  ceasing  of  the  sacrifice  and  oblation.  He  men-
tions the  destruction  of  Jerusalem,  and  the  war  of  the
little  horn ;  the  desolation  of  the  people  of  God,  and
overspreading  of  abominations.  He  carries  us  to  the
consummation,  destruction  of  the  little  horn,  called  here
the  desolator.  See  marginal  reading.  Gabriel,  after
giving  the  history  of  the  seventy  weeks,  dwells  not  in
detail  on  the  remainder  of  the  vision,  but  reserves  a  more
detailed  account  for  the  next  visit, which  is  given  untc


Christ's  second  coming.  71

us  in  the  10th  to  the  12th  chapter  of  Daniel  inclu-
sive.

But  the  seventy  weeks,  of  which  we  are  more  partic-
ularly speaking-,  the  angel  Gabriel  has  told  us  Avhen
it  began  :  at  the  going  forth  of  the  commandment  to  re-
store and  build  Jerusalem,  &c.  We  have  found  no  com-
mand that  will  apply  in  all  its  bearings,  but  the  one  given
to  Ezra,  which  was  given  in  the  457th  year  before  the
birth  of  Christ :  and  33  years  afterwards  Christ  was  cru-
cified; which  two  numbers,  if  added,  make  490  years,
exactly  seventy  weeks  of  years.  We  learn  that  Gabriel,
in  order  to  make  the  vision  doubly  sure,  divides  the
seventy  weeks  into  three  parts,  seven,  sixty-two,  and
one,  making  in  all  seventy.  He  then  tells  us  plainly
what  would  be  accomplished  in  each  part  separately.

1st.  Seven  weeks.  "  The  street  shall  be  built  again,
and  the  wall,  even  in  troublous  times."  No  man  can
dispute  but  that  this  was  accomplished  under  the  ad-
ministration of  Ezra  and  Nehemiah.  And  it  is  very
evident  that  these  two  were  governors  over  J  erusalem
49  years,  which  makes  the  seven  weeks  of  years,  and
carries  us  down  the  stream  of  time  to  the  year
408  B.  C.

2d.  Sixty-two  weeks.  "  Unto  the  Messiah,  the
Prince;"  that  is,  unto  the  time  that  Jesus  was
anointed  with  the  Holy  Spirit  and  power  to  preach
the  gospel,  either  in  himself  or  forerunner  John.  See
Mark  i.  1.  Sixty-two  weeks  of  years  would  be  434
years.  This  would  carry  us  down  to  twenty-six  years
after  Christ's  birth,  and  brings  us  to  the  very  year  of
"the  beo-inning  of  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ,  the  son
of  God."     Marki.  1.

3d.  One  week.  "  He  shall  confirm  the  covenant  with
many  for  one  week."  One  week  would,  of  course,  be
seven  years,  which,  added  to  twenty-six,  would  make
thirty-three  years  after  Christ.  Here,  too,  we  find  an
exact  and  literal  accomplishment  of  the  angel's  declara-
tion. The  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ  preached  by  John
three  and  a  half  years,  and  by  Christ  three  and  a  half
years,  making  seven  years,  called  one  week,  and  then
Messiah  cut  off,  and  not  for  himself,  Christ  crucified,


72  LECTURE    IV.

ends  the  seventy  weeks,  proves  Daniel's  prophecy  true,
establishes  the  vision,  confounds  the  Jew,  confutes  the
infidel,  and  ought  to  establish  the  mind  of  every  be-
liever in  the  remainder  of  the  vision.

Here,  then,  is  a  combination  of  facts  and  circum-
stances, together  with  dates  and  times,  which  throws
upon  the  mind  such  strong  array  of  testimony,  that  it
would  seem  no  rational  being  could  withstand  the  proof
And  methinks  I  hear  some  say,  Why  all  this  argument  ?
Wo  one  but  a  Jew  ever  disputed,  but  that  the  seventy
weeks  were  fulfilled  at  the  death  of  Christ,  and  that  a
day  in  this  prophecy  was  a  figure  of  a  year.

1  should  not  have  been  thus  particular,  and  have  tres-
passed so  much  on  your  time  to  prove  a  given  point  in
Christendom,  had  1  not  recently  met  with  more  than  one
Christian  professor,  and  even  teachers  in  Zion,  who  deny
that  the  seventy  weeks  ended  with  the  death  of  Christ,
or  that  a  day  in  this  prophecy  means  a  year.  Some  have
gone  so  far  in  infidelity  as  to  deny  that  "  Most  Holy,"  in
our  text,  and  "  Messiah,"  in  our  context,  means  Christ
This  surely  would  make  a  Jew  blush.  I  agree  that  1
never  anticipated  that  any  objection  could  be  raised  on
those  points,  without  a  wilful  perversion  of  language,
and  a  total  disregard  of  the  word  of  God.

But  man,  in  his  fallen  state,  is  an  unaccountable,
strange  being ;  if  his  favorite  notions  are  crossed,  he
will,  to  avoid  conclusions,  deny  even  his  own  senses^
Therefore  it  becomes  necessary  for  me  to  prove,  what
has  been  considered  by  many,  even  of  the  objectors
themselves  in  previous  time,  given  points  in  theology.

It  is  not  more  than  four  years  since  many  of  the
clergy  and  D.D.'s  in  the  city  of  New  York  met  a  dele-
gation of  the  Jewish  patriarchs  from  the  East,  and  in
their  conference  the  clergy  and  doctors  brought  forward
the  seventy  weeks  in  Daniel,  as  proof  positive  of  Jesus
of  Nazareth  being  the  true  Messiah.  They  explained
the  seventy  weeks  in  the  same  manner  I  have  to  you,
and  asked  the  Jews  how  they  could  avoid  the  conclu-
sion? and  I  understood  they  could  get  no  answer.
Now,  suppose  these  same  clergy  and  D.D.'s  should
meet  me  on  the  question  now  pending ;  I  should  not  be


Christ's  second  coming.  73

greatly  disappointed  if  they  should  deny  my  premises.
«  Why  would  they  do  thus  ?  "  say  you.  I  answer,  For  the
same  reason  that  the  lawyer  hesitated,  when  he  learned
that  it  was  his  bull  that  gored  the  farmer's  ox.

"  But  might  we  not  understand  the  seventy  weeks  to  be
so  many  literal  weeks,  that  is,  490  common  days  ?  "  say
you.  I  answer,  If  so,  then  the  command  to  build  Jeru-
salem must  have  been  given  only  a  year  and  a  third
before  Christ's  death ;  and  it  would  have  been  very
improper  for  Gabriel  to  have  said,  "  Unto  the  Messiah,
the  Prince,  shall  be  seven  weeks,  and  threescore  and
two  weeks,"  when  he  had  already  come,  and  had  been
preaching  more  than  two  years  before  the  weeks  began.
No,  my  friends ;  every  reasonable  controversialist  must
acknowledge  there  is  no  possible  way  to  get  rid  of
our  conclusion  but  to  deny  that  Most  Holy,  and
Messiah,  means  Christ,  in  our  text  and  context  And
I  pity,  and  leave  the  man  in  the  hands  of  him  who
knows  all  hearts,  that  is  forced  on  to  ground  so  un-
tenable as  this.

If  I  have  got  a  right  understanding  of  the  seventy
weeks,  that  a  day  stands  for  a  year,  —  and  I  have  never
been  able  to  find  a  Christian  expositor  who  disagrees
with  me  on  this  point,  either  modern  or  ancient,  —  then
the  conclusion  is,  as  far  as  I  can  see,  unavoidable,  that
the  vision  of  Daniel  is  2300  years  long,  and  that  the
490  years  before  Christ's  death  is  not  only  the  key  to
unlock  the  commencing  of  the  vision,  but  shows  con-
clusively how  and  when,  and  manner  and  time,  the  king-
doms of  this  world  will  be  broken  to  pieces  and  carried
away,  and  no  place  found  for  them,  by  the  stone  which
will  become  a  great  mountain  and  fill  the  whole  earth.

For  the  seventy  weeks  must  seal  up  the  vision  and
make  the  prophecy  of  Daniel  true.  Then,  if  2300  days
is  the  length  of  the  vision,  and  490  days  of  that  vision
were  fulfilled  in  490  years  ending  with  Christ's  death,
so  must  1810  days  end  the  vision,  which,  upon  precisely
the  same  rule,  will  be  fulfilled  in  1810  years  after
Christ's  death,  or  in  1843  after  his  birth,  which  is  the
same  thing.

But,  sav  some,  "  Daniel  did  not  understand  the  vision
7


74  LECTURE    IV.

nor  end."  Then  the  angel  Gabriel  was  not  obedient  to
the  heavenly  command ;  for  he  was  commanded  to  make
Daniel  "  understand  the  vision,"  and  the  vision  and  end
are  connected  by  the  angel  himself.  He  says,  "  At  the
time  of  the  end  shall  be  the  vision."

Again :  if  Daniel  did  not  understand,  the  angel  must
have  been  disappointed ;  for  the  angel  says,  "  Behold,  I
will  make  thee  know  what  shall  be  in  the  last  end  of  the
indignation ;  for  at  the  time  appointed,  (2300  days,)  the
end  shall  be."

Again :  if  Daniel  did  not  understand  the  vision  and
time,  then  his  own  words  cannot  be  taken  as  evidence.
"A  thing  was  revealed  unto  Daniel,  and  the  thing  was
true,  but  the  time  appointed  (2300  days)  was  long."
This  shows  that  Daniel  understood  the  time ;  for  he  says
it  was  long.  For  no  man  would  have  called  2300  com-
mon days  (not  quite  seven  years)  a  long  time  for  so
many  great  and  important  events,  as  are  noticed  in  the
vision,  to  transpire  in.  "  And  he  understood  the  thing,
(that  is,  the  time,)  and  had  understanding  of  the  vision."
Daniel  x.  1.

Now,  let  the  objector  quarrel  with  Gabriel  and  Daniel
if  he  pleases.  I  have  their  testimony,  and  shall  give
them  the  preference.  Some  say,  "  God  has  not  revealed
the  time."  I  ask,  then,  Who  revealed  this  vision  to
Daniel?  By  whose  command  was  the  answer  given,
2300  days?  Who  revealed  the  seventy  weeks,  the
"  time,  times,  and  a  half"  ?  How  came  Daniel  by  his
1290  and  1335  days  ?  Who  said  to  Daniel,  "  But  go
thou  thy  way  till  the  end  6e,  for  thou  shalt  rest  and  stand
in  thy  lot  at  the  end  of  the  days  "  ?  Read  Daniel  ii.  20,
23,  and  28th  verses,  and  let  the  objector  lay  his  hands
upon  his  mouth  and  be  silent.  Has  man  become  so  bold
in  sin  that  he  will  contradict  angels,  defame  the  proph-
ets, deny  the  word  of  God,  that  we  may  cry  peace
and  safety,  when  sudden  destruction  cometh  ?  "But
if  ye  will  not  hear  Moses  and  the  prophets,  neither
would  you  though  one  rose  from  the  dead."  Peter  says,
*}  There  shall  be  scoffers  in  the  last  day,  saying,  Where
is  the  promise  of  his  coming  ?  "  God  has  not  revealed
the  time  of  the  end,  say  ypu ;  therefore  it  will  be  no


Christ's  second  coming.  75

barm  for  you  to  "  say  in  your  hearts,  My  Lord  delayeth
ois  coming."

Who  shall  tell  the  friend  of  the  bridegroom  when
to  give  the  midnight  cry,  "  Behold,  the  bridegroom
cometh  "  ?  For  this  must  be  before  he  comes  —  no  time
then  to  cry  ;  for  it  will  be  as  sudden  as  the  lightning,
says  the  dear  Savior.

Let  the  objectors  look  to  it,  that  they  do  not  reject  the
council  of  God  against  themselves.  "

"  But  ye,  brethren,  are  not  in  darkness,  (ignorant  of
the  revelation  of  God,)  that  that  day  shall  overtake  you
as  a  thie£"    Ameiu


LECTURE    V.


REV.  xiii.  18.


Here  is  wisdom.  Let  him  that  hath  understanding  eount  the  num-
ber of  the  beast ;  for  it  is  the  number  of  a  man  ;  and  his  number
is  six  hundred  threescore  and  six.


This  text  has  caused  as  much  speculation  as  any
text  in  the  whole  Bible ;  rivers  of  ink  have  been  shed
to  explain  its  meaning ,  brains  have  been  addled  in
trying-  to  find  some  great  mystery  which  the  wisdom  of
this  world,  as  was  supposed,  could  only  discover ;  and  in
trying  to  be  wise  above  what  was  written,  men  have
lost  their  balance,  and  fell  into  absurdities  too  ridiculous
to  mention.  Some  have  searched  through  all  the  vo-
cabulary of  Greek  names,  to  find  one  whose  numerical
letters  would  make  the  number  666,  and  they  have  been
wonderfully  blest,  for  they  found  a  number ;  but  here
again  there  remained  a  difficulty  to  surmount,  which
required  as  much  ingenuity  as  the  former ;  but  to
remedy  the  evil,  every  Greek  scholar  chose  the  one  his
fancy  dictated,  wrote  his  book  on  the  number  666,  and
then  died,  and  his  wonderful  name  died  with  him ;  for
every  wise  Greek  had  his  own  favorite  name.  Also,  the
Latin  book-worms,  not  wishing  to  be  outdone  by  their
Greek  brethren,  rummaged  all  the  old  goatskin  parch-
ments and  musty  books  in  the  cloisters  of  all  the  monks
in  Christendom ;  and  behold,  a  much  greater  harvest  was
the  fruit  of  their  labor ;  for  now  every  Latinus  had  three
or  more  names  to  his  share  ;  and  in  all  this  wisdom,  all
other  nations  were   left   without  any   wisdom,  except


Christ's  second  coming.  77

what  they  borrowed  from  their  neighbors,  the  learned
Greeks  and  Latins.  But  I  hope,  my  dear  hearers,  that
you  have  learned  that  if  there  is  any  mystery  of  God  not
explained  by  the  Bible,  it  is  not  for  us  to  understand.
Therefore,  in  treating  upon  this  subject,  I  shall  en-
deavor to  present  the  Scripture  on  the  point,  and  then
leave  you  to  judge  whether  we  have  light  or  not.

I.  Show  what  wisdom  this  is  spoken  of  in  the  text.

II.  Speak   of  the  beast  numbered,  and   show  what
beast.

III.  The  number,  and  what  we  may  understand  by  it.
I.   The  wisdom  spoken  of  in  the  text.

1st.  Is  it  the  wisdom  of  men,  or  of  this  world  ?  I
answer,  No.  For  Paul  says,  1  Cor. ii.  4,13,  "And  my
speech  and  my  preaching  was  not  with  enticing  words
of  man's  wisdom,  but  in  demonstration  of  the  spirit  and
of  power ;  that  your  faith  should  not  stand  in  the  wisdom
of  man,  but  in  the  power  of  God.  Howbeit  we  speak
wisdom  among  them  that  are  perfect ;  yet  not  the  wis-
dom of  this  world,  nor  of  the  princes  of  this  world,  that
come  to  nought  But  we  speak  the  wisdom  of  God  in  a
mystery,  even  the  hidden  wisdom  which  God  ordained
before  the  world  unto  our  glory."  Now,  if  Paul  would
not  preach  the  wisdom  of  men  or  the  world,  surely  the
angel  would  not  instruct  John  to  use  the  wisdom  of
man  or  of  this  world,  "  for  the  wisdom  of  this  world  is
foolishness  with  God,"  1  Cor.  iii.  19.  And  if  Paul  said
our  faith  should  not  stand  in  the  wisdom  of  men,  neither
would  John  have  given  any  thing  that  depended  on  the
wisdom  of  men  for  a  foundation  of  our  faith.  But  Paul
has  taught  us  what  true  wisdom  is,  by  saying,  "  Christ,
the  power  of  God,  and  the  wisdom  of  God ; "  "  But  God
hath  revealed  them  unto  us  by  his  Spirit,  for  the  Spirit
searcheth  all  things,  yea,  the  deep  things  of  God."  And
Paul  tells  us  how  we  may  exercise  this  wisdom,  1  Cor.
ii.  13,  "  Which  things  also  we  speak,  not  in  the  words
which  man's  wisdom  teacheth,  but  which  the  Holy  Ghost
teacheth ;  comparing  spiritual  things  with  spiritual."
Here,  then,  my  dear  hearer,  is  the  great  secret  of  wis-
dom, to  compare  spiritual  things  with  spiritual ;  and  then
we  have  the  mind  and  will  of  the  Spirit,  and  shall  not  be
7*


78  LECTURE    V.

very  liable  to  err.    Let  us,  then,  follow  this  rale  while
we  try  to  explain.

II.  The  beast  numbered  in  the  text.  And,
1st.  Let  us  inquire  what  beast  it  is.  I  answer,  It  is
the  first  beast.  See  our  context,  12th  verse,  "  And  he
exerciseth  all  the  power  of  the  first  beast  before  him ;  "
that  is,  the  beast  which  John  saw  come  up  out  of  the
sea,  (the  Roman  government,)  having  seven  heads  and
ten  horns,  and  upon  his  horns  ten  crowns,  and  upon  his
head  the  name  of  blasphemy  ;  and  the  beast  which  I  saw
was  like  unto  a  leopard,  and  his  fee*  v;^re  as  the  feet
of  a  bear,  and  his  mouth  as  the  mouth  of  a  lion  ;  and  the
dragon  gave  him  his  power,  and  his  seat,  and  great
authority,"  By  this  beast,  I  understand  the  same  as
Daniel's  fourth  kingdom,  the  Roman  government ;  by
"  names  of  blasphemy,"  I  understand  a  mode  of  worship
which  would  be  idolatrous  or  blasphemous ;  by  the
dragon,  we  must  understand  the  civil  power  of  the  same
government  giving  its  power  to  the  ecclesiastical  beast,
whether  Pagan  or  Papal.  3d  verse,  «  And  I  saw  one
of  his  heads,  (of  blasphemy,  Pagan)  as  it  were,  wounded
to  death;  and  his  deadly  wound  was  healed,  (by  the
substitution  of  the  Papal  blasphemous  head  ;)  and  all  the
world  wondered  after  the  beast."

John  then  goes  on  to  describe  the  civil  power  of  this
Roman  government  under  this  last  head,  and  shows  the
length  of  time  they  would  exercise  this  last  power  —  "  for-
ty-two months"  —  which  is  the  same  as  Daniel's  time,
times,  and  a  half,  or  John's  1260  days,  mentioned  Rev.
xi.  3,  xii.  6.  His  power  to  make  war  and  overcome  the
saints  is  foretold.  In  the  tenth  verse  he  shows  us  how
this  civil  power  should  be  destroyed,  by  captivity  and
the  sword ;  and  this  was  fulfilled  in  1798,  when  the  pope
was  carried  a  captive  into  France,  and  the  states  of  Italy
were  conquered  by  the  sword  of  the  French  army.  In
the  11th  verse  he  gives  us  a  discovery  of  the  same  beast
in  his  ecclesiastical  power;  Pagan  Rome  in  the  first
beast,  and  Papacy  in  the  image  beast ;  and  it  will  be  evi-
dent to  any  one  who  will  examine  the  chapter  carefully,
that  John  was  not  commanded  to  number  the  image
beast  —  for  the  civil  power   of  that  beast  was  before


Christ's  second  coming.  79

numbered  in  the  5th  verse,  —  but  the  beast  which  existed
before  him,  which  the  Papal  ecclesiastical  beast  is  an
image  of,  or  Daniel's  daily  sacrifice  abomination,  (Dan.
xii.  11,)  the  one  which  Paul  said,  "he  who  now  letteth
will  let,  until  he  be  taken  out  of  the  way."

In  this  passage  it  is  evident  the  apostle  alludes  to  the
same  power,  although  he  calls  it  the  "  working  of  Satan."
John  also  gives  a  similar  description  in  Rev.  xii.  9,
"  And  the  dragon  was  cast  out,  that  old  serpent,  called
the  Devil,  and  Satan,  which  deceiveth  the  whole  world:
he  was  cast  out  into  the  earth,  and  his  angels  were  cast
out  with  him."  But  I  have  another  evidence  that  the
beast  numbered  was  Pagan  Rome,  and  I  think  it  must
be  conclusive  testimony,  in  Rev.  xvii.  3.  In  this  chapter
one  of  the  seven  angels  that  had  the  seven  vials  came  to
instruct  John,  and  to  show  him  "the  judgment  of  the
great  whore  with  whom  the  kings  of  the  earth  had  com-
mitted fornication,  and  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth  have
been  made  drunk  with  the  wine  of  her  fornication."
"  So  he  carried  me  away  in  the  spirit  into  the  wilder-
ness, and  I  saw  a  woman  sit  upon  a  scarlet-colored  beast,
full  of  names  of  blasphemy,  having  seven  heads  and  ten
horns."

Here  the  same  idolatrous  beast,  having  seven  heads
and  ten  horns,  is  described;  the  woman  sitting  upon
this  beast  is  the  same  as  Daniel's  little  horn  which  came
up  among  the  ten  horns,  and  shows  plainly  that  it  was
that  part  of  Roman  power  which  was  prior  to  the  woman,
and  was  of  course  called  the  first  beast.  When  John
saw  this  woman  on  the  scarlet-colored  beast,  he  wondered
with  great  admiration,  and  says,  Rev.  xvii.  7,  "  And  the
angel  said  unto  me,  Wherefore  didst  thou  marvel  ?  I
will  tell  thee  the  mystery  of  the  woman  and  of  the  beast
that  carrieth  her,  which  hath  the  seven  heads  and  ten
horns.  Th»s  beast  that  thou  sawest  was,  and  is  not ;  and
shall  ascend  out  of  the  bottomless  pit,  and  go  into  perdi-
tion, and  they  that  dwell  on  the  earth  shall  wonder,
whose  names  were  not  written  in  the  book  of  life  from
the  foundation  of  the  world,  when  they  behold  the  beast
that  was,  and  is  not,  and  yet  is."  "  That  was,"  Pagan
Rome  before  John  saw  his  vision.  "  and  is  not,"  vet  in


80  LECTURE    V.

its  last  stage  of  Papal  Rome,  "  and  yet  is,"  m  the  same
spirit,  for  Papal  Rome  is  but  an  image  of  Paganism,  as
says  the  Apostle,  2  Thess.  ii.  6,  7,  "  And  now  ye  know
what  withholdeth,  that  he  may  be  revealed  in  his  time,
for  the  mystery  of  iniquity  doth  already  work."  And,  1
John  ii.  18,  "Little  children,  it  is  the  last  time,  and  as
ye  have  heard  that  anti-Christ  shall  come,  even  now  are
there  many  anti-Christs,  whereby  we  know  it  is  the  last
time."  And  again,  Rev.  xvii.  9,  "  And  here  is  the  mind
which  hath  wisdom ;  "  evidently  referring  John  right
back  to  our  text,  "  Here  is  wisdom ;  let  him  that  hath
understanding,"  the  same  as  mind  in  the  above  quotation.
"The  seven  heads  are  seven  mountains  on  which  the
woman  sitteth,  and  there  are  seven  kings  ;  five  are  fallen,
one  is,  and  the  other  is  not  yet  come ;  and  when  he
cometh,  he  must  continue  a  short  space,  and  the  beast
that  was,  and  is  not  even  he  is  the  eighth,  and  is  of  the
seven,  and  goeth  into  perdition."  These  texts  explain
the  whole  matter ;  for  it  is  evident  that  the  beast  here
alluded  to  was  the  seven-headed  monster  who  was  then
in  existence  when  John  wrote,  for  five  of  its  executive
fofms  of  government  (of  which  kings  and  mountains  are
figures)  had  fallen.  Republican  Rome  had  five  different
offices  under  that  particular  form  of  government  —  her
senatorial,  tribunate,  consular,  decemvir,  and  triumvirate.
These  were  fallen.  One  is,  (that  was  when  John  wrote
his  prophecy,)  Imperial,  and  the  other  had  not  yet  come,
Kingly,  which  is  the  same  as  the  ten  horns.  For  when
the  Western  Empire  fell,  Rome  was  divided  into  ten
kingdoms,  "  And  the  ten  horns  which  thou  sawest  are
ten  kings,  which  have  received  no  kingdom  as  yet ;  but
receive  power  as  kings  one  hour  with  the  beast."  These
have  one  mind,  (that  is,  were  all  converted  to  the  Catho-
lic faith,)  and  shall  give  their  power  and  strength  unto
the  beast,  Papal  Rome.  "  These  shall  make  war  with
the  Lamb,  and  the  Lamb  shall  overcome  them  ;  for  he  is
Lord  of  lords  and  King  of  kings  ;  and  they  that  are  with
him  are  called,  and  chosen,  and  faithful."  And  although
this  beast,  whatever  form  it  may  assume,  whether
Pagan  or  Papal,  may  for  a  season  tyrannize  over  and
trample  on  the  followers  of  Christ,  through  the  agency


Christ's  second  coming.  81

ol  the  evil  power  of  empires,  kingdoms,  states,  or  repub-
lics, yet  He  who  rules  over  all,  will,  in  the  end,  destroy
all  these  powers,  and  himself  reign  King  of  kings  and
Lord  over  all.  "  And  the  ten  horns  which  thou  sawest
upon  the  beast,  these  shall  hate  the  whore,  and  shall
make  her  desolate  and  naked,  and  cut  her  flesh,  and  burn
her  with  fire."

This  text  has  been  literally  accomplished  within  a  few
years ;  and  those  kingdoms  which  were  of  the  ten,  king-
doms which  first  gave  power  to  the  beast,  have  of  late
persecuted  and  destroyed  her,  who  is  the  abomination
of  the  whole  earth.  Witness  the  transactions  of  Great
Britain,  France,  Spain,  Portugal,  Austria,  Naples,  and
Tuscany,  the  Seven  Kingdoms  which  were  not  plucked
up  by  the  little  horn ;  each  of  these  nations  have  in  their
turn  resisted  the  power  and  pretensions  of  the  Pope  of
Rome,  until  his  civil  authority  is  reduced  to  a  cipher  in
all  these  kingdoms.  "  For  God  hath  put  in  their  hearts
to  fulfil  his  will,  and  to  agree  and  give  their  kingdom
unto  the  beast,  until  the  words  of  God  shall  be  fulfilled."
Then  must  the  Papal  beast,  the  image  of  Paganism,  be
numbered  and  finished,  and  like  a  weighty  mill-stone
sunk  in  the  deep,  he  must  with  the  Pagan  beast  sink
forever  and  ever.

Thus  we  seethe  two  beasts,  although  supported  by  the
same  power,  "  the  great  red  dragon  or  Roman  kingdom,"
exercising  the  same  authority  over  the  bodies  and  souls
of  men,  partaking  of  tne  same  spirit  of  Satan,  made  like
each  other,  one  being  but  an  image  of  the  other,  having
the  same  names  of  blasphemy  on  their  heads,  and  both
having,  at  the  close  of  their  times,  the  same  ten  horns,
and  both  have,  and  are  to  have,  their  civil  power
destroyed  by  the  same  ten  horns.  Yet  we  see  them  kept
separate  and  distinct.  Pagan  Rome  must  reign  his
time,  and  then  the  ten  horns,  or  kings,  would  take  away
.the  "  daily  sacrifice  abomination,"  and  place  in  his  stead
the  "  abomination  that  maketh  desolate."  The  last
abomination  was  numbered  in  the  same  chapter  where
our  text  is  found,  "  forty  and  two  months."  And  why
not  give  us  the  number  of  the  first  beast?  He  has:
"Let  him  that  hath  understanding  count  the  number  of


OS  LECTURE    V.

the  beast ;  for  it  is  the  number  of  a  man  ;  and  his  num-
ber is  six  hundred  threescore  and  six."  This  brings  us
to  our  next  proposition.

III.  To  show  what  we  may  understand  by  the  num
bering  of  the  beast.     And,

1st.  What  may  we  understand  by  numbering  any
thing  of  this  kind  in  Scripture  ?  For  the  Scripture  must
be  our  guide,  as  we  have  before  said.

I  answer,  It  is  to  count,  to  finish,  or  to  destroy,  when
used  in  a  figurative  sense,  or  in  prophetic  Scripture,  as  in
Isa.  xxii.  10,  "  And  ye  have  numbered  the  houses  of  Je-
rusalem, and  the  houses  have  ye  broken  down  to  fortify
the  wall."  They  were  accused  by  the  prophet  of  de-
stroying houses,  by  numbering  them  or  counting  them
for  destruction.  Also  see  Isa.  lxv.  12,  "  Therefore  will
I  number  you  to  the  sword,  and  ye  shall  all  bow  down  to
the  slaughter."  Here  again  it  is  used  in  the  same  sense :
I  will  reckon  or  count  you  to  the  sword.  Again,  Dan,
v.  25, 26,  "  And  this  is  the  hand- writing  that  was  written :
Mene,  mene,  tekel,  upharsin.  This  is  the  interpreta-
tion of  the  thing :  mene,  God  hath  numbered  thy  king-
dom and  hath  finished  it."

As,  therefore,  the  idolatrous  and  blasphemous  king-
dom of  Babylon  was  numbered  and  finished  by  God,
whose  decree  was  conveyed  by  the  hand-writing  on  the
wall  to  the  knowledge  of  Daniel  and  others,  so  was
John  commanded,  by  the  inspiration  of  the  Holy  Spirit,
to  write  in  this  last  book  of  prophecy,  the  mene,  tekel,
of  this  last  idolatrous  Pagan  beast.  "  Here  is  wisdom."
Let  a  wise  Daniel,  or  him  that  hath  the  wisdom  of
God  like  a  Daniel,  or  "  let  him  that  hath  understanding  "
in  the  word  of  God,  or  him  that  will  compare  scrip-
ture with  scripture,  "  count  the  number  of  tire  beast,"
or  the  number  of  his  name.

Let  us  inquire  what  is  the  name  of  this  beast  His
name  is  blasphemy,  because  he  causes  all,  both  high  and
low,  rich  and  poor,  bond  and  free,  to  worship  stocks  and
stones,  idols  of  gold,  and  silver,  and  wood,  that  can  nei-
ther see,  hear,  nor  talk.  See  the  1st  verse  of  our  con-
text, "  and  upon  his  head  the  name  of  blasphemy"  which
teaches  us  what  the  name  of  this  beast  is,  and  shows  us


Christ's  second  coming.  83

that  we  are  to  count,  or  reckon,  how  long  before  the
blasphemies  of  this  Pagan  power  will  be  finished ;  "  for
it  is  the  number  of  a  man."  And  what,  you  may  inquire,
is  the  number  of  a  man  ?  I  answer  again,  We  must  apply
to  God's  word  "  the  number  of  a  man."

Moses  says,  Exodus  xxiii.  26,  "  The  number  of  thy
days  I  will  fulfil."  Job,  speaking  of  man,  says,  xiv.  5,
"Seeing  his  days  are  determined,  the  number  of  his
months  is  with  thee,  thou  hast  appointed  his  bounds  that
he  cannot  pass."  David  says,  Ps.  xc.  12,  "  So  teach  us
to  number  our  days,  that  we  may  apply  our  hearts  unto
wisdom."  Therefore,  we  may  reasonably  conclude  that
the  "  number  of  a  man  "  is  the  number  of  his  days ;  and
the  Scriptures  often  speak  of  man  in  connection  with  his
time  of  sojourn  on  the  earth,  calling  it  days ;  as,  "  few  and
evil  have  been  the  days  of  my  pilgrimage  ; "  "  died,  being
old  and  full  of  days  ; "  "  length  of  days  is  in  her  right
hand ;  "  "  all  the  days  of  thy  life  ; "  "  I  will  wait  all  the
days  of  rny  appointed  time  until  my  change  come."  If
this  is  the  understanding  of  this  part  of  our  text,  which  I
cannot  see  any  reason  to  doubt,  then  our  text  has  this
plain  meaning.  Here  is  need  of  spiritual  wisdom.  Let
him  that  hath  understanding  count  the  number  of  his
days;  for  his  days  are  numbered  as  a  man's;  they  are
six  hundred  threescore  and  six.  This  power  (Rome
Pagan)  would  be  taken  away  when  his  six  hundred  and
sixty-six  prophetic  days  should  end ;  and  this  brings  us
to  show  when  those  days  began,  and  of  course  when
they  ended.

They  must  have  begun  when  the  Jewish  rites  and
ceremonies  were  in  being ;  for  this  was  the  sole  object
of  Paganism,  to  counteract  the  Jewish  rituals  and  draw
the  Jewish  worshippers  into  idolatry,  and  to  blend  the
heathen  rites  with  theirs.  They  must  have  begun  be-
fore Christ  was  born,  for  the  great  red  dragon  having
seven  heads  and  ten  horns  was  to  stand  before  the  woman,
(the  Jewish  Church,)  ready  to  devour  the  man  child  as
soon  as  it  was  born.  They  could  not  have  begun  before
they  became  connected  with  the  Jews,  for  the  reason
that  no  nation  is  prophesied  of,  or  noticed  in  the  proph-
ecies, except  they  are  somehow  connected  with  the


84  LECTURE    V.

people  of  God  ;  and  for  the  very  reason  that  this  beast
was  to  tread  down  the  Jews,  and  finally,  by  cunning,  de-
ceit, and  intrigue,  destroy  the  city  and  nation  of  the  Jews,
then  1  think  the  fairest  conclusion  is,  that  when  they  be-
came connected  with  the  Jews  by  league,  and  when  they
had  conquered  Daniel's  third  kingdom,  the  Grecian.
Then,  and  not  until  then,  had  the  Romans  any  part  in
this  prophecy.  This  agrees  with  the  angel's  statement,
Dan.  xi.  23,  "  After  the  league  made  with  him,  (that  is,
Romans,)  he  shall  work  deceitfully,  and  become  strong
with  a  small  (republican)  people."  This  league  was
made  between  the  Romans  and  the  Jews,  ratified  and
carried  into  effect  when  the  Greeks  under  Bachides  left
besieging  Jerusalem,  upon  the  command  of  the  Romans,
and,  as  Josephus  and  Maccabees  tell  us,  never  returned
to  trouble  them  (the  Jews)  any  more.  This  league,
then,  took  effect  when  the  third  kingdom  in  Daniel's
vision  ceased  harassing  the  Jews,  and  the  fourth  king-
dom began  its  rule  over  the  Jews  and  the  world.  This
was  in  the  year  B.  C.  158.  Let  those  who  wish  to  be
satisfied  of  the  correctness  of  the  foregoing  statements
read  the  8th  and  9th  chapters  of  the  1st  Maccabees,
and  Josephus,  B.  XII.  chapter  x.  sec.  6,  of  his  Antiquities.
Then,  if  this  be  correct,  that  Pagan  Rome  began  his
power  in  the  year  B.  C.  158,  and  was  to  continue  666
years,  when  would  Paganism  fall  in  the  H.c™*n  kingdom,
and  the  "  daily  sacrifice  abomination  "  be  taken  out  of
the  way  to  make  room  for  the  abomination  of  desolation  ?
I  answer,  Take  158  from  666  and  you  will  have  508.
Then  in  the  year  A.  D.  508  Paganism  ceased.

What  is  the  history  of  that  time  ?  I  answer,  that
about  the  year  A.  D.  476  the  Western  Empire  of  Rome
crumbled  to  pieces,  and  the  Pagan  nations  of  the  north,
crossing  the  Rhine  and  the  Danube,  established  ten
kingdoms  in  what  was  considered  the  Western  Empire.
France  was  the  principal  kingdom  of  the  ten.  These
kingdoms  were  all  governed  by  Pagan  kings  ;  and  his-
tory informs  us  that  in  the  city  of  Rome  and  other  places
in  the  empire  these  Pagan  conquerors  sacrificed  men,
women,  and  children  to  their  supposed  deities ;  and
that  in  the  year  496  Clovis  king  of  France  was  converted


Christ's  second  coming,  85

and  baptized  into  the  Christian  faith ;  and  that  the  re-
mainder of  these  kings  embraced  the  religion  of  Christ
shortly  after,  the  last  of  which  was  Christianized  in  the
year  508,  and  of  course  Paganism  ceased,  having  lost
its  head  by  the  power  of  the  sword,  or  kings  who  wield
the  sword.  Here,  then,  was  the  accomplishment  of  two
important  prophecies  —  the  daily  sacrifice  abomination
taken  out  of  the  way,  and  the  Pagan  beast  receiving
its  deadly  wound  by  a  sword  ;  since  which  time  we  have
no  account  of  any  Pagan  rites  or  sacrifices  being  offered
within  the  bounds  of  ancient  Rome.  How  exactly  has
the  word  of  God  been  accomplished !  How  just  and
true  are  all  the  ways  of  the  God  of  heaven !  And  how
blind  are  mortals  that  they  cannot  see  their  own  destiny
in  the  rise  and  fall  of  others  !  I  am  astonished  sometimes
when  I  reflect  on  the  simple  truths  of  the  word  of  God,
the  exact  fulfilment  of  the  prophecies,  that  more  do  not
believe,  repent,  and  turn  to  God.
8


LECTURE    VI.


DANIEL  x.  14.


Now  I  am  come  to  make  thee  understand  what  shall  befall  thy
people  in  the  latter  days  5  for  yet  the  vision  is  for  many  days.


This  is  the  third  time  the  angel  Gabriel  came  to  in-
struct Daniel.  The  first  time  was  when  Daniel  had  the
vision  of  the  he-goat,  Daniel  viii.  16.  This  was  553
years  before  Christ.  The  second  time  he  came  was
when  Daniel  was  praying  for  the  deliverance  of  his  peo-
ple from  their  Babylonish  captivity,  fifteen  years  after
the  first  visit,  when  he  instructed  him  into  the  seventy
weeks,  and  crucifixion  of  the  Messiah.  Now  he  has
come  in  the  third  year  of  Cyrus  the  Persian,  in  the  534
B.  C,  21  years  after  Daniel  had  his  vision  of  the  four
beasts,  nineteen  after  the  he-goat,  and  four  years  after
the  seventy  weeks'  instruction.

After  informing  Daniel  his  purpose,  as  in  our  text,
and  making  some  preliminary  observations  concerning
the  vision  in  the  remainder  of  the  tenth  chapter,  he  be-
gins his  teachings  to  Daniel,  and  through  him  to  us,
with  the  first  of  the  11th  chapter.  1st  verse,  he  tells
who  he,  the  heavenly  messenger,  is  —  the  same  who
confirmed  Daniel  in  the  seventy  weeks.  See  Daniel
ix.  1,  21.  And  in  the  second  verse  he  begins  with  the
fifth  king  of  Persia,  the  very  same  king  who  issued  the
decree  to  Ezra  to  go  up  and  build  the  walls  of  Jerusa-
lem, which  began  our  seventy  weeks,  Daniel  ix.  25 ;
Ezra  vii.  1 — 14.  For  the  first  Persian  king  was  then  on
the  throne,  Daniel  x.  1,  which  was  the  third  year  of  the


Christ's  second  coming.  87

reign  of  Cyrus,  king  of  Persia.  This  was  the  same
Cyrus  who  was  general  and  son-in-law  to  Darius  the
Mede,  that  conquered  Babylon.  Besides  whom  "  there
should  be  yet  three  kings,"  which  three  kings  were
Artaxerxes,  Darius,  and  Ahasuerus,  as  they  are  named
in  Scripture.  See  Ezra,  iv.  v.  and  vi.  chapters.  I  am
aware  that  history  has  named  four  where  Scripture  has
only  named  three.  History  names,  1,  Cambyses  ;  2,
Smerdis,  same  as  Artaxerxes  above  named  in  Scripture  ;
3,  Darius,  son  of  Hystaspes,  same  as  above  ;  4,  Xerxes,
same  as  Scripture  calls  Ahasuerus.  Why  the  Scripture
did  not  name  Cambyses,  if  there  was  such  a  king,  I  am
not  able  to  tell,  unless  his  reign  was  so  short  (which  all
historians  agree  in)  that  he  had  no  hand  in  building  or
hindering  the  building  of  the  temple  at  Jerusalem,  as
the  other  three  kings  had,  which  Ezra  has  named.  But
as  Gabriel  did  not  come  to  tell  Daniel  any  thing  which
was  not  "  noted  in  the  Scripture  of  truth,"  (see  Daniel
x.  21,  "  But  I  will  show  thee  that  which  is  noted  in  the
Scripture  of  truth,")  therefore  the  language  of  our
text  now  under  examination  will  be  this  —  "There  shall
stand  up  yet  three  kings  in  Persia,  (noted  in  the  Scripture
of  truth,)  and  the  fourth  shall  be  far  richer  than  they
all,"  &c.  This  fourth  king  was  Artaxerxes  Longimanus,
and  is  the  same  king  noted  in  Ezra  vii.,  and  the  first  and
only  king  of  Persia  "  noted  in  the  Scriptures,"  who  ever
gave  a  decree  to  rebuild  the  walls  and  streets  of  Jeru-
salem, especially  in  troublous  times.  We  may  therefore
reasonably  and  conclusively  determine  that  the  mes-
senger Gabriel  begins  his  instruction  with  this  king's
reign,  the  5th  king  noted  in  Scripture.  And  if  so,  we
have  another  strong  and  forcible  evidence  that  Daniel's
vision  of  the  ram  and  he-goat  began  with  the  seventy
weeks,  457  years  before  the  birth  of  Christ,  and  490
years,  or  70  prophetic  weeks,  before  his  death,  Dan.  xi.
3,  4.  We  have  the  plain  history  of  Alexander,  the  con-
queror of  the  world,  his  death,  and  division  of  the  king-
dom into  four  great  empires.  Hear  what  Gabriel  says
of  him  more  than  200  years  before  the  event  happened,
and  learn,  ye  skeptics,  the  evidence  that  this  prophecy
is  of  divine  origin.    "  And  a  mighty  king  shall  stand  up


88  LECTURE    VI.

that  shall  rule  with  great  dominion,  and  do  according'  to
his  will.  And  when  he  shall  stand  up,  his  kingdom
shall  be  broken,  and  shall  be  divided  toward  the  four
winds  of  heaven,  and  not  to  his  posterity,  nor  according
to  his  dominion  which  he  ruled ;  for  his  kingdom  shall
be  plucked  up,  even  for  others  besides  those,"  (that  is,
his  posterity.)

Need  I,  then,  tell  my  hearers  that  history  tells  us  that
Alexander  conquered  the  then  known  world  in  about  six
years,  and  that  he  died  323  years  B.  C.  at  Babylon  ;  that
his  kingdom  was  divided  among  his  greatest  generals,
from  which  division  arose  four  gTeat  kingdoms,  Egypt  in
the  south,  Persia  in  the  east,  Syria  in  the  north,  and
Macedonia  in  the  west,  which  kingdoms  lasted  until
conquered  by  the  Romans  ?  Between  the  years  190  and
30  B.C.  nearly  all  these  kingdoms  became  Roman  prov-
inces. From  Daniel  xi.  5,  13,  inclusive,  we  have  a
prophecy  of  the  two  principal  kingdoms  out  of  these  four
—  Egypt  and  Syria ;  and  any  one  who  may  have  the  cu-
riosity to  see  the  exact  agreement  between  the  prophecy
and  history,  can  read  Rollin's  Ancient  History,  where  he
has  not  only  given  us  the  history,  but  applied  this  proph-
ecy. And  as  I  see  no  reason  to  disagree  from  him  in  his
application  of  these  texts,  I  shall,  therefore,  for  brevity's
sake,  pass  over  these  texts,  and  examine  the  text,  Dan.  xi.
14, "  And  in  those  times  there  shall  many  stand  up  against
the  king  of  the  south ;  also,  the  robbers  of  thy  people
shall  exalt  themselves  to  establish  the  vision ;  but  they
shall  ie  11."  The  king  of  the  south,  in  this  verse,  without
any  doabt,  means  king  of  Egypt ;  but  what  the  robbers
of  thy  people  means  remains  yet  a  doubt  perhaps  to  some.
That  it  cannot  mean  Antiochus,  or  any  king  of  Syria,  it  is
plain ;  for  the  angel  had  been  talking  about  that  nation  for
a  number  of  verses  previous,  and  now  says,  "also  the
robbers  of  thy  people,"  &c,  evidently  implying  some
other  nation.  I  will  admit  that  Antiochus  did  perhaps
rob  the  Jews  ;  but  how  could  this  "  establish  the  vision,"
as  Antiochus  is  not  spoken  of  any  where  in  the  vision  as
performing  any  act  of  that  kind ;  for  he  belonged  to  what
is  called  the  Grecian  kingdom  in  the  vision.  Again,  "  to
establish  the  vision"  must  mean  to  make  sure,  complete,
or  fulfil  the  same.     And  if  it  cannot  be  shown  that  the


Christ's  second  coming.  89

Grecian  kingdom  was  to  rob  the  people  of  God,  1  think
it  must  mean  some  other  nation  which  would  do  these
acts,  to  which  every  word  will  apply.  And  to  this  we
need  not  be  at  a  loss  ;  for  at  this  very  time  of  which  the
angel  is  speaking,  Rome,  the  least  kingdom  in  Daniel's
vision,  did  exalt  itself,  and  this  kingdom  did  have  the  very
marks  in  the  vision,  and  in  the  events  following.  This
kingdom  was  to  have  great  iron  teeth;  it  was  to  break  in
pieces,  and  stamp  the  residue  with  the  feet  of  it.  The
vision  also  says,  "  He  shall  destroy  wonderfully,  and
shall  prosper  and  practise,  and  shall  destroy  the  mighty
and  holy  people,  and  that  ije  should  magnify  himself,"
&c,  the  same  as  exalt  himself,  Daniel  vii.  7,  23 ;  viii.
10 — 12, 24,  25  verses.  And  it  cannot  be  denied  but  that
the  Jews  have  been  robbed  of  their  city  and  sanctuary
by  the  Romans,  and  the  Christian  church  has  been  per-
secuted and  robbed  by  this  dreadful  beast,  the  Roman
kingdom.  It  is  evident  too  that  when  this  kingdom  falls,
the  vision  will  be  completed,  fulfilled,  established  :  "  but
they  shall  fall,"  says  the  angel  in  the  verse  under  our
present  examination;  "they  shall  fall;"  that  is,  the  ten
horns  in  this  fourth  kingdom,  when  the  vision  is  fulfilled
or  established,  and  when  the  stone  cut  out  of  the  moun-
tain without  hands  shall  grind  them  to  powder.  We
will  take  the  15th,  "So  the  king  of  the  north  "  (Rome
is  now  the  king  of  the  north,  because  they  had  conquered
the  Macedonian  kingdom,  and  had  become  masters  of  the
countries  north  and  east  before  they  attacked  Egypt)
"  shall  come  and  cast  up  a  mount,  and  take  the  most
fenced  cities  ;  and  the  arms  of  the  south  shall  not  with-
stand, neither  his  chosen  people,  neither  shall  there  be
any  strength  to  withstand."  This  was  about  fifty  years
before  Christ,  when  Pompey,  a  Roman  general,  con-
quered Egypt,  and  made  that  kingdom  tributary  to  the
Romans,  and  afterwards  entered  Jerusalem,  and  made
them  subjects  of  the  Roman  government.  See  verses
16  and  17,  "  But  he  that  cometh  against  him  "  (Pompey
coming  against  Egypt)  "  shall  do  according  to  his  own
will,  and  none  shall  stand  before  him,  and  he  shall  stand
in  the  glorious  land  which  by  his  hand  shall  be  con-
sumed.   He  shall  also  set  his  face  to  enter  with  the


90  LECTURE    VI.

strength  of  his  whole  kingdom,  and  upright  ones  with
him,"  (or  men  of  equal  conditions,  as  it  might  have  been
rendered.)  The  Roman  army,  of  which  Pompey  had  the
command,  when  he  went  into  Egypt  and  Palestine,  were
composed  of  the  sons  of  all  the  principal  citizens  of
Rome,  who  were,  according  to  the  laws  of  the  republic,
to  serve  ten  years  in  the  service  of  their  country  before
they  were  admitted  to  receive  the  high  offices  which
they  might  afterwards  be  candidates  for.  This  accounts
for  the  language  just  read  in  the  text  —  "upright  ones
with  him."  And  "  thus  shall  he  do  :  he  shall  give  him
the  daughter  of  woman,  corrupting  her;  but  she  shall
not  stand  on  his  side  nor  be  for  him."  When  Pompey
went  into  Egypt,  he  found  that  country  divided  between
Ptolemy  and  Cleopatra.  Pompey,  after  he  had  made
them  tributary  to  the  Romans,  compelled  them  to  settle
their  differences  by  marriage.  Afterwards,  when  Julius
Caesar  came  against  Pompey  with  his  western  veterans,
with  whom  he  had  conquered  the  west  part  of  Europe.,,
and  in  the  battle  fought  between  these  two  contending
rivals,  Pompey  and  Julius  Csesar,  Cleopatra  had  the
command  of  the  Egyptian  fleet  on  the  side  of  Pompey  ;
but  in  the  midst  of  the  action  she  deserted  over  to  Csesar
with  her  whole  fleet,  which  turned  the  fortune  of  the
day  in  favor  of  Julius  Csesar.  Pompey  then  fled  into
the  Grecian  isles,  where  he  compelled  many  of  them  to
declare  in  his  favor.  But  Csesar  soon  followed  him,  and
at  the  battle  of  Pharsalia  completely  defeated  Pompey,
who  was  slain  by  a  band  of  pirates  or  robbers.  This
part  we  have  in  the  18th  verse,  "  After  this  shall  he
(Pompey)  turn  his  face  unto  the  isles,  and  shall  take
many  ;  but  a  prince  (Csesar)  for  his  own  behalf  shall
cause  the  reproach  offered  by  him  (Pompey)  to  cease  ;
without  his  own  (Csesar)  reproach  he  shall  cause  it  to
turn  upon  him,  (Pompey  :)  19th  verse,  "  Then  he  (Csesar)
shall  turn  his  face  towards  the  fort  of  his  own  land  ;
but  he  shall  stumble  and  fall,  and  not  be  found."  The
history  of  Caesar's  death  is  familiar  to  every  school-boy.
After  he  had  conquered  Pompey,  he  returned  to  Rome,
entered  the  city  in  triumph,  and  a  few  days  after,  when
he  was  about  to  be  crowned  Emperor,  he  was  slain  in


Christ's  second  coming.  91

the  senate-house,  before  Pompey's  pillar,  by  his  own
friends;  "he  stumbled  and  fell,  and  was  not  found."
20th  verse,  "  Then  shall  stand  up  in  his  estate  a  raiser
of  taxes,  in  the  glory  of  the  kingdom  ;  but  within  a  few
days  he  shall  be  destroyed,  neither  in  anger  nor  in
battle."  This  verse  describes  Octavius  Caesar,  who  first
taxed  the  Roman  provinces,  Judea  being  taxed  (see
Luke  ii.  1,  5)  when  our  Savior  was  born ;  but  Octavius
Caesar,  afterwards  called  Augustus  Caesar,  was  not
slain  like  his  uncle  Julius,  nor  like  his  successors  ;  but
died  peaceably  in  his  bed.  21st  and  22d  verses,  "  And
in  his  estate  shall  stand  up  a  vile  person,  to  whom  they
shall  not  give  the  honor  of  the  kingdom ;  but  he  shall
come  in  peaceably,  and  obtain  the  kingdom  by  flatteries.
And  with  the  arms  of  a  flood  shall  they  be  overthrown
from  before  him,  and  shall  be  broken;  yea,  also,  the
prince  of  the  covenant."  In  these  two  verses  we  have
the  history  of  Tiberius  Caesar,  who  was  the  successor  of
Octavius  Caesar  in  the  Roman  empire  ;  and  was  one  of
the  most  vile,  profligate,  bloody  tyrants  that  ever  sat
upon  the  Roman  throne.  History  gives  us  the  same
account,  that  he  obtained  by  flatteries  the  kingdom,  and
afterwards  ruled  it  by  tyranny.  He  also  assumed  the
name  of  Augustus.  In  his  reign  Christ  was  crucified,
"  the  Prince  of  the  covenant  was  broken."  Here  ends
the  history  of.  the  seventy  weeks.  This  prophetic  his-
tory being  divided  into  four  divisions,  the  first  part  is
the  history  of  the  seventy  weeks,  to  which  we  have  been
attending,  which  began  in  the  seventh  year  of  Arta-
xerxes'  reign,  and  ended  in  the  22d  year  of  Tiberius
Caesar's,  being  four  hundred  and  ninety  years  ;  the  second
part  will  be  the  history  of  Pagan  Rome,  which  begins
with  the  first  league  made  between  the  Romans  and  the
Jews,  and  will  carry  us  down  six  hundred  and  sixty-six
years.  You  will  likewise  observe  that  the  angel  goes
back  and  begins  this  history  with  the  league.  22d  verse,
"  And  after  the  league  made  with  him  he  shall  work
deceitfully :  he  shall  come  up,  and  shall  become  strong
with  a  small  people."

Let  us  in  the  first  place  inquire,  Between  whom  is  this
league  made  ?  The  Romans  must  be  one  of  the  contract-


92  LECTURE    VI.

ing  parties,  from  the  fact  that  the  angel  is  talking  about
that  government  before  and  afterwards,  and  that  the
fourth  or  Roman  kingdom  was  to  work  deceitfully,  "  and
through  his  policy  also  he  shall  cause  craft  to  prosper  in
his  hand."  See  Daniel  viii.  25.  And  also  from  the  cir-
cumstance of  their  being  a  small  or  republican  people  at
first,  Rome,  too,  was  small  in  territory  at  this  time,  al-
though many  nations  and  kingdoms  were  tributary  unto
them ;  but  who  was  the  other  contracting  party  in  this
league?  T  answer,  It  must  have  been  some  people  whom
the  angel  had  in  view ;  and  he,  Daniel,  had  the  same  in
view,  or  he  would  have  given  some  mark  by  which  Dan-
iel or  the  reader  could  have  come  to  a  just  conclusion.
Yes,  this  was  the  case ;  for  he  had  told  Daniel  in  the
very  outset,  "  Now  I  am  come  to  make  thee  understand
what  shall  befall  thy  people  in  the  latter  days."  See  our
text.  This,  then,  is  the  key  that  unlocks  the  whole  sub-
ject, and  explains  two  important  points  in  the  vision.
First,  it  teaches  who  are  the  subjects  of  this  vision;  and,
secondly,  when  and  how  the  Roman  kingdom  became
connected  with  the  vision.  If  I  am  thus  far  correct,  then
the  angel  has  reference  to  the  league  made  Aviththe  Ro-
mans 158  years  B.  C,  when  the  Grecian  general  Bachi-
des  withdrew  his  army  from  before  Jerusalem,  and  never
returned  to  vex  the  Jews  any  more,  as  says  1  Maccabees
ix.  72.  For  the  history  of  this  league,  you  can  read  1
Maccabees  viii.  and  Josephus  B.  XII.  chap.  x.  sec.  6.
This  league  was  the  first  ever  made  between  the  Romans
and  the  Jews,  according  to  Josephus.  It  took  effect
158  years  B.  C,  when  the  Grecian  kingdom,  at  the
command  of  the  Romans,  ceased  to  trouble  the  Jews,  and
the  Romans  began  to  work  deceitfully.  Then  began  the
Pagan  beast  to  exercise  his  influence  over  the  people
of  God.  And  now  let  us  pursue  his  history  as  given  by
the  angel  Gabriel,  24th  verse,  "  He  shall  enter  peace-
ably, even  upon  the  fattest  places  of  the  province  ;  and
he  shall  do  that  which  his  fathers  have  not  done,  nor  his
fathers'  fathers ;  he  shall  scatter  among  them  the  prey,
and  spoil,  and  riches  ;  yea,  he  shall  forecast  his  devices
against  the  strong  holds  even  for  a  time."    This  verse


Christ's  second  coming.  93

is  a  true  history  of  the  rise  of  the  Roman  power ;  they
did  scatter  the  prey  and  spoil  among  the  provinces,  and
conquered  more  nations  by  their  munificence  and  be-
nevolence in  the  outset,  than  by  their  arms  or  battles.
Rome  bought  more  nations  by  riches  and  intrigue  than
she  conquered  in  war ;  and  she  compelled  the  Jews  to
submit  for  about  two  centuries  to  that  which  no  nation
before  had  been  able  ever  to  do,  viz.,  to  be  ruled  by  kings,
governors,  and  high  priests,  appointed  by  the  Romans,
and  not  chosen  by  themselves.  25th  verse,  "  And  he
shall  stir  up  his  power  and  his  courage  against  the  king
of  the  south  with  a  great  army ;  and  the  king  of  the
south  shall  be  stirred  up  to  battle  with  a  very  great  and
mighty  army  ;  but  he  shall  not  stand  ;  for  they  shall
forecast  devices  against  him."  This  is  a  description  of
the  war  in  Egypt,  under  the  government  of  Mark  Antony
and  Octavius  Caesar.  "Yea,  they  that  feed  of  the  por-
tion of  his  meat  shall  destroy  him,  and  his  army  shall
overflow,  and  many  shall  fall  down  slain."  When  An-
tony went  into  Egypt  with  a  great  army,  Cleopatra,  then
queen  of  Egypt,  deserted  her  husband's  standard,  as  she
had  before  Pompey's,  and  went  over  to  Mark  Antony
with  all  the  forces  she  could  command,  by  which  means
Egypt  became  an  easy  prey  to  the  Romans  ;  so  that  a
part  of  the  Egyptian  army,  that  fed  of  the  portion  of  the
king's  meat,  were  the  means  of  destroying  the  kingdom.
"  And  both  of  these  kings'  hearts  shall  be  to  do  mischief,
and  they  shall  speak  lies  at  one  table ;  but  it  shall  not
prosper ;  for  yet  the  end  shall  be  at  the  time  appointed."
These  two  kings  are  Antony  and  Octavius,  their  char-
acters agreeing  with  the  description  given  in  this  pas-
sage; history  agreeing  that  they  ruled  over  the  Romans
for  a  season  jointly,  and  that  they  were  both  of  them
great  deceivers  and  liars.  History  also  informs  us  that
after  Antony  had  conquered  Egypt,  he  and  Octavius
quarrelled ;  Octavius  Cassar  declared  war  against  An-
tony, marched  an  army  towards  Egypt,  and  at  the  bat-
tle of  Actium  defeated  Antony  and  Cleopatra's  forces,
afterwards  took  Alexandria  in  Egypt,  and  Antony  and
Cleopatra  put  themselves  to  death,  and  Egypt  becomes
a  Roman  province.    This  wis  thirty  years  before  the


94  LECTURE    VI.

birth  of  Christ.  28,  "  Then  shall  he  return  into  his  land
with  great  riches ;  and  his  heart  shall  be  against  the
holy  covenant ;  and  he  shall  do  exploits  and  return  to
his  own  land."  Then  Octavius  returned  to  Rome.
And  the  next  exploit  that  this  fourth  kingdom  would  do
would  he  against  the  holy  covenant.  They,  by  their
authority,  crucified  our  Savior,  persecuted  the  saints,
and  destroyed  Jerusalem ;  and  this  fills  up  the  acts  of
this  Pagan  history  until  towards  the  close  of  the  reign
of  the  Pagan  beast.  29,  "  At  the  time  appointed,  he
shall  return,  and  come  toward  the  south  ;  but  it  shall  not
be  as  the  former,  or  as  the  latter."  The  time  appointed
must  mean  the  length  of  the  reign  of  this  beast,  whose
history  the  angel  is  now  giving,  which  I  have  shown,  in
a  former  lecture,  is  666  years.  "  He  shall  return,  and
come  towards  the  south,"  not  as  the  former  or  latter.
Not  as  the  Romans  going  into  Egypt,  the  latter ;  nor
the  Syrians  going  into  Egypt,  as  the  former ;  but  Italy
must  now  take  her  turn  to  be  overrun  by  the  northern
barbarians.  Therefore  the  angel  says,  in  the  next  verse,
see  30,  (  "  For  the  ships  of  Chittim  shall  come  against
him ; ")  the  meaning  of  which  is,  that  the  Huns,  which
lived  on  the  north  of  the  Adriatic  Sea,  the  place  where
it  was  anciently  called  Chittim,  under  their  leader  Attila,
(surnamed  the  Scourge  of  God,)  should  ravage  the  Ro-
man empire.  This  was  fulfilled  447  years  after  Christ.
"  Therefore  he  shall  be  grieved  and  return,  and  have  in-
dignation against  the  holy  covenant ;  so  shall  he  do  ;  he
shall  return,  and  have  intelligence  with  them  that  for-
sake the  holy  covenant."

About  the  time  that  Attila  ravaged  the  Roman  empire,
Christians  conceived  it  to  be  a  judgment  of  God  upon
the  Romans  for  their  idolatry  and  wickedness,  refused
to  bear  arms  in  favor  of  the  Roman  emperors,  which  led
to  a  bloody  persecution  of  Christians,  and  a  renewal  of
Pagan  rites  and  sacrifices,  which  had  been  partially  sus-
pended during  the  reign  of  Constantine  and  succeeding
emperors,  except  in  the  case  of  Julian  the  Apostate.
"  And  arms  shall  stand  on  his  part,"  that  is,  the  force  of
the  empire  would  be  on  the  side  of  Paganism  "  And
they  shall  pollute  the  sanctuary  of  strength."     They,  in


Christ's  second  coming.  95

this  passage,  mean  the  governments  or  kings,  established
on  the  fall  of  the  Roman  empire  in  the  west,  by  the
Huns,  Goths  and  Vandals  of  the  north.  "By  sanctuary  of
strength,"  is  meant  Rome.  And  it  is  said  that  at  the
time  that  Rome  was  taken,  men,  women,  and  children
were  sacrificed  to  their  Pagan  deities.  "  And  shall
take  away  the  daily  sacrifice."  The  angel  is  giving  us
a  history  of  what  these  kings  would  do,  when  Rome
should  be  divided  into  its  ten  toes,  or  when  the  ten  horns
should  arise,  which  the  angel  has  heretofore  explained
to  mean  ten  kings,  Daniel  vii.  24.  This  is  evident  by
his  using  the  plural  pronoun  instead  of  the  singular,  as
before,  or  as  he  will  following,  when  the  little  horn  ob-
tains the  power.  To  "  take  away  the  daily  sacrifice,"
means  to  destroy  Paganism  out  of  the  kingdom.  This
was  done  by  those  ten  kings  who  now  ruled  the  Roman
empire,  and  would  for  a  little  season,  until  they  should
give  their  power  to  the  image  beast.  "  And  they  shall
place  the  abomination  that  maketh  desolate."  They,
meaning  the  ten  kings,  shall  place,  shall  put  in  the  room
ox  place,  of  the  daily  sacrifice  or  Pagan  beast  which  Avould
now  receive  its  death  wound  by  the  sword,  that  is,  by  the
civil  power  of  this  fourth  kingdom,  under  the  reigning
power  of  these  ten  kings  ;  for  John  tells  us,  Rev.  xvii.
32,13,  "And  the  ten  horns  which  thou  sawest  are  ten
kings,  which  have  received  no  kingdom  as  yet;  but
shall  receive  power  as  kings  one  hour  with  the  beast ;
these  have  one  mind,  (being  all  Pagans,)  and  shall  give
their  power  and  strength  unto  the  beast ;"  that  is,  to  sup-
port Paganism.  Now,  this  was  evidently  fulfilled  ;  for
after  the  fall  of  the  Western  Empire,  A.  D.  476,  and  be-
fore A.  D.  490,  ten  kings  had  risen  upon  the  ruins,  and
formed  ten  separate  kingdoms,  the  names  of  which  I
have  before  given;  they  all  being  Pagans,  of  course
they  supported  that  form  of  worship,  until  they  were  con-
verted to  the  Christian  faith,  which  happened  within  the
space  of  twenty  years,  Clovis,  the  king  of  France,  having
been  converted  and  baptized  in  the  year  A.  D.  496.  By
the  year  A.  D.  508,  the  remainder  of  the  kings  were
brought  over  and  embraced  the  Christian  religion,  which
closes  the  history  of  the  Pagan  beast,  whose  number


96  LECTURE    VI.

was  666;  which,  beginning  158  years  B.  C,  would  end
the  beast's  reign  A.  D.  508,  having  reigned  but  a  short
time,  (one  hour,  says  John,)  with  the  ten  kings.  We
have  now  gone  through  with  the  angel  Gabriel's  second
part  of  the  history,  as  we  promised.

I  shall  now  go  on  with  the  illustration  of  the  third
part  of  his  prophetic  history,  which  is  the  history  of  the
image  beast,  the  deadly  wound  healed,  or  what  Daniel
calls  "  the  abomination  that  maketh  desolate."  This
beast  would  rule  over  the  kings  of  the  earth,  and  tread
the  church  of  God  under  foot  forty-two  months,  or  time,
times,  and  a  half,  which  is  twelve  hundred  and  sixty
years,  in  common  time,  or,  as  the  angel  tells  us  in  Daniel
xii.  11,  from  the  taking  away  the  daily  abomination  to
set  up  the  abomination  that  maketh  desolate,  should  be
a  thousand  two  hundred  and  ninety  days,  showing  a
difference  of  thirty  years  from  the  statement  of  the
actual  reign  of  the  image  beast  and  the  other,  which  in-
cludes all  the  time  from  taking  away  down  through  the
setting  up  or  reign  of  the  image  beast.  Therefore,  to
reconcile  these  two  statements,  we  must  conclude  there
were  30  years  from  A.  D.  508,  when  Paganism  ceased,
before  the  image  beast,  or  Papal  Rome,  would  begin  her
reign.  If  this  is  correct,  then  the  1290  began  508,  and
would  end  us  in  1798.  But  the  reign  of  Papacy  would
not  be  set  up  until  A.  D.  538,  and  would  end  us  in  the
same  year,  A.  D.  1798,  being  1260.  This,  then,  is  the
history  the  angel  will  give  us  next.  32,  "  And  such  as
do  wickedly  against  the  covenant  shall  be  corrupted  by
flatterers  ;  but  the  people  that  do  know  their  God  shall
be  strong,  and  do  exploits."  The  ecclesiastical  histori-
ans tell  us  that  in  the  beginning  of  the  sixth  century,
about  A.  D.  538,  a  number  of  writers  in  that  day  under-
took to  prove  that  the  Papal  chair,  together  with  coun-
cils of  his  approval,  were  infallible,  and  their  laws  were
binding  on  the  whole  church.  These  writers  were
highly  honored  and  flattered  with  promotion  by  the  reign-
ing powers  ;  while  on  the  other  hand  there  were  many
who  opposed  this  power  of  the  Pope  and  clergy,  who
were  denounced  as  schismatics  and  Arians,  and  driven
out  of  the  kingdoms  under  the  control  of  the  Romish


Christ's  second  coming,  97

church.  33,  "And  they  that  understand  among  the
people  shall  instruct  many ;  yet  they  shall  fall  by  the
sword,  and  by  flame,  by  captivity,  and  by  spoil  many
days."  Those  who  instructed  the  common  people,  and
opposed  the  worshipping  of  images,  the  infallibility  of
the  Pope  and  councils,  the  canonizing  of  departed  saints,
were  persecuted  by  the  civil  power,  (the  sword,)  were
burned  by  order  of  the  ecclesiastical  courts  established
by  the  laws  of  Justinian,  emperor  of  Constantinople,
whose  code  of  laws,  published  about  A.  D.  534,  gave
unto  the  bishop  of  Rome  power  to  establish  courts  for  this
purpose,  and  many  in  the  sixth  century  and  subsequent
down  to  a  late  period,  " many  days"  suffered  death,  im-
prisonment, and  confiscation  of  goods,  in  consequence
of  a  difference  of  opinion  in  matters  of  religion,  by  the
tyranny  of  this  abomination,  "  the  bloody  city  which  has
reigned  over  the  kings  of  the  earth,"  34,  "Now,  when
they  shall  fall,  they  shall  be  helped  with  a  little  help ;
but  many  shall  cleave  to  them  with  flatteries."  This
text  agrees  with  one  in  Revelation  xii.  16,  "  And  the
earth  helped  the  woman."  "But  many  shall  cleave  to
them ; "  that  is,  many  men  of  the  world  would  cleave  to
them,  and  professedly  would  flatter  the  true  people  of
God  that  they  were  friendly  at  least  to  them,  and  by
these  means  Satan  carried  on  his  wars  against  the  chil-
dren of  God.  35,  "  And  some  of  them  of  understanding
shall  fall,  to  try  them,  and  to  purge  and  to  make  them
white,  even  to  the  time  of  the  end,  because  it  is  yet  for
a  time  appointed."  This  verse  shows  us  that  even  Chris-
tians would  be  led  into  some  of  the  errors  of  Papacy,
and  would  be  tried  and  purged,  even  to  the  end  of  this
image  beast's  reign,  which  time  is  appointed,  as  I  have
already  shown,  to  be  "  time,  times,  and  a  half,"  1260  years,
ending  A.  D.  179&  36,  "  And  the  king  shall  do  accord-
ing to  his  will ;  and  he  shall  exalt  himself  and  magnify
himself  above  every  god,  and  shall  speak  marvellous
things  against  the  God  of  gods,  and  shall  prosper  till  the
indignation  be  accomplished,  for  that  that  is  determined
shall  be  done."  The  king  here  spoken  of  is  the  same
as  Daniel's  little  horn,  which  came  up  among  the  ten
horns.     It  it  the  same   that  blasphemed  the   God  of


98  LECTURE    VI.

heaven.  It  is  mystical  Babylon.  Isa.  xiv.  12 — 15;
Rev.  xiii.  5, 6.  The  same  Paul  has  described  in  his
Epistle,  2  Thess.  ii.  1 — 9;  the  same  image  beast  which
we  have  been  examining-  the  history  of;  and  one  thing
is  evident,  that  this  beast  will  continue  until  the  day
that  God  pours  out  his  indignation  upon  a  guilty  world
in  some  form  or  other.  37,  "  Neither  shall  he  regard
the  God  of  his  fathers,  nor  the  desire  of  women,  nor  re-
gard any  god ;  for  he  shall  magnify  himself  above  all."
In  this  passage  we  have  a  plain  description  of  Papacy ;
they  do  not  worship  the  same  gods  the  Pagans  did  —
"  their  fathers.''''  And  their  clergy  are  forbidden  to
marry  ;  the  Pope  calls  himself  the  vicegerent  of  God,  or
God  on  earth,  having  the  keys  of  heaven,  &.c.  38,  "  But
in  his  estate  shall  he  honor  the  god  of  forces  ;  and  a  god
whom  his  fathers  knew  not  shall  he  honor  with  gold,
and  silver,  and  precious  stones,  and  pleasant  things."
It  is  true  that  the  Pope,  for  ages  past,  has  had  large
armies  at  his  command,  and  always  a  body-guard  to  at-
tend him  in  his  capital ;  also,  that  they  adorn  their
pictures  with  gold,  and  silver,  and  precious  stones,  and
pleasant  things,  and  that  the  gods  they  worship,  such  as
the  images  of  Christ,  apostles,  and  Virgin  Mary,  and
canonized  saints,  were  not  known  to  Pagan  worship-
pers. 39,  "  Thus  shall  he  do  in  the  most  strong  holds
with  a  strange  god  whom  he  shall  acknowledge  and  in-
crease with  glory  ;  and  he  shall  cause  them  to  rule  over
many,  and  shall  divide  the  land  for  gain."

These  patron  saints,  which  the  Pope  divided  among
the  several  nations  of  the  earth,  and  in  almost  every
family,  each  one  having  their  patron  saint  to  rule  over
them,  by  the  appointment  of  the  Pope,  were  strange  gods
indeed ;  and  rational  beings  might  truly  wonder  when
they  beheld  the  power  of  this  last  abomination  over  the
minds  and  judgments  of  mankind.  And  then,  again,  to
see  the  number  of  kingdoms,  provinces,  states,  and  ter-
ritories, which  the  Pope  has  sold  to  enrich  his  coffers,
without  any  more  right  or  title  to  them  than  we  have  to
the  land  in  the  moon,  must  convince  every  one  that  the
description  given  must  apply  to  the  church  of  Rome  or


Christ's  second  coming.  99

the  Pope,  who  claims  to  exercise  this  great  authority  by
his  crazy  title  to  St.  Peter's  chair.

We  have  now  arrived  to  the  end  of  the  third  division
of  the  angel's  history ;  for  the  next  verse  tells  us,  "  and
at  the  time  of  the  end"  meaning  the  end  of  his  power,  to
tread  on  the  church  by  his  civil  authority,  or  reign  over
the  kings  of  the  earth,  and  to  dispose  of  lands  for  gain
I  have  brought  you  down,  my  kind  hearer,  through  a
long  prophetic  history  of  more  than  2200  years,  and
landed  you  to  the  year  A.  D.  1798,  when  the  Pope  of
Rome  lost  his  civil  power.  In  the  beginning  of  the
year  1798,  on  the  15th  of  February,  a  French  general,
Berthier,  entered  Rome  with  a  French  army  without
resistance,  deposed  the  Pope,  abolished  the  Papal  gov-
ernment, and  erected  the  republic  of  Italy.  The  Pope,
being  taken  prisoner,  was  carried  a  prisoner  by  them
first  to  Sienna  in  Tuscany,  from  thence  to  Florence,
afterwards  to  Grenoble,  and  then  to  Valence,  in  France,
where  he  died  on  the  19th  of  August,  1799,  since  which
time  the  Pope  of  Rome  has  exercised  no  more  of  his
former' power  over  any  of  the  kings  in  Europe,  or  the
Protestant  church.  We  shall  now  close  our  lecture  on
this  history  for  the  present,  reserving  the  remainder  of
Gabriel's  interesting  history  for  another  lecture.


LECTURE    VII.


DANIEL  xii.  8.


And  I  heard,  but  I  understood  not :  then  said  L  O  my  Lord,
what  shall  be  the  end  of  these  things  ?

Previous  to  Daniel's  asking  the  question  contained
in  our  text,  he  had  been  taught,  as  we  have  seen  in  our
former  lecture,  not  only  the  history  of  future  events  as
they  would  succeed  each  other  down  to  the  end  of  the
world,  but  he  had  the  regular  order  of  time  speci-
fied in  the  duration  of  the  little  horn,  "  time,  times,  and  a
half"  as  in  Daniel  vii.  25,  and  xii.  7.  But  he  had  been
informed  of  many  events  which  should  transpire  after
his  "time,  times,  and  a  half"  should  be  finished,  and  not
having  the  length  of  the  Pagan  beast,  or  daily  abomina-
tion, given  to  him  at  all,  he  could  not  tell  or  understand
whereabouts  in  his  grand  number  of  2300  days,  the
end  of  the  civil  power  of  the  little  horn,  or  Papal  Rome,
carried  him:  there  was  no  rule  given  Daniel  yet  by
which  he  could  tell  when  or  how  long  after  the  cruci-
fixion of  the  Messiah  before  the  daily  sacrifice  abomi-
nation would  be  taken  out  of  the  way,  and  the  power  of
the  little  horn  be  established,  and  the  abomination  of
desolation  set  up.  Be  sure,  Daniel  had  heard  the  whole
history  down  to  the  resurrection,  and  had  the  whole  vision
specified  in  his  2300  days.  But  as  he  saw  there  were
evidently  three  divisions  of  the  time  after  the  crucifixion
or  cutting  off  of  the  Messiah  at  the  fulfilment  of  his
490  years,  or  70  weeks,  down  to  the  end  of  his  1810
years,  which  would  be  the  remainder  of  his  total  number
of  2300  years,  after  his  70  weeks  should  be  fulfilled :


CHRIST  S    SECOND    COMING.  101

and  having  only  1260  of  those  years  accounted  for  by
the  reign  of  his  little  horn,  leaving  five  hundred  and
fifty  years  to  be  applied  on  the  Pagan  beast,  and  for  the
events  which  we  are  to  attend  to  after  the  Papal  beast
lost  his  civil  power,  —  therefore  the  propriety  of  DanieFs
saying  in  our  text,  "  Then  I  heard,  but  I  understood  not."
He  understood  not  how  this  time  was  divided,  and  espe-
cially, how  much  time  would  be  taken  up  in  the  last
division  of  the  angel's  history,  beginning  with  the  40th
verse  of  the  11th  chapter,  where  our  last  lecture  ended,
and  finishing  with  the  context  of  the  12th  chapter,  the
verse  previous  to  our  text  That  this  is  the  plain  and
significant  meaning,  is  evident  from  what  follows  our
text,  viz.,  the  angel's  answer  to  Daniel's  question,  "  What
shall  be  the  end  of  these  things?"  And  he  said,  Go
thy  way,  Daniel ;  for  the  words  are  closed  up  and  sealed
till  the  time  of  the  end ; "  that  is,  my  mission  is  closed,
the  words  are  finished,  and  registered  in  the  roll  of  God's
word,  they  are  sealed,  that  is,  made  sure,  unalterable,
will  stand  until  every  word  has  its  fulfilment,  which  in
the  end  shall  be  accomplished ;  not,  as  some  suppose,
that  Daniel's  prophecy  is  sealed,  closed  up,  out  of  sight,
and  cannot  be  understood.  This  is  not  the  way  of  God's
dealings  with  us ;  for  if  this  had  been  the  angel's  mean-
ing, he  would  have  said  to  Daniel  as  he  did  to  John  in
similar  circumstances,  Rev.  x.  4,  "Seal  up  those  things,
and  write  them  not"  But  it  is  the  reverse  ;  for  he  says
in  the  next  verse,  10,  "  Many  shall  be  purified,  and  made
white,  and  tried ;  but  the  wicked  shall  do  wickedly,  and
none  of  the  wicked  shall  understand."  None  of  the
wicked  shall  understand  what  ?  Why,  the  things  before
spoken  of —  Daniel's  vision  and  instruction.  Very  well,
then  the  wicked  do  right  for  once.  Certainly,  if  your
exposition  of  the  former  text  is  correct,  that  it  is  hid,  and
cannot  be  known,  they  are  obeying  the  command  of  the
angel,  close  up  and  seal  the  words ;  and  surely  they  will
not  be  condemned  for  obedience.  "  But  the  wise  shall
understand,"  says  the  angel.  What  shall  the  wise
understand  ?  They  shall  understand  the  vision ;  or  the
words  before  spoken  by  the  angel  at  least  But  say  you,
'•'  Daniel  was  commanded  to  seal  up  and  close  the  words,
{)*


102  LECTURE    VII.

so  that  they  may  never  know  them  till  the  end,  and  the
wise  understand  them.  How  can  these  things  be?"  I
answer,  These  texts  explain  each  other.  There  is  a  close
connection  in  the  word  of  God  which  must  always  be
kept  in  view,  and  if  our  exposition  of  one  contradicts
another  of  the  same  connection  or  of  like  import,  we  may
know  there  is  a  wrong  in  us.  Now,  one  thing  is  certain,
—  "  all  Scripture  is  given  by  inspiration  of  God,  and  is
profitable  for  doctrine,  for  reproof,  for  correction,  for  in-
struction in  righteousness,  that  the  man  of  God  may  be
perfect,  thoroughly  furnished  unto  all  good  works."
And  "secret  things  belong  to  God;  but  things  revealed,
to  us  and  our  children."  And  when  I  see  pretended
servants  of  God,  men  of  great  pretence  to  piety  and
knowledge,  disputing  long  and  sharp  on  some  metaphys-
ical point  in  theology  which  they  nor  their  hearers  can
never  understand,  and  when  they  are  asked  to  explain  the
plain  declarations  of  God,  pat  it  off,  by  saying,  it  is  sealed
up,  and  we  ought  not  to  try  to  understand  it,  it  makes  me
think  of  iEsop's  fable  of  the  dog  in  the  manger;  of
Christ's  reproof  to  the  scribes  and  Pharisees,  "  Woe  unto
you,  scribes  and  Pharisees,  hypocrites !  for  ye  shut  up
the  kingdom  of  heaven  against  men ;  for  ye  neither  go
in  yourselves,  neither  suffer  ye  them  that  are  entering  to
go  in ; "  and  this  passage  in  Daniel,  "  The  wicked  shall
do  wickedly ;  and  none  of  the  wicked  shall  understand ;
but  the  wise  shall  understand."  You  may  depend  upon
one  thing,  when  you  hear  such  declarations  as  the  above
from  the  pulpit,  that  the  speaker  does  not  love  his  Bible
as  well  as  he  loves  his  own  popularity,  and  studies  to
support  his  faith,  the  popular  writers  and  standard  au-
thors of  the  day,  more  than  the  divine  revelation  of  God.
Bat  God  is  now  trying  his  people ;  he  is  now  giving  them
a  great  rule  to  know  their  love  for  his  word.  If  the
word  of  God  is  to  them  foolishness,  and  they  take  more
delight  in  the  popular  writers  of  the  day,  they  may  de-
pend upon  it  they  are  stumbling  at  that  stumbling-stone.
But  the  angel  tells  us  that  many  shall  be  purified  and
made  white.  This  was  good  news  to  Daniel,  and  ought
to  be  so  to  us ;  for  it  is  the  declaration  of  God  through
the  medium  of  Gabriel,  his  messenger.     u  And  from  the


Christ's  second  coming.  103

time  that  the  daily  sacrifice  shall  be  taken  away,  and  the
abomination  that  maketh  desolate  set  up,  there  shall  be
a  thousand  two  hundred  and  ninety  days.  Blessed  is  he
that  waiteth,  and  cometh  to  the  thousand  three  hundred
and  five  and  thirty  days :  but  go  thou  thy  way  till  the
end  be,  for  thou  shalt  rest,  and  stand  in  thy  lot  at  the
end  of  the  days."  Now  Daniel  had  all  he  could  ask  for ;
now  he  could  understand  the  time,  and  the  length,  and
part  of  every  division  which  the  angel  had  given  him  in
his  instruction,  so  far  as  to  fill  up  his  vision  of  2300
years,  (as  we  shall  call  them,  having  proved  in  a  former
lecture  that  they  ought  to  be  so  reckoned,  and  have  been
so  fulfilled.)  He  has  now  learned  that,  to  begin  and
reckon  back  from  the  resurrection,  which  he  well  knew
would  be  1810  years  after  Christ's  crucifixion,  he  might
find  out  when  the  daily  sacrifice  abomination  would  be
taken  away.  Therefore  take  1335  years  from  1810
years,  would  leave  475  years ;  and  he  could  reckon  from
the  end  of  the  70  weeks,  or  490  years,  to  the  end  of  Pagan
Rome,  would  be  475,  from  thence  to  the  time  he  should
stand  in  his  lot,  would  be  1335  years.     Then  by  adding

490

475

1335

would  make  the  sum  total  of  his  whole  vision  2300  years.
And  now,  let  us  suppose  he  wished  to  know  when  the
abomination  of  desolation  would  end,  and  when  it  would
begin.  He  has  only  to  take  his  number,  one  thousand
two  hundred  and  ninety,  as  given  him  by  his  angel,  from
his  1335,  thus—  1335

1290

45

and  he  finds  that  45  years  before  the  resurrection  the
little  horn  would  lose  his  civil  power.  Now,  let  him
take  his  time,  times,  and  a  half,  and  add,  say  1260  years
to  45  years,  and  he  will  find  that  the  little  horn  began
his  reign  1305  years  before  the  resurrection,  and  30
years  after  the  daily  sacrifice  abomination  was  taken
away.     And  now  he  is  prepared  to  give  his  vision  and


104  LECTURE    VII.

the  instruction  of  the  angel  all  their  proper  bearings,
and  prove  it  thus  :  —

1st.  The  seventy  weeks  or  490  years  to  the  cruci-
fixion of  Christ, 490

From  crucifixion  to  taking  away  daily  abomination,     475

From  taking  away  Pagan  rites  to  the  setting  up

abomination  of  desolation, 30

From  setting  up  Papal  power  (time,  times,  and  a

half )  to  the  end  of  his  civil  reign,       .     .     .  1260

From  the  taking  away  the  Papal  civil  rule  to  the

resurrection, 45

Now  add  these  together,  and  you  will  have  the  whole  2300
years  of  Daniel's  vision.  Do  you  not,  kind  hearer,
see  by  this  mode,  and  by  these  last  numbers  given  him,
Daniel  could  learn  every  part  and  division  of  the  whole
history  down  to  the  time  when  he  should  stand  in  his
lot  ?  But  now,  for  his  instruction,  we  will  suppose  Dan-
iel understood  our  mode  of  reckoning  time  ;  he  might
have  given  it  to  us  in  this  way :  —  "  The  70  weeks,  or
490  years,  will  be  accomplished  A.  D.  33.  The  pagan
abomination  will  be  taken  away  475  years  afterwards,
which  will  be  A.  D.  508.  The  papal  abomination  will  be
set  up  30  years  after,  A.  D.  538,  and  will  continue  1260
years,  A.  D.  1798.  After  this  45  years,  I  shall  stand  in
my  lot,  and  all  that  come  forth  to  this  resurrection  will
be  blessed,  A.  D.  1843."  "  Blessed  is  he  that  waiteth
and  cometh  to  the  thousand  three  hundred  and  five
and  thirty  days."  Rev.  xx.  6.  "  Blessed  and  holy  is  he
that  hath  part  in  the  first  resurrection."

We  are  now  prepared  to  give  you  the  remainder  of
the  angel's  instruction  to  Daniel,  beginning  where  we
left  off  in  our  last  lecture ;  and  you  will  likewise  now
take  notice  that  it  is  the  last  division,  and  what  we  now
shall  read  to  you  must  all  take  place  in  45  years,  be-
tween the  years  1798  and  1843.  So  that  you  may,  al-
most all  of  you,  judge  for  yourselves,  upon  your  own
observations,  whether  these  things  are  so  or  not.

We  therefore  begin  at  the  40th  verse  of  the  11  th
chapter  of  Daniel,  "  and  at  the  time  of  the  end  "  of  the
papal  civil  power.     Now,  another  person  has  obtained


Christ's  second  coming.  105

this  civil  power :  this  was  Bonaparte,  the  ruler  of  the
French  nation.  This  year  of  which  we  are  now  treat-
ing was  the  very  year  that  the  French  destroyed  the
power  of  the  pope,  and  Bonaparte  began  his  extraordina-
ry career  in  conquest  and  authority ;  and  it  was  evident,
by  his  success  and  fortune,  that  he  was  raised  up  by
God  himself  for  some  great  and  special  purpose ;  and
through  him,  as  an  instrument,  and  by  means  of  the
French  revolution,  the  shackles  that  had  bound  more
than  half  of  Europe  in  bigotry,  superstition,  and  tyranny,
were  burst  asunder,  and  the  inquisition  and  Papacy  lost
their  power  and  terror  over  the  bodies  and  minds  of
men.  At  this  time,  then,  our  prophecy  begins,  and  Bo-
naparte is  the  person  designated  by  the  pronouns  he  and
Mm  in  the  prophecy :  "  And,  at  the  time  of  the  end,  shall
the  king  of  the  south  push  at  him ;  and  the  king  of  the
north  shall  come  against  him  like  a  whirlwind,  with
chariots,  and  with  horsemen,  and  with  many  ships."
This  is  a  description  of  an  alliance  entered  into  by  the
king  of  Sardinia,  Italy,  and  Spain,  in  the  south,  and
Great  Britain,  in  the  north,  for  six  years.  England  en-
gaged, in  this  treaty,  to  pay  the  king  of  Sardinia  200,0Q0L
per  annum  to  furnish  an  army  of  horse  and  a  large  fleet
The  command  of  the  fleet  was  given  to  Lord  Nelson.
Yarious  was  the  success  of  the  allies  in  the  south.
Spain  had  to  recede,  and  finally  joined  the  French.  The
king  of  Sardinia  had  to  leave  his  territories  on  the  con-
tinent, and  shut  himself  up  in  the  island  of  Sardinia.
The  king  of  Naples  fled  to  the  island  of  Sicily,  after
making  a  vigorous  push  at  the  French,  in  November,
1798,  and  getting  possession  of  Rome,  while  Lord  Nelson
took  and  destroyed  the  French  fleet,  near  Lie  mouth  of
the  Nile,  the  same  year.  But  the  French  soon  retook
Italy;  and  this  broke  up  this  league,  and  the  French
remained  masters  of  almost  all  that  belonged  to  the
Western  Empire  of  Rome,  except  Great  Britain.  "  And
he  shall  enter  into  the  countries,  and  shall  overflow,  and
pass  over,"  was  literally  accomplished.  "  He  shall  enter
also  into  the  glorious  land,"  (or  land  of  delight,  as  it
might  have  been  translated.)  This,  I  have  no  doubt,
means  Italy.     Bonaparte  fought  some  of  his  most  bril-


106  LECTURE    VII.

liant  battles  in  this  delightsome  country.  The  battle
of  Marengo  was  fought,  if  I  mistake  not,  in  June,  1800,
after  crossing  the  Alps,  an  impassable  barrier  between
France  and  Italy,  as  it  was  supposed  by  his  enemies
"  And  many  countries  shall  be  overthrown."  It  is  said
that  Bonaparte  conquered  three  kingdoms  at  the  battle
of  Marengo.  "But  these  shall  escape  out  of  his  hands,
even  Edom  and  Moab,  and  the  chief  of  the  children  of
Amnion."  Bonaparte,  when  he  went  into  Egypt,  calcu-
lated to  march  into  the  East  Indies :  he  advanced  into
Syria,  where,  after  gaining  some  advantages,  he  re-
ceived a  decisive  check  before  St  John  d'Acre,  when
he  was  obliged  to  raise  the  siege,  and  retreat  back  to
Egypt  with  the  shattered  remains  of  his  army.  So  the
country  once  inhabited  by  the  Edomites,  Moabites,  and
Ammonites,  "  escaped  out  of  his  hands."  42 ,  "  He  shall
stretch  forth  his  hands  also  upon  the  countries ;  and  the
land  of  Egypt  shall  not  escape."  "  Hands "  signifies
power;  and  what  country  on  the  globe  did  not  more  or
less  feel  the  effects  of  Bonaparte's  power?  Egypt,
surely,  did  not  escape ;  for  all  Lower  Egypt  was  con-
quered by  his  arms.  43,  "  But  he  shall  have  power
over  the  treasures  of  gold,  and  of  silver,  and  over  all  the
precious  things  of  Egypt."  Bonaparte,  in  his  conquest
of  Egypt,  levied  contributions  upon  the  inhabitants  of
the  country  sufficient  to  support  and  pay  his  troops,  and
brought  away  much  with  him.  "  And  the  Lybians  and
Ethiopians  shall  be  at  his  steps."  When  he  first  went
into  Egypt,  he  landed  his  army  on  the  coast  of  what  was
anciently  called  Lybia,  and  his  last  battle  was  fought  in
Upper  Egypt  —  what  the  ancients  called  Ethiopia.  So
both  of  these  places  were  at  his  steps,  although  neither
of  them  was  fairly  conquered,  as  was  Egypt.  44,  "  But
tidings  out  of  the  east,  and  out  of  the  north,  shall  trouble
him."  This  was  what  was  at  that  time  called  the  Holy
Alliance.  This  was  composed  of  most  of  the  kings  on
the  north  and  east  of  France,  which  finally  proved  the
overthrow  of  the  power  of  Bonaparte,  and  the  restora
tion  of  the  Bourbons  on  the  throne  of  France.

The  news  of  this  alliance  caused  him  much  trouble,
and  also  his  immediate  return  to  France.    "  Therefore


Christ's  second  coming.  107

ne  shall  go  forth  with  great  fury  to  destroy  and  utterly
to  make  away  many."  This  is  a  plain  description  of
Bonaparte's  campaign  into  Russia.  He  went  forth  with
an  army  of  400,000  men,  with  fury,  in  order  to  break  up
the  Holy  Alliance.  He  did  utterly  destroy  Moscow,
and  laid  desolate  the  country  through  which  he  passed.
He  made  away  with  more  than  200,000  of  his  own  army,
besides  the  destruction  of  his  enemies,  say  many  thou-
sands more.  Such  a  destruction  of  life  and  property  in
one  campaign  was  never  known  since  the  days  of  the
Persians  and  the  Greeks.  45,  "  And  he  shall  plant  the
tabernacle  of  his  palace  between  the  seas  in  the  glorious
holy  mountain,"  (or  mountain  of  delight.)  This  was  lit-
erally fulfilled,  in  May  26,  1805,  when  Bonaparte  was
crowned  king  of  Italy  at  Milan,  —  Italy  lying  between
two  seas.  To  "  plant  the  tabernacle  of  his  palace "
would  be  to  establish  him  as  king.  "  Yet  he  shall  come
to  his  end,  and  none  shall  help  him."  This  closes  the
history  of  one  of  the  most  powerful  monarchs  —  the  most
ambitious  and  fortunate  of  warriors,  and  a  man  of  un-
bounded sway  —  that  modern  times  had  ever  produced.
He  had  destroyed,  perhaps,  more  than  3,000,000  lives ;
he  had  dethroned  more  than  one  half  of  the  kings  of
Europe  ;  he  had  disposed  of  kingdoms  at  his  wrill ;  all
nations  had  been  under  the  control  of  his  decrees ;  he
had  commanded  more  than  two  millions  of  veteran  sol-
diers; the  treasures  of  the  four  quarters  of  the  globe  lay
at  his  feet  "  Yet  he  shall  come  to  his  end,  and  none
shall  help  him."  How  soon  the  tale  of  his  end  is  told !
A  breath,  and  his  end  is  come  ;  a  vapor,  and  he  is  gone.
O  God !  the  breath  of  kings  is  in  thy  hand ;  thy  word
goeth  forth,  and  it  is  done  ;  thy  decree  passeth,  and  it
stands  fast  "  He  shall  come  to  his  end,  and  none  shall
help  him."  Where  are  those  kings  that  courted  his  al-
liance? Where  the  twenty  millions  of  French  who
idolized  him  as  a  god  ?  Where  are  those  two  millions
of  veteran  soldiers  whose  bodies  had  been  used  as  ram-
parts to  mount  him  to  glory  ?  Where  are  his  five  breth-
ren who  sat  in  the  seat  of  kings  by  his  power  ?  Where
is  his  mother,  made  a  rich  dowager  by  his  munificence  ?
Where,  O  where  is  the  empress  Maria  Louisa,  and  the


108  LECTURE    VII.

young  king  of  Italy  ?  "  And  none  shall  help  him."
Yes,  Bonaparte  was  by  the  British,  after  he  had  resigned
himself  into  their  hands,  earned  a  prisoner  to  the  island
of  St.  Helena,  in  the  Atlantic  Ocean,  where  he  died
in  exile.  "  He  shall  come  to  his  end,  and  none  shall
help  him."

By  this  history  the  kings  of  the  earth  may  learn,  that
God  can,  with  perfect  ease,  when  the  set  time  shall  come,
break  them  and  their  kingdoms  to  pieces,  so  that  the  wind
may  carry  them  away  like  chaff,  that  no  place  shall  be
found  for  them.

I  shall  now  examine  the  remainder  of  Gabriel's  mes-
sage, contained  in  Daniel  xii.  1,  "  And  at  that  time  shall
Michael  stand  up,  the  great  Prince  which  standeth  for
the  children  of  thy  people."  Michael,  in  this  passage,
must  mean  Christ ;  he  is  the  great  Prince,  and  Prince
of  princes.

The  time  here  spoken  of  is  when  Bonaparte  shall
come  to  his  end,  and  none  to  help  him.  This  was  in
the  latter  part  of  the  year  A.  D.  1815.  There  are  two
things  for  which  Christ  stands  up  for  his  people  to  ac-
complish ;  one  is  their  faith,  and  the  other  their  judg-
ment. Jer.  iii.  13.  Now,  it  is  evident  he  did  not  then
stand  up  in  judgment ;  therefore  I  shall  choose  the
former,  that  he  stood  up  to  plead  the  cause  of  his
people,  to  restrain  backsliders,  and  to  add  to  the  church
of  God  many  who  should  be  saved.  And  blessed  be
his  holy  name,  he  accomplished  his  purpose ;  for  in  the
years  1816,  17,  18,  more  people  were  converted  to  the
faith  of  Jesus  than  had  been  for  thirty  years  before.
Almost,  and  I  know  not  but  every  town  in  these  states
was  visited  with  a  shower  of  mercy,  and  hundreds  and
thousands,  yea,  tens  of  thousands,  were  born  into  the
invisible  kingdom  of  the  dear  Redeemer,  and  their
names  recorded  among  the  members  of  the  church  of
the  first  born.  This  has  lasted  in  a  great  measure  for
20  years,  and  has  spread  over  a  large  share  of  the
Christian  world  ;  even  the  islands  of  the  sea  have  lifted
up  their  voices  to  God,  and  the  wilderness  has  bloomed
like  the  rose,  and  the  heathen  have  seen  of  his  salva-
tion.   The  grace  of  God  has  distilled  upon  us  like  the


Christ's  second  coming.  109

morning  dew,  and  like  showers  upon  a  thirsty  soil.
Surely  this  must  be  by  the  power  of  Michael,  the
great  Prince  of  the  covenant.  "  And  there  shall  be  a
time  of  trouble,  such  as  there  never  was  since  there
was  a  nation,  even  to  that  same  time."  This  time  of
trouble  is  yet  in  futurity ;  but  is  hanging,  as  it  were,
over  our  heads,  ready  to  break  upon  us  in  tenfold
vengeance,  when  the  angel  of  the  gospel,  who  is  now
flying  through  the  midst  of  heaven,  shall  seal  the  last
child  of  God  in  their  foreheads.  And  when  the  four
angels,  who  are  now  holding  the  four  winds,  that  it
blow  not  on  the  sea  nor  on  the  land,  shall  cease  their
holding  ;  when  the  angel,  standing  on  the  sea  and  land,
shall  lift  his  hand  to  heaven  and  swear  by  him  that
liveth  forever  and  ever,  that  time  shall  be  no  longer,  or,
as  it  might,  and,  perhaps,  ought  to  have  been  translated,
"that  there  should  be  no  longer  delay  ;"  that  is,  God
would  wait  no  longer  for  repentance,  no  longer  to  be
gracious ;  but  his  spirit  would  take  its  flight  from  the
world,  and  the  grace  of  God  would  cease  to  restrain
men.  He  that  is  filthy  will  be  filthy  still.  Mankind
will,  for  a  short  season,  give  loose  to  all  the  corrupt
passions  of  the  human  heart.  No  laws,  human  or
divine,  will  be  regarded  ;  all  authority  will  be  trampled
under  foot ;  anarchy  will  be  the  order  of  governments,
and  confusion  fill  the  world  with  horror  and  despair.
Murder,  treason,  and  crime,  will  be  common  law,  and
division  and  disunion  the  only  bond  of  fellowship.
Christians  will  be  persecuted  unto  death,  and  dens  and
caves  of  the  earth  will  be  their  retreat  All  things
which  are  net  eternal  will  be  shaken  to  pieces,  that
that  which  cannot  be  shaken  may  remain.  And  this,  if
I  am  right  in  my  calculations,  will  begin  on  or  before
A.  D.  1&39.  "  And  at  that  time  thy  people  shall  be
delivered,  every  one  that  shall  be  found  written  in  the
book."  Nov/  is  come  salvation  indeed.  The  people
of  God  are  now  to  be  delivered  from  outward  foes  and
inbred  lusts,  from  the  corruptions  of  the  grave  and  the
vileness  of  the  flesh.  Every  one,  the  poor  and  despised
child  of  God,  will  then  be  delivered  when  he  makes  up
his  jewels.  "  And  many  of  them  that  sleep  in  the  dust
JO


110  LECTURE    VII.

of  the  earth  shall  awake,  some  to  everlasting  life,  and
some  to  shame  and  everlasting  contempt."  This  verse
brings  us  down  to  the  resurrection  of  the  dead,  when
the  dust  will  give  up  the  bodies  of  the  saints,  and  they
shall  awake  to  everlasting  life,  when  death  shall  be
finally  conquered,  and  the  grave  resign  up  her  captive
saints  to  victory  and  glory.  The  angel  also  mentions
the  resurrection  of  the  wicked,  and  speaks  of  their
shame  and  everlasting  contempt  He  dwells  not  in
detail  on  this  second  resurrection,  as  though  it  was  too
painful  for  thought,  yet  tells  enough  to  let  the  wicked
unbeliever  know  his  awful  doom,  and  is  silent.  "And
they  that  be  wise  shall  shine  as  the  brightness  of  the
firmament;  and  they  that  turn  many  to  righteousness
as  the  stars  forever  and  ever."  This  verse  needs  no
comment;  it  is  a  beautiful  figure  of  the  righteous  in
glory,  and  the  durability  of  that  happiness  in  the  in-
visible and  immortal  kingdom  of  God.  "But  thou,  O
Daniel,  shut  up  the  words,  and  seal  the  book,  even  to
the  time  of  the  end."  Some  have  taken  occasion,  from
these  words,  to  say,  that  this  prophecy  was  to  be  shut
up  and  sealed,  that  none  might  understand  it  until  the
end.  If  it  was  so,  why  give  it  to  Daniel  at  all  ?  Why
note  it  in  the  Scripture  of  truth  ?  Why  give  to  us  the
same  instruction  which  made  Daniel  understand  what
should  befall  the  people  of  God  in  the  latter  day  ?  But
the  plain  and  obvious  meaning  of  the  first  part  of  this
verse  is,  But  thou,  O  Daniel,  close  up  your  prophecy,
and  set  your  seal  to  the  truth  of  it,  for  at  "  the  time  of
the  end  many  shall  run  to  and  fro ; "  that  is,  at  the  time
of  the  end  the  means  of  travel  would  be  greatly  ex-
tended, so  that  many  would  travel  into  all  parts  of  the
earth,  and  would  increase  in  knowledge  of  places,  men,
and  things.  "  And  knowledge  shall  be  increased."  Can
any  prophecy  be  more  literally  fulfilled  than  this  ?  The
increase  of  travel,  and  the  means  of  conveyance,  and  the
improvement  in  the  arts  and  sciences  at  the  present  day,
have  astonished  the  projectors  themselves.  But  if  it
should  mean  holy  things,  then  look  at  the  great  number
of  missionaries  sent  into  all  parts  of  our  world.  There
?jxe  but  few  nations,  civilized  or  barbarous,  Christian  or


Christ's  second  coming.  Ill

hodthen,  but  what  are  visited  by  the  professed  ministers
of  Christ,  and  knowledge  of  the  word  of  God  has  in-
creased. And  within  thirty  years,  the  Bible  has  been
translated  into  one  hundred  and  fifty  languages,  more
than  three  times  the  number  of  all  languages  that  had
received  a  translation  during  1800  years  before.  Mil-
lions of  copies  of  the  Bible  have  been  circulated  within
the  thirty  years  past,  where  thousands  only  had  been
circulated  before.  "Then  I,  Daniel,  looked,  and  be-
hold, there  stood  other  two,  the  one  on  this  side  of  the
bank  of  the  river,  and  the  other  on  that  side  of  the  bank
of  the  river,  and  said  to  the  man  clothed  in  linen,  which
was  upon  the  waters  of  the  river,  How  long  shall  it  be
to  the  end  of  these  wonders  ?  "  Here  Daniel  saw  the
two  holy  ones  inquiring  of  the  man  clothed  in  linen,
which  stood  upon  the  waters  of  the  river.  This  man  is
the  same  as  Michael  standing  up  for  the  children  of  thy
people.  The  reason  I  assign  is,  he  is  clothed  in  linen,
which  shows  he  is  the  high  priest  for  the  people  of
God.  It  is  the  same  angel  that  John  describes,  Rev.
x.  1 — 6.  This  angel  is  represented  as  being  the  mes-
senger of  the  covenant,  by  having  a  rainbow  on  his  head.
He  was  clothed  with  a  cloud  pure  and  white  like  linen.
He,  too,  had  a  little  book  open,  showing  what  he  should
do,  agreeing  with  our  explanation,  spreading  the  gospel
for  the  last  time  through  the  world,  standing  one
foot  on  the  sea,  and  the  other  on  the  earth,  to  keep
down  the  power  of  anti-Christ,  who  sits  on  many  waters
Rev.  xvii.  1,  15,  and  the  power  of  the  kings  of  the  earth,
until  the  whole  elect  should  be  sealed.  See  Rev.  vii.
1 — 3.  And  that  this  Angel  is  the  Mediator  is  evident.
And  now  he  closes  up  the  mediatorial  kingdom,  when
he  says,  Rev.  x.  6,  "That  there  should  be  time  no
longer,"  or,  as  some  translate  it,  tluti  there  should  be  no
longer  delay,  which  must  of  course  have  one  of  two
meanings  —  either  God  will  no  longer  delay  his  judg-
ment, or  he  will  no  longer  wait  to  be  gracious.  See
next  verse,  and  2  Peter  iii.  9.  Take  either  one  or  both
positions,  and  it  proves  my  object,  that  a  part  of  the
45  years,  the  history  of  which  we  are  now  considering,
is  taken  up  in  spreading  the  gospel,  and  bringing  the


112  LECTURE    VII.

last  remnant  into  Christ's  fold.  "  For  this  gospel  of  the
kingdom  shall  be  preached  in  all  the  world  as  a  witness
unto  all  nations ;  and  then  shall  the  end  come ; "  Matt.
xxiv.  14.  But  the  question,  How  long  to  the  end  of
these  wonders  ?  means  to  the  end  of  the  reign  of  the
beast,  which  the  world  wondered  after.  Rev.  xiii.  3,
7th  verse,  "And  I  heard  the  man  clothed  in  linen,
which  was  upon  the  waters  of  the  river,  when  he  held
up  his  right  hand  and  his  left  hand  unto  heaven."  This
language  shows  us  plainly,  that  it  is  the  same  angel
which  John  saw  in  Rev.  x.  i.  1 — 7.  And  the  same  time
is  indicated  in  Revelation  as  in  Daniel.  Here  in
Daniel  it  is  in  the  last  45  years,  and  in  Revelation
immediately  preceding  the  time  when  the  mystery  of
God  shall  be  finished,  all  that  had  been  declared  by  his
servants,  the  prophets,  the  whole  prophecies  would  be
accomplished.  "And  sware  by  him  that  liveth  forever,
that  it  shall  be  for  a  time,  times,  and  a  half."  This  is
the  same  length  of  time  given  in  Daniel  vii.  25,  which
is  there  given  as  the  reign  of  the  little  horn.  It  is  also
the  same  time  which  is  given  in  Rev.  xi.  2.  Forty-two
months,  (three  years  and  a  half,)  to  give  the  holy  city  to
be  trodden  under  foot.  Again,  the  same  time  is  given,
Rev.  xi.  3,  for  the  two  witnesses  to  prophesy,  clothed  in
sackcloth,  1260  days.  Also,  Rev.  xii.  6,  14,  for  the
church  in  the  wilderness,  and,  again,  in  Rev.  xiii.  5,
where  the  anti-Christian  beast  had  his  delegated  power
to  continue  forty-two  months.  All  these  times  ended  in
A.  D.  1798,  as  we  may  hereafter  show;  when  the  45
years  began  to  accomplish  the  things  which  I  have  been
attending  to  in  this  lecture.  "And  when  he  shall  have
accomplished  to  scatter  the  power  of  the  holy  people,
all  these  things  shall  be  finished."

This  brings  us  down  to  our  text,  and  gives  us  another
important  and  conclusive  sign  by  which  we  may  know
we  live  on  the  eve  of  finishing  the  prophecies,  and  on
the  threshold  of  the  immortal  and  eternal  state.  Let  us
be  wise,  then,  and  secure  an  interest  in  the  inheritance
among  the  just,  that  when  we  fail  on  earth,  we  may  be
received  into  everlasting  habitations  prepared  for  those
who  love  Christ


Christ's  second  coming.  113

But  the  last  sign, "  the  scattering  of  the  holy  people ; "
a  part  of  the  perilous  times.  How  are  they  to  be  scat-
ered?  I  answer,  By  the  errors  of  the  anti-Christian
abomination,  and  the  lo  heres  and  lo  theres,  by  dividing
the  people  of  God  into  parties,  divisions  and  subdivisions.
And  methinks  I  hear  you  say,  "Surely  these  things
are  already  accomplished."  Yes,  you  are  right,  in  part,
but  not  to  its  extent ;  the  sects  are  all  divided  now,  but
not  crumbled  to  pieces ;  some  are  subdivided,  but  not
scattered.  The  time  is  soon  coming  when  father  will
be  against  the  son,  and  son  against  the  father.  Yea,  the
sects  are  all  divided  now.  Presbyterians  are  divided
into  Old  and  New  School,  and  then  again  into  Perfec-
tionists. Congregationalists  are  divided  between  Or-
thodox and  Unitarian,  old  and  new  measures,  Union-
ists, &c.  Methodists  are  divided  between  Episcopal
and  Protestant.  Baptists  are  divided  between  old  and
new  measures,  Antimasons,  Campbellites,  open  and
close  communion,  &c.  &c.  Quakers  are  divided  be-
tween Orthodox  and  Hicksites ;  and  thus  might  we  go
on  and  name  the  divisions  and  subdivisions  of  all  sects
who  have  taken  Christ  for  their  captain.

And  now  let  me  sum  up  in  short  what  we  have  proved
to  you  in  this  discourse.  And  first,  I  showed  the  length
of  time  our  history  would  take  up,  viz.,  45  years.  By
the  numbers  given  in  Daniel  xii.  11 — 13,  his  1290  days,
beginning  when  the  ten  kings,  represented  by  the  ten
toes  in  Nebuchadnezzar's  dream,  and  ten  horns  in  Dan-
iel's vision,  should  be  converted  to  the  Christian  faith,
and  the  daily  sacrifice  abomination  taken  out  of  the
way,  viz.,  A.  D.  508,  which  would  end  us  in  1798,  when
the  Pope  lost  his  power  to  reign  over  the  kings  and
trample  on  the  holy  people,  and  the  abomination  of
desolation  ceased  his  civil  reign,  by  being  deprived  of
his  civil  power  by  Bonaparte.  I  then  showed  you  that
the  number  1335  days,  beginning  at  the  same  time  as
the  1290  days,  viz.  A.  D.  508,  would  end  in  1843,  at  the
resurrection,  for  Daniel  would  stand  in  his  lot  at  the  end
of  these  days.  And  you  have  undoubtedly  noticed  that
this  brought  us  to  the  same  year  that  Daniel's  whole
number,  2300,  brought  us,  which  is  forty-five  years,  the
10*


114  LECTURE     VII,

difference  between  the  two  numbers,  1290  and  1335.  1
then  began  at  Daniel  xi.  40,  and  gave  you  the  history  of
Bonaparte,  his  wonderful  career  of  conquest  and  power,
and  his  final  end.  I  then  gave  you  the  history  of  Michael
standing  up,  and  the  reformation  that  followed  in  the
years  1815,1(3,17,  even  down  to  the  present  time.
Then  the  unfulfilled  prophecy  which  must  come  soon
upon  us,  the  troublous  times.  Next  we  came  to  the
time  of  the  deliverance  of  the  people  of  God,  every
one  that  sleep  in  the  dust  of  the  earth,  and  the  resurrec-
tion. Then  the  angel  gave  us  a  few  signs  which  would
happen  in  the  course  of  this  time,  such  as  the  running
to  and  fro,  the  increase  of  knowledge,  the  nations  being
restrained  from  preventing  the  gospel  being  preached,
and  scattering  the  power  of  the  holy  people,  all  which
you  have  many  of  you  witnessed,  and  can  judge  for
yourselves  whether  these  .things  are  so.

I  shall  now  leave  you  for  the  present ;  and  may  you
reflect  candidly  and  seriously  on  the  subject ;  for  many
of  you  who  are  now  on  the  earth  may  live  to  witness
this  fulfilment ;  and  if  unprepared  then,  with  what  regret
will  you  look  back  on  your  present  opportunity,  and
wish  you  had  improved  these  precious  moments  for
the  salvation  of  your  souls,  and  for  the  glory  of  God  !

Be  wise,  O  ye  inhabitants  of  the  earth,  for  the  Lord
will  come  and  will  not  tarry,  and  the  day  of  vengeance
will  overtake  you  as  a  thief  in  the  night  $  "  but  the  wise
shall  understand*"


LECTURE    VIII


REV.    viii.  1C


And  1  beheld  and  heard  an  angel  flying  through  the  midst  of
heaven,  saying,  with  a  loud  voice,  Woe,  woe,  woe,  to  the  in«
habitants  of  the  earth,  by  reason  of  the  other  voices  of  the  trum-
pet of  the  three  angels  which  are  yet  to  sound.

In  prophetical  scripture,  the  sounding  of  trumpets  is
always  used  to  denote  the  downfall  of  some  empire,  na-
tion, or  place,  or  some  dreadful  battle,  which  may  decide
the  fate  of  empires,  nations,  or  places.  At  the  fall  of
Jericho,  the  trumpet  was  the  instrument,  in  the  hands
of  the  priest  of  the  mighty  God  of  Jacob,  which  cast
down  her  walls,  destroyed  the  city,  and  a  curse  pro-
nounced against  the  man  that  should  ever  build  up  her
walls  again.  Again,  the  trumpet  was  the  instrument  by
which  Gideon  put  to  flight  the  armies  of  the  aliens.
And  the  prophet  Amos  says,  "  Shall  a  trumpet  be  blown
in  the  city,  and  the  people  not  be  afraid?"  Therefore
we  may  reasonably  conclude  that  a  trumpet  is  the
harbinger  of  destructive  wars,  and  the  dissolution  of
empires,  states,  or  the  earth,  as  the  case  may  be.  The
seven  trumpets  mentioned  in  Revelation,  the  three
last  of  which  are  mentioned  in  our  text,  indicate  the
final  overthrow  of  the  powers  spoken  of  in  the  prophecy.
The  four  first  had  their  accomplishment  in  the  destruc-
tion of  the  Jews  and  their  dispersion,  in  the  fall  of  im-
perial Rome,  in  the  overthrow  of  the  Asiatic  kingdom,
and  in  the  taking  away  of  Pagan  rites  and  cere-
monies.

The  last  three  trumpets  will  claim  our  attention  in


116  LECTURE    VIII.

this  discourse ;  the  first  four  having  their  accomplish-
ment under  Rome  Pagan ;  to  the  last  three  under  Rome
Papal.  These  three  trumpets  and  three  woes  are  a
description  of  the  judgments  that  God  has  sent  and  will
send  on  this  Papal  beast,  the  abomination  of  the  whole
earth.  Therefore  we  see  the  propriety  of  the  language
of  our  text,  "  Woe,  woe,  woe,  to  the  inhabitants  of  the
earth,"  meaning  the  worshippers  of  this  Papal  beast,  the
followers  of  this  abomination.  The  fifth  trumpet  alludes
to  the  rise  of  the  Turkish  empire  under  Ottoman,  at  the
downfall  of  the  Saracens.  Ottoman  uniting  under  his
government  the  four  contending  nations  of  Mahometans,
which  had  long  contended  for  the  power  during  the
reign  of  the  Saracen  empire,  viz.,  the  Saracens,  Tartars,
Arabs,  and  Turks.  These,  all  being  by  profession  Ma-
hometans, were  ready  to  follow  any  daring  leader  to
conquer  and  drive  out  from  Asia  (and  even  make  excur-
sion into  Europe)  all  avIio  professed  the  Christian  faith.
They,  having  embraced  the  errors  of  that  fallen  star,
Mahomet,  whose  principles  were  promulgated  by  con-
quest and  the  sword,  became  one  and  perhaps  the  only
barrier  to  the  spread  of  the  Papal  doctrine  and  power  in
the  eastern  world.  Here  the  Roman  Church  had  long
held  a  powerful  sway  over  the  minds  and  consciences  of
the  Christian  or  Greek  church  in  the  east,  by  the  aid  of  the
eastern  emperor  at  Constantinople.  But  the  Turks  or
Ottomans,  whom  the  Lord  suffered  to  rise  up  in  Bithynia,
on  or  near  the  head  waters  of  the  Euphrates,  as  a  scourge
against  this  Papal  abomination,  now  became,  a  check  to
the  Roman  power ;  and  from  this  time  we  may  reason-
ably date  the  declension  of  Papal  authority.  Therefore
on  the  sounding  of  the  fifth  trumpet,  Rome  Papal  began
to  show  a  weakness  which  in  every  succeeding  age  has
been  more  and  more  manifested,  until  her  civil  power
has  crumbled  to  ruin,  and  her  ecclesiastical  assumptions
must  sink,  at  the  sounding  of  the  seventh  trump,  to  rise
no  more  forever.

In  the  description  of  these  trumpets  we  shall  be  able
to  apply  the  prophecy,  as  the  writer  believes,  to  those
events  designed  by  the  vision  which  John  saw.

Rev.  ix.  1.    "And  the  fifth  angel  sounded,  and  I  saw


Christ's  second  coming.  117

a  star  fall  from  heaven  unto  the  earth ;  and  to  him  was
given  the  key  of  the  bottomless  pit."  After  the  down-
fall of  Pagan  Rome,  and  the  rise  of  the  anti-Christian
abomination,  Mahomet  promulgated  a  religion  which
evidently  came  from  the  bottomless  pit ;  for  it  fostered
all  the  wicked  passions  of  the  human  heart,  such  as  war,
murder,  slavery,  and  lust.

2d  verse,  "And  he  opened  the  bottomless  pit,  and
there  arose  a  smoke  out  of  the  pit  as  the  smoke  of  a
great  furnace ;  and  the  sun  and  the  air  was  darkened  by
reason  of  the  smoke  of  the  pit"  The  figures  used  in
this  text  are,  the  bottomless  pit,  which  denote  the  theo-
ries of  men  or  devils,  that  have  no  foundation  in  the
word  of  God.  Smoke  denotes  the  errors  from  such  doc-
trine, which  serve  to  blind  the  eyes  of  men,  that  they
cannot  see  the  truth.  As  the  smoke  of  a  great  furnace
shows  the  great  extent  or  effect  of  this  error  over  the
world.  The  sun  denotes  the  gospel,  which  is  the  great
luminary  of  the  moral  world,  The  air  denotes  the
moral  influence  on  the  mind,  which  is  commonly  called
piety.  As  air  supports  or  gives  to  the  lungs  animation
in  the  physical  world,  so  does  the  piety  of  the  heart  to
the  moral.

This,  then,  is  the  true  sentiment  of  this  passage.  And
by  reason  of  the  Mahometan  errors  which  would  be  be-
lieved or  followed  by  a  great  multitude,  the  gospel  and
the  pious  influence  of  the  same  would  be  in  a  great
measure  hid  or  lost  to  the  world.

3d  verse,  "  And  there  came  out  of  the  smoke  locusts
upon  the  earth ;  and  unto  them  was  given  power,  as  the
scorpions  of  the  earth  have  power."  By  these  locusts  I
understand  armies.  See  Joel,  1st  and  2d  chapters.
Therefore  I  should  read  this  text  thus  :  And  there  came
out  from  these  Mahometan  followers  large  armies,  which
should  have  great  power  to  execute  the  judgments  of
God  on  this  anti-Christian  beast,  which  had  filled  the
earth  with  her  abominations.

4th  verse,  "  And  it  was  commanded  them  that  they
should  not  hurt  the  grass  of  the  earth,  neither  any  green
thing,  neither  any  tree,  but  only  those  men  which  have
not  the  seal  of  God  in  their  foreheads."    By  grass,  green


118  LECTURE    VIII.

things,  and  trees,  Ps.  lxxii.  16,  Hosea  xiv.  8,  I  under-
stand the  true  church,  or  people  of  God.  By  those  men
having  not  the  seal  of  God,  &c,  I  understand  the  anti-
Christian  church,  or  Papal  Rome.  Then  this  would  he
the  sense :  And  it  was  commanded  them  that  they
should  not  hurt  the  true  church,  or  people  of  God,  but
only  the  anti-Christian  beast,  or  powers  subject  to  her.

5th  verse,  "  And  to  them  it  was  given  that  they  should
not  kill  them,  but  that  they  should  be  tormented  five
months;  and  their  torment  was  as  the  torment  of  a
scorpion,  when  he  striketh  a  man."  To  kill  is  to  de-
stroy. Five  months  is  in  prophecy  150  years.  To  tor-
ment as  a  scorpion,  &c,  is  to  make  sudden  incursions
and  irruptions  into  the  country,  &c.  Then  this  is  the
sentiment  to  me  conveyed  in  the  text :  And  the  Turkish
armies  would  not  have  power  to  destroy  the  Papal  pow-
ers for  150  years,  but  would  make  sudden  and  quick
incursions  into  their  territories,  and  harass  and  perplex
the  nations  under  the  Papal  control.

6th  verse,  "  And  in  those  days  shall  men  seek  death,
and  shall  not  find  it ;  and  shall  desire  to  die,  and  death
shall  flee  from  them."  About  this  time  the  Greek
church,  in  Constantinople,  was  so  harassed  by  the  Pa-
pal authority,  that  it  gave  rise  to  a  saying  among  them,
that  they  "  had  rather  see  the  Turkish  turban  on  the
throne  of  the  Eastern  Empire,  than  the  Pope's  tiara."
And  any  one  who  has  read  the  history  of  the  14th  cen-
tury, will  see  that  this  text  was  literally  accomplished.

7th  verse,  "  And  the  shapes  of  the  locusts  were  like
unto  horses  prepared  unto  battle  ;  and  on  their  heads
were,  as  it  were,  crowns  like  gold,  and  their  faces  were
as  the  faces  of  men."  In  this  verse  we  have  a  descrip-
tion of  the  Turkish  armies.  In  the  first  place  they  are
represented  as  being  all  horsemen.  This  was  true  with
the  Turks,  and  no  other  kingdom  since  Christ's  time,
that  we  have  any  knowledge  of,  whose  armies  were  all
horsemen.  They  wore  on  their  heads  yellow  turbans,
which  can  only  apply  to  the  Turks,  looking  like  crowns
of  gold.

8th  verse,  "  And  they  had  hair  as  the  hair  of  women,
and  their  teeth  were  as  the  teeth  of  lions."    They  wore


Christ's  second  coming.  119

long  hair  attached  to  their  turbans,  and  they  fought  with
javelins  like  the  teeth  of  lions.

9th  verse,  "And  they  had  breastplates,  as  it  were
breastplates  of  iron ;  and  the  sound  of  their  wings  was
as  the  sound  of  chariots  of  many  horses  running  to  bat-
tle." By  their  breastplates  1  understand  shields,  which
the  Turks  carried  in  their  battles ;  and  history  tells  us
that  when  they  charged  an  enemy,  they  made  a  noise
upon  them  like  the  noise  of  chariot  wheels.

10th  verse,  "And  they  had  tails  like  unto  scorpions,
and  there  were  stings  in  their  tails  ;  and  their  power  was-
to  hurt  men  five  months."  The  Turkish  horsemen  had
each  a  cimeter  which  hung  in  a  scabbard  at  their  waist,
that  they  used  in  close  combat  after  they  had  discharged
their  javelins,  with  which  they  were  very  expert,  sever-
ing a  man's  or  even  a  horse's  head  at  a  blow.  And
from  the  time  that  the  Ottoman  power  or  Turkish  em-
pire was  first  established  in  Bithynia,  until  the  downfall
of  the  Greek  or  Eastern  Empire,  when  the  Turks  took
Constantinople,  was  five  prophetic  months,  or  one  hun-
dred and  fifty  years.

11th  verse,  "  And  they  had  a  king  over  them,  which  is
the  angel  of  the  bottomless  pit,  whose  name  in  the  He-
brew tongue  is  Abaddon,  but  in  the  Greek  tongue  hath
his  name  Apollyon."  The  Turkish  government  had  a
king  when  they  began,  as  before  mentioned,  and  he  was
a  follower  of  the  Mahometan  faith,  and  truly  a  servant
or  messenger  of  this  doctrine  of  the  bottomless  pit.  The
name  of  their  first  king,  who  is  styled  in  history  the  foun-
der of  the  Turkish  empire,  was  Qthoman  or  Ottoman,
from  whom  the  empire  took  its  name,  and  has  been  call-
ed to  this  day  the  Ottoman  empire.  And  great  has  been
the  destruction  which  this  government  has  executed  upon
the  world;  and  well  may  this  empire  be  styled  Destroyer,
in  prophecy  the  signification  of  Abaddon  or  Apollyon.

12th  verse,  "  One  woe  is  past ;  and  behold,  there  come
two  woes  more  hereafter."  This  closes  the  fifth  trumpet
and  the  first  woe,  commencing  at  the  foundation  of  the
Turkish  empire  in  Bithynia,  in  the  year  A.  D.  1298,  and
lasting  five  prophetic  months,  or  150  years,  which  carries
us  down  to  the  year  A.  D.  1448.     When  we  take  into


120  LECTURE    VIII.

view  the  object  and  design  of  God  in  sending  this  judg-
ment or  scourge  upon  the  men  who  have  not  the  seal  of
God  on  their  foreheads;  the  anti-Christian  beast,  who
profess  to  be  Christians,  but  are  not ;  when  we  compare
the  history  of  those  times  with  the  prophecy  —  we  have
been  examining,  and  the  events  which  have  transpired
concerning  the  Ottoman  empire,  with  the  descriptive
character  given  of  them  in  this  prophecy,  —  we  cannot,  I
think,  hesitate  for  a  moment  to  apply  the  fulfilment  of
this  trumpet  and  woe,  to  these  events,  time,  and  place ;  and
must  be  led  to  admire  the  agreement  between  the  proph-
ecy and  fulfilment,  and  to  believe  this  book  of  Revela-
tion to  be  indited  by  the  unerring  wisdom  of  the  Divine
Spirit ;  for  no  human  forethought  could  have  so  exactly
described  these  events,  dress,  manners,  customs,  and
mode  of  warfare  1200  years  beforehand,  except  the  wis-
dom of  God  had  assisted  him.  And  if  these  things  are
revealed  by  God  himself  unto  us,  surely  no  one  will  dare
to  say  that  it  is  non-essential  whether  we  believe  this
part  of  the  revealed  will  of  God  or  not.  Shall  God
speak  and  man  disregard  it?  Forbid  it,  O  Father;  and
let  us  have  "  ears  to  hear  what  the  Spirit  saith  to  the
churches."

We  shall  now  follow  the  revelation  of  God  into  the
sixth  trumpet  and  second  woe ;  and  may  we  have  the
Spirit  of  God  to  assist  us  and  lead  our  minds  into  the
truth  of  these  things.

13th  verse,  "  And  the  sixth  angel  sounded,  and  I  heard
a  voice  from  the  four  horns  of  the  golden  altar  which  is
before  God,"  14th  verse,  "  Saying  to  the  sixth  angel
which  had  the  trumpet,  Loose  the  four  angels  which  are
bound  in  the  great  river  Euphrates."  By  the  sounding
of  the  trumpet,  I  understand  the  commencing  of  those
judgments  which  were  to  be  poured  out  upon  the  earth
under  this  trumpet;  and  by  the  " voice  from  the  four
horns  of  the  golden  altar,"  the  agreement  of  all  the  pow-
ers of  heaven  and  earth  to  execute  the  design  of  God  in
this  thing.  By  loosing  the  four  angels  which  are  bound
in  the  great  river  Euphrates,  I  understand  that  God  was
now  about  to  suffer  the  four  principal  nations  of  which
the  Ottoman  empire  was  composed,  which  had  in  vain


Christ's   second   coming.  121

attempted  to  subdue  the  Eastern  Empire  at  Constantino-
ple, and  made  but  little  progress  in  conquering  Europe,
now  to  take  Constantinople,  and  to  overrun  and  subdue
one  third  part  of  Europe,  which  was  the  fact  about  the
middle  of  the  fifteenth  century.

15th  verse,  "  And  the  four  angels  were  loosed,  Avhich
were  prepared  for  an  hour,  and  a  day,  and  a  month,  and
a  year,  to  slay  the  third  part  of  men."  The  four  angels,
we  may  reasonably  conclude,  are  a  representation  of  the
four  nations  that  had  embraced  the  Mahometan  religion,
and  were  now  under  the  control  of  the  Ottoman,  viz.,
Turks,  Tartars,  Arabs,  and  Saracens.  The  time  ex-
pressed in  the  last-mentioned  verse  is  391  years  and  15
days.  u  To  slay  the  third  part  of  men,"  is  to  destroy  and
conquer  one  third  part  of  the  governments  or  kingdoms
of  which  the  Papal  beast  had  the  control,  which  was  true
in  the  end.

16th  verse,  "  And  the  number  of  the  army  of  the  horse-
men was  two  hundred  thousand  thousand ;  and  I  heard
the  number  of  them."  In  this  verse  the  precise  number
of  the  army  of  horsemen  is  given,  for  John  tells  us  "  he
heard  the  number  of  them."  And  if  we  should  under-
stand the  prophet  to  mean,  as  some  suppose  he  does,
200,000,  multiplied  by  a  1000,  then  the  sum  total  would
be  200,000,000,  which  would  be  more  men  than  were
ever  on  our  earth  at  one  time  capable  of  bearing  arms  ;
therefore  I  believe  this  is  not  the  meaning  of  the  prophet,
neither  do  I  think  that  it  was  a  succession  of  armies  dur-
ing the  whole  period  of  391  years,  making  the  sum  total
of  200,000,000,  for  this,  too,  would  be  incredible  ;  for  al-
lowing a  standing  army  of  15,385,000  to  be  recruited
every  30  years,  it  would  only  make  the  two  hundred
millions  ;  and  this  sum  would  be  more  than  five  times  the
number  of  all  the  standing  armies  in  the  known  world.
And  from  these  considerations  I  have  for  myself  given
this  construction,  that  the  prophet  John  heard  the  num-
ber of  200,000  repeated,  or  twice  told,  which  would
make  an  army  of  400,000  horsemen;  and  this  would  not
be  incredible.  And  what  is  to  me  strong  proof  of  the
fact  is,  that  the  history  informs  us  that  Mahomet  II.  came
against  Constantinople  about  the  year  A.  D.  1450,  with
11


122  LECTURE    VliT.

an  army  of  400,000  #  horsemen,  and  after  a  long  siege
took  the  city  in  the  year  1453,  and  destroyed  the  East-
ern Empire,  which  had  stood  more  than  ten  centuries
from  its  foundation  by  Constantine.

17th  verse  :  "  And  thus  T  saw  the  horses  in  the  vision,
and  them  that  sat  on  them,  having  breastplates  of  fire,
and  of  jacinth  and  brimstone ;  and  the  heads  of  the
horses  were  as  the  heads  of  lions,  and  out  of  their
mouths  issued  fire,  and  smoke,  and  brimstone."  18th
verse,  "  By  these  three  was  the  third  part  of  men  killed,
by  the  fire,  and  by  the  smoke,  and  by  the  brimstone,
which  issued  out  of  their  mouths."  19th  verse,  "  For
their  power  is  in  their  month,  and  in  their  tails  ;  for  their
tails  were  like  unto  serpents,  and  had  heads,  and  with
them  they  do  hurt."  In  these  verses  which  we  have
now  read,  we  are  plainly  informed  that  it  was  an  army
of  horses,  and  men  on  them,  which  John  saw  in  the  vis-
ion. And  the  implements  and  manner  of  fighting,  such
as  the  trapping  of  their  horses,  and  the  instruments  of-
fensive and  defensive,  gunpowder  and  guns,  are  as  ex-
actly described  as  any  person  could  describe  it  without
knowing  the  name  by  which  we  describe  it  at  the  pres-
ent day.  Fire,  smoke,  and  brimstone,  would  be  the
most  visible  component  parts  of  gunpowder.  Fire  and
smoke  we  should  see,  and  brimstone  we  should  smell.
And  who  ever  saw  an  army  of  horsemen  engaged  in  an
action  but  would  think  of  John's  description,  "  out  of
their  mouths  issued  fire,  and  smoke,  and  brimstone,"  and
in  the  breech  of  the  guns  were  bullets,  "  like  heads,
and  with  these  they  do  hurt"?  Every  part  of  this  de-
scription is  exactly  applicable  to  an  army  of  horsemen
with  fire-arms ;  and  what  is  equally  strong  in  the  evi-
dence is,  that  guns  and  fire-arms  were  invented  but  a
short  time  previous  to  this  trump-sounding,  and  the
Turks  claimed  the  honor  (if  honor  it  can  be  called)  of
inventing  gunpowder  and  guns  ;  and  it  is  equally  evi-
dent by  the  history  that  guns  were -first  used  by  the
Turks  at  the  taking  of  Constantinople,  they  having  one
single  cannon  that  took  70  yoke  of  oxen  to  draw  it  at
the  siege,  as  says  Dr.  Gill  on  this  passage.

*  Soms  authors  say  300,000.


123

20th  verse,  "  And  the  rest  of  the  men  which  were
not  killed  by  these  plagues  yet  repented  not  of  the
works  of  their  hands,  that  they  should  not  worship  dev-
ils, and  idols  of  gold,  and  silver,  and  brass,  and  stone,
and  of  wood,  which  neither  can  see,  nor  hear,  nor  walk."
21st  verse,  "Neither  repented  they  of  their  murders,
nor  of  their  sorceries,  nor  of  their  fornication,  nor  of
their  thefts."  In  these  verses,  we  have  the  character
of  the  persons  or  government  on  whose  account  these
plagues  were  sent  In  the  first  place,  they  are  repre-
sented as  idolaters,  as  worshipping  devils,  idols  of  gold,
&c,  full  of  murder,  sorceries,  fornication,  and  theft.
This  exactly  agrees  with  the  description  John  has  given
of  the  "woman  sitting  on  the  scarlet-colored  beast,  full
of  names  of  blasphemy,  having  seven  heads  and  ten
horns.  And  the  woman  was  arrayed  in  purple  and  scar-
let color,  and  decked  with  gold,  and  precious  stones,  and
pearls,  having  a  golden  cup  in  her  hand  full  of  abomina-
tions and  filthiness  of  her  fornication.  And  upon  her
forehead  was  a  name  written,  Mystery,  Babylon  the
Great,  the  Mother  of  Harlots,  and  the  abominations  of  the
earth."  So  we  see  that  the  fifth  and  sixth  trumpets,  and
the  two  first  woes,  were  sent  as  the  judgments  of  God
upon  this  anti-Christian  beast,  and  clearly  shows  the
decline  of  the  power  which  she  had  exercised  over  the
kings  of  the  earth  and  the  people  of  God  for  more  than
eight  centuries,  to  the  commencing  of  the  sixth  trumpet,
when  the  Turks  were  let  loose  upon  those  kingdoms  un-
der the  control  of  Papacy,  conquered  all  Asia  and  about
one  third  part  of  Europe,  and  were  in  the  end  the  means
of  opening  the  eyes  of  many  of  the  inhabitants  of  the
world  to  see  that  the  Pope's  pretension  of  being  the  vice-
gerent of  God  was  not  well  founded;  for,  if  be  could
not  foresee  and  resist  the  inroads  of  the  Turks,  —  that
infidel  nation,  —  surely  he  could  not  perform  those  great
miracles  which  he  pretended  to  perform  in  order  to  sup-
port his  ecclesiastical  and  civil  power:  and  individuals,
and  afterwards  nations,  began  to  disregard  his  authority,
excommunications,  and  bulls,  until  his  power  is  now  but
a  little  more  than  a  bishop  of  Rome.

Here  we  see  the  wonder-working  ways  of  our  God,


124  LECTURE    VIII.

who,  in  wisdom  and  providence,  suffers  the  corrupt  and
infidel  nations  of  the  earth  to  pull  down  each  other,  and
to  bring  about  his  purposes  and  designs,  and  will  event-
ually destroy  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  earth,  by  such
means,  and  in  such  ways,  as  the  prophets  have  foretold ;
and  whoever  lives  until  the  year  1839  will  see  the  final
dissolution  of  the  Turkish  empire,  for  then  the  sixth
.rumpet  will  have  finished  its  sounding,  which,  if  I  am
correct,  will  be  the  final  overthrow  of  the  Ottoman
power.  And  then  will  the  seventh  trump  and  last  woe
begin,  under  which  the  kingdoms  of  the  earth  and  the
anti-Christian  beast  will  be  destroyed,  the  powers  of
darkness  chained,  the  world  cleansed,  and  the  church
purified.

See  the  10th  chapter  of  Revelation,  5th,  6th,  and  7th
verses,  "  And  the  angel  which  I  saw  stand  upon  the  sea
and  upon  the  earth  lifted  up  his  hand  to  heaven."  This
is  the  angel  of  the  covenant,  the  great  Mediator.  See
the  first  verse,  "  And  I  saw  another  mighty  angel  come
down  from  heaven,  clothed  with  a  cloud."  So  is  Christ
to  come  in  the  clouds  with  power  and  great  glory.
"And  a  rainbow  was  upon  his  head."  This  shows
plainly  that  it  is  Christ ;  for  the  rainbow  is  a  token  of
the  covenant.  "  And  his  face  was  as  it  were  the  sun."
The  same  as  when  he  was  transfigured,  Matt.  xvii.  2,
"And  his  feet  as  pillars  of  fire."  See  Rev.  i.  15,  "His
feet  like  unto  fine  brass,  as  if  they  burned  in  a  furnace."
Surely  this  must  be  Christ  "  And  he  had  in  his  hand
a  little  book  open."  None  could  open  the  book  but  the
lion  of  the  tribe  of  Judah  —  another  strong  proof  that
the  angel  in  Rev.  x.  5  is  Christ.  And  who  but  Christ
could  stand  upon  the  sea  and  upon  the  earth,  and  lift
"  up  his  hand  to  heaven,  and  swear  by  Him  that  liveth
forever  and  ever,  who  created  heaven  and  the  things
that  therein  are,  and  the  sea  and  the  things  which  are
therein,  that  there  should  be  time  no  longer"?  that  is,
gospel  or  mediatorial  time  should  cease.  No  more  time
for  mercy  ;  no  more  Spirit  to  strive  with  you,  sinner ;  no
more  means  of  grace  ;  no  more  repentance  unto  life  ;  no
more  hopes  of  heaven ;  for  Jesus  has  sworn  by  himself,
because  he  could  swear  by  no  greater,  that  your  day  of


Christ's  second  coming.  125

probation  "  should  be  no  longer."  For  "  he  that  is  filthy
shall  be  filthy  still."  The  Bridegroom  has  come,  and  shut
to  the  door.  I  know,  sinner,  you  will  then  cry,  Lord,  Lord,
open  unto  us ;  but  he  will  say  unto  you,  Depart  from
me,  ye  workers  of  iniquity,  for  I  know  you  not :  when  I
called  to  you  to  open  the  door  of  your  hearts,  that  I  might
come  in  and  sup  with  you,  ye  refused ;  when  I  stretched
out  my  arm  all  the  long  day  of  the  gospel,  ye  regarded
it  not;  I  will  now  laugh  at  your  calamity,  and  mock
when  your  fear  cometh.  Then  will  the  angel,  flying
through  the  midst  of  heaven,  cry,  with  a  loud  voice.
Woe,  woe,  woe  to  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth ;  for,
when  the  last  woe  is  pronounced,  and  "  in  the  days  of
the  voice  of  the  seventh  angel,  when  he  shall  begin  to
sound,  the  mystery  of  God  should  be  finished,  as  he  hath
declared  to  his  servants  the  prophets."  "  The  second  woe
is  past,  and  behold  the  third  woe  cometh  quickly.  And
the  seventh  angel  sounded  ;  and  there  were  great  voices
in  heaven,  saying,  The  kingdoms  of  this  world  are  be-
come the  kingdoms  of  our  Lord  and  of  his  Christ,  and
he  shall  reign  forever  and  ever,"  Rev.  xi.  14,  15.  By
these  passages  we  learn  that,  when  the  sixth  trumpet
has  done  sounding,  when  the  second  woe  is  past,  then
the  third  woe  comes  quickly.  The  seventh  trump  be-
gins to  sound  ;  the  mystery  of  God  is  finished  —  all  that
has  been  spoken  by  the  prophets,  that  is,  all  that  con-
cerns the  kingdom  of  Christ;  for  then  will  be  brought
to  pass  the  saying,  Death  is  swallowed  up  in  victory  ;
for,  when  the  last  trumpet  shall  sound,  the  dead  in
Christ  shall  be  raised:  "For  as  in  Adam  all  died,  even
so  in  Christ  shall  all  be  made  alive."  "  But  every  man
in  his  own  order.  Christ  the  first  fruits,  afterwards  they
that  are  Christ's  at  his  coming."  "  The  first  man  is  of
the  earth,  earthy;  the  second  Man  is  the  Lord  from
heaven."  "  As  is  the  earthy,  such  are  they  also  that  are
earthy ;  and  as  is  the  heavenly,  such  are  they  also  that
are  heavenly."  "  And  as  we  have  borne  the  image  of
the  earthy,  we  shall  also  bear  the  image  of  the  heavenly.
Now,  this  1  say,  brethren,  that  fle=h  and  blood  cannot
inherit  the  kingdom  of  God;  neither  doth  corruption  in-
herit incorruption."  "  Behold,  I  show  you  a  mystery :
li*


126  LECTURE    VIII.

we  shall  not  all  sleep,  but  we  shall  all  be  changed,  in  a
moment,  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye,  at  the  last  trump  ,
for  the  trumpet  shall  sound,  and  the  dead  shall  be  raised
incorruptible,  and  we  shall  be  changed ;  for  this  cor-
ruptible must  put  on  incorruption,  and  this  mortal  must
put  on  immortality."  "  Then  will  be  brought  to  pass  the
saying  that  is  written,  Death  is  swallowed  up  in  victory ,"
1  Cor.  xv.  22—54.


^  ■*


LECTURE   IX.


Rev.  i.  20.


The  mystery  of  the  seven  stars  which  thou  sawest  in  my  right  hand,
and  the  seven  golden  candlesticks.     The  seven  stars  are  the  an-

§els  of  the  seven  churches ;    and  the  seven  candlesticks  which
iou  sawest  are  the  seven  churches.

It  has  generally  been  believed  that  the  seven  churches
to  whom  the  angel  instructed  John  to  write,  were  seven
different  and  distinct  churches  in  Asia,  and  by  almost
all  of  our  commentators  at  the  present  day  are  under-
stood to  mean  seven  literal  churches.  But  your  speaker
is  forced,  from  the  reasons  which  will  hereafter  be  pro-
duced, to  believe  that  these  seven  churches  of  Asia  are
to  be  understood  in  a  figurative  sense,  alluding  to  seven
periods  of  the  church  militant,  during  the  Christian  dis-
pensation, down  to  the  first  resurrection,  and  the  com-
mencing of  the  glorious  reign  of  Christ  on  the  earth,  com-
monly called  The  Millennium.  If  this  view  of  the  subject
should  prove  to  be  the  correct  exposition  of  the  text,  how
important  and  interesting  is  the  subject  to  us  who  live  in
the  last  stage  of  the  church !  Then  we  who  live  at  this
day,  are  particularly,  and  solemnly  and  aivfnlty,  admon-
ished in  what  is  said  by  Christ  to  the  church  of  the  Laod-
iceans,  that  church  corresponding  with  our  stage  of
the  church  immediately  previous  to  the  commencing  of
the  millennial  glory ;  and  how  necessary  that  we  should
know  that  these  admonitions  do  most  deeply  concern  us !

This  view  of  the  subject  will  then  claim  our  first  at-
tention. Were  the  seven  churches  used  as  a  figure  of
tho  whole  Christian  dispensation,  or  were  they  not  ?    I


128  LECTURE    IX.

answer,  In  my  humble  opinion,  they  were.  Because,
first,  the  book  of  Revelation  does  evidently  contain  a
prophecy  of  things  which  did  not  concern  those  seven
literal  churches  in  Asia;  for  those  churches  have  long
since  passed  away  and  become  extinct;  yet  the  book  of
Revelation  contains  prophecies  which  are  daily  fulfil-
ling, and  have  been  for  eighteen  centuries.  It  is  also
said  to  be  a  revelation  of  things  which  must  shortly  come
to  pass.  "The  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ  which  God
gave  unto  him,  to  show  unto  his  servants  things  which
must  shortly  come  to  pass."  Not  things  that  have  been.
Yet  if  Christ  is  only  giving  admonitory  advice  to  those
seven  literal  churches,  then  he  is  only  relating  their  char-
acters as  they  then  were,  and  so  far  as  these  churches
Avere  concerned  it  would  cease  to  be  a  prophecy,  and  the
very  first  verse  in  Revelation  would  be  violated.  Again,
3d  verse,  "Blessed  is  he  that  readeth  and  they  that  hear
the  words  of  this  prophecy,  and  keep  those  things  which
are  written  therein  ;  for  the  time  is  at  hand."  We  see
that  it  is  called  a  prophecy  in  this  verse,  and  must  al-
lude to  the  whole  book ;  but  who  will  pretend  that  the
three  chapters  in  the  beginning  of  Revelation  are  a
prophecy,  if  we  understand  them  as  relating  the  char-
acter of  seven  literal  churches  in  Asia  only?  None,
none.

Again :  the  word  seven  is  often  used  in  the  word  of
God  as  a  mystical  number,  meaning  the  whole,  as  seven
spirits,  seven  stars,  seven  angels,  seven  candlesticks,
seven  seals,  seven  trumpets,  seven  vials,  seven  thun-
ders, seven  plagues,  seven  mountains,  seven  heads,  seven
eyes,  seven  horns,  seven  crowns,  seven  kings,  and  seven
churches.  All  these  are  used  in  Revelation  and  apply  to
or  concerning  the  whole  Gospel  period.  If,  then,  the
number  seven  is  used  so  often  in  this  book  in  a  figurative
sense,  may  we  not  reasonably  suppose  that  it  is  so  used
in  the  dedication  of  this  book  to  the  seven  churches  in
Asia,  and  the  history  of  those  seven  churches  be  pro-
phetic ?  for  no  scripture  is  given  for  any  private  inter-
pretation, and  surely  the  instruction  in  the  introduction
of  the  book  carries  us  down  to  the  coming  of  Christ  in
the  clouds  —  «  Behold,  he  cometh  with  clouds  ;  and  every


Christ's  second  coming.  129

eye  shall  see  him,  and  they  also  which  pierced  him ;  and
all  kindreds  of  the  earth  shall  wail  because  of  him ;  even
so,  amen.  I  am  Alpha  and  Omega,  the  beginning  and
the  ending,  which  is,  and  which  was,  and  which  is  to
come,  the  Almighty."  And  why  all  this  descriptive  gran-
deur in  the  address  to  these  seven  churches,  if  they  only
were  meant  ?  Surely  there  were  other  churches  of  equal
importance  at  that  day.  Where  were  the  churches  at
Corinth,  Cappadocia,  Galatia,  Thessalonica,  Philippi,  Col-
losse,  Rome,  Jerusalem,  Bithynia,  &c.  ?  Our  text  shows
that  the  seven  churches  were  to  be  understood  in  a  fig-
urative or  mystical  sense.  "  The  mystery  of  the  seven
stars  which  thou  sawest  in  my  right  hand,  and  the  seven
golden  candlesticks.  The  seven  stars  are  the  angels  of
the  seven  churches ;  and  the  seven  candlesticks  which
thou  sawest  are  the  seven  churches."  These  seven
churches  are  represented  by  "  seven  lamps."  See  Zach.
iv.  2,  "  And  said  unto  me,  What  seest  thou  ?  And  I  said,
I  have  looked,  and  behold  a  candlestick  all  of  gold,  with
a  bowl  upon  the  top  of  it,  and  his  seven  lamps  thereon,
and  seven  pipes  to  the  seven  lamps  which  were  upon  the
top  thereof."  These  seven  lamps  are  called  "  the  eyes
of  the  Lord  which  run  to  and  fro  through  the  whole
earth."  See  Zach.  iv.  10.  If  this  is  true,  then  it  readily
follows  that  the  seven  churches  of  Asia  are  only  used  as
a  figure  representing  the  churcli  "through  the  whole
earth."  Again :  the  seven  lamps,  which  are  the  seven
churches,  are  called  the  seven  spirits  of  God.  Rev.  iv.
5,  "And there  were  seven  lamps  of  fire  burning  before
the  throne,  which  are  the  seven  spirits  of  God."  I  have
clearly  proved,  and  I  think  it  will  be  admitted  by  all,  that
the  "  seven  eyes  of  the  Lord,"  and  "  the  seven  spirits  of
God,"  are  the  seven  churches  to  whom  John  was  di-
rected to  write  or  dedicate  his  book,  the  Revelation  of
Jesus  Christ

And  I  will  now  show  that  these  comprehended  the
whole  church  through  the  whole  earth.  See  Rev.  v.  6,
"  And  I  beheld,  and  lo!  in  the  midst  of  the  throne  and
of  the  four  beasts,  and  in  the  midst  of  the  elders,  stood  a
lamb  as  it  had  been  slain,  having  seven  horns,  and  seven
eyes,  which  are  the  "  seven  spirits  of  God  sent  forth  into


130  LECTURE    IX.

all  the  earth."  Again :  when  we  compare  the  severa.,
characteristic  marks  or  events,  upon  opening  the  seven
seals,  with  those  marks  and  instructions  to  the  seven
churches,  we  shall  be  led  to  admire  the  beauty,  harmony,
and  consistency  of  the  Revelation  of  Jesus  Christ  to  his
people.  And  I  think  the  mind  will  rest  satisfied  that  this
view  of  the  subject  is  the  truth,  because  it  so  exactly
agrees  with  Christ's  manner  of  teaching  by  parables
when  he  was  with  us  in  the  flesh.

Some  may  inquire,  "  Why  were  those  seven  churches
in  Asia  used  as  figures  to  represent  the  church  militant
in  her  several  conditions  to  the  end  of  her  militant  state  ?  "
I  answer,  )  if  we  may  be  allowed  to  answer  the  whys  or
wherefores,)  Because  the  signification  of  the  names  of
those  seven  churches  describe  the  spirit  and  qualities  of
the  several  periods  of  the  Christian  church,  which  they
are  brought  forward  to  represent,  which  we  shall  attempt
to  show  in  its  proper  place.

I  shall  now  endeavor  to  take  up  the  churches  in  the
order  in  which  they  are  laid  down  to  us  in  Revelation.
(Read  Rev.  ii.  1 — 7,  inclusive.)  1st,  The  word  Efhesus,
desirable  chief.  This  is  true  concerning  the  first  age  of
the  church,  in  the  apostles'  days,  when  the  Holy  Ghost
was  given  the  power  to  work  miracles,  and  the  power  to
distinguish  between  good  and  evil  spirits,  and  when  all
were  of  one  heart  and  one  mind,  and  the  canon  of  the
Holy  Scriptures  were  filling  up,  and  the  inspired  apostles
were  setting  things  in  order,  and  establishing  churches
through  the  world.  Yes,  my  brethren,  these  were  desirable
times  surely.  But  to  proceed  :  This  church  is  addressed
by  the  character  "  that  holdeth  the  seven  stars,"  the
ministers  and  servants  of  him  who  holdeth  them  "  in  his
right  hand,"  under  his  immediate  care  and  control,  "  who
walketh  in  the  midst  of  the  seven  golden  candlesticks,"
and  has  said,  where  two  or  three  are  gathered  together
in  his  name,  there  will  he  be  in  the  midst  of  them,  and
has  promised  that  whatsoever  they  should  ask  in  his  name
it  should  be  granted  unto  them.  He  says,  "  I  know  thy
works."  In  that  day  they  brought  forth  fruits  meet  for
repentance,  and  they  went  every  where  preaching*  that
men  should  repent ;  and  Paul  said,  when  preaching  at


Christ's  second   coming.  131

Athens,  "  But  now  comraandeth  all  men  every  where  to
repent."  Yes,  all,  saint  or  sinner,  high  or  low,  rich  or
poor ;  all,  all  must  repent.  And  O  !  my  brethren,  how
much  we  need  these  works  at  the  present  day !  "  Re-
member, therefore,  from  whence  thou  art  fallen,  and  re-
pent and  do  thy  first  works."  Again  he  says,  "  I  know
thy  labor."  Did  not  the  apostles  labor  night  and  day  ?
2  Thess.  iii.  8,  "  Neither  did  we  eat  any  man's  bread  for
nought,  but  wrought  with  labor  and  travail  night  and  day,,
that  we  might  not  be  chargeable  to  any  of  you."  See  1
Thess.  ii.  8,  9,  "  So  being  affectionately  desirous  of  you,
we  were  willing  to  have  imparted  unto  you,  not  the  gos-
pel of  God  only,  but  also  our  own  souls,  because  ye  were
dear  unto  us.  For  ye  remember,  brethren,  our  labor  and
travail ;  for  laboring  night  and  day,  because  we  would
not  be  chargeable  to  any  of  you,  we  preached  unto  you
the  gospel  of  God."  Again  he  says,  "  And  thy  patience."
This,  too,  will  apply  to  the  apostles'  days.  For  Paul  says,
2  Cor.  vi.  4,  "  But  in  all  things  approving  ourselves  as
the  ministers  of  God,  in  much  patience,  in  afflictions,  in
necessities,  in  distresses."  Also,  xii.  12,  "Truly  the
signs  of  an  apostle  were  wrought  among  you  in  all  pa-
tience, in  signs,  and  wonders,  and  mighty  deeds.  And
again  the  apostle  says  to  Timothy,  "  But  thou  hast  fully
known  my  doctrine,  manner  of  life,  purpose,  faith,  long-
suffering,  charity,  'patience?  And  who  can  read  the  his-
tory of  the  first  age  of  the  church,  but  will  admit  that
works,  labor  and  patience,  were  prominent  features  of
that  age,  and  virtues  which  adorned  the  Christian  church
in  its  infancy,  more  than  any  age  since  ?  "  And  how
thou  canst  not  bear  them  which  are  evil."  Who  can
read  Paul's  instructions  to  his  Corinthian  brethren,  in  1
Cor.  v.  11,  without  seeing  this  text  fulfilled  ?  "  But  now
I  have  written  unto  you  not  to  keep  company,  if  any  man
that  is  called  a  brother  [as  though  such  a  one  could  not
be  a  real  brother,  but  only  called  so]  be  a  fornicator,  or
covetous,  or  an  idolater,  or  a  railer,  or  a  drunkard,  or  an
extortioner ;  with  such  a  one  no  not  to  eat."  And  had
the  servants  of  Christ  at  the  present  day  the  power  of
the  apostles  to  discern  the  spirits  by  which  we  are  gov-
erned, how  many  in  this  congregation  would  blush  when


132  LECTURE     IX.

"fornicator"  is  mentioned!  How  many  "covetous"
would  hide  their  faces !  How  many  "idolaters"  would
bow  their  heads,  or  "railers"  would  begin  to  murmur  at
the  plainness  of  the  speaker !  How  many  "  drunkards '
would  not  have  staggered  into  this  house!  And  how
many  "  extortioners  "  would  have  staid  at  home !  O  God,
thou  knowest.  Or  who  can  read  the  2d  chapter  of  the
2d  epistle  of  Peter,  and  John's  first  epistle,  Jude,  and
others,  and  not  be  convinced  that  the  apostles  could  not
bear  with  them  that  were  evil  ?  Again  :  "  Thou  hast
tried  them  which  say  they  are  apostles,  and  are  not,  and
hast  found  them  liars."  This  sentence  was  fulfilled  in
the  apostles'  days.  Simon  Magus,  after  he  was  profess-
edly a  disciple  of  Christ,  was  found  out  by  Peter  to  be
in  the  "  gall  of  bitterness  and  bonds  of  iniquity."  Hy-
meneus  and  Alexander,  whom  Paul  delivered  to  Satan,
that  they  may  learn  not  to  blaspheme.  1  Tim.  i.  20,
Also  Philetus,  Demas,  and  Alexander  the  coppersmith,
were  all  found  to  be  liars,  and  many  others  who  went  out
from  them,  as  the  apostle  says,  because  they  were  not  of
them.  And  how  many  are  there  now,  my  brethren,  among
us,  who,  when  tribulation  cometh,  will  be  offended,  and
go  out  from  us !  Lord,  is  it  I  ?  "  And  hast  borne,  and
hast  patience,  and  for  my  name's  sake  hast  labored,  and
hast  not  fainted."  Yes,  my  brethren,  it  was  for  the  name
of  Jesus,  that  the  primitive  Christians  bore  the  persecu-
tions of  their  day.  Acts  xv.  25,  26,  "  It  seemed  good
unto  us  to  send  chosen  men  unto  you,  with  our  beloved
Barnabas  and  Paul,  men  that  have  hazarded  their  lives
for  the  name  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  Acts  ix.  16,
"  For  I  will  show  him  what  great  things  he  must  suffer
for  my  name's  sake."  Verse  41,  "  And  they  departed  from
the  presence  of  the  council,  rejoicing  that  they  were
counted  worthy  to  suffer  shame  for  his  name."  And,
may  I  not  inquire,  how  many  of  us  are  willing  and  would
rejoice  to  suffer  shame  for  the  name  of  Christ  ?  Perhaps
none.  We  had  rather  be  called  Rabbi,  Rev.,  Dr.,  &c.
We  are  contending  for  our  names  at  the  present  day  ;  for
Baptists,  Congregational ists,  Presbyterians,  Methodists,
Free- wills,  Campbellites,  &c.  If  we  do  not  contend  earn-
estly for  our  sect,  they  will  decrease,  and  we  shall  come


Christ's  second  coming.  133

to  nought.  .  And  I  say,  May  God  speed  it ;  so  that  you
all  may  fall  on  the  word  of  God,  and  rally  again  under
the  name  of  Jesus.  But  we  will  proceed  with  our  sub-
ject. 4th  verse,  "  Nevertheless  I  have  somewhat  against
thee,  because  thou  hast  left  thy  first  love."  Can  this  be
true  ?  Did  the  apostolic  church,  in  its  purity,  so  soon
depart  from  the  first  principles  of  the  gospel  ?  Yes,  in
Acts  xv.  24,  "  Forasmuch  as  we  have  heard  that  certain
which  went  out  from  us  have  troubled  you  with  words,
subverting  your  souls,  saying,  ye  must  be  circumcised,
and  keep  the  whole  law,  to  whom  we  gave  no  such  com-
mandment." Gal.  i.  6,  "  I  marvel  that  ye  are  so  soon
removed  from  him  that  called  you  into  the  grace  of
Christ  unto  another  gospel."  1  Timothy,  i.  19,  "  Hold-
ing faith  and  a  good  conscience,  which  some  having  put
away,  concerning  faith,  have  made  shipwreck."  2  Tim.
i.  15,  "This  thou  knowest,  that  all  they  which  are  in
Asia  are  turned  away  from  me."  And  Paul  further  says,
iv.  16,  "At  my  first  answer  no  man  stood  with  me,  but
all  men  forsook  me.  I  pray  God  lay  not  this  sin  to  their
charge."

Many  more  evidences  might  be  brought,  to  prove  that
many,  in  that  early  state  of  the  church,  did  fall  away  from
the  doctrine  of  grace,  which  Paul  and  the  apostles  taught.
And  now,  my  brethren,  how  is  it  with  us?  Are  we
built  on  the  truth  ?  Have  we  a  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord,"
for  all  we  believe  and  do  ?  Are  we  built  on  "  the  proph-
ets and  apostles,  Jesus  Christ  himself  being  the  chief
corner-stone  "  ?  Look  well  to  your  foundation  —  the
day  is  coming  that  will  try  every  man's  works.

Verse  5,  "  Remember,  therefore,  from  whence  thou
art  fallen,  and  repent  and  do  the  first  works,  or  else  1
will  come  unto  thee  quickly,  and  will  remove  the  candle-
stick out  of  his  place,  except  thou  repent"  In  this  verse
the  great  Head  of  the  church  admonishes  the  Christians
of  their  former  sins  in  neglecting  the  doctrine  of  grace,
and  falling  into  the  popular  errors  of  the  day,  which  I
have  before  noticed,  and  warns  them  of  their  duty  to
repent,  which  is  the  first  and  great  command  under  the
gospel.  He  also  gives  them  notice,  that,  except  they
repent,  he  will  remove  the  "desirable"  state  of  the
12


134  LECTURE    IX.

church  into  the  next,  which  would  be  a  state  of  trial,
persecution,  and  poverty.

6th  verse,

deeds  of  the  Nicolaitans,  which  1  also  hate."     What  the
deeds  of  the  Nicolaitans  were,  we  are  not  able,  from  the
word  of  God,  to  determine  ;  but  from  some  things  hinted
at  by  some  ancient  authors,  we  have  good  reason  to  be-
lieve that  Nicolas,  one  of  the  seven  deacons,  departed
from  the  doctrine  which  the  apostles  taught,  and  preached
a  doctrine  which  was  repugnant  to  the  gospel  of  Christ,
viz.,  a  community  or  plurality  of  wives,  which  led  Paul
in  his  instructions  to  say,  "  Let  the  deacons  be  the  hus-
band of  one  wife,"  1  Tim.  iii.  12.      "  He  that  hath  an
ear,  let  him  hear  what  the  Spirit  saith  to  the  churches."
Here  we  have  another  evidence,  that  the  branch  of  the
church  at  Ephesus  was  not  the  only  church  addressed
in  this  epistle  and  prophecy ;  for,  if  so,  what  propriety
in  using  the  word  churches,  in  the  plural,  when  only  one
church  in  Asia  was  spoken  of?      No,  it  could  not  be
proper,  neither  would  it  have  been,  as  it  is  so  used  in
every  epistle  through  the  whole  seven,  had  not  Christ
designed  it  for  all  the  churches  in  ar-certain  age.    There
is  also  an  admonition  contained   in  these   last-quoted
words,  to  read,  hear,  and  observe  the   prophecy   now
given  by  the  Spirit  to  John,  the  inspired  servant  of  Christ ;
and  for  all  the  churches  of  the  age  spoken  of,  to  be  care-
ful to  apply  to  themselves  the  admonitions,  designed  by
the  Holy  Spirit  for  their  immediate  benefit.     "  To  him
that  overcometh  will  I  give  to  eat  of  the  tree  of  life,
which  is  in  the  midst  of  the  paradise  of  God."     How
precious  is  this  promise  to  the  faithful  and  tried  soul,
who  places  all  his  hope,  and  strength,  and  dependence,
on  one  who  is  mighty  to  save,  and  on  one  who  has  prom-
ised to  bring  him  off  conqueror  over  all  the  enemies
of  grace,  and  the  powers  of  hell !     Yes,  and,  more  than
all,  he  has  overcome  and  entered  within  the  veil,  as  a
forerunner  for  us  who  believe.     May  we  all,  by  faith,
have  a  right  to  this  tree  of  life,  this  paradise  of  God.

I  will  now  examine  the  prophecy  to  the  second  church,
which  I  understand  to  commence  about  the  close  of  the
first  century,  and  lasted  about  two  hundred  years,  until
the  days  of  Constantine,  A.  D.  312.


Christ's  second  coming.  135

8th  verse,    "  And  unto  the  angel  of  the   church  in
Smyrna,  write."     The  signification  of  the  word  Smyrna,
is  myrrh ;  denoting  that  the  church  in  this  age  would  be
a  sweet-smelling  savor  to  God,  while  she  was  passing
through  the  fiery  ordeal  of  persecution   and  affliction,
which  always  has  served  to  weed  out  those  obnoxious
plants  of  pride,  popularity,  self-dependence  —  the  bane
and  poison  of  true  faith,  piety,  and  devotion.     And  O,
my  brethren,  could  we  learn  wisdom,  by  what  the  church
has  already  suffered  in  the  days  of  our  forefathers,  we
should  be  more  humble,  the  more  worldly  peace   and
prosperity  we  enjoyed.     For  it  is  only  in  the  midst  of
persecution  and  trial,  that  the  church  manifest  great  pu-
rity of  doctrine  or  life.     How  well,  then,  might  this  age
of  the  church  be  compared  to  myrrh,  when  she   must
have  been  separated  from  worldly  honors,  avarice,  pride,
popularity,  and  hypocrisy,  wh'en  the  hypocrite  and  world-
ling had  no  motives  to  unite  with  and  destroy  the  union
of  the  brotherhood,  and  when  the  hireling  shepherd  could
expect  no  fleece,  that  would  suit  his  cupidity,  to  filch
from  the  lambs  of  Christ !     "  These  things  saith  the  first
and  the  last,  which  was  dead  and  is  alive."     In  these
words  we  learn  the  character  speaking  to  the  church.
It  is  no  less  than  the  mighty  God,  the  everlasting  Fa-
ther, the  Prince  of  Peace.    "  I  know  thy  works,  and  trib-
ulation, and  poverty."     Now,  their  works  were  about  to
be  tried  ;  although  God  knew  them  that  were  his,  yet  he
designed  to  manifest  to  a  world  who  would  be  faithful
even  unto  death,  and  to  show  that  pure  and  undefiled  re-
ligion would  burn  with  a  brighter  flame  in  tribulation
and  poverty,  and  the  richness  of  that  faith,  which  would
bring  off  the  true  Christian  conqueror  over  the  powers
of  the  world,  the  temptations  of  Satan,  and  corruptions
of  the  flesh.     "  But  thou  art  rich."     Yes,  brethren,  the
true  and  genuine  Christian  is  rich.     For  charity  can  suf-
fer long  in  tribulation,  and  the  spirit  of  Christ  will  make
us  forsake  all  for  his  sake,  and  endure  poverty  for  the
name  of  Jesus.     "  And  I  know,"  says  Christ,  "the  blas-
phemy of  them  which  say  they  are  Jews,  (that  is,  people
of  God,)  and  are  not,  but  are  the  synagogue  of  Satan."
Although  Christ  knew  the  hypocrites  and  false  profea-


136  LECTURE    IX.

sors  that  had  rushed  into  his  visible  kingdom  during  a
time  of  prosperity  that  the  church  had  experienced  in  its
Ephesian  state,  or  apostolic  age,  yet  now  the  time  had
come,  when  that  candlestick  must  be  removed,  and  the
next  age  of  the  church  or  candlestick  be  set  up ;  and  the
same  means  used  by  God  to  purify  the  silver  would
purge  out  the  dross,  so  that  the  kingdom  would  again  be
cleansed  of  its  worldly,  hypocritical,  and  false  professors.
10,  "  Fear  none  of  those  things  which  thou  shalt  suf-
fer." The  true  child  of  God  need  not  fear  to  suffer  for
Christ's  sake,  for  the  sufferings  of  this  present  evil  world
will  work  out  for  us  a  far  more  exceeding  and  eternal
weight  of  glory.  "  Behold,  the  devil  shall  cast  some  of
you  into  prison,  that  ye  may  be  tried,  and  ye  shall  have
tribulation  ten  days."  The  devil  in  this  verse  means  Pa-
gan Rome.  See  Rev.  xii.  9,  17,  "  And  the  great  dragon
was  cast  out,  that  old  serpent,  called  the  devil."  "  And
the  dragon  was  wroth  with  the  woman,  and  went  to  make
war  with  the  remnant  of  her  seed,  which  keep  the  com-
mandments of  God,  and  have  the  testimony  of  Jesus
Christ."  How  exactly  was  this  prophecy  fulfilled  in  the
days  of  Nero,  Domitian,  and  other  Roman  emperors,  and
how  faithful  has  history  been  to  record  the  ten  persecu-
tions between  the  days  of  John's  prophecy  and  the  em-
peror Constantine !  In  these  ten  persecutions  of  the  Ro-
man government,  in  the  text  called  ten  days,  we  learn  by
the  history  of  those  days  the  church  suffered  a  great  di-
minution in  numbers  by  apostasy  and  fear ;  yet  those
that  remained  steadfast  made  up  in  graces  what  they  lost
in  numbers ;  and  it  was  truly  a  time  of  trial,  for  many
were  cast  into  prison,  and  many  suffered  torture  and
death,  rather  than  to  offer  sacrifices  to  their  Pagan  gods.
"  Be  thou  faithful  unto  death,  and  I  will  give  thee  a
crown  of  life."  Yes,  my  brethren,  if  we  can  believe  the
history  of  those  days,  many  of  the  dear  disciples  of  Christ
were  faithful  unto  death,  and  have  long  enjoyed  the
crown  of  life  promised  in  this  prophecy.

1 1,  "  He  that  hath  an  ear,  let  him  hear  what  the  Spirit
saith  to  the  churches.  He  that  overcometh  shall  not  be
hurt  of  the  second  death."  Here,  then,  we  find  some  of
those  characters  who  will  have  part  in  the  first  resurrec-


Christ's  second  coming.  137

tion,  the  blessed  martyrs  who  were  slain  for  the  witness
of  Jesus.  See  Rev.  xx.  4.  And  in  this  passage  we  are
again  commanded  to  hear  what  the  Spirit  saith  to  the
churches  —  all,  all  who  have  ears;  not  the  branch  in
Smyrna  only,  but  all  who  have  ears.  We  have  long  been
in  the  habit  of  giving  away  Scripture  to  others  when  it
belongs  to  us  and  our  children ;  let  us  therefore  apply  it
home.

12,  «  And  to  the  angel  of  the  church  in  Pergamos
write."  Very  earthy  elevated  is  the  signification  of  the
word  Pergamos ;  and  this  church  represents  the  age  of
Constantine,  Avhich  lasted  more  than  two  hundred  years,
until  the  rise  of  anti-Christ,  from  A.  D.  312  until  A.  D.
538.  During  this  age  the  church  became  very  earthy,
having  her  worldly  policy,  and,  like  the  church  in  the
present  day,  attending  more  to  the  outward  concerns,
and  the  worldly  part  of  religion,  than  to  inward  piety
and  graces  of  trie  spirit,  looking  more  for  forms  and  cere-
monies, than  for  the  life,  power,  and  spirit  of  the  religion
of  Jesus,  spending  much  of  their  time  in  building  elegant
chapels,  gorgeous  temples,  high  places  to  educate  their
ministry,  and  adorning  them  with  pictures  and  pleasant
things,  and  filling  the  hearts  of  their  worshippers  with
high,  popular,  and  haughty  notions.  Yes,  my  brethren,
the  age  of  trial  was  gone  ;  the  holy  and  secret  aspirations
of  piety  fled  away,  and,  now  she  had  obtained  an  earthly
emperor,  her  divine  Master  was  forgotten.  And  here
was  the  falling  away  mentioned  by  Paul,  2  Thess.  ii.  3,
"  Let  no  man  deceive  you  by  any  means  ;  for  that  day
shall  not  come  except  there  come  a  falling  away  first,
and  that  man  of  sin  be  revealed,  the  son  of  perdition."
This,  then,  was  the  age  that  prepared  the  church  to  re-
ceive that  monster,  the  man  of  sin,  the  son  of  perdition,
into  her  bosom,  which  stung  the  church  with  the  poison  of
asps,  and  filled  the  temple  of  God  with  image  worship,
and  the  church  with  idolatry,  selfishness,  avarice,  and
nride.

"  These  things  saith  he  which  hath  the  sharp  sword

with  two  edges."     By  the  sharp  sword  with  two  edges,

we  must  understand  the  word  of  God,  which  denounces

heavy  judgments  on  the  wicked,  and  cuts  off  the  corrup-

12*


138  LECTURE    IX.

tions  and  errors  from  the  church.  The  Psalmist  says,
cxlix.  5 — 7,  "Let  the  saints  be  joyful  in  glory;  let
them  sing  aloud  upon  their  beds.  Let  the  high  praises
of  God  be  in  their  mouth,  and  a  two-edged  sword  in
their  hand,  to  execute  vengeance  upon  the  heathen,  and
punishments  upon  the  people."  Paul  says,  Heb.  iv.  12,
"  For  the  word  of  God  is  quick  and  powerful,  sharper
than  any  two-edged  sword,  piercing  even  to  the  dividing
asunder  of  soul  and  spirit,  and  of  the  joints  and  mar-
row, and  is  a  discerner  of  the  thoughts  and  intents  of
the  heart  And  John  saw,  Rev.  i.  16,  "And  he  had  in
his  right  hand  seven  stars ;  and  out  of  his  mouth  went
a  sharp  two-edged  sword."  Then  this  is  the  meaning
of  the  passage  under  consideration,  "  These  things  saith
he,"  which  hath  the  word  of  God,  and  showing  us  the
importance  of  attending  to  the  subject  following,  by  the
importance  of  the  speaker,  "  He  that  is  Christ."  And
now,  while  we  read  or  hear,  let  us  keep  in  memory  that
it  is  no  less  a  personage  speaking,  than  Him  of  whom
the  prophets  did  write ;  who  holdeth  the  stars  in  his
right  hand,  and  created  and  preserves  all  things  by  the
word  of  his  power.     Hear  him.

"  I  know  thy  works,  and  where  thou  dwellest,  even
where  Satan's  seat  is.  Here,  again,  we  have  an  evidence
that  this  church  is  mystical,  "  dwelling  in  Satan's  seat,"
the  fourth  kingdom,  the  great  red  dragon,  imperial
Rome,  whereon  the  great  mystical  whore  of  Babylon
sitteth.  The  church,  in  this  age,  became  immediately
connected  with  this  power  called  Satan,  which  is  the
devil,  Pagan  Rome.  "And  thou  holdest  fast  my  name,
and  hast  not  denied  my  faith."  In  this  time  of  popular
religion,  and  when  many,  from  political  and  worldly
motives,  united  their  names  to  the  people  of  God,  still
there  were  some  who  held  to  the  doctrine  of  Christ,  and
did  not  deny  the  faith.

"  Even  in  those  days,  wherein  Antipas  was  my  faithful
martyr,  who  was  slain  among  you  where  Satan  dwell-
eth."  It  is  supposed  that  Antipas  was  not  an  individ-
ual, but  a  class  of  men  who  opposed  the  power  of  the
bishops  or  Popes  in  that  day,  being  a  combination  of
two  words,  Anti,  opposed,  and  Papas,  father  or  Pope.


Christ's  second  coming.  139

and  many  of  them  suffered  martyrdom,  at  that  time,  in
Constantinople  and  Rome,  where  the  bishops  and  Popes
began  to  exercise  the  power  which  soon  after  brought
into  subjection  the  kings  of  the  earth,  and  trampled  on
the  rights  of  the  church  of  Christ.  And,  for  myself,  I
see  no  reason  to  reject  this  explanation  of  the  word
Antipas  in  this  text,  as  the  history  of  those  times  are
perfectly  silent  respecting  such  an  individual  as  is
here  named.  Yet  many,  who  opposed  the  worship  of
saints  and  pictures,  and  the  infallibility  of  the  bishop  of
Rome,  were  excommunicated,  persecuted,  and  finally
driven  out  from  among  men,  and  in  the  next  age  of  the
church  had  to  flee  into  the  wilderness.  All  this  hap-
pened in  the  kingdom  of  Rome,  "where  Satan  dwell-
eth."

"  But  I  have  a  few  things  against  thee,  because  thou
hast  there  them  that  hold  the  doctrine  of  Balaam,
who  taught  Balak  to  cast  a  stumbling-block  before  the
children  of  Israel,  to  eat  things  sacrificed  unto  idols,
and  to  commit  fornication."  The  world  have  always
been  endeavoring  to  draw  the  church  of  Christ  into
fellowship  with  them,  and  to  a  mixed  communion  of
idolatry,  as  Balaam  taught  Balak  to  draw  the  children
of  Israel  from  their  God  and  his  commands,  by  mixing
with  the  Jews  in  their  worship,  and,  at  the  same  time,
by  degrees,  introduce  their  priests,  their  altars  and
idol  worship  into  their  camp.  In  Constantine's  day  this
mode  of  warfare  was  introduced  with  great  success  by
Pagan  worshippers,  so  that  in  little  more  than  two  cen-
turies the  greater  part  of  the  professed  Christian  church
became  the  image  of  the  beast  of  which  we  are  now
speaking,  viz.,  Pagan  Rome.  Here,  then,  we  see  the
rise  of  Papacy  on  the  downfall  of  Pagan  Rome.  Who-
soever will  take  the  pains  of  comparing  the  Pagan
manner  of  worship,  forms,  and  ceremonies  with  Papacy,
cannot  help  being  forcibly  struck  with  the  similarity  of
the  two.  One  deified  their  departed  heroes  and  poets,
the  other  her  departed  saints  and  votaries.  The  one
consulted  her  oracles  and  priests  for  laws  and  instruc-
tions, the  other  her  Popes  and  cardinals.  The  one
had  her  altars,  images,  and  statues,  the  other  her  chap-


140  LECTURE     IX.

els,  pictures,  and  crosses.  Both  had  them  erected  in
every  public  place,  for  the  multitude  to  fall  before  and
worship.  Both  had  their  holy  fire,  holy  water,  and  both
claimed  to  perform  miracles ;  the  one  by  the  response  of
her  wooden  oracles,  and  the  other  by  her  carnal  priest-
hood. Here,  then,  we  see  how  the  church,  in  the  fourth
and  fifth  century,  was  led  over  the  stumbling-block  of
Paganism,  to  eat  things  sacrificed  to  idols,  and  to  com-
mit fornication.

"  So,  also,  hast  thou  them  that  hold  the  doctrine  of  the
Nicolaitans,  which  thing  I  hate."  This  doctrine  was
promulgated  in  the  fourth  century.  See  the  church  his-
tory,  and  our  former  observations.

"  Repent,  or  else  I  will  come  unto  thee  quickly,  and
will  fight  against  them  with  the  sword  of  my  mouth P
Again  the  Lord  calls  for  repentance,  and  threatens  the
judgments  of  his  word  upon  them  that  obey  not.  O  !
may  we  take  warning,  my  brethren,  and  tempt  not  the
heavy  judgments  of  God  upon  us,  for  our  idolatry  and
fellowship  of  that  which  is  not  the  religion  of  Jesus.

"  He  that  hath  an  ear,  let  him  hear  what  the  Spirit
saith  unto  the  churches.  To  him  that  overcometh  will
I  give  to  eat  of  the  hidden  manna,  and  will  give  him  a
white  stone,  and  in  the  stone  a  new  name  written,  which
no  man  knoweth  saving  he  that  receiveth  it."  Again,
all  that  have  ears  are  commanded  to  hear,  and  those
who  remain  faithful,  that  do  not  fall  away,  receive  a
promise  of  spiritual  food,  and  a  name  and  righteousness
which  none  can  know  but  they  who  receive  it

18,  "And  unto  the  angel  of  the  church  in  Thyatira
write."  The  signification  of  Thyatira  is,  a  "sweet
savor  of  labor  or  sacrifice  and  contrition,"  and  is  a  de-
scription of  the  church,  after  she  is  driven  into  the  wil-
derness by  the  anti-Christian  beast.  This  church  lasted
until  about  the  tenth  century;  and  little  of  her  history
is  known  to  the  world ;  but  some  authors  have  pretended
to  trace  her  into  the  north-west  part  of  Asia,  and  in  the
north-east  part  of  Europe,  where  they  lived  until  about
the  tenth  century,  unknown  unto  the  rest  of  the  world,,
or  taking  but  little  concern  with  the  nations  aroun<J
them*    Yet  it  is  said  they  retained  religion  in  its  puri


Christ's  second  coMim?.  14!

ty,  and  held  to  the  doctrines  of  the  word  of  God.  At
any  rate  this  church  is  represented  as  being  in  a  state
of  heavy  trial,  and  subject  to  seduction  by  some  power
represented  by  that  woman  Jezebel,  of  which  I  shall
speak  in  its  place.  "These  things  saith  the  Son  of
God,  who  hath  his  eyes  like  unto  a  flame  of  fire,  and
his  feet  are  like  fine  brass ; "  representing",  as  in  all
the  other  declarations  to  the  churches,  that  the  character
addressing  them  is  no  less  than  the  mighty  God,  the
omniscient,  omnipotent,  and  omnipresent  Jehovah,  who
says,  "  I  know  thy  works,  and  charity,  and  service,  and
faith,  and  patience,  and  thy  works ;  and  the  last  to  be
more  than  the  first."  When  this  church  existed,  which
was  when  anti-Christ  began  her  reign,  there  was  great
need  of  the  exercise  of  those  graces  of  the  spirit  which
in  this  passage  are  enumerated.  1st  In  works  they  had
to,  and  without  doubt  did,  combat  the  anti-Christian
doctrines  which  began  in  the  sixth  century  to  over-
whelm the  Christian  world,  such  as  worshipping  angels,
departed  saints,  subjection  to  councils  and  bishops,
infallibility  of  the  Pope,  &c.  They,  in  charity,  too,
had  many  of  their  brethren  to  sustain  while  combatting
these  errors  against  the  power  of  this  beast  They  did
much  service  in  holding  up  the  hands  of  their  pious
teachers  and  pastors  who  were  not  led  away  by  this
wicked  one.  How  much  faith,  too,  must  they  have
been  in  possession  of  to  have  withstood  the  power
of  their  councils,  the  excommunications  of  the  Pope,
and  a  majority  of  their  brethren  who  had  fell  into
Papal  errors !  how  much  "patience "  to  have  re-
mained unwavering  amidst  persecution  when  driven
from  their  homes,  their  eountry  and  friends,  into  the
wilderness,  where  God  prepared  a  place  for  her !  and
how  much  more  necessary  were  their  last  works  to  sup-
port each  other  in  exile,  poverty,  and  distress,  the  natural
consequence  of  being  driven  from  among  men !  But
these  things  were  so,  according  to  the  best  account  we
can  obtain  of  those  times.

20, "  Notwithstanding,  I  have  a  few  things  against  thee,
because  thou  sufferest  that  woman  Jezebel,  which  call-
eth  herself  a  prophetess,  to  teach  and  to  seduce  my


142  LECTURE    IX.

servants  to  commit  fornication,  and  to  eat  things
sacrificed  to  idols."  In  this  verse  we  have  strong
testimony  that  the  exposition  we  have  given  of  the
seven  churches  is  correct;  for  no  character  given  the
woman  Jezebel  will  apply  so  exactly,  as  the  woman
sitting  on  the  scarlet-colored  beast,  full  of  names  of
blasphemy,  "having  a  golden  cup  in  her  hand  full  of
abominations  and  filthiness  of  her  fornication."

Jezebel  is  a  figurative  name,  alluding  to  Ahab's  wife,
who  slew  the  prophets  of  the  Lord,  led  her  husband  into
idolatry,  and  fed  the  prophets  of  Baal  at  her  own  table.
A  more  striking  figure  could  not  have  been  used  to  de-
scribe the  Papal  abomination.  See  1  Kings  xviii.  xix.
xxi.  chapters.  It  is  very  evident  from  history,  as  well  as
from  this  verse  in  Revelation,  that  the  church  of  Christ
did  suffer  some  of  the  Papal  monks  to  preach  and  teach
among  them.     See  the  history  of  the  Waldenses.

21,  "And  I  gave  her  space  to  repent  of  her  fornica-
tion, and  she  repented  not."  22,  "  Behold  I  will  cast  her
into  a  bed,  and  them  that  commit  adultery  with  her  into
great  tribulation,  except  they  repent  of  their  deeds."  23,
"And  I  will  kill  her  children  with  death;  and  all  the
churches  shall  know  that  I  am  he  which  searcheth  the
reins  and  hearts,  and  I  will  give  unto  every  one  of  you
according  to  your  works."  We  cannot  be  mistaken  in
the  character  given  to  this  mystical  Jezebel,  when  we
compare  the  descriptions  here  used,  and  the  judgments
threatened,  with  other  passages  of  like  import  in  Revela-
tion, where  mystical  Babylon  is  described  and  threat-
ened. See  Rev.  ix.  20,  21,  "And  the  rest  of  the  men
which  were  not  killed  by  these  plagues,  yet  repented  not
of  the  works  of  their  hands,  that  they  should  not  worship
devils  and  idols  of  gold,  and  silver,  and  brass,  and  stone,
and  of  wood,  which  neither  can  see,  nor  hear,  nor  walk :
neither  repented  they  of  their  murders,  nor  of  their  sor-
ceries, nor  of  their  fornication,  nor  of  their  thefts."

If  these  last  texts  mean  anti-Christ,  of  which  I  believe
none  have  any  doubt,  that  is,  no  commentator  that  I  have
been  able  to  consult,  then  it  is  equally  evident  that  this
woman,  called  Jezebel,  in  this  prophecy  of  the  church  in
Thyatira,  means  the  same  ;  and  the  conclusion  is  strong


chp-ist's  second  coming.  143

that  the  Thyatira  church  represents  the  churches  in
some  age  of  anti-Christ,  and  the  prophecy  contained  in
the  verses  we  have  already  quoted  are  the  judgments  God
has  and  will  pour  out  on  that  great  city  that  rules  over
the  kings  of  the  earth,  and  has  for  ages  past  trodden  the
church  under  foot,  and  contaminated  the  people  of  God
by  her  seductions,  sorceries,  and  fornications.

24,  "  But  unto  you  I  say,  and  unto  the  rest  in  Thya-
tira, As  many  as  have  not  this  doctrine,  and  which  have
not  known  the  depths  of  Satan  as  they  speak,  I  will  put
upon  you  none  other  burden."  25,  "  But  that  which  ye
have  already,  hold  fast  till  I  come."  In  these  verses  the
church  which  have  not  fellowshipped  the  anti- Christian
doctrine,  and  have  not  followed  the  practices  of  the  Sa-
tanic blasphemies  of  their  abominations,  are  here  prom-
ised to  experience  no  other  persecution  except  what  they
may  experience  from  this  beast  or  woman  Jezebel,  which
is  another  proof  of  this  being  anti-Christ;  for  the  church
in  Thyatira  has  long  been  extinct,  if  there  ever  was  such
a  church,  and  was  when  the  man  of  sin  was  revealed ;
and  yet  they  are  promised  to  have  none  other  burden  un-
til he  come,  as  it  is  more  than  implied  ;  and  this  power  is
to  stand  until  he  comes.  For  Paul  says,  "  Whom  he  shall
consume  with  the  spirit  of  his  mouth  and  destroy  with  the
brightness  of  his  coming."  This  is  Daniel's  fourth  king-
dom, which  was  to  be  broken  without  hand,  and  to  be
carried  away  like  the  chaff  of  the  summer  threshing-floor
before  the  wind,  that  no  place  be  found  for  it.

26,  "  And  he  that  overcometh  and  keepeth  my  works
unto  the  end,  to  him  will  I  give  power  over  the  nations,"
27,  ("  And  he  shall  rule  them  with  a  rod  of  iron;  as  the
vessels  of  a  potter  shall  they  be  broken  to  shivers,)  even
as  I  received  of  my  Father.  And  I  will  give  him  the
morning  star."  29,  "He  that  hath  an  ear,  let  him  hear
what  the  Spirit  saith  to  the  churches."

In  closing  the  prophecies  to  the  churches,  our  divine
Instructor  carries  them  down  to  that  day  when  he  shall
come  to  be  admired  in  all  them  that  believe,  or  to  glorify
his  saints,  to  crown  them  his  in  his  kingdom  of  glory,  to
break  in  pieces  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  earth  as  a  potter's
vessel  is  broken  to  shivers,  as  the  last  text  says,  which


144  LECTURE    IX.

proves  that  when  Christ  comes,  he  will  bring  all  the  saints
with  him,  and  this  too  when  the  kingdoms  of  this  world
and  anti-Christ  will  be  destroyed.  And  this  proves  an-
other important  point  in  which  many  good  and  pious  peo-
ple are  greatly  mistaken,  viz.,  that  there  will  not  be  a
thousand  years'  happy  reign  previous  to  Christ's  coming
the  second  time  without  sin  unto  salvation.  What  happy
reign  can  there  be  while  the  kingdoms  of  the  earth  stand
as  they  now  do ;  while  the  anti-Christian  beast  has  power
to  seduce  and  draw  the  servants  of  God  into  idolatry,  and
lull  to  her  serpentine  folds  thousands  and  tens  of  thou-
sands human  beings  yearly,  and  deceive  the  nations  by
her  siren  song  of  mother  church ;  while  by  means  of  her
poison,  subtle,  secret,  and  deep,  she  is  undermining  and
sapping  the  foundation  of  every  religious  sect  but  her
own ;  of  every  civil  government  but  such  as  will  resign
their  power  unto  her  control  ?  And  now,  while  I  am
speaking,  she  is  exerting  an  influence  in  this  once  favored
land,  by  means  of  her  Jesuits,  that  will  set  father  against
son,  and  son  against  father,  and  drench  our  country  in
blood.  Can  this  monster  of  murder,  iniquity,  and  blood,
retain  her  life,  her  standing  in  society,  and  we  have  a
happy  reign  ?  No.  She  must  and  will  sink  like  a  mill-
stone in  the  mighty  deep,  and  God  will  avenge  the  blood
of  his  servants.  Her  flesh  must  be  eaten  by  dogs ;  yes-,
the  kings  of  the  earth  shall  eat  her  flesh,  and  God  shall
consume  her  with  fire  before  the  happy  reign  comes.
**  Come,  Lord  Jesus,  come  quickly"


LECTURE    X.


The  mystery  of  the  seven  stars  which  thou  sawest  in  my  right
hand,  and  the  seven  golden  candlesticks.  The  seven  stars  are
the  angels  of  the  seven  churches ;  and  the  seven  candlesticks
which  thou  sawest  are  the  seven  churches.


In  my  former  lectures  I  have  given  my  views  of  four
of  the  churches  spoken  of  in  the  text  Three  more  re-
main, wiiich  will  complete  the  prophetic  history  of  the
church  through  all  the  ages  of  the  New  Testament  times
until  the  state  of  trial  shall  be  fulfilled,  and  the  church
shall  enter  her  glorified  kingdom  in  triumph.  You  have
undoubtedly  been  led,  by  the  comparison  of  the  churches
with  the  history  thus  far,  to  admire  the  agreement  of  the
prophecy  of  the  four  churches  with  the  history  of  the
times ;  and  truly  this  is  one  of  the  greatest  evidences  we
have  of  the  truth  of  the  divine  inspiration  of  revelation,
and  this  evidence  fixes  the  authenticity  of  the  Scriptures
beyond  a  reasonable  doubt.  I  shall  now  claim  a  few
moments'  indulgence  while  I  attempt  to  show  where  and
when  the  other  three  churches  have  been  or  will  be  ful-
filled.    See  Rev.  iii.

1,  "  And  unto  the  angel  of  the  church  in  Sardis  write."
Song  of  joy,  or  that  which  remains,  is  the  signification
of  Sardis,  The  last  signification  is  the  one  which  the
heavenly  Instructor  has  affixed  himself  to  this  church  in
the  second  verse,  "Be  watchful,  and  strengthen  the
things  which  remain."  The  church  preceding  this
had  passed  a  long,  dark,  and  benighted  sge  of  the  world,
13


146  LECTURE    X.

and  every  writer  of  these  times  calls  them  the  dark
ages ;  and  truly  it  was  an  age  of  superstition,  bigotry,
and  ignorance  ;  therefore  we  must  reasonably  suppose
that  but  few  were  the  true  worshippers  of  God,  and
those  few  enjoying  but  a  faint  knowledge  of  divine
things.  But  we  will  pursue  our  course.  "  These  things
saith  he  that  hath  the  seven  spirits  of  God,  and  the
seven  stars,  I  know  thy  works,  that  thou  hast  a  name,
that  thou  livest,  and  art  dead."  The  same  character
that  has  addressed  the  other  churches,  still  gives  him-
self a  quality  by  which  we  may  know  that  it  is  he  who
is  called  God  man,  having  the  spirit  of  God,  and  as  man
governing  his  church  as  the  star  of  Bethlehem.  This
church  began  about  the  tenth  century,  and  lasted  until
the  Reformation  under  Luther,  Calvin,  and  others.
They  had  a  name,  were  called  Waldenses,  Valdenses,
&c,  "  and  art  dead ; "  that  is,  she  was  or  would
be  of  little  use  to  the  rest  of  the  world,  hiding  her  influ-
ence within  her  own  sphere,  and  of  course  did  not  mani-
fest her  light  to  the  world,  was  inactive,  idle,  not  per-
forming the  work  which  God  had  commanded  them  to
perform,  to  set  their  light  on  the  candlestand,  that  it
might  give  light  to  all.  This  was  the  case  with  the
church  in  the  valleys  of  Piedmont  during  the  time  of  the
crusades  to  the  Holy  Land;  and  while  the  Pope  had  the
command  of  all  the  armies  of  Europe,  the  church  lived
in  these  valleys  of  the  Pyrenees,  nearly  in  the  centre  of
Europe,  unknowing  and  unknown.

2d  verse,  "  Be  watchful,  and  strengthen  the  things
which  remain,  that  are  ready  to  die  ;  for  I  have  not  found
thy  works  perfect  before  God."  Although  the  church
in  this  age  retained  some  of  the  leading  principles  of  the
gospel,  the  ordinances  were  in  part  retained  among
them,  yet  towards  the  close  of  this  Sardis  age,  the  Papal
monks  and  priests  were  sent  in  among  them,  and  many
of  the  Waldenses  became  corrupted  by  the  Papal  beast
and  her  doctrine.  Therefore  the  admonition,  "  Be  watch-
ful, and  strengthen  the  things  which  remain."

3d  verse,  "Remember  how  thou  hast  received  and
heard,  and  hold  fast  and  repent  If,  therefore,  thou
shalt  not  watch,  I  will  come  on  thee  as  a  thief,  and  thou


Christ's  second  coming.  147

shalt  not  know  what  hour  I  will  come  upon  thee."  The
judgment  threatened  in  this  verse,  "  I  will  come  upon
thee,"  is  undoubtedly  a  prophecy  of  the  persecution  of
the  Waldenses  and  Lollards,  by  the  Papal  authority,  and
through  the  inquisition,  as  an  instrument,  about  the  close
of  the  fourteenth  century,  when,  for  their  departure  from
the  true  doctrine  of  the  gospel,  and  the  commands  of
God,  they  were  persecuted  and  scattered  among  all
nations,  so  that  by  the  judgments  of  God,  for  their  trans-
gressions, they  were  made  instruments  in  the  hands  of
God  of  spreading  the  knowledge  of  the  gospel  among
the  nations,  which  they  ought  to  have  done  in  obedience
to  his  word,  and  for  the  love  of  souls.  And  these  judg-
ments served  the  double  purpose  of  punishment  for  sin,
and  opening  a  door  for  a  more  general  display  of  sal-
vation.

4th  verse,  "  Thou  hast  a  few  names  even  in  Sardis
which  have  not  defiled  their  garments,  and  they  shall
walk  with  me  in  white,  for  they  are  worthy."  There
were  a  few  even  in  this  age  of  moral  darkness  who  fol-
lowed Christ  in  his  laws  and  ordinances,  and  they
receive  the  promise  of  justification  before  God,  "  walk
with  me  in  white."

5th  verse,  "He  that  overcometh,  the  same  shall  be
clothed  in  white  raiment,  and  I  will  not  blot  out  his
name  out  of  the  book  of  life  ;  but  I  will  confess  his  name
before  my  Father  and  before  his  angels."  Whenever
the  phrase,  "  he  that  overcometh,"  is  used,  it  always  im-
plies, I  think,  in  the  Scriptures,  that  the  persons  addressed
are,  or  will  pass  through  a  time  of  persecution ;  and  in
this  text  the  church  in  this  age  is  shown  that  those  only
who  can  endure  tribulation  and  persecution  will  be
acknowledged  at  the  bar  of  God  as  the  children  of  faith.
And  then  this  church  is  again  warned  to  hear  and  be-
lieve what  the  Spirit  saith  to  the  churches.

6th  verse,  "  He  that  hath  an  ear,  let  him  hear  what
the  Spirit  saith  to  the  churches."

I  shall  now  attempt  to  show  to  what  age  we  may  cal-
culate the  Philadelphia  church  should  answer,  and  when
this  prophecy  was  fulfilled.

7th  verse,  "  And  to  the  angel  of  the  church  in  Phila-


148  LECTURE    X.

delphia  write,  These  things  saith  he  that  is  holy,  he  that
is  true,  he  that  hath  the  key  of  David,  he  that  openeth
and  no  man  shutteth,  and  shutteth  and  no  man  openeth."
This  verse  is  a  description  of  the  character  addressing
the  church  and  gives  an  account  of  his  holiness,  his  vera-
city, authority,  and  power,  and  leaves  us  without  a  doubt
that  it  is  Jesus  the  son  of  David,  the  Holy  One  of
Israel,  the  faithful  and  true  witness,  he  that  hath  all
power  in  heaven  and  in  earth.  And  he  thus  addresses
them,  8th  verse,  "  I  know  thy  works :  behold,  I  have  set
before  thee  an  open  door,  and  no  man  can  shut  it,  for
thou  hast  a  little  strength,  and  hast  kept  my  word,  and
hast  not  denied  my  name."  The  signification  of  the
name  of  this  church,  Philadelphia,  is  brotherly  love,  and
this  age  began  about  the  time  of  the  Reformation  ;  for
then  God  opened  an  effectual  door  for  the  gospel  to  be
spread  which  no  man  or  set  of  men  has  been  able  to
shut.  And  the  early  reformers  displayed  a  zeal  and
fearlessness  in  their  cause  which  astonished  their  friends
and  confounded  their  enemies.  At  this  time,  too,  Chris-
tian love  and  fellowship  was  evidently  one  of  the
strongest  marks  of  the  day  and  manifested  that  the  work
was  of  God.

9th  verse,  "  Behold,  I  will  make  them  of  the  syna-
gogue of  Satan  which  say  they  are  Jews  and  are  not,
but  do  lie."  The  characters  here  spoken  of  are  the
same  as  those  who  sit  in  Satan's  seat,  who  profess  to  be
Christians,  but  are  anti-Christians ;  they  are  worshippers
of  the  Papal  beast,  professing  to  be  the  mother  church,
but  are  only  that  part  which  are  fallen  away,  as  Paul
has  told  us,  "  there  should  come  a  falling  away  first,  and
then  the  man  of  sin  should  be  revealed,  who  opposeth,
(or  is  anti,)and  exalteth  himself  (calling  themselves  Jews,
a  figurative  expression,  or  name  for  Christian)  above
all  that  is  called  God."  "  Behold,  I  will  make  them  to
come  and  worship  before  thy  feet,  and  to  know  that  I
have  loved  thee."  This  sentence  shows  that  anti-Christ
"would  be  humbled  in  this  age  of  the  church  and  brought
to  take  the  back  ground,  or  in  some  measure  lose  her
civil  power  over  the  Protestant  church  and  be  humbled
at  her  feet    Has  not  this  prophecy  been  accomplished


Christ's  second  coming.  149

strictly  according  to  the  letter  ?  Witness  Great  Britain,
Germany,  and  other  nations.  And  to  this  day  she  has
not  been  able  to  bring  into  subjection  any  of  the  Protes-
tant states,  and  is  only  permitted  to  dwell  among  them  by
toleration.  And  although  within  a  few  years  past  she
seems  to  be  making  an  effort  to  regain  her  lost  power
and  authority,  yet  it  is  but  a  last  struggle,  a  dying  gasp ;
for  soon  she  must  and  will  fall,  to  rise  in  civil  power  no
more  forever.

10th  verse,  "  Because  thou  hast  kept  the  word  of  my
patience,  I  also  will  keep  thee  from  the  hour  of  tempta-
tion which  shall  come  upon  all  the  world  to  try  them  that
dwell  upon  the  earth."  This  part  of  the  prophecy  Avas
fulfilled  on  or  before  the  French  revolution,  when  Athe-
ism and  Deism  made  such  rapid  progress  through
Europe  or  the  Roman  government,  which  in  prophecy  is
called  the  earth.  See  Rev.  xii.  9.  And  it  is  a  fact,  that
through  this  age  of  profligacy  and  corruption,  the  church
retained  her  principles  as  pure  and  with  as  little  defec-
tion as  any  age  in  modern  times  ;  although  men  of  the
world  were  led  away  by  the  plausible  writings  of  Vol-
taire, Hume,  Tom  Paine,  and  others,  yet  it  had  no  effect
on  the  Christian  church :  and  the  promise,  "  I  will  keep
thee  from  the  hour  of  temptation,"  was  fully  and  faith-
fully accomplished ;  and  the  very  means  that  Satan  used
to  destroy  the  religion  of  Jesus  Christ,  or  "  the  twelve
fishermen,"  was  the  means  of  bringing  the  church  out
of  the  wilderness.  And  those  governments  of  the  world
which  had  for  more  than  twelve  centuries  persecuted
the  children  of  God,  now  granted  free  toleration  for  all
men  to  worship  God  according  to  the  dictates  of  their
own  conscience.  And  from  this  period  we  may  see  the
"  angel  flying  through  the  midst  of  heaven  having  the
everlasting  gospel  to  preach  to  them  that  dwell  on  the
earth."  Now  the  church  began  to  awake  to  the  subject
of  missions  ;  and  while  the  world  was  tempted  and  tried,
the  kingdoms  of  the  earth  shaken  to  their  centre,  (yet
not  destroyed ;)  while  the  civil  power  of  the  mother  of
harlots,  the  inquisition  of  Spain,  and  the  horrible  means
of  torture,  persecution,  slavery,  and  cruelty,  were  all
swept  away  in  one  revolution,  —  the  church,  by  the  power


150  LECTURE    X.

of  Him  who  had  promised  to  "keep  them,"  passed
through  the  fiery  ordeal  without  the  smell  of  fire  on  her
garments.

11th  verse,  "Behold,  I  come  quickly;  hold  that  fast
which  thou  hast,  that  no  man  take  thy  crown."  In  this
verse  we  have  notice  of  his  second  coming,  and  that  it
would  be  quickly ;  by  which  I  understand  that  the  age
of  the  seventh  church,  which  was  yet  to  come,  would  be
short,  and  the  second  coming  of  him,  who  will  overcome
and  subdue  all  things,  would  be  quickly.  He  likewise
admonishes  us  to  hold  fast  that  which  we  have,  giving
us,  as  I  understand,  warning  that  the  next  age  of  the
church  would  be  an  age  of  invention  \  of  lo  heres,  of
departure  from  the  true  faith,  of  denying  the  crown  of
the  church,  the  twelve  stars,  the  apostles'  doctrine.  And
amidst  the  confusion  of  the  doctrines  arid  revelations  of
the  present  day,  if  any  one  should  inquire  of  me  what
sentiment  it  would  be  best  for  them  to  embrace,  I  would
first  point  them  to  the  Bible,  and  second,  back  to  the
fathers  and  teachers  of  the  last  century,  and  say,  Hold
fast  that  they  held ;  let.  no  man  take  thy  crown.  Let  us
then,  my  brethren,  be  watchful,  and  remember  "him  that
overcometh  will  I  make  a  pillar  in  the  temple  of  my
God,  and  he  shall  go  no  more  out ;  and  I  will  write
upon  him  the  name  of  my  God,  and  the  name  of  the  city
of  my  God,  which  is  New  Jerusalem,  which  cometh
down  out  of  heaven  from  my  God ;  and  I  will  write  upon
him  my  new  name."  The  blessings  promised  in  this
text  are  to  be  realized  when  the  New  Jerusalem  comes
down  from  God  out  of  heaven ;  then  shall  the  spiritual
born  child  of  heaven  be  a  pillar  in  the  temple  of  God,  in
that  building  made  without  hands  ;  then,  too,  will  he
receive  that  rich  inheritance  that  is  laid  up  in  heaven  for
those  that  love  God,  and  there  obtain  that  eternal  crown,
that  immortal  life  which  is  now  hid  with  Christ  in  God,
and  then  and  there  realize  that  "  blessed  hope  at  the
glorious  appearing  of  the  great  God  and  our  Savior
Jesus  Christ-"  "  And  he  shall  go  no  more  out "  of  that
glorious  temple ;  no  tempting  devil  there,  for  he  will  be
chained ;  no  persecuting  kingdom,  for  they  will  "  all  be
destroyed  and  carried  away  like  the  chat?  of  the  summer


cpirist's  second  coming.  151

threshing-floor."  Then  will  he  receive  the  new  name,
"  The  Lord  our  righteousness,"  for  the  Lord  is  there.
Then,  too,  a  citizen  of  the  glorified  kingdom,  the  New
Jerusalem,  married  to  the  Lamb,  and  shall  live  and  reign
with  him  forever  and  forever.  "He  that  hath  an  ear,
let  him  hear  what  the  Spirit  saith  unto  the  churches."
This  closes  the  prophecy  to  the  sixth  church ;  and  now
let  us  see  to  it  that  we  do  not  lose  the  blessings  promised
by  refusing  to  hear  what  the  Spirit  saith  to  the  churches.
Hear,  and  your  souls  shall  liv°, ;  disobey,  turn  a  deaf
ear,  refuse  the  offered  grace,  rmd  you  will  die  ;  for  the
soul  that  sinneth  shall  die.

It  now  remains  for  me  to  show  the  age  of  the  seventh
or  Laodicean  church,  and  the  characteristic  marks  of
that  church  or  age.  And.  if  I  am  right  in  considering
these  churches  in  a  mystical  sense,  as  our  text  more
than  implies,  and  our  arguments  and  references  strongly
prove,  in  my  humble  opinion,  then,  this  part  of  our  sub-
ject becomes  doubly  interesting  to  us,  who  live  in  the
very  age  of  the  fulfilment  of  this  prophecy.  Yes,  my
brethren,  we  live  at  the  very  time  when  the  great  head
of  the  church  says,

14th  verse,  "  And  unto  the  angel  of  the  church  in
Laodicea  write,  These  things  saith  the  Amen,  the  faithful
and  true  witness,  the  beginning  of  the  creation  of  God."
Laodicea  signifies  the  judging  of  the  people,  and  may
have  reference  to  the  church  in  its  last  stage,  when  God
would  pour  out  his  justice  and  judgment  upon  a  guilty
world,  and  upon  a  haughty,  proud,  and  self- exalted
church,  and  spue  them  out  of  his  mouth.  This  idea  may
be  warranted  from  the  subject  in  connection.  The  ad-
dress to  this  church  begins  by  showing  that  it  is  the
closing  up  of  this  dispensation,  by  saying,  "  These  things
saith  the  Amen."  It  also  teaches  us  that  it  commences
the  judgment,  or  prepares  for  a  judgment,  by  bringing
forward  "  the  faithful  and  true  witness."  It  also  shows
the  universality  of  this  judgment  by  the  knowledge  of
the  witness  being  "  the  beginning  of  the  creation  of
God."

15th  verse,  "  I  know  thy  works,  that  thou  art  neither
cold  nor  hot :  I  would  thou  wert  cold  or  hot"     To  be


152  LECTURE    X.

neither  cold  nor  hot  in  religious  things  implies  a  pro«
fession  of  religion  without  a  spiritual  life,  or  the  middle
way  between  the  world  and  Christ;  taking  much  pains
after  worldly  things,  to  the  neglect  of  spiritual  things  ;
endeavoring  to  move  between  the  doctrine  of  Christ  and
the  doctrine  of  men ;  taking  the  middle  ground,  as  I  have
often  heard  it  expressed.

16th  verse,  "  So  then,  because  thou  art  lukewarm,  and
neither  cold  nor  hot,  I  will  spue  thee  out  of  my  mouth."
For  this  cause,  that  is,  because  they  are  engaged  more
for  show,  honors,  or  profits  of  this  world  than  for  God,  he
would  spue  them  out  of  his  mouth.  The  word  spue  is
used  in  three  places  in  Scripture,  besides  the  one  under
consideration;  in  Levit.  xviii.  28,  xx. 22,  Jer.  xxv.  27;
and  in  all  these  places  stands  connected  with  the  judg-
ments of  God  upon  Israel,  or  the  nations  spoken  of,  and
implies  a  shaking  out  or  driving  from  their  present
standing,  either  among  nations  or  in  the  kingdom  of
Christ,  as  the  case  may  be.  And  this  passage,  I  suppose,
alludes  to  the  time  when  God  hath  promised,  saying,
"Yet  once  more  I  shake  not  the  earth  only,  but  also
heaven,"  Heb.  xii.  26.  So  Ave  may  expect  a  shaking
of  the  church  of  Christ,  if  this  is  the  age  spoken  of,  that
those  things  which  cannot  be  shaken  may  remain.  This,
too,  is  the  age  when  the  wise  and  foolish  virgins  are
sleeping  and  slumbering  together.

17th  verse,  "  Because  thou  sayest,  I  am  rich,  and  in-
creased with  goods,  and  have  need  of  nothing,  and  know-
est  not  that  thou  art  wretched,  and  miserable,  and  poor,
and  blind,  and  naked."  Our  heavenly  Instructor  has
given  us  in  this  verse  the  reason  why  they  are  lukewarm ;
"  because  thou  sayest,  I  am  rich."  The  church  in  this
Laodicean  state,  like  the  rich  man,  will  be  laying  up
goods,  or  making  great  calculations  for  the  outward  or
worldly  concerns  of  the  church  for  many  years  to  come,
building  places  for  worship,  establishing  colleges,  high
schools,  academies,  theological  institutions,  to  raise  up
a  popular  ministry,  that  the  world  may  be  pleased,  the
ministry  well  supported,  and  they  become  the  most  popu-
lar sect  of  the  day,"  increased  with  goods."  This,  too,
is  the  church.     What  shall  be  called  the  ffoods  of  the


Christ's  second  coming.  1&3

church  ?  It  is  those  contributions  which  are  depositee
for  charitable  and  pious  uses,  such  as  Paul  informed  his
brethren  to  lay  by  them  in  store  on  the  first  day  of  the
week.  These  will  be  increased  to  a  great  and  astonish-
ing degree  in  this  age  of  the  church.  Theological
writings  and  publications,  too,  are  the  goods  of  the
church :  there  will  be  a  great  increase  of  these.  "  Come,
see  what  great  things  we  are  doing,"  will  be  the  general
language  of  the  church,  and  the  names  of  donors  and
the  sums  they  contribute  will  be  published  through  the
world.  "  And  knowest  not  that  thou  art  wretched. "
The  corruptions  of  the  church  will  be  kept  out  of  sight ;
and  pride,  popularity,  self-righteousness,  depravity,  will
be  the  besetting  sins  of  the  members  and  great  body  of
public  professors,  and  few,  very  few  of  the  ministers  of
the  churches  will  be  valiant  or  bold  enough  to  tell  them
the  truth.  "  And  miserable."  Real  piety  will  be  very
little  enjoyed ;  the  hopes  of  a  large  body  of  professors
will  be  but  the  hope  of  a  hypocrite.  "  And  poor."  With-
out a  tried  faith,  suffering  but  little  or  no  persecution,
the  church  will  lack  those  riches  which  are  more  precious
than  fine  gold,  the  trial  of  their  faith.  "  And  blind,"
without  faith,  living  by  things  seen  more  than  on  the
promises  of  God.  "  And  naked,"  having  on  their  own
righteousness.  "I  counsel  thee  to  buy  of  me  gold  tried
in  the  fire."  That  is,  the  Amen,  the  faithful  and  true
witness,  counsels  the  Laodicean  church  to  buy  the  gold
tried  in  the  fire,  which  may  mean  either  that  faith  which
will  stand  the  fiery  trial  of  temptation  and  persecution,
or  that  truth  which  is  like  "  apples  of  gold  in  pictures
of  silver ; "  "  that  thou  may  est  be  rich ;  "  rich  in  faith  or
in  the  knowledge  of  the  truth ;  "  and  white  raiment  that
thou  mayest  be  clothed?  that  raiment  which  John  saw
the  saints  in  heaven  clothed  with,  which  is  the  righte-
ousness of  the  saints,  the  imputed  righteousness  of
Christ, "  the  Lord  our  righteousness"  If  it  is  not  so,  why
counsel  the  church  to  buy  of  him  ?  Yes,  my  brethren,
we  are  counselled  to  buy  a  raiment  without  spot  or
wrinkle,  "  and  that  the  shame  of  thy  nakedness  do  not
appear."  Truly,  when  Christ  comes,  and  we  find  we  have
been  trusting  in  self,  although  we  have  called  ourselves


154  LECTURE    X.

by  his  name,  we  have  worn  our  own  clothing,  and  eat
our  own  bread,  and  instead  of  being  clothed  upon,  we
shall  find  ourselves  naked.  Shall  we  not  be  ashamed
before  him  at  his  coming,  if  we  are  in  this  situation
when  he  comes  ?  O,  what  an  awful  thought !  There-
fore let  us  now  receive  the  further  admonition,  "  And
anoint  thine  eyes  with  eye-salve,  that  thou  mayest  see."
To  anoint  the  eyes,  in  a  figurative  sense,  is  to  examine
the  truth  and  evidences  of  Scripture,  that  we  may  see
clearly  our  state  and  standing  as  it  respects  our  charac-
ter towards  God  and  our  hope  in  his  future  aid,  promises,
and  blessings,  It  is  to  see  our  sins,  and  feel  the  need
of  help,  to  know  our  weakness,  and  trust  in  his  strength
—  in  one  word,  it  is  to  repent  and  believe  in  the  gospel
of  Jesus  Christ.  For  he  says,  "  As  many  as  I  love  I  re-
buke and  chasten:  be  zealous  therefore  and  repent"
Here,  then,  is  one  comfortable  promise  to  this  lukewarm
church.  If  there  is  any  tried,  chastened,  penitent  soul
in  this  church,  this  Laodicean  state  or  age  of  the  church,
they  have  the  promise  of  his  love,  his  everlasting  love,
his  unchangeable  love  ;  his  loving  kindness  he  will  not
take  from  him,  although  he  should  "  visit  their  trans-
gressions with  a  rod,  and  their  iniquity  with  stripes."
Be  zealous,  therefore,  brethren,  and  repent

20th  verse,  "  Behold,  I  stand  at  the  door  and  knock."
He  that  is  the  "  Amen  "  is  now  at  the  door.  In  this  La-
odicean age  of  the  church  he  comes  ;  he  knocks  by  his
judgments,  by  the  fulfilment  of  the  signs,  by  his  word,
by  all  the  means  of  grace  that  God  has  ever  used  to
alarm  the  sleepy,  slumbering  virgins  of  his  approach.
He  gives  the  cautionary  word,  "  Behold,  I  stand  at  the
door  and  knock ;  if  any  man  hear  my  voice  and  open  the
door,  I  will  come  in  to  him,  and  wall  sup  with  him,  and
he  with  me."  In  this  passage  of  prophecy  we  are  brought
down  to  the  marriage  supper  of  the  Lamb  —  another
and  a  strong  testimony  that  the  churches  are  to  be  con-
sidered in  a  mystical  sense,  and  the  language  or  subject
prophetical.  For  this  is  certainly  the  saying  of  Jesus,
the  faithful  and  true  witness  ;  "  for  the  testimony  of  Jesus
is  the  spirit  of  prophecy."  Rev.  xix.  7 — 9,  "  Let  us  re-
joice and  be  glad,  and  give  honor  to  him  ;  for  the  mar-


Christ's  second  coming.  155

riage  of  the  Lamb  is  come,  and  his  wife  hath  made
herself  ready.  And  to  her  was  granted  that  she  should
be  arrayed  in  fine  linen,  clean  and  white  ;  for  the  fine
linen  is  the  righteousness  of  saints.  And  he  saith  unto
me,  Write,  Blessed  are  they  which  are  called  to  the
marriage  supper  of  the  Lamb.  And  he  saith  unto  me,
These  are  the  true  sayings  of  God."  We  see,  my  friends,
by  the  similarity  of  the  sentiments  given  in  the  marriage
supper,  and  those  admonitions  and  prophecies  to  the
Laodicean  church,  that  they  must  mean  one  and  the
same  event.  To  hear  the  voice  of  the  bridegroom,  and
to  open  the  door,  and  go  out  to  meet  him,  is  the  way
which  the  bride  makes  herself  ready ;  and  his  supping
with  them  and  they  with  him,  shows  that  it  is  when
Christ  shall  come,  and  live,  and  reign  with  them.

"  To  him  that  overcometh  will  I  grant  to  sit  with  me
in  my  throne,  even  as  1  also  overcame,  and  am  set  down
with  my  Father  in  his  throne."  Here  is  another  expres-
sion which  proves  we  are  brought  down  to  the  end  of
time,  "  to  him  thai  overcometh"  What  can  the  faithful
and  true  witness  mean  by  this  expression  ?  He  explains
himself,  "  even  as  I  also  overcame.''''  How  did  Christ  over-
come when  he  sat  down  with  his  Father  ?  I  answer,  By
bursting  the  bands  of  death,  by  conquering  the  grave,  he
arose  a  glorious  conqueror,  and  was  seated  at  the  right
hand  of  God.  Then  this  is  the  true  meaning  of  the  text,
to  him,  that  hath  part  in  the  first  resurrection,  will  I  grant
to  sit  with  me  in  my  throne.  "  Blessed  and  holy  is  he
that  hath  part  in  the  first  resurrection;  on  such  the  sec-
ond death  hath  no  power ;  but  they  shall  be  kings  and
priests  of  God,  and  of  Christ,  and  shall  reign  with  him."
What  light  m^y  we  not  receive  from  the  word  of  God,
when  taken  together,  when  explained  by  its  own  lan-
guage, when  kept  unbroken !  "  He  that  hath  an  ear,
let  him  hear  what  the  Spirit  saith  unto  the  churches."
This  closes  what  1  call,  and  what  Christ,  I  think,  calls,
a  prophecy.  "  Blessed  is  he  that  readeth,  and  they  that
hear  the  words  of  this  prophecy,  and  keep  those  things
which  are  written  therein ;  for  the  time  is  at  hand."

This  Laodicean  church  began  about  A.  D.  1 798,  and
will  last  the  forty-five  years.    When  this  dispensation


,


156  LECTURE   X.

will  close,  the  ^udgment  will  set,  and  the  books  will  be
opened  ;  the  hypocrites  will  be  spued  out  of  the  church,
and  the  sanctuary  cleansed.

Will  the  situation  of  the  church,  the  character  of
Christians,  the  doctrines  taught,  and  the  signs  of  the
times  warrant  us  to  believe  that  we  live  in  the  Laodicean
age  of  the  church  ?  Let  us  for  a  moment  examine  the
evidence  and  see.

]st.  The  situation  of  the  church,  enjoying  peace  in
and  among  the  kingdoms  of  the  earth,  enjoying  all  the
privileges  of  citizens  without  persecution,  making  great
and  many  improvements  in  her  worldly  concerns,  rich  in
this  world's  goods,  having  at  her  command  many  millions
of  funds,  and  almost  swaying  the  destinies  of  the  world ;
great,  learned  and  rich  men  enlisting  under  her  banners,
controlling  the  fashions,  customs,  and  laws  of  the  day,
swaying  a  mighty  influence  over  the  education  of  our
youth,  and  giving  a  general  tone  to  the  literature  of  the
world,  increasing  her  demands  for  power,  establishing
bishoprics,  presbyteries,  national  and  state  conventions,
conferences,  councils,  associations,  consociations,  socie-
ties innumerable  ;  and  all  these  controlled  almost  exclu-
sively by  her  clergy.  May  we  not  say  truly,  "  She  is  rich
and  increased  in  goods  ?  "  But  is  this  all  ?  No.  Look
at  her  colleges,  theological  schools,  academies,  deposito-
ries, public  edifices,  presses,  theological  writings  and
publications,  in  almost  every  nation,  kingdom,  state,  and
territory,  and  in  this  country  in  almost  every  county  and
town ;  and  all  this  by  contributions.  Well  may  it  be
said,  she  has  need  of  nothing.  These  things,  too,  among
all  sects  and  denominations,  one  cannot  outdo  another
apparently,  yet  each  is  striving  for  the  msstery.

2d.  The  characters  of  Christians  generally.  In  speak-
ing of  the  character  of  our  brethren,  it  becomes  the  speak-
er to  be  very  careful  and  unassuming,  for  God  has  not
made  him  a  judge  over  his  brethren.  Therefore,  to  judge
this  one  is  right,  and  that  one  wrong,  we  shall  leave  for
the  judgment  seat  of  Christ.  But  on  a  general  scale
surely  we  may  be  allowed  to  examine  and  compare  our-
selves with  the  prophecies.  In  all  ages  back,  Christians,
when  living  godly,  have  been  a  poor,  despised,  persecu-


Christ's  second  coming.  157

ted  people,  pilgrims  and  strangers  in  the  world,  plainly
showing-  that  this  is  not  their  continuing-  city,  but  that
they  are  seeking-  one  to  come.  But  is  it  so  now  ?  Have
not  professors  generally,  for  more  than  thirty  yea^Fs,
been  seeking-  for  the  riches  of  this  life,  for  the  honors
of  the  world,  and  following-  the  fashions  of  the  times  as
greedily  as  men  of  the  world  ?  Yes.  And  can  we  dis-
tinguish a  professor  of  religion  in  our  public  assemblies
from  a  man  of  the  world,  except  we  are  informed  ?  No.
Where,  then,  do  Christians  plainly  show  they  seek  a
better  country  ?  Nowhere.  May  we  not  live  in  the
same  neighborhood  with  professors  for  years,  and  not
hear  them  recommend  the  religion  they  profess  ?  Yes.
But  do  we  not  hear  the  same  persons  talk  freely,  flippantly,
and  zealously  about  the  world,  the  politics  and  the  fashions
of  the  day  ?  Yes.  Is  it  not  a  general  complaint  with
all  of  our  churches,  of  coldness,  of  a  want  of  spiritual
life,  and  a  great  failure  in  active  spiritual  duties  ?  Yes.
Has  not  a  spirit  of  sloth  and  supineness  seized  upon
professors  generally  ?  Do  not  many  think,  if  they  have
a  hired  servant  to  talk  religion,  and  visit  the  widow
and  fatherless,  and  keep  themselves  unspotted  from  the
world,  for  them  it  is  enough  ?  Yes.  And  does  not  all
this,  and  much  more  which  might  with  truth  be  said  on
this  point,  declare  loudly  that  the  professors  of  Chris-
tianity, generally,  are  in  a  lukewarm  state  ?  Yes.  We
must  respond,  Yes.

The  doctrine  taught.  Here  again  your  speaker  feels
a  diffidence  in  speaking  on  this  subject,  knowing  that
many  great,  learned,  and  good  men  diner  on  this  point ;
but  we  must  all  stand  or  fall  to  our  own  Master,  and  I
must  answer  how  I  speak  or  shun  to  declare  the  whole
counsel  of  God.  Your  speaker  believes  that  the  de-
pravity of  the  human  heart,  our  dependence  on  God,  and
indebtedness  to  grace,  are  abundantly  taught  in  the
Scriptures.  See  Eph.  ii.  4 — 13.  But  how  stands  this
doctrine  with  our  public  proclaimers  at  the  present  day  ?
Some  few  may  preach  it,  but  there  is  more  than  ten  to
one  who  do  not  preach  it,  or,  if  they  do,  they  so  cover  it
up  by  their  plausible  and  specious  reasoning,  that  the
force  of  the  doctrine  and  the  object  of  the  inspired
14


158  LECTURE    X.

writers  are  wholly  lost.  We  are  now  taught  that  man
can  make  himself  a  Christian  as  easily  as  he  can  turn
abxmt  in  the  highway ;  that  ohedience  or  baptism  is  re-
generation ;  that  works  are  the  medium  of  acceptance
with  God,  and  that  the  righteousness  of  Christ  is  not
imputed.  How  can  such  doctrine  be  more  clearly
pointed  out  than  it  is  by  the  "  faithful  and  true  witness"
to  the  Laodicean  church  ?  "  And  knowest  not  that  thou
art  wretched,  and  miserable,  and  poor,  and  blind,  and
naked."  That  is,  they  know  not  their  depravity.  "1
counsel  thee  to  buy  of  me  (see  here  their  dependence  on
God)  gold  tried  in  the  fire,  that  thou  mayest  be  rich ;
and  white  raiment,  that  thou  mayest  be  clothed,  that  the
shame  of  thy  nakedness  do  not  appear;  and  anoint  thine
eyes  with  eye-salve,  that  thou  mayest  see."  Grace,
grace,  from  the  foundation  to  the  top  stone.  Surely,  my
dear  friends,  no  candid  observer  of  the  doctrine  taught
at  the  present  day,  but  what  must  in  his  heart  acknowl-
edge that  the  doctrine  taught  by  many,  among  the  dif-
ferent sects,  is  the  same  described  by  our  divine  Master
in  the  prophecy  to  the  Laodicean  church.

The  signs  of  the  times.  In  the  close  of  Christ's  in-
structions to  the  church  under  consideration,  he  says,
"  Behold,  I  stand  at  the  door  and  knock ;  if  any  man  hear
my  voice,"  &c.  Daniel  says,  "  At  that  time  shall  Mi-
chael stand  up,  the  great  Prince  that  standeth  up  for  the
children  of  thy  people."  And  Christ  says,  "  For  many
shall  come  in  my  name,  saying,  I  am  Christ,  and  shall
deceive  many."  These  were  particular  signs  given  by
Christ  and  the  prophets.  And  how  have  these  come  to
pass  ?  Witness  the  great  and  many  reformations  which
for  thirty  years  have  progressed  in  our  land,  in  Europe,
and  the  islands  of  the  seas.  See  also  the  word  of  God
published,  in  whole  or  in  part,  among  all  nations.  See
the  missionaries  of  the  gospel  running  to  and  fro  through
the  whole  earth.  Do  not  these  indicate  that  Christ
stands  at  the  door,  and  that  his  voice  has  gone  out  even
unto  the  ends  of  the  world,  and  that  Michael  has  stood
up  for  the  children  of  thy  people  ?  Yes.  Again  :  how
many  new  sects  have  arisen,  how  many  false  Christs  have
come  in  this  blaze  of  gospel  light,  and  are  drawing  away


Christ's  second  coming.  159

their  hundreds  and  thousands  after  them  !  It  is  almost
incredible,  when  we  take  into  view  the  light  and  knowl-
edge under  which  we  live ;  but  all  go  to  prove  that
Christ  is  nigh,  even  at  the  door.

In  reviewing  our  subject,  we  learn  by  the  events  of
the  Sardis  church,  and  by  the  admonitions  given,  our
duty  to  guard  against  the  introduction  of  errors  into  the
church,  and  to  strengthen  ourselves  in  the  truth ;  and
likewise  of  being  active  in  all  the  duties  of  religion,  that
we  may  not  only  have  a  name  to  live,  but  have  the  life
and  power  of  the  gospel,  that  we  may  resist  all  the
temptations  and  fiery  darts  of  the  enemies  of  the
church.

By  the  church  of  Philadelphia,  we  learn  that  if  we
keep  the  word  of  God  and  the  testimony  of  Jesus  Christ,
he  will  keep  us  from  those  trials  and  judgments  which
he  sends  on  an  ungodly  and  rebellious  people,  and  that
God  has  opened  a  door  for  the  spread  of  the  gospel,
which  no  power  on  earth  will  be  able  to  shut,  until  the
angel  standing  on  the  sea  and  on  the  land,  shall  swear
that  time  shall  be  no  longer.  We  also  learn  the  impor-
tance of  having  brotherly  love  and  perseverance  in  holy
things,  that  no  man  take  from  us  the  crown  which  is  laid
up  for  those  that  love  God,  and  which  will  be  given  to
them  who  remain  steadfast  in  Christ  Jesus  at  his  coming,
which  is  promised  quickly  to  this  church.

By  the  Laodicean  church,  we  learn  the  important  les-
son that  we  cannot  serve  two  masters ;  we  cannot  love
the  present  evil  world,  and  at  the  same  time  be  the  ser-
vants of  God;  that  to  be  lukewarm  in  religion  is  to  be
cast  out  of  his  presence,  and  call  down  the  vengeance  of
God's  final  judgment  upon  our  heads,  and,  while  we  may
flatter  ourselves  that  we  are  righteous,  find  to  our  ever
lasting  shame,  that  we  are  wretched,  miserable,  poor
blind,  and  naked.

Think,  O  think,  my  dear  friends,  you  that  are  trusting
in  your  own  goodness,  when  that  day  of  justice  shall
come,  and  the  faithful  and  true  witness  shall  stand
against  you,  when  your  goodness  shall  pass  away  like  the
morning  cloud,  and  the  righteous  Judge  shall  pronounce


160  LECTURE   X.

the  dreadful  sentence,  Depart  —  what  must  be  your
feelings !  The  -world,  which  you  here  worshipped,  is
burning  up  ;  the  friends  with  whom  you  here  associated
are  gone  to  meet  the  Lord  in  the  air,  or  are  sinking  with
you  into  endless  and  hopeless  misery.  The  Savior,
whose  name  you  are  now  ashamed  to  own,  or  whose
righteousness  you  think  you  need  not,  is  now  your  Judge,
seated  on  a  great  white  throne,  from  whose  face  the
heavens  and  the  earth  shall  flee  away.  Think,  O  sinner!
where  wilt  thou  be  found !


LECTURE    XI


REV.  v.  9,  10.


And  they  sung  a  new  song,  saying,  Thou  art  worthy  to  take  the
book,  and  to  open  the  seals  thereof  j  for  thou  wast  slain,  and
hast  redeemed  us  to  God  by  thy  blood  out  of  every  kindred,
and  tongue,  and  people,  and  nation  ;  and  hast  made  us  unto  our
God  kings  and  priests ;  and  we  shall  reign  on  the  earth.


There  is  such  harmony,  beauty,  and  knowledge  m
every  part  of  the  word  of  God,  that  the  Bible  student,
whose  heart  is  interested  in  the  same,  has  often,  while
reading,  been  led  to  stop  and  admire  the  order,  wisdom,
and  light  which  burst  upon  his  enraptured  vision,  at  the
unfolding  of  the  figures  and  truths  which  until  that  mo-
ment, perhaps,  lay  in  darkness,  doubt,  and  obscurity,  and
seemed  to  be  wrapped  up  in  a  mysterious  veil  that  al-
most makes  the  reader  quail,  and  come  to  the  conclu-
sion that  he  is  treading  on  forbidden  ground ;  but,  perhaps,
in  an  unexpected  moment,  the  inspired  penman,  seem-
ingly having  anticipated  our  ignorance  or  darkness,
throws  out  a  spark  of  that  live  coal  which  had  touched
his  lips,  and  our  darkness  is  dispelled,  ignorance  vanishes
before  the  fulness  of  knowledge  of  the  word  of  God,
and  we  stand  reproved  and  admonished  for  our  stupidity
and  ignorance  in  the  figures  and  truths  before  explained.
Our  text  is  a  brilliant  spark  of  that  fire  which  is  upon
the  altar  between  the  cherubims,  and  gives  us  a  clear
ray  of  light  to  discover  the  allusion  of  the  figures  con-
tained in  the  fourth  and  fifth  chapters  of  this  Sook.  It  is
conveyed  unto  us  by  way  of  a  chorus,  like  the  angel's
14*


162  LECTURE    XI.

song-  at  the  birth  of  our  Savior  in  Bethlehem  of  Judea.
It  explains  to  us  in  a  divine  song  what  the  four  beasts
are,  and  gives  a  key  to  unlock  the  mystery  of  the  twenty-
four  elders,  and  clearly  shows  who  opens  the  seals  of
the  book.     I  shall,  in  illustrating  this  subject,  inquire

I.  Who  they  were  that  sung  this  new  song ;

II.  Show  the  song,  and  the  occasion  of  it ;  and,

III.  Speak  of  the  reign  and  the  place  where.

I.  We  are  to  inquire  who  are  the  singers  in  this
grand  chorus.  The  prophet  calls  them  "the  four
beasts,"  or,  as  it  might  have  been  more  properly  transla-
ted, four  animate  beings ;  and  the  "  four  and  twenty
elders,"  he  also  calls  them  "  saints,"  See  the  8th  verse,
"  And  when  he  had  taken  the  book,  the  four  beasts  and
four  and  twenty  elders  fell  down  before  the  Lamb,  hav-
ing every  one  of  them  harps  and  golden  vials  full  of
odors,  which  are  the  prayers  of  the  saints."  Then  comes
in  our  text,  "  And  they  sung  a  new  song,"  &c.  The
four  beasts  is  a  figurative  representation  of  the  whole
New  Testament  church,  not  only  in  character,  but  in
chronology,  representing  the  four  different  stages  of  trial
through  which  the  church  should  pass  in  her  pilgrimage
in  the  wilderness  of  this  world,  before  she  would  enter
the  visible  kingdom  of  her  glorious  Redeemer,  the  New
Jerusalem,  and  reign  on  the  earth.  And  every  individ-
ual Christian,  who  may  live  any  length  of  time  after  his
conversion,  passes  through  some  or  all  of  these  states  of
trial.  The  four  and  twenty  elders  are  the  twelve  patri-
archs, which  are  sometimes  called  prophets,  and  the
twelve  apostles  of  the  Lamb.  For  it  is  said,  we  are
built  on  the  prophets  and  apostles,  Jesus  Christ  being
the  chief  corner-stone ;  and  figuratively  it  may  represent
the  faithful  and  true  ministers  of  Jesus  Christ,  the  same
as  the  twenty-four  courses  of  the  priesthood  under  the
Jewish  economy.  See  1  Chron.  xxiv.  7 — 19.  And  the
four  beasts  are  typified  by  the  four  grand  divisions  of
the  Jewish  camp  under  Moses.  The  first,  on  the  east,
Was  to  follow  the  standard  of  Judah  ;  that  on  the  south
side,  and  second  in  the  march,  wa3  the  standard  of  Reu-
ben ;  on  the  west  side,  Ephraim,  and  his,  was  the  third
standard  in  the  march;  on  the  north  side  was  Dan'a


Christ's  second  coming,  163

standard  and  Dan  brought  up  the  rear  in  the  march  of
the  Jews  through  the  wilderness.  What  their  several
standards  were,  I  cannot  tell,  except  that  of  Judah,
which  marched  in  front,  immediately  after  the  ark,  which
in  all  probability  was  a  lion.  And  our  "  first  beast "
under  consideration  was  "like  a  lion,  and  the  seconds
beast  like  a  calf,  and  the  third  beast  had  a  face  as  a  man,
and  the  fourth  beast  was  like  a  flying  eagle."  These
represent  the  four  grand  divisions  of  the  gospel  church.
The  first  represents  the  church  in  the  apostolic  age,
when  the  church  went  forth,  bold  as  a  lion,  preaching
and  proclaiming  the  gospel  among  all  nations.  The
second  state  or  division  of  the  church  was  the  times  of
persecution  and  slaughter  by  the  Roman  emperors,
represented  by  the  calf.  The  third  state  of  the  church
was  in  Constantine's  day,  when  the  church  enjoyed
privileges  as  a  man,  and  became  independent,  and  like
a  natural  man,  proud,  avaricious,  and  worldly.  The
fourth  and  last  state  of  trial  was  when  the  anti-Christian
beast  arose  ;  and,  under  the  scourge  of  this  abomination,
the  church  having  two  wings  given  her,  like  the  wings
of  an  eagle,  she  flew  into  the  wilderness,  where,  a  place
being  prepared  for  her,  she  is  nourished  from  the  face  of
the  serpent  a  thousand  two  hundred  and  threescore
days,  Rev.  xii.  6, 14.

This  of  course  would  include  the  whole  Christian
church  until  Christ's  second  coming,  when  anti-Christ
will  be  destroyed,  and  the  church  delivered  from  all
her  foes,  and  brought  into  her  New  Jerusalem  state,
where  John  now  sees  in  his  vision  the  whole  family  of
the  redeemed,  singing  the  grand  chorus  as  in  the  verses
following  our  text.  "  And  I  beheld,  and  I  heard  the
voice  of  many  angels  round  about  the  throne,  and  the
beasts,  and  the  elders  ;  and  the  number  of  them  was  ten
thousand  times  ten  thousands  and  thousands  of  thou-
sands." In  this  vision  John  has  the  same  view  which
Daniel  had  in  his  vision.  See  Daniel  vii.  10.  Daniel
saw  the  same  throne,  and  the  same  numbers  stood  before
it;  which  proves,  almost  beyond  a  doubt  that  Daniel's
vision  carries  us  into  the  eternal,  immortal,  and  glorified


164  LECTURE    XI.

statef;  for  John,  in  the  next  verses,  carries  us  into  the
eternal  state  of  the  righteous.

12th  verse,  "  Saying  with  a  loud  voice,  Worthy  is  the
Lamb  that  was  slain  to  receive  power,  and  riches,  and
wisdom,  and  strength,  and  honor,  and  glory,  and  blessing.
And  every  creature  which  is  in  heaven,  and  on  the
earth,  and  under  the  earth,  and  such  as  are  in  the  sea,
and  all  that  are  in  them,  heard  I  saying,  Blessing,  and
honor,  and  glory,  and  power,  be  unto  him  that  sitteth
upon  the  throne,  and  unto  the  Lamb  forever  and  ever.
And  the  four  beasts  said,  Amen.  And  the  four  and
twenty  elders  fell  down  and  worshipped  him  that  liveth
forever  and  ever."  Nothing  can  be  more  evident  than
that  John  here  saw  the  whole  family  of  the  redeemed,
as  they  will  be  after  the  first  resurrection ;  for  he  gives
the  several  situations  of  every  part  of  the  whole  family
as  they  actually  were,  that  is,  in  body,  or  the  situation
of  their  bodies  at  that  very  time  when  he  was  writing,
"  every  creature,"  that  is,  in  person,  in  their  bodies,  as
they  will  be  after  the  resurrection ;  not  all  mankind,  as
some  vainly  suppose,  but  those  who  are  redeemed,  or
who  may  hereafter  be  redeemed,  "  out  of  every  kindred,
and  tongue,  and  people,  and  nation."  See  our  text.  If
it  had  been  "  all  nations,"  &c,  he  would  not  have  said,
"  out  of,"  &c.  Therefore  we  must  take  the  whole  in
connection.  But  John  saw  every  creature  whose  bodies
then  were  some  of  them  in  heaven,  as  Enoch  and  Elijah  ;
every  creature  who  was  then  alive  on  the  earth,  like  him-
self and  brethren;  every  body  of  the  saints  that  had
slept  and  been  buried  under  ground,  or  in  the  sea,  and
all  the  saints  who  were  yet  in  the  loins  of.  their  fathers.
In  one  word,  he  saw  the  whole  general  assembly,  and
church  of  the  first  born,  whose  names  were  written  in
the  Lamb's  book  of  life.  These  four  beasts  are  the  same
living  creatures  which  Isaiah  saw  when  he  had  a  view
of  the  glory  of  God.  lsa.  vi.-l — 3,  "In  the  year  that
king  Uzziah  died,  I  saw  also  the  Lord  sitting  upon  a
throne,  high  and  lifted  up,  and  his  train  filled  the  temple.
Above  it  stood  the  seraphims  ;  each  one  had  six  wings:
with   twain  he   covered   his   face,  and   with  twain  he


Christ's  second  coming.  165

covered  his  feet,  and  with  twain  he  did  fly.  And  one
cried  unto  another,  and  said,  Holy,  holy,  holy  is  the  Lord
of  hosts ;  the  whole  earth  is  full  of  his  glory."  Ezekiel
also  saw  the  same  living  creatures  that  Isaiah  calls  "se-
raphims,"  and  John  "  four  beasts."  Ezekiel  calls  them
"  cherubims."  See  Ezek.  i.  and  x.  chapters.  John  says,
Rev.  iv.  8,  "  And  the  four  beasts  had  each  of  them  six
wings  about  him,"  the  same  as  Isaiah's  "seraphims."
These  wings  are  the  graces  of  the  Spirit,  as  is  strongly
implied  by  Ezekiel  i.  12,  "  And  they  went  every  one
straight  forward ;  whither  the  spirit  was  to  go,  they
went ;  and  they  turned  not  when  they  went"  "  With
two  they  covered  their  face  " — humility  and  repentance :
"  with  two  they  covered  their  feet " — that  is,  they  walked
by  two  of  the  graces,  faith  and  patience,  faith  in  God
and  patient  in  tribulation ;  "  and  with  two  they  did  fly  " —
hope  and  love.  They  "  mount  up  with  wings  as  eagles ;
they  shall  run  and  not  be  weary,  walk  and  not  faint,"
says  the  prophet  Isaiah,  xl.  31.  And  again  John  says,
they  were  "  full  of  eyes  before  and  behind,  and  they
were  full  of  eyes  within ; "  showing  that  they  would
have  just  views  of  sin,  of  God,  and  his  word,  and  of
themselves :  they  could  look  back  and  see  their  sins,
and  the  pit  from  which  they  had  been  delivered,  and
with  gratitude  remember  their  Redeemer.  They  could
with  eyes  of  faith  look  forward  and  believe  in  the
promises  of  God,  and  have  a  view  of  the  glory  that
shall  be  revealed  at  his  second  coming.  With  eyes
within,  they  could  look  into  their  own  hearts,  and  see  the
remaining  corruption  and  hidden  depravity  that  lie
lurking  in  every  corner  of  the  soul,  and  by  this  means
put  off  the  old  man  with  his  deeds.  They  are  represent-
ed by  John  as  being  praying  souls,  "  and  golden  vials
full  of  odors,  which  are  the  prayers  of  saints."  Every
one  had  these  vials,  says  John.  How  then,  I  ask,  can
the  prayerless  man  or  woman  think  to  join  this  celestial
throng  ?  "  Having  every  one  of  them  harps  ; "  showing
that  all  of  them  would  have  new  hearts,  be  born  of  God;
so  they  would  be  enabled  to  sing  in  the  New  Jerusalem
state  the  new  song.
These  are  the  characters  and  persons  which  John  saw


166  LECTURE    XI.

represented  by  the  four  and  twenty  elders  and  the  font
beasts.     I  shall  now,

II.  Show  what  we  may  understand  by  the  new  song1,
and  the  occasion  of  it.

The  prophet  John  had  been  led  by  the  angel  through
seven  different  stages  of  the  church,  by  the  vision  of  the
mystery  of  the  seven  stars  and  seven  golden  candlesticks,
under  the  name  of  the  seven  churches  of  Asia,  which
ought  to  be  understood  symbolically  down  to  the  time
when  the  judge  stands  at  the  door  ready  to  enter  in  to
the  supper  of  the  great  God,  when  all  wicked  flesh  will  be
destroyed,  and  till  the  marriage  supper  of  the  Lamb
arrives,  when  all  the  righteous  will  be  raised,  enter  into
the  glorified  state,  and  live  and  reign  with  him  on  earth.
Then  it  is  perfectly  natural  that  after  we  had  read  the
history  of  the  church  through  all  her  trials,  persecutions,
and  imperfections,  we  should  be  led  to  see  her  deliver-
ance on  the  other  side  of  the  banks  of  Jordan,  or  beyond
the  power  of  death,  and  to  hear  a  part,  at  least,  of  that
new  song  which  no  man  can  sing  unless  he  is  redeemed
from  the  earth.

In  the  second  and  third  chapters  of  Revelation,  we
have  the  history  of  the  church,  as  I  have  endeavored  to
show  in  my  lectures  on  the  churches.  In  the  fourth  and
fifth  chapters  we  have  a  view  of  the  glorified  state,  and
the  characters  given  of  those  who  will  enjoy  the  privilege
of  that  state,  the  song  which  will  employ  the  golden  harps,
and  the  place  where.  The  characters  I  have  already
given.  The  song  is  represented  as  a  new  song.  It  is  new
because  it  is  sung  only  in  that  state  Avhere  all  things  are
made  new.  See  2  Pet.  iii.  13,  "  Nevertheless  we,  accord-
ing to  his  promise,  look  for  new  heavens  and  a  new  earth,
wherein  dwelleth  righteousness."  Rev.  xxi.  5,  "  And  he
that  sat  upon  the  throne  said,  Behold,  I  make  all  things
new."  Now  John  saw,  in  Rev.  iv.  2,  the  same  throne,
and  him  that  sat  upon  it,  and  in  the  verse  above  quoted
he  speaks  as  though  he  had  mentioned  before  "  him  that
sat  upon  the  throne."  And  as  he  has  not  mentioned  him
in  this  language  in  any  other  place,  we  may  have  strong
reason  to  believe  that  the  time  and  subject  matter  is  the
same  in  the  4th  chapter  of  Revelation  as  in  the  21st


Christ's  second  coming.  167

chapter.  Again :  we  are  expressly  told  that  no  man
could  learn  the  new  song,  but  those  who  are  redeemed
from  the  earth,  Rev.  xiv.  3.  And  redemption  from  the
earth  is  no  where  spoken  of  until  the  resurrection  of  the
body.  Christ  says,  in  Luke  xxi.  27,  28,  "  And  then  shall
they  see  the  Son  of  Man  coming  in  a  cloud  with  power
and  great  glory.  And  when  these  things  begin  to  come
to  pass,  then  look  up,  and  lift  up  your  heads,  for  your
redemption  draweth  nigh."  And  Paul  says,  Rom.  vih.
23,  "  Even  we  ourselves  groan  within  ourselves,  waiting
for  the  adoption,  to  wit,  the  redemption  of  our  bodies."
In  this  state  they  can  sing,  "  For  thou  wast  slain,  and
hast  redeemed  us  to  God  by  thy  blood,  out  of  every
kindred,  and  tongue,  and  people,  and  nation."  It  is  also
a  holy  song  ;  for  they  cry,  "  and  rest  not  day  and  night,
saying,  Holy,  holy,  holy  Lord  God  Almighty,  which  was,
and  is,  and  is  to  come."  The  church  in  this  state  are
not  all  holy  ;  they  have  but  a  faint  view  of  the  holiness
of- God's  character,  his  law  or  government;  neither  could
they  endure  the  sight ;  for  when  God  has  seen  fit  to  re-
veal a  small  part  of  his  holiness,  men  have  fainted  under
it.  Isaiah  cried  out,  "  Woe  is  me."  Ezekiel  fell  upon
his  face,  Ezek.  i.  28.  Daniel's  comeliness  was  turned
into  corruption,  so  that  he  retained  no  strength,  Dan.
x.  8.  Therefore  it  is  evident  that  this  holy  song  can
only  be  sung  in  a  state  of  immortality,  when  we  shall
be  holy,  even  as  God  is  holy.  This  new  and  holy  song
will  not  cease,  for  they  rest  not  day  and  night,  which
proves  it  to  be  in  the  eternal  state.  And  the  dress  and
crowns  of  the  elders,  "  clothed  in  white  raiment,"  and
ttiay  had  on  their  heads  "  crowns  of  gold,"  and  they
"cast  their  crowns  before  the  throne,  saying,  Thou  art
worthy,  O  Lord,  to  receive  glory,  and  honor,  and  power"  —
all  proves  that  the  new  song  is  sung  after  the  second
coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  for  Paul  tells  us,  that
a  crown  is  laid  up  for  him  which  the  righteous  Judge
shall  give  him  at  that  day ;  and  not  only  him,  but  to  all
them  also  that  love  his  appearing.  So  neither  the  elders
nor  the  beasts  can  sing  this  new  song  until  the  New
Jerusalem  is  formed,  their  bodies  redeemed  from  the
earth,  and  they  brought  into  the  eternal  state  of  the


168  LECTURE    XI.

righteous.  It  will  not  be  sung  until  the  last  child  is
born  into  the  kingdom  —  the  last  enemy  conquered  —
the  elect  gathered  from  the  four  winds  of  heaven,  and
the  cap  stone  brought  forth,  when  the  heavens  will
ring  with  this  general  chorus.  "  Holy,  holy,  holy  is  the
Lord  God  Almighty  :  blessing,  and  honor,  and  glory,  and
power,  be  unto  him  that  sitteth  upon  the  throne,  and
unto  the  Lamb  forever  and  ever  ;  and  the  four  beasts  will
say,  Amen."

III.  I  shall  now  show  the  reign  spoken  of  in  our  text,
and  the  place  where.

There  is  much  speculation  at  the  present  day  on  the
reign  of  Christ  on  the  earth,  which  is  promised  in  his
word,  and  in  the  text  Some  have  supposed  that  it
would  be  purely  spiritual,  by  the  Holy  Spirit's  influence,
when  all,  or  a  large  share  of  mankind  who  then  should
fee  on  the  earth,  would  be  regenerated  and  become  the
subjects  of  his  spiritual  kingdom  ;  that  there  would  be
no  tempting  devil  to  deceive,  nor  any  kingdoms  on  the
earth,  but  what  would  be  subject  to  Christ's  spiritual
reign,  and  the  church  would  enjoy  a  long  Sabbath  of
rest;  and  the  long-desired  period  of  some  who  profess
to  be  the  servants  of  Christ  would  come  ;  when  church
and  state  would  be  united,  and  war  would  cease  to  the
end  of  the  world,  and  the  world  would  increase  in  riches,
arts,  and  science  to  an  amazing  degree,  beyond  any  thing
we  have  yet  conceived  *,  thousands  would  inhabit  the
earth  where  there  are  but  tens  now,  and  man  would  live
to  a  good  old  age,  and  nations  be  born  in  a  day.  This
theory  is  the  most  rational  one  I  have  been  able  to  dis-
cover, aside  from  the  glorious  reign  of  Christ  with  his
people  in  a  state  of  immortality.

To  the  above  theory  I  have  many  scriptural  objections.
Although  the  advocates  of  this  theory  call  it  spiritual,
yet  a  large  share,  if  not  all,  are  temporal  blessings  of
this  kingdom,  and  are  exactly  the  same  that  the  Jews
believed  they  should  possess  at  Christ's  first  coming.
Again :  they  must  suppose,  if  this  be  true,  that  the
rulers  of  the  world  must  all  be  Christians,  or  professedly
so.  Then  what  must  we  say  to  Christ's  words,  «  My
kingdom   is   not  of  this  world "  ?  and  again,  "  In   the


CHRIST'S    SECOND    COMING.  lOb?

world  ye  shall  have  tribulation  "  ?  The  world  hate  you7
and  if  ye  live  godly,  ye  shall  suffer  persecution,  and
these  (meaning  the  whole  family  of  the  redeemed)  have
come  out  of  much  tribulation.  How  could  those  millions
who  are  born  or  live  in  this  happy  period,  come  out  of
great  tribulation  ?  But  where  do  the  advocates  of  the
above  system  prove  their  doctrine  ?  Some  pretend  to
bring  the  same  passages  in  the  Old  Testament  that  the
Jews  did,  to  prove  their  temporal  kingdom  over  the
Gentiles,  and  do  not  see  that  much  of  the  Old  Testa-
ment prophecy  was,  and  has  been  fulfilled  in  its  typical
sense.  And  it  is  very  easy  to  show  that  the  passages
they  pretend  to  bring  in  the  Old  Testament  were  all
fulfilled  1800  years  ago.

But,  if  they  had  believed  in  this  theory,  would  not
some  of  the  New  Testament  writers  have  mentioned  this
important  period  ?  I  remember,  when  I  was  but  a  child,
of  hearing  an  old  minister  of  the  gospel  make  a  remark
like  this:  —  "All  the  Old  Testament  prophecies,"  said
he,  "  which  were  not  fulfilled  when  Christ  came  in  the
flesh,  are  carried  into  the  New  Testament,  and  further
explained."  1  then  thought  there  was  reason  and  pro-
priety in  the  remark;  I  think  so  still,  for  the  two  wit-
nesses must  and  will  agree.  And  where  do  the  believ-
ers in  this  system  bring  us  one  word  from  Christ  ?  Not
one.  But  we  can  show  much  to  the  contrary.  The
parable  of  the  tares  and  the  wheat  carries  us  to  the  end
of  the  world;  and  he  expressly  says,  "Let  them  grow
together  until  the  harvest."  His  prophecy  and  parables
in  Matt.  xxiv.  and  xxv.  give  us  a  prophecy  until  his
second  coming,  and  not  a  word  about  a  happy  period
previously,  but  much  about  lo  heres,  and  lo  theres,  and
wicked  servants  beating  and  bruising  their  fellow-ser-
vants, and  eating  and  drinking  with  the  drunken,  saying
in  their  hearts,  My  Lord  delayeth  his  coming.  Can  this
be  a  millennium?  No.  Too  much  devil  in  such  con-
duct as  this.  Where  does  Paul,  a  very  prominent  writer,
give  us  a  hint  of  these  important  things  ?  He  must  have
understood  the  Old  Testament  as  well  as  some,  if  not
all,  of  our  modern  divines.  But  he,  too,  has  given  the
reverse.  In  his  epistle  to  the  Thessalonians,  he  tells  us
15


170  LECTURE    XI.

plainly,  "  Then  shall  that  wicked  be  revealed,  whom  the
Lord  shall  consume  with  the  spirit  of  his  mouth,  and  de-
stroy by  the  brightness  of  his  coming,"  2  Thess.  ii.  In
his  2  Thess.  i.,  he  tells  them  of  the  necessity  of  patience
and  faith  in  all  their  persecutions  and  tribulations ;  which,
he  says,  is  a  manifest  token  of  the  righteous  judgment
of  God ;  and  then  goes  on  to  show  Christ's  coming,  and
destruction  of  an  ungodly  world ;  nothing  that  looks  like
a  millennium  in  this,  or  any  part  of  Paul's  writings,  be-
fore Christ's  -second  coming.  Where,  then,  shall  we
find  it  in 'the  New  Testament?  Perhaps  they  may  say
in  Rev.  xx. ;  but  this  chapter  can  never  be  given  to  them
until  they  do  away  the  first  resurrection ;  for  all  in  that
chapter  is  after  the  first  resurrection,  and,  of  course,  is
after  the  personal  and  second  coming  of  the  Savior ;  and
all  the  arguments  to  do  away  or  destroy  the  word  resur-
rection are  so  futile  and  weak  that  it  needs  no  argument
to  refute  them ;  for  what  could  do  it  in  that  place  might
in  every  other  case,  and  we  should  be  Sadducees  at
once.  James,  Peter,  and  Jude  mention  the  last  days  in
their  epistles,  and  describe  them  as  being  very  wicked,
yet  make  no  mention  of  a  day  of  the  spread  of  the  gos-
pel in  this  wonderful  manner.  James  speaks  of  their
heaping  up  treasures  for  the  last  days.  "  Behold,  the
hire  of  the  laborers  who  have  reaped  down  your  fields,
which  is  of  you  kept  back  by  fraud,  crieth  ;  and  the  cries
of  them  which  have  reaped  are  entered,  into  the  ears  of
the  Lord  of  Sabaoth.  Ye  have  lived  in  pleasure  on  the
earth,  and  been  wanton:  ye  have  nourished  your  hearts
as  in  a  day  of  slaughter.  Ye  have  condemned  and  killed
the  just;  and  he  doth  not  resist  you.  Be  patient,  there-
fore, brethren,  unto  the  coming  of  the  Lord,  for  the  com-
ing of  the  Lord  draweth  nigh."  Can  this  be  the  millen-
nium ?  No !  unless  proud,  earthly  pleasure,  wantonness,
and  murder,  are  the  spirit  of  their  millennium.  Yet,  if
it  is  temporal,  this  would  be  the  most  likely  fruits,  if  we
judge  of  the  future  by  the  past;  for  the  greater  the  tem-
poral blessings,  the  greater  is  man's  rebellion.  Read
the  second  and  third  chapters  of  2  Peter,  where  he  ex-
pressly speaks  of  the  last  days.  "  Knowing  this  first,
that  there  shall  come,  in  the  last  days,  scoffers,  walking


Christ's  second  coming.  171

after  their  own  lusts,  and  saying,  Where  is  the  promise
of  his  coming?"  &c,  agreeing  with  what  Christ  said  the
wicked  ministers  would  be  doing  when  he  comes.  They
would  say  in  their  hearts,  My  Lord  delayeth  his  coming.
Can  there  be  this  happy  time  described  in  the  above
theory  ?  All  must  answer,  No.  Then  let  this  suffice  els
answer  to  the  above  theory,  until  our  opponents  prove
their  own  sentiments  by  the  word.  There  are  many
more  branches  of  the  above  system,  but  none  that  I  have
seen  but  are  liable  to  the  same  objections.

I  shall  now  undertake  to  prove  that  this  reign  is  in  the
immortal  state,  after  the  resurrection ;  that  Christ  will
be  present  with  his  people,  and,  of  course,  personally,
and  that  it  will  be  on  the  earth.

I.  .Then  I  am  to  prove  that  it  will  be  immortal  after
the  resurrection.

The  present  reign  is  called,  in  Scripture,  a  reign  of
grace ;  "  So  might  grace  reign  through  righteousness
unto  eternal  life,  by  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord."  This  reign
has  been  ever  since  Christ  was  in  the  world,  for  1800
years  past.  We  shall  now  show  that  this  reign  must
continue  until  after  the  resurrection  of  the  dead.  See
1  Cor.  xv.  23 — 26;  "But  every  man  in  his  own  order;
Christ  the  first  fruits,  (resurrection ;)  afterwards  they  that
are  Christ's  at  his  coming.  Then  cometh  the  end,  when
he  shall  have  given  up  the  kingdom  to  God,  even  the
Father ;  when  he  shall  put  down  all  rule,  and  all  author-
ity and  power.  For  he  must  reign  till  he  hath  put  all
enemies  under  his  feet  The  last  enemy  that  shall  be
destroyed  is  death."  Here  we  have  plain  Scripture  that
the  same  reign  of  grace  must  continue  unto  eternal  life ;
and.  in  the  other  text,  until  the  resurrection  of  them  that
are  Christ's,  and  death,  the  last  enemy  to  the  church,  is
destroyed.  Where,  then,  shall  we  get  in  a  spiritual  or
temporal  reign  ?  We  see  evidently  there  is  no  change
of  the  reign  of  Christ  in  the  gospel  or  grace,  from  the
apostles'  days  until  the  time  comes  when  the  saints  shall
possess  the  kingdom  in  the  immortal  state.  Paul  says,
Rom.  v.  17,  "  For  if  by  one  man's  offence  death  reigned
by  one,  much  more  they  which  receive  abundance  of


172  LECTURE    XI.

grace  and  of  the  gift  of  righteousness,  shall  reign  in  life
by  one,  Jesus  Christ"  Here  the  saints  are  promised  to
reign  after  the  gift  of  righteousness,  (which  the  righteous
Judge  shall  give  all  those  who  love  his  appearing  at  that
day,)  in  life,  that  is,  eternal  life.  See  21st  v&rse.  1  Pe-
ter v.  4,  "  And  when  the  chief  Shepherd  shall  appear,
ye  shall  receive  a  crown  of  glory  that  fadeth  not  away."
This  must,  of  course,  be  in  the  immortal  state,  for  it
fadeth  not  away.

II.  That  Christ  will  be  present  with  his  people  in  a
state  of  immortality,  can  hardly  be  doubted  v/hen  we
read  such  texts  as  these :  —  John  xii.  24,  "  If  any  man
serve  me,  let  him  follow  me ;  and  where  I  am,  there  also
shall  my  servant  be."  Again,  John  xiv.  3,  "  And  if  I
go  and  prepare  a  place  for  you,  I  will  come  again  and
receive  you  to  myself;  that  whe&e  I  am  there  ye  may  be
also."  So  much  for  Christ's  promise  to  his  disciples.
And  now  let  us  read  his  prayer  to  his  Father  on  this
point,  John  xvii,  24,  "Father,  I  will  that  they,  also,
whom  thou  hast  given  me,  be  with  me  where  I  am,  that
they  may  behold  my  glory."  Paul  says,  1  Thess.  iv.  17,
"And  so  shall  we  ever  be  with  the  Lord."  "  For  it  doth
not  yet  appear  what  we  shall  be ;  but  we  know  that
when  he  shall  appear,  we  shall  be  like  him;  for  we  shall
see  him  as  he  is."  Our  text  says,  "  And  hast  made  us
unto  our  God  kings  and  priests."  Rev.  xx.  4,  6,  "And
they  lived  and  reigned  with  Christ"  "  And  shall  reign
with  him."  xxi.  3,  "And  I  heard  a  great  voice  out  of
heaven,  saying,  Behold,  the  tabernacle  of  God  is  with
men,  and  he  will  dwell  with  them,  and  they  shall  be  his
people,  and  God  himself  shall  be  with  them,  and  be
their  God."

III.  "  And  we  shall  reign  on  the  earth,"  says  our  text
Not  under  its  present  dispensation,  but  after  it  is  cleansed
by  fire;  after  the  wicked  are  destroyed  by  fire,  as  the
antediluvians  were  by  water,  after  the  resurrection  of  the
saints,  and  when  Christ's  prayer,  taught  to  his  disciples,
shall  be  answered,  "  Thy  will  be  done  on  earth,  even  as  in
heaven"  When  the  bride  has  made  herself  ready,  and
married  to  the  bridegroom,  he  will  then  move  her  into


Christ's  second  coming.  173

thw  New  Jerusalem  state,  prepared  as  a  bride  adorned
for  her  husband,  where  we  shall  reign  with  him  forever
and  ever  on  the  new  earth  and  in  the  new  heavens;
"and  God  shall  wipe  away  all  tears  from  their  eyes,
and  there  shall  be  no  more  death,  neither  sorrow  nor
crying,  neither  shall  there  be  any  more  pain ;  for  the
former  things  are  passed  away.  Then  the  whole
earth  "  shall  be  full  of  his  glory ;"  and  then,  as  says  the
prophet  Isaiah,  liv.  5,  "For  thy  Maker  is  thine  husband  ;
the  Lord  of  Hosts  is  his  name ;  and  thy  Redeemer,  the
Holy  One  of  Israel ;  the  God  of  the  whole  earth  shall
he  be  called."

And  then,  my  dear  hearer,  if  you  have  had  your  heart
broken  off  from  sin;  if  you  have  by  faith  been  united  in
spirit  to  the  Lamb  of  God;  if  you  have  patiently  endured
tribulation  and  persecution  for  his  name, — then  you  will
live  and  reign  with  him  on  the  earth,  and  this  earth  will
be  regenerated  by  fire  and  the  power  of  God,  the  cursed
destroyed,  sin,  pain,  crying,  sorrow,  and  death  banished
from  the  world,  and  mortality  clothed  upon  by  immor-
tality, death  swallowed  up  in  victory.  You  will  rise  up
in  that  general  assembly,  and  clapping  your  hands  with
joy,  cry,  "  Holy,  holy,  holy  is  the  Lord  God  Almighty,
which  was,  and  is,  and  is  now  come."  Then  you  will  be
in  a  situation  to  join  the  grand  chorus,  and  sing  the  new
song,  saying,  "  Thou  art  worthy,  for  thou  wast  slain,  and
hast  redeemed  us  to  God  by  thy  blood,  out  of  every
kindred,  and  tongue,  and  people,  and  nation,  and  hast
made  us  unto  our  God  kings  and  priests,  and  we  shall
reign  on  the  earth,  saying,  with  a  loud  voice,  Worthy  is
the  Lamb  that  was  slain  to  receive  power,  and  riches,
and  wisdom,  and  strength,  and  honor,  and  glory,  and
blessing."  And  all  who  meet  in  that  grand  assembly
will  be  then  heard  to  shout,  "  Blessing,  and  honor,  and
glory,  and  power  be  unto  him  that  sitteth  upon  the  throne,
and  unto  the  Lamb  forever  and  ever."  And  methinks  I
can  now  see  every  one  who  loves  out  Lord  and  Savior
Jesus  Christ  in  this  assembly,  rising  upon  their  feet,  and
in  one  united  prayer  of  faith,  crying,  "  Come,  Lord  Jesus,
O  come  quickly."
15*


174  LECTURE    XI.

But  you,  O  impenitent  man  or  woman,  where  will
you  be  then?  When  heaven  shall  resound  with  the
mighty  song,  and  distant  realms  shall  echo  back  the
sound,  where,  tell  me,  where  will  you  be  then  ?     In  hell !

0  think!  In  hell !  a  dreadful  word!  Once  more  think!
In  hell !  lifting  up  your  eyes,  being  in  torment.  Stop,
sinner;  think!  In  hell  /where  shall  be  weeping,  wail-
ing, and  gnashing  of  teeth.  Stop,  sinner,  stop ;  consider
on  your  latter  end.  In  Mil!  "where  the  beast  and
false  prophet  are,  and  shall  be  tormented  day  and  night
forever  and  ever."     I  entreat  of  you  to  think  —  in  hell !

1  know  you  hate  to  hear  the  word.  It  sounds  too  harsh.
There  is  no  music  in  it  You  say  it  grates  upon  the
ear.  But  think,  when  it  grates  upon  the  soul,  the  con-
science, and  the  ear,  and  not  by  sound  only,  but  a  dread
reality,  when  there  can  be  no  respite,  no  cessation,  no
deliverance,  no  hope !  You  will  then  think,  yes,  of  this
warning,  of  a  thousand  others,  perhaps  of  this  hour,  with
many  more  that  are  lost ;  yes,  worse  than  lost,  that
have  been  squandered  in  earthly,  vain,  and  transitory
mirth,  have  been  abused ;  for  there  have  been  many  hours
the  Spirit  strove  with  you,  and  you  prayed  to  be  excused.
There  was  an  hour  when  conscience  spake  ;  but  you
stopped  your  ears  and  would  not  hear.  There  was  a
time  when  judgment  and  reason  whispered ;  but  you  soon
drowned  their  cry  by  calling  in  some  aid  against  your
own  soul.  To  judgment  and  reason  you  have  opposed
will  and  wit,  and  said, "  in  hell"  was  only  in  the  grave.  In
this  vain  citadel,  on  this  frail  house  of  sand,  you  will
build,  until  the  last  seal  is  broken,  the  last  trump  will
sound,  the  last  woe  be  pronounced,  and  the  last  vial  be
poured  upon  the  earth.  Then,  impenitent  man  or  woman,
you  will  awake  in  everlasting  woe !

Be  warned  ;  repent ;  fly,  fly  for  succor  to  the  ark  of
God,  to  Jesus  Christ,  the  Lamb  that  once  was  slain,  that
you  might  live,  for  he  is  worthy  to  receive  all  honor,
power,  and  glory.  Believe,  and  you  shall  live.  Obey
his  word,  his  spirit,  his  calls,  his  invitations  ;  there  is  no
time  for  delay  ;  put  it  not  off,  I  beg  of  you  ;  no,  not  for  a
moment    Do  you  want  to  join  that  heavenly  choir  and


Christ's  second  coming.  175

sing  the  new  song  ?  Then  come  in  God's  appointed
way;  repent  Do  you  want  a  house  not  made  with
hands,  eternal  in  the  heavens  ?  Then  join  in  heart  and
soul  this  happy  people,  whose  God  is  the  Lord.  Do  you
want  an  interest  in  the  New  Jerusalem,  the  beloved
city  ?  Then  set  your  face  as  a  flint  Zion-ward  ;  become
a  pilgrim  in  the  good  old  way.  "  Seek  first  the  kingdom
of  heaven,"  says  Christ,  "  and  then  all  these  things  shall
be  added  unto  you."


LECTURE    XII


REV.  v.  5.

And  one  of  the  elders  saith  unto  me,  Weep  not :  behold,  the  Lion  of
the  tribe  of  Judah,  the  root  of  David,  hath  prevailed  to  open  the  book
and  to  loose  the  seven  seals  thereof.


The  book  of  Revelation  has  been  called  by  tnousands
a  sealed  book ;  and  many  a  dear  saint,  while  in  this  im-
perfect state  of  vision  and  knowledge,  has  wept  much,
because  they  could  not  read  and  understand  the  book.
For  it  is  very  evident  that  the  book  of  Revelation  is  not
only  interesting  in  its  symbolical  and  mystical  descrip-
tions, natural  scenery,  and  figurative  language,  but  it  is
rich  in  truth,  and  the  communication  of  events  then  hid
under  the  veil  of  futurity,  and  would  only  be  unfolded
to  the  natural  visions  of  men,  many  ages  to  come.  John
has  written  this  book  after  the  laws  of  nature ;  that  is,
he  has  seemed  to  copy  after  some  of  the  richest  and
most  picturesque  scenes  in  nature's  laws.  He  has,  in
revealing  truths  to  our  minds,  followed  the  same  steady
course  that  fountains  of  water  do  in  their  course  to  the
sea.  He  begins  as  it  were  back  upon  the  mountains,
where  the  head  may  be  but  a  fountain,  and  there  gives
us  a  description  of  the  source.  He  then  glides  gently
along  through  the  vale  below,  winding  between  hills  and
mountains,  visiting  in  his  course  the  hamlets  of  the
peasant,  the  villages  of  men,  the  populous  towns  and
cities  of  commerce,  until  he  lands  us  or  leaves  us  in  the
ocean  of  eternity.  At  first,  he  appears  to  be  describing
-  bubbling  fountain  or  gentle  spring,  and  swelling


Christ's  second  coming.  177

in  importance  as  he  proceeds,  brings  in  and  adds  every
important  stream  of  event,  deepens  and  widens  in  hig
course,  until  he  makes  his  prophetic  history  like  a  deep-
flowing  river,  bearing  upon  its  bosom  the  gallant  ships
and  galley  with  oars.  At  first,  he  describes  a  pebbly
brook  murmuring  along  the  hills,  now  and  then  bursting
into  view  with  some  gentle  fall,  then  gliding  softly
away,  until  it  meets  some  rugged  head-land,  shifts  its
course,  and  almost  seems  to  retrace  its  path ;  then,  sud-
denly bursting  from  the  hills  in  cataracts  of  foam,  bound-
ing from  rock  to  rock,  leaping  into  the  vale  below,  he
again  seems  to  follow  the  alluvial  flats  and  receives  his
tributary  streams,  winds  on  his  way,  until  it  falls  at  its
mouth  by  a  tremendous  leap  into  a  gulf  of  waters,  and
is  swallowed  up  in  the  waves  of  the  sea.

Four  times  the  Revelation  seems  to  bring  us  down  in
this  manner,  as  though  he  had  begun  on  one  mountain,
and  traced  four  different  streams  of  history  down  to  the
great  ocean  of  eternity  ;  like  the  river  of  Eden,  which
watered  the  garden,  becoming  four  heads  of  four  great
rivers,  which  watered  and  encompassed  the  whole  land,
taking  different  points  of  the  compass,  but  falling  at  last
into  the  ocean,  Gen.  ii.  10 — 14 ;  and  all  these  having
seven  tributary  streams  in  their  course.  The  seven
churches  of  Asia  is  a  history  of  the  church  of  Christ  in
her  seven  forms,  in  all  her  windings  and  turnings,  in  all
her  prosperity  and  adversity,  from  the  days  of  the  apos
ties  down  to  the  end  of  the  world.  The  seven  seals  are
a  history  of  the  transactions  of  the  powers  and  kings  of
the  earth  over  the  church,  and  God's  protection  of  his
people  during  the  same  time.  The  seven  trumpets  are
a  history  of  seven  peculiar  and  heavy  judgments  sent
upon  the  earth,  or  Roman  kingdom.  And  the  seven
vials  are  the  seven  last  plagues  sent  upon  Papal  Rome.
Mixed  with  these  are  many  other  events,  woven  in  like
tributary  streams,  and  filling  up  the  grand  river  of  proph-
ecy, until  the  whole  ends  us  in  the  ocean  of  eternity.

This,  to  me,  is  the  plan  of  John's  prophecy  in  the  book
of  Revelation.  And  the  man  who  wishes  to  understand
this  book,  must  have  a  thorough  knowledge  of  other  parts
of  the  word  of  God.    The  figures  and  metaphors  used


178  IiECTURE   XII.

in  this  prophecy,  are  not  all  explained  in  the  same,  but
must  be  found  in  other  prophets,  and  explained  in  other
passages  of  Scripture.  Therefore  it  is  evident  that  God
has  designed  the  study  of  the  whole,  even  to  obtain  a
clear  knowledge  of  any  part.  I  shall  then  pursue  the
following  method :  —

I.  Explain  the  book  which  was  in  the  right  hand  of
him  who  sat  on  the  throne.

II.  Give  the  history  of  the  seven  seals,  and  their
opening.

I.   I  am  to  explain  what  is  meant  by  the  book.

The  book  is  often  spoken  of  in  the  word  of  God.
Sometimes  we  hear  it  spoken  of  as  a  little  book,  open,
in  the  hands  of  the  angel ;  and  sometimes  it  is  command-
ed to  be  sealed  up  ;  and  sometimes  to  be  unloosed,  as  in
our  text.  The  question  arises,  What  can  this  book  mean  ?
It  cannot  mean  the  book  of  Revelation,  for  John  was
commanded  not  to  se|l  the  sayings  of  this  book,  Rev.
xxii.  10.  Neither  could  it  be  the  prophecies,  for  they
we*re  commanded  to  be  read  every  Sabbath  day  by  the
Jews,  and  were  so  read.  Yet  John  tells  us,  in  our  con-
text, "  That  no  man,  neither  in  heaven,  nor  in  earth,  nor
under  the  earth,  was  able  to  open  the  book,  neither  to
look  thereon ;  and  I  wept  much,  because  no  man  was
found  worthy  to  open  and  to  read  the  book,  neither  to
look  thereon."  We  see,  plainly,  that  it  could  not  apply
to  the  law,  nor  the  prophets,  to  the  Old  or  New  Testa-
ments, for  these  were  committed  to  the  Jews,  and  also
unto  us  Gentiles,  and  were  to  be  read  by  all  men ;  but
this  book  they  could  not  open,  read,  nor  look  thereon.
There  is  one  more  book  which  answers  to  John's  de-
scription, which  no  man,  neither  in  heaven,  nor  on  earth,
nor  under  the  earth,  has  yet  been  able  to  look  thereon,
or  open  and  read,  as  we  have  any  account  of ;  and  which,
according  to  the  whole  tenor  of  the  Scripture,  will  never
be  opened,  read,  or  looked  upon,  until  the  last  seal  is
broken,  and  the  judgment  sits.  "  And  I  saw  the  dead,
small  and  great,  stand  before  God ;  and  the  books  were
opened  ;  and  another  book  was  opened,  ivhich  is  the  book
of  life  ;  and  the  dead  were  judged  out  of  those  things
which  were  written  in  the  books."     In  this  book,  which


Christ's  second  coming.  179

is  called  the  hook  of  life,  the  names  of  all  the  redeerrfed
in  heaven,  in  earth,  or  under  the  earth,  are  written,
which  are  not  known  to  any  man,  neither  will  be  known,
until  the  last  seal  is  broken  open  ;  for  the  judgment  will
declare  who  is  on  the  Lord's  side.  For  the  apostle  tells
us,  plainly,  "  Our  lives  are  hid  with  Christ  in  God ;  that,
when  he  appears,  then  we  shall  appear  with  him  in  glo-
ry." And  John  tells  us,  Rev.  xxi.  26,  27,  "  And  they
shall  bring  the  glory  and  honor  of  the  nations  into  it,
and  there  shall  in  no  wise  enter  into  it  any  thing  that
defileth,  neither  whatsoever  worketh  abomination,  or
maketh  a  lie  ;  hut  they  which  are  written  in  the  Lamb's
hook  of  life."  "  And  whosoever  was  not  found  written
in  the  book  of  life,  was  cast  into  the  lake  of  fire."  Again  :
"  And  they  whose  names  were  not  written  in  the  book
of  life,  from  the  foundation  of  the  world,  shall  wonder,"
&c.  This  book,  although  we  are  abundantly  informed
there  is  one,  in  the  right  hand  of  him  that  sitteth  upon
the  throne,  no  man,  as  we  are  any  where  informed,  has
been  able  to  look  upon  it,  or  open  it,  or  to  read  its  con-
tents. This,  then,  is  the  book,  on  account  of  which
John  wept  to  know  its  contents.  And  so  it  has  been
with  all  Christians.  They  are  anxious  to  know  whether
their  names  are  written  in  the  Lamb's  book  of  life.  But
you  must  first  learn,  my  dear  brother  in  Christ,  to  live  by
faith  ;  and  faith,  too,  founded  on  the  book  in  which  you  can
look  —  of  which  you  may  read  the  promises,  the  proph-
ecies, and  commands.  But  into  the  book  of  life  you  can
never  look,  until  the  Lamb  of  God  shall  open  the  seventh
seal,  and  the  righteous  dead  be  raised,  to  meet  with  the
dear  Savior  in  that  world  of  glory,  when  the  book  will
be  opened  in  the  presence  of  the  universe,  and  he  will
own  you  as  his,  and  crown  you  with  joy  unspeakable  and
full  of  glory.

II.  I  shall  now  give  the  history  of  the  seven  seals,
with  the  time  of  their  opening.  After  the  prophecy  of
the  seven  churches,  in  the  2d  and  3d  chapters  of  Reve-
lation, John  has  a  view  of  the  heavenly  host,  singing  the
grand  song,  and  gives  us  a  description  of  the  heavenly
choir,  and  a  part  of  the  song.  He  likewise  introduces
the  book,  sealed  with  seven  seals,  and  shows  who  can


180  LECTURE    XII.

open  the  book,  in  the  fourth  and  fifth  chapters.     These
we  have  attended  to,  in  a  former  lecture.

We  shall  now  begin  with  the  sixth  chapter,  1st  verse,
"  And  I  saw  when  the  Lamb  opened  one  of  the  seals ;
and  I  heard,  as  it  were  the  noise  of  thunder,  one  of  the
four  beasts,  saying,  Come  and  see.  And  I  saw,  and  be-
hold, a  white  horse,  and  he  that  sat  on  him  had  a  bow ;
and  a  crown  was  given  unto  him ;  and  he  went  forth
conquering  and  to  conquer."  The  "  beast,"  in  this  pas-
sage, is  the  first,  which  was  like  a  lion,  representing  the
church  in  its  first  state,  in  the  days  of  the  apostles,  when
the  church  went  every  where,  preaching  the  word,  bold  as
a  lion.  The  white  horse,  and  him  that  sat  upon  him,  rep-
resent Jesus  Christ  going  forth  in  the  power  of  the  gos-
pel. This  is  proved  by  the  passage,  Rev.  xix.  11 — 13,
"  And  I  saw  heaven  opened,  and  behold,  a  white  horse  ;
and  he  that  sat  upon  him  was  called  Paithful  and  True,
and  in  righteousness  he  doth  judge  and  make  war.  His
eyes  were  as  a  flame  of  fire,  and  on  his  head  were  many
crowns  ;  and  he  had  a  name  written  that  no  man  knew
but  he  himself,  and  he  was  clothed  in  a  vesture  dipped
in  blood ;  and  his  name  is  called  The  Word  of  God."
This  is  the  same  personage  as  the  other,  and  both  places
represent  the  same  thing,  only  the  first  description  is  rep-
resenting the  spread  of  the  gospel  in  the  beginning  of
the  gospel  day,  the  other  at  the  end  of  the  gospel  period,
under  which  we  are  now  living.  Therefore  the  first  seal
opens  with  the  promulgation  of  the  gospel,  as  the  last
will  be  closed  by  the  same.  3d  and  4th  verses,  "  And
when  he  had  opened  the  second  seal,  I  heard  the  second
beast  say,  Come  and  see.  And  there  went  out  another
horse,  that  was  red  ;  and  power  was  given  to  him  that
sat  thereon  to  take  peace  from  the  earth,  and  that  they
should  kill  one  another ;  and  there  was  given  unto  him  a
great  sword."  The  red  horse  denotes  blood  and  carnage,
and  has  reference  to  the  times  of  persecution  in  the  days
of  Nero  and  other  Roman  emperors,  and  answers  to  the
same  time  as  the  Smyrna  church.  "  Given  unto  him  a
great  sword,"  shows  that  the  power  would  have  great  au-
thority. The  second  beast  spoken  of  in  this  passage  is
the  representation  of  the  church,  which  was  like  a  calf?


Christ's  seco±nd  coming.  181

showing  that  the  church  would  be  given  to  the  slaughter,
like  a  calf  fatted  for  the  market,  during  the  period  of  the
opening  of  this  seal,  which  period  lasted  until  about  A.
D.  318,  when  Constantine  put  a  period  to  the  persecu-
tions of  the  Christians.

5th  and  6th  verses,  "  And  when  he  had  opened  the
third  seal,  1  heard  the  third  beast  say,  Come  and  see.
And  I  beheld,  and  lo,  a  black  horse  ;  and  he  that  sat
upon  him  had  a  pair  of  balances  in  his  hand.  And  I
heard  a  voice  in  the  midst  of  the  four  beasts  say,  A
measure  of  wheat  for  a  penny,  and  three  measures  of
barley  for  a  penny,  and  see  thou  hurt  not  the  oil  and  the
wine."  The  third  beast,  which  represents  the  church,
under  this  seal,  had  a  face  as  a  man,  and  shows  that  the
church  would  be  like  a  natural  man,  proud,  haughty,
independent,  selfish,  ambitious,  covetous,  and  worldly.
This  seal  was  opened  in  the  days  of  Constantine,  when
religion  became  popular,  and  was  a  stepping-stone  to
power ;  and  this  seal  agrees  with  the  Pergamos  church,
as  to  time  and  place.  The  black  horse  denotes  error
and  darkness ;  and  when  the  church  became  connected
with  worldly  power  and  wisdom,  she  lost  her  purity  of
doctrine  and  practice,  and  adopted,  in  her  creed,  maxims
and  principles  congenial  with  the  natural  heart,  and
forms  and  ceremonies  for  show  and  parade,  rather  than
the  humbling  and  cross-bearing  life  of  the  followers  of
Jpsus.  The  balances  denoted  that  religion  and  civil
power  would  be  united  in  the  person  who  would  ad-
minister the  executive  power  in  the  government,  and
that  he  would  claim  the  judicial  authority  both  in  church
and  state.  This  was  true  among  the  Roman  emperors,
from  the  days  of  Constantine  until  the  reign  of  Justin-
ian, when  he  gave  the  same  judicial  power  to  the  bishop
of  Rome.  The  measures  of  wheat  and  barley  for  a
penny  denote  that  the  members  of  the  church  would
be  eagerly  engaged  after  worldly  goods,  and  the  love  of
money  would  be  the  prevailing  spirit  of  the  times,  for
they  would  dispose  of  any  thing  for  money.  The  oil
and  wine  denote  the  graces  of  the  Spirit,  faith  and  love,
and  there  was  great  danger  of  hurting  these,  under  the
influence  of  so  much  worldly  spirit  And  it  is  well  at-
16


182  LECTURE    XII.

tested,  by  all  historians,  that  the  prosperity  of  the  church
in  this  age  produced  the  corruptions  which  finally  ter-
minated in  the  falling  away,  and  setting  up  the  anti-
Christian  abominations.

7th  and  8th  verses,  "  And  when  he  had  opened  the
fourth  seal,  I  heard  the  fourth  beast  say,  Come  and  see.
And  I  looked,  and  behold,  a  pale  horse,  and  his  name  that
sat  on  him  was  Death,  and  hell  followed  with  him ;  and
power  was  given  unto  them  over  the  fourth  part  of  the
earth,  to  kill  with  sword,  and  with  hunger,  and  with
death,  and  with  beasts  of  the  earth."  The  fourth  seal
opened  in  the  year  A.  D.  538,  when  anti-Christ  first
arose,  for  the  fourth  beast  was  like  a  flying  eagle.  "  And
to  the  woman  was  given  two  wings  of  an  eagle,  that  she
might  fly  into  the  wilderness,  into  her  place,  where  she
is  nourished  for  a  time,  times,  and  a  half,  from  the  face
of  the  serpent."  The  pale  horse  is  named,  in  this  pas-
sage, death.  And  hell  followed,  showing  us  plainly  that
it  is  the  anti-Christian  power  which  would  have  the
ascendency  over  one  fourth  part  of  the  earth,  during  the
opening  of  this  seal.  "  Power  was  given  unto  them,"
shows  conclusively  that  it  is  the  same  power  mentioned
in  Rev.  xiii.  2 — 5,  "  And  the  dragon  gave  him  his  power,
and  his  seat,  and  great  authority."  "And  there  was
given  him  a  mouth  speaking  great  things  and  blasphe-
mies ;  and  power  was  given  unto  him  to  continue  forty
and  two  months."  Again,  7th  verse,  "  And  it  was  given
unto  him  to  make  war  with  the  saints,  and  to  overcome
them ;  and  power  was  given  him  over  all  kindreds,  and
tongues,  and  nations."  Jn  our  text  he  says,  "  Power  was
given  them  to  kill  with  the  sword,"  that  is,  to  make  war,
which  was  fulfilled  in  Europe,  when  the  papal  power
sent  out  large  armies  to  exterminate  the  heretics,  as
they  were  called,  who  would  not  worship  the  beast  or
his  image.  "  And  with  hunger  ; "  this  was  fulfilled  by
the  same  power  imprisoning  and  starving  to  death  many
thousands  of  persons  who  were  suspected  of  opposition
to  her  ungodly  pretensions.  "And  with  death;"  in-
venting the  most  cruel  and  bloody  means  of  torture  that
were  ever  imposed  upon  our  world ;  to  inflict  death,  in
every  possible  shape  that  men  or  devils  could  invent


Christ's  second  coming.  183

thousands  and  tens  of  thousands  suffered  death  under
the  most  excruciating  torments  that  the  Inquisition  could
devise.  "  And  with  the  beasts  of  the  earth ; "  after
they  had  glutted  their  thirst  for  blood  in  every  possible
shape  that  man  could  inflict,  thousands  were  thrown  to
ferocious  beasts,  to  be  destroyed  by  them.  The  time
and  place  of  the  opening  of  this  seal  we  cannot  be  mis-
taken in.  It  must  have  been  during  the  bloody  and
persecuting  reign  of  the  papal  church.

9th — 11th  verses,  "And  when  he  had  opened  the  fifth
seal,  I  saw  under  the  altar  the  souls  of  them  that  were
slain  for  the  word  of  God,  and  for  the  testimony  which
they  held  ;  and  they  cried  with  a  loud  voice,  saying,  How
long,  O  Lord,  holy  and  true,  dost  thou  not  judge  and
avenge  our  blood  on  them  that  dwell  on  the  earth  ?  And
white  robes  were  given  unto  every  one  of  them ;  and  it
was  said  unto  them  that  they  should  rest  yet  for  a  little
season,  until  their  fellow-servants  also,  and  their  breth-
ren, that  should  be  killed  as  they  were,  should  be  fulfil-
led." On  the  opening  of  the  fifth  seal,  there  is  no  beast
to  say,  "  Come  and  see,"  for  this  very  good  reason  —  the
church  has  not  changed  her  position,  and  is  yet  in  the
wilderness,  like  the  flying  eagle.  Therefore,  under  the
fourth  beast,  the  church  is  likewise  under  the  control  of
the  same  anti-Christian  power  as  under  the  fourth  seal,
but  the  difference  appears  to  be  only  in  one  thing  —  the
church  appears  to  enjoy  a  little  respite  from  her  persecu-
ting enemy ;  and  it  would  seem  by  the  language  of  the
souls  of  the  martyrs  that  they  are  now  looking  for  a  day
of  vengeance,  which  God  hath  promised  upon  them  who
worshipped  the  beast  or  his  image ;  and  the  inquiry  is,
How  long  before  this  day  of  vengeance  will  come  ?  The
answer  is  given  to  these  praying  souls  to  rest  a  little  sea-
son, and  they  are  informed  there  must  be  one  more  day  or
little  season  of  persecution,  when  their  brethren  must  be
killed  in  like  manner  with  themselves  ;  and  when  that  is
accomplished,  they  would  then  experience  the  last  prom-
ise of  God,  the  resurrection.  This  seal  was  opened
about  the  beginning  of  the  18th  century,  A.  D.  1700
when  the  bloody  persecutions  against  Protestants  ceased,
and  the  nations  of  the  world  began  to  enjoy  religious
freedom.


184  LECTURE    XII.

12th — 17th  verses,  "  And  I  beheld  when  he  had  open
ed  the  sixth  seal,  and  lo,  there  was  a  great  earthquake.'
On  the  opening  of  this  seal  there  is  a  great  earthquake
This  earthquake  is  spoken  of  in  other  places  in  this  book
and  alludes  to  the  French  revolution ;  and  of  course  this
seal  opened  about  A.  D.  1790.  "  And  the  sun  became
black  as  sackcloth  of  hair,  and  the  moon  became  aa
blood."  Sun  sometimes  denotes  rulers  or  kings,  as  in
the  case  of  Joseph's  dream,  when  the  sun,  moon  and
stars  made  obeisance  to  him,  meaning  his  father,  head
over  all  Israel,  his  mother,  and  his  brethren ;  for  where
the  king  is  called  the  sun,  the  queen  is  called  the  moon,
and  inferior  rulers  are  called  stars,  as  Christ  is  called
sun  of  righteousness,  because  he  is  king  of  Zion.  The
church  is  called  the  moon,  because  she  is  the  bride  of
Christ.  Ministers  are  called  stars  because  they  are  in-
ferior rulers  in  Christ's  kingdom.  Therefore  I  under-^
stand  this  to  mean  in  that  revolution  when  the  king  lost
his  authority,  and  tried  to  disguise  himself,  and  fled  from
his  own  subjects,  afterwards  was  beheaded.  The  queen,
too,  became  blood,  and  all  the  nobility  of  France  fell  to
the  earth.  One  decree  levelled  all  titles  and  distinctions
with  the  commonalty,  like  a  fig-tree  casting  her  untime-
ly figs.  "  And  the  stars  of  heaven  fell  unto  the  earth,
even  as  a  fig-tree  casteth  her  untimely  figs  when  she  is
shaken  of  a  mighty  wind.  And  the  heaven  departed  as
a  scroll  when  it  is  rolled  together."  The  heavens  must
mean  that  circle  in  which  the  planets  move ;  and  if  that
is  to  be  understood  figuratively,  so  must  this.  Heavens
must  then  mean  the  laws  and  government  of  France,
These  were  all  swept  away,  or  rolled  up  and  laid  away
like  an  old  parchment  out  of  date  or  use.  "  And  every
mountain  and  island  were  moved  out  of  their  places.'-
Mountains  and  islands  are  figures  of  large  and  small
governments,  and  in  the  French  revolution  every  gov-
ernment was  removed  from  their  legitimate  sovereigns,
except  England,  in  the  old  Roman  empire,  and  given  to
kings  of  Bonaparte's  creation.  And  certainly  all  the
kingdoms  in  Europe  were  changed  from  what  they  were
before ;  so  that  when  legitimacy  was  restored,  the  an-
cient kings  could  not  and  have  not  found  their  kingdoms


Christ's  second  coming.  185

in  the  same  situation  they  were  in  before  the  revolution.
"  And  the  kings  of  the  earth,  and  the  great  men,  and  the
rich  men,  and  the  chief  captains,  and  the  mighty  men,
and  every  bondman,  and  every  freeman,  hid  themselves
in  the  dens,  and  in  the  rocks  of  the  mountains,  and  said
to  the  rocks  and  mountains,  Fall  on  us,  and  hide  us  from
the  face  of  him  that  sitteth  on  the  throne,  and  from  the
wrath  of  the  Lamb."

It  is  a  well-known  fact  to  all  who  are  conversant  with
the  history  of  the  French  revolution,  that  almost  every
king  in  Europe  had  to  flee  from  his  kingdom  during  the
space  of  about  five  and  twenty  years :  the  king  of  Por-
tugal to  Brazil ;  the  king  of  Spain  to  France;  the  king  of
France  fled  to  England ;  the  Pope  died  in  exile  ;  the  king
of  Sardinia  left  his  kingdom  and  fled  to  the  island  of  Sar-
dinia ;  the  king  of  Naples  to  the  island  of  the  same  name ;
the  king  of  Austria  left  his  capital ;  and  the  king  of  Prussia
took  shelter  under  Russia  ;  the  emperor  of  all  the  Russias
left  Moscow  to  its  fate  ;  and  Bonaparte  himself  fled  to  the
island  of  Elba,  and  died  a  prisoner  on  St.  Helena.  The
great  men  and  chief  captains,  and  all  orders  and  degrees
of  men,  had  to  flee  from  the  land  of  their  fathers,  and  seek
an  asylum  among  strangers.  So  true  was  this  passage  of
Scripture  fulfilled  that  many  writers  and  divines  actually
supposed  that  it  was  the  last  great  battle  and  supper  of
the  great  God.  "For  the  great  day  of  his  wrath  is
come,  and  who  shall  be  able  to  stand  ?  "  The  sixth  seal
is  not  yet  wholly  opened ;  for  it  is  evident  that  we  are
carried  down  to  the  last  day,  the  great  day  of  wrath
which  will  immediately  follow  the  sealing  time  which
he  gives  us  in  the  next  chapter.

Rev.  vii.  1,  "And  after  these  things  I  saw  four  angels
standing  on  the  four  corners  of  the  earth,  holding  the
four  winds  of  the  earth,  that  it  should  not  blow  on  the
earth,  nor  on  the  sea,  nor  on  any  tree."  Daniel  tells  us,
vii.  2,  "I  saw  in  my  vision  by  night,  and  behold,  the  four
winds  of  the  heaven  strove  upon  the  great  sea." .  The
four  ivinds,  then,  means  the  opposing  elements,  war  and
contention.  These  principal  elements  of  war  and  con-
tention God  would  restrain  for  a  little  season,  so  they
should  not  fan  up  the  spirit  of  war  and  strife,  neither  in
the  Roman  government,  (called  earth,)  nor  on  the  great
16*


186  LECTURE     XII.

nations,  (called  great  sea,)  nor  on  individuals  or  small
societies  of  men,  (called  trees ;)  and  this  has  been  re-
markably fulfilled  for  twenty  years  past  Not  a  particle
of  opposition  has  been  experienced  against  the  transla-
tion and  spread  of  the  Bible,  or  the  missionary  cause.
Kings  have  been  nursing  fathers,  and  queens  nursing
mothers,  to  help  forward  the  cause  of  God.  The  wind
of  Papacy  has  been  kept  down  by  the  angel,  so  that  all
the  opposition  they  could  raise  has  been  weak  and  in-
efficient. The  Mahometan  wind  has  not  blown  a  blast
for  twenty  years ;  the  idolatrous  and  pagan  nations  of
the  East  have,  by  some  invisible  power,  been  kept  in
check ;  the  infidel  and  deistical  principles  of  the  West
have  been  held  in  complete  subjection  by  the  same
invisible  hand,  until  the  servants  of  God  should  be
sealed.  Therefore,  since  the  French  revolution,  none
of  these  four  winds  of  opposition  to  Christ  have  been
permitted  to  use  any  physical  force,  as  formerly,  to  sup-
press the  spread  of  the  gospel  through  the  earth.  "And
I  saw  another  angel  ascending  from  the  east,  having  the
seal  of  the  living  God ;  and  he  cried  with  a  loud  voice
to  the  four  angels  to  whom  it  was  given  to  hurt  the  earth
and  the  sea."  The  angel  here  spoken  of  as  ascending
from  the  east,  is  the  angel  standing  on  the  land  and  on  the
sea,  with  a  little  book  open,  and  the  same  that  is  represent-
ed in  another  place  as  flying  through  the  midst  of  heaven
having  the  everlasting  gospel  to  preach  to  them  who  dwell
on  the  earth.  Coming  from  the  east,  the  place  of  light,  and
having  the  seal  of  the  living  God,  shows  plainly  that  it  is
the  angel  of  the  gospel.  The  four  angels  are  the  four  mes-
sengers of  God,  who  suppress  those  four  opposition  princi-
ples, until  the  sealing  time  shall  be  over,  "  saying,  Hurt  not
the  earth,  neither  the  sea,  nor  the  trees,  till  we  have
sealed  the  servants  of  God  in  their  foreheads."  The
four  angels  are  here  commanded  not  to  let  these  four
winds  of  opposition  hurt  the  earth,  sea,  or  trees,  until
the  sealing  time  is  past,  which  is  the  same  time  spoken
of,  Daniel  xii.  1,  "Then  shall  Michael  stand  up,  the
great  Prince  which  standeth  for  the  children  of  thy
people."  "And  I  heard  the  number  of  them  which  were
sealed ;  and  there  were  sealed  a  hundred  forty  and
four  thousand  of  all  the  tribes  of  the  children  of  Israel."


Christ's  second  coming.  187

John  first  gives  us  an  account  of  the  number  that  were
sealed  in  his  day,  out  of  all  the  tribes  of  Israel.  They
were  sealed,  as  he  tells  us  when  he  wrote,  it  being  fin-
ished in  the  close  of  the  Jewish  dispensation.  It  being
a  complete  number,  144,000,  and  therefore  could  be  num-
bered ;  and  as  these  were  sealed  at  the  close  of  that
dispensation,  so  John  now  saw  in  vision  a  great  number,
which  no  man  could  number,  sealed  at  the  close  of  the
Gentile  dispensation,  of  which  he  has  been  prophesy-
ing; for  after  he  has  gone  through  with  numbering
twelve  thousand  in  every  tribe,  he  then  says,  Rev.  vii.
9,  "After  this  I  beheld,"  that  is,  after  this  sealing,  by
which  144,000  had  been  sealed  among  the  Jews,  he
beheld,  "  and  lo,  a  great  multitude,  which  no  man  could
number,  of  all  nations,  and  kindreds,  and  people,  and
tongues,  stood  before  the  throne  and  before  the  Lamb,
clothed  with  white  robes,  and  palms  in  their  hands."
This  evidently  refers  to  the  last  sealing  time  among  all
nations ;  for  he  again  hears  them  singing  the  grand
chorus  song,  as  at  the  close  of  the  history  of  the  seven
churches,  "  And  cried  with  a  loud  voice,  saying,  Salva-
tion to  our  God,  which  sitteth  upon  the  throne,  and  unto
the  Lamb.  And  all  the  angels  stood  round  about  the
throne,  and  about,  the  elders  and  the  four  beasts,  and
fell  before  the  throne  on  their  faces,  and  worshipped
God,  saying,  Amen:  blessing,  and  glory,  and  wisdom?
and  thanksgiving,  and  honor,  and  power,  and  might  be
unto  our  God  forever  and  ever,  amen."

This  shows  us  that  we  are  again  brought  down  the
stream  of  time,  to  hear  a  part,  at  least,  of  the  song
which  no  man  can  sing,  but  those  whose  bodies  are
redeemed  from  the  earth.  "And  one  of  the  elders
answered,  saying  unto  me,  What  are  these  which  are
arrayed  in  white  robes  ?  And  whence  came  they  ?  And
I  said  unto  him,  Sir,  thou  knowest.  And  he  said  unto
me,  These  are  they  which  come  out  of  great  tribulation,
and  have  washed  their  robes,  and  made  them  white  in
the  blood  of  the  Lamb."  This  passage  shows  who
those  were  that  John  saw,  and  how  they  obtained  the
honor  and  glory,  which  John  saw  them  possessing,
through  great  tribulation,  and  the  blood  of  the  Lamb
"Therefore  are  they   before  the  throne  of  God,  and


188  LECTURE    XII.

serve  him  day  and  night  in  his  temple:  and  he  that
sitteth  on  the  throne  shall  dwell  among  them;"  the
same  as  in  Rev.  xx.  6,  "And  they  lived  and  reigned
with  him,"  in  the  New  Jerusalem  state  ;  for  he  goes  on
to  describe  this  state  of  happiness,  which  John  does  in
Rev.  xxi.  1 — 5,  compared  with  the  two  following,
and  there  can  be  no  doubt  on  the  mind  that  John  is  de-
scribing the  same  in  one  place  as  in  the  other.  "  They
shall  hunger  no  more,  neither  thirst  any  more ;  neithei
shall  the  sun  light  on  them,  nor  any  heat.  For  the
Lamb,  which  is  in  the  midst  of  the  throne,  shall  feed
them,  and  shall  lead  them  unto  living  fountains  of
waters ;  and  God  shall  wipe  away  all  tears  from  their
eyes."  There  can  be  no  doubt  left  on  the  mind  of  any
man,  that  John  has,  in  these  passages,  given  us  a  view
of  the  New  Jerusalem  in  the  immortal  state.  We  have
been  permitted  to  hear  a  part  of  the  new  song,  and  have
received,  in  the  passage  just  read,  the  blessed  promises
contained  in  that  beloved  city.  And  now,  we  only  wait
for  the  last  seal  to  open.  "And  when  he  had  opened
the  seventh  seal,  there  was  silence  in  heaven  about  the
space  of  half*  an  hour."  Zechariah  says,  ii.  13,  "  Be
silent,  O  all  flesh,  before  the  Lord ;  for  he  is  raised  up
out  of  his  holy  habitation !  "  Habakkuk  says,  ii.  20,  "  But
the  Lord  is  in  his  holy  temple ;  let  all  the  earth  keep
silence  before  him ! "  From  these  passages  I  should
infer,  that  when  God  arises  up  to  the  prey,  when  his
g-reat  white  throne  is  set  in  the  heavens,  and  when  the
Son  of  Man  shall  come  in  the  clouds  of  heaven,  with
power  and  great  glory,  then  will  all  flesh  be  silent
before  him.  And  it  is  reasonable  to  suppose  that  the
whole  universe  of  rational  beings  who  may  be  permitted
to  witness  that  grand  scene,  will  be  so  filled  with  won-
der and  awe  at  the  sight  of  the  glory  of  God,  that  they
will  be  silent  Then,  too,  will  the  redeemed  souls,
while  the  great  Judge  is  separating  them  from  the
wicked,  while  they  are  rising  to  meet  their  Lord  in  the
air,  be  silent.  They  will,  like  the  children  of  Israel,
stand  still,  (be  silent,)  and  see  the  salvation  of  God.
And  the  wicked  world,  who  have  scoffed  at  the  idea
of  Christ's  second  coming,  who  have  said,  "  Where  is
the   promise   of  his  coming  ? "   and  laughed  and  ridi-


Christ's  second  coming.  189

culed  the  servants  of  Christ,  who  have  cried  to  them,  in
their  midnight  revels,  "  Behold,  the  bridegroom  cometh,"
will  be  silent.  Then  will  those  servants  who  have  "  said  in
their  hearts,  My  Lord  delayeth  his  coming,"  and  "be-
gin to  beat  and  bruise  their  fellow-servants,"  who  have
proclaimed  his  coming,  "  and  to  eat  and  drink  with  the
drunken"  be  silent  Then,  too,  will  all  the  false
prophets,  who  have  cried  Peace,  peace,  when  there  was
no  peace,  be  silent,  when  they  see  the  frowns  of  an
angry  judge  whom  they  have  disregarded.  Then
shall  those  who  have  promised  the  wicked  life,  though
he  should  not  turn  from  his  wickedness,  be  silent.  Then,
every  one  found  in  that  great  assembly,  when  the  Son
of  Man  shall  come  in  the  clouds,  and  all  the  holy  angels
with  him,  and  all  the  saints  who  have  slept,  and  all  na-
tions then  shall  be  gathered  before  him,  and  every  eye
shall  see  him ;  then,  T  say,  will  every  one  found  in
this  vast  multitude,  not  having  on  the  wedding  gar-
ment, be  silent ;  for  the  Scripture  says,  "  He  ivas  sptech-

And  now,  my  dear  friends,  what  say  you  ?  Have  you
wept  much  to  know  whether  your  names  are  written  in
the  Lamb's  book  of  life  ?  "  Weep  not,"  for  "  behold,  the
Lion  of  the  tribe  of  Judah  hath  prevailed  to  open  the
book."  And  he  says,  "  He  that  overcometh,  the  same
shall  be  clothed  in  white  raiment ;  and  I  will  not  blot
his  name  out  of  the  book  of  life,  but  I  will  confess  his
name  before  my  Father,  and  before  his  angels.  There-
fore, "rejoice,  because  your  names  are  written  in
heaven,"  says  the  dear  Savior.

But  you,  my  impenitent  friends,  who  have  never  wept,
nor  confessed  your  sins  to  God,  who  have  been  more
anxious  to  have  your  names  written  in  the  book  of  fame,
of  worldly  honor,  of  the  riches  of  this  world,  than  in
the  book  of  life,  remember,  you  too  will  weep  when  all
heaven  is  silent  —  when  the  last  seal  is  broken  —  then
you  will  see  the  book,  and  your  name  blotted  out.
Then  you  will  weep  and  say,  "  Once,  my  name  was
there  ;  I  had  a  day  of  probation ;  life  vras  proffered ;  but
I  hated  instruction,  I  despised  reproof,  and  my  part  is
taken  from  the  book  of  life.  Farewell,  happiness
farewell,  hope !    Amen.


LECTURE    XIII.


REV.  xi.  3.


And  I  will  give  power  unto  my  two  witnesses,  and  they  shall  proph-
esy a  thousand  two  hundred  and  threescore  days,  clothed  in
sackcloth.


The  two  witnesses  in  our  text  have  caused  as  much
speculation  among  the  writers  on  the  New  Testament,  as
any  other  passage  in  the  word  of  God.  Some  have  sup-
posed that  it  was  a  succession  of  orthodox  divines,  whom
God  had  raised  up  to  witness  to  the  truth,  during-  the
time  specified,  which  all  agree  is  twelve  hundred  and
sixty  years.  And  those  writers  who  have  taken  this  side
of  the  question,  have  endeavored  to  find  some  favorite
divines,  among  their  sect,  answering  to  the  description
given  of  the  two  witnesses.  Upon  this  construction  every
sect  might  claim  the  honor  of  giving  to  the  world  the  two
witnesses.  And  were  this  explanation  true,  instead  of
two  witnesses,  we  should  have  more  than  eight  hundred  ;
for  every  sect  must  have  a  set,  and  I  dare  not  give  pref-
erence to  any.  .  This  would  destroy  the  idea  of  two  wit-
nesses at  once.

Other  writers  have  fixed  on  the  church  as  the  two,
clergy  and  laity ;  hut  here  are  many  difficulties  to  en-
counter, the  same  as  above.  Every  sect  must  have  their
own  church  and  clergy,  or  admit  at  once  that  they  are
not  the  true  church.  But  let  us  now  come  to  the  word
of  God.  And  if  the  word  of  God  does  not  explain  the
"  two  witnesses,"  I  shall  despair  of  ever  coming  to  the
truth  on  this  subject,  for  I  am  commanded  by  Christ  him-
self to  call  no  man  master.    I  shall,  then,


Christ's  second  coming.  191

Attempt  to  show  what  the  Bible  calls  the  two  wit-


II.  What  we  may  understand  by  their  being1  clothed
in  sackcloth.

III.  Their  history,  prophecy,  and  time  specified.

I.  What  is  the  Bible  account  of  the  two  witnesses  ?
And,  first,  What  is  a  witness  ?  I  answer,  A  witness  is  a
person,  or  legal  instrument,  testifying  to  the  truth,  the
whole  truth,  and  nothing  but  the  truth,  on  matters  of  fact
which  are  supposed  to  be  known  no  way  but  through  tes-
timony, either  oral  or  written.  Oral  testimony  is  given
by  a  person  who  is  sworn  to  tell  the  whole  truth,  as  above,
and  relate  what  he  actually  knows,  by  the  medium  of  his
own  senses,  and  no  more  nor  less.  The  apostles  were
such  witnesses ;  for  they  testified  to  the  things  which
Christ  did  in  public.  And  when  Judas  fell  by  transgres-
sion, Peter  informed  his  brethren  that  one  must  be  cho-
sen, "  of  these  men  which  have  companied  with  us  all  the
time  that  the  Lord  Jesus  went  in  and  out  among  us,  be-
ginning at  the  baptism  of  John,  unto  the  same  day  that
he  was  taken  up  from  us?  must  one  be  ordained  to  be  a
ivitness  with  us  of  his  resurrection."  But  these  could  not
be  the  "two  witnesses;"  for  here  were  twelve.  But  we
learn  by  this  history  what  a  witness  must  be.  He  must
go  in  and  out ;  he  must  know  by  actual  observation,  or
he  could  not  testify  any  thing  concerning  Christ.  That
was  the  manner  of  oral  testimony  in  that  day,  and  so  it  is
at  the  present.  This,  then,  precludes  the  idea  at  once
of  any  men,  or  set  of  men,  being  Christ's  witnesses  at  the
present  day,  or  since  the  days  of  the  apostles.  But,  says
the  objector,  does  not.  the  word  of  God  call  all  Christians
witnesses  for  Christ?  I  do  not  know  of  any  scripture
where  Christians  are  called  witnesses,  except  the  proph-
ets and  apostles,  or  inspired  writers,  that  is,  concerning
Christ.  They  may  witness  a  good  profession,  or  they
may  witness  for  themselves,  that  they  believe  in  Christ
or  his  word  ;  but  further  they  cannot  go.  They  are  not
witness  either  to  the  person  of  Christ,  to  his  works,  death,
miracles,  or  resurrection  and  ascension :  and  if  there  was
no  other  testimony  but  oral,  we  should  be  no  better  off
than  the  darkest  Hindoo   or  most  ignorant  Hottentot


192  LECTURE    XIII.

But,  thanks  be  to  God,  he  has  not  left  us  without  a  wit-
ness. There  is  a  better  testimony  than  all  Christendom,
which  is  written ;  and  it  is  this  which  I  hold  in  my  hand ;
it  is  the  word  of  God.  It  tells  the  truth ;  "  for  not  one  jot
or  tittle  of  this  word  shall  fail."  It  tells  the  wjiole  truth,
"  that  the  man  of  God  may  be  perfectly  furnished  to
every  good  work."  It  tells  nothing  but  the  truth;  for  it
is  the  truth  indited  by  him  who  cannot  lie.

You  are  well  aware,  my  friends,  that  written  testimony
is  considered  in  all  courts,  under  all  laws,  to  be  stronger
than  any  oral  testimony  whatever.  For  instance,  take  the
last  will  and  testament  of  any  man;  if  it  was  written  or
indited  by  himself,  signed  by  his  own  hand,  sealed  with
his  own  seal,  in  presence  of  "witnesses  chosen  by  himself,
and  ratified  by  his  death,  no  oral  testimony  can  be  brought-
against  it ;  unless  the  instrument  itself  shows  some  con-
tradiction or  discrepancy,  it  cannot  be  destroyed.  So  it
is  with  these  two  testaments,  revealed,  indited,  confirmed,
witnessed,  and  ratified,  by  the  death  of  the  testator,  the
Lord  Jesus  Christ.  And  although  wicked  men  and  dev-.
ils  have  endeavored  to  show  some  contradiction  or  dis
crepancy  in  its  testimony,  it  has  stood  the  shock  of
ages,  the  wreck  of  kingdoms,  and  will  stand  when  these
heavens  and  this  earth  shall  pass  away  with  a  great  noise
and  the  elements  melt  with  fervent  heat ;  for  by  this
word  we  must  all  be  judged  ;  by  these  witnesses  we  shall
be  justified  or  condemned.  Christ  says,  "  Search  the
Scriptures  ;  for  in  them  ye  think  ye  have  eternal  life  ;  and
they  are  they  which  testify  of  me."  The  angel  tells  John,
in  the  next  verse  following  our  text,  that  the  two  wit-
nesses "  are  the  two  olive  trees,  and  the  two  candlesticks
standing  before  the  God  of  the  earth."  The  angel,  in  his
allusion  to  the  two  olive  trees,  quotes  the  prophet  Zech-
ariah,  iv.,3,  "  And  two  olive  trees  by  it,  one  upon  the  right
side  of  the  bowl,  and  the  other  upon  the  left  side  thereof."
Here  the  olive  trees  are  used  in  a  figurative  sense,  and
properly  denote  the  "  sons-  of  oil,"  or  the  two  cherubims
which  stood  over  the  ark,  and  spread  their  wings  over  the
mercy  seat.  The  wings  of  the  cherubims  stretched  from
either  side  of  the  house  to  the  centre  over  the  mercy  seat,
and  their  faces  turned  inwards  down  upon  the  mercy  seat,


Christ's  second   coming.  198

and  the  glory  of  the  God  of  Israel  was  above  the  cheru-
bims.  These  cherub ims  are  a  lively  type  of  the  Old  and
.New  Testament.  The  signification  of  cherub  is  "ful-
ness of  knowledge;"  so  is  the  word  of  God,  "that  the
man  of  God  may  be  thoroughly  furnished,  perfect  in  every
good  work."  They  have  the  whole  truth,  all  we  can
know  about  Jesus  Christ  in  this  state.  They  stand  on
either  hand  of  Christ,  one  before  he  came  in  the  flesh,
pointing  to  a  Messiah  to  come,  by  all  its  types  and  shad-
ows ;  and  like  the  cherub  whose  wings  touched  the  outer
wall  of  the  room  and  reached  to  the  centre  over  the  mercy
seat,  so  did  the  Old  Testament  reach  from  the  creation
of  the  world  down  to  John's  preaching  in  the  wilderness,
and  like  the  cherub  looking  down  on  the  mercy  seat,  it
testified  of  the  Messiah.  The  other  cherubim's  wings
reached  from  the  centre  over  the  mercy  seat,  and  touched
the  other  wall  of  the  room,  while  his  face  was  turned
back  upon  the  mercy  seat.  So  does  the  New  Testament
begin  at  the  preaching  of  John,  and  reveals  all  that  is
necessary  for  us  to  know,  down  to  the  end  of  the  world.
And  all  the  ordinances  of  the  New  Testament  house  look
back  to  the  sufferings,  death,  and  resurrection  of  Jesus
Christ,  and  are  to  continue  until  his  second  coming  and
end  of  the  world.  These  cherubims  were  made  of  olive
trees,  and  overlaid  with  pure  gold,  1  Kings  vi.  23 — 28.
Again:  the  angel  tells  Zechariah  what  the  two  olive
trees  are,  Zech.  iv.  4 — 6,  "  So  I  answered  and  spake  to
the  angel  that  talked  with  me,  saying,  What  are  these,
my  lord?"  (the  two  olive  trees.)  "  Then  the  angel  that
talked  with  me  answered  and  said  unto  me,  Knowest
thou  not  what  these  be?  And  I  said,  No,  my  lord.
Then  he  answered  and  spake  unto  me,  saying,  This  is
the  word  of  the  Lord  unto  Zerubabel,"  &c.  Here  we
are  plainly  told  that  the  two  olive  trees  are  the  word  of
the  Lord,  and  the  angel  tells  John,  Rev.  xi.  4,  that  "  the
two  witnesses  are  the  two  olive  trees  and  the  two  candle-
sticks." As  candlesticks  are  the  means  of  light,  so  is
the  word  of  God.  Candlesticks  are  used  in  Scripture  in
the  same  sense  as  lamps.  And  David  says, "  Thy  word  is
a  lamp  to  my  feet  and  a  light  to  my  path."  Therefore  1
humbly  believe  that  I  have  fairly  and  conclusively  proved


194  LECTURE   Xltf.

that  the  two  witnesses  are  the  Old  and  New  Testament.
And  I  will,

II.  Show  what  we  may  understand  by  the  two  wit-
nesses being  clothed  in  sackcloth.

Sackcloth  denotes  a  state  of  darkness,  as  in  Rev.  vi.
12,  "  The  sun  became  black  as  sackcloth  of  hair  ;"  that
is,  the  sun  became  dark,  invisible,  and  did  not  give  its
light.  Just  so  during  the  dark  ages  of  papal  rule,  the
word  of  God  was  darkened  by  monkish  superstition,  big-
otry, and  ignorance  in  its  sacred  principles.  It  did  not
give  its  true  light,  because  the  laws,  doctrines,  and  ordi-
nances were  changed  by  the  laws  of  the  Latin  church ;
its  doctrine  was  perverted  by  the  introduction  of  the  doc-
trine of  devils  and  the  anti- Christian  abominations :  its
ordinances  were  so  altered  as  to  suit  the  convenience  of
carnal  men  ;  and  it  was  obscured,  because  the  common
people  were  forbidden  to  read  it,  or  even  to  have  it  in
their  houses,  by  the  Papal  authority.  It  was  hid  from
the  world  in  a  great  measure;  for  the  Papal  beast,  the
church  of  Rome,  forbade  its  translation  into  any  language
except  the  Greek  and  Latin,  which  languages  ceased  to
be  spoken  in  the  R,oman  government  in  the  middle  of  the
sixth  century.  Sackcloth  denotes  great  calamities  and
troubles,  as  in  the  days  of  Hezekiah,  2  Kings,  xix.  1,  2,
"  When  king  Hezekiah  heard  (the  threatenings  of  the
king  of  Assyria,)  he  rent  his  clothes,  and  covered  him-
self with  sackcloth  ;"  also,  the  Ninevites  put  on  sackcloth
at  the  preaching  of  Jonah,  when  their  city  was  threat-
ened with  a  final  overthrow.  So  with  the  two  witnesses  ;
while  they  were  clothed  in  sackcloth,  it  was  a  time  of
great  Calamity  and  trouble  to  the  people  of  God  ;  perse-
cution raged  without  any  mitigation  in  some  or  all  parts
of  the  Roman  government,  and  the  church  of  God,  which
was  fed  and  nourished  by  the  "  two  witnesses,"  during'
her  residence  in  the  wilderness,  was  threatened  With  a
final  destruction  by  the  Papal  armies,  the  inquisition,  and
every  other  means  that  could  be  devised  by  wicked  men
or  devils.  But  God  has  preserved  his  word,  through  all
the  persecutions  of  the  Roman  power.     I  shall  now,

III.  Show  their  history,  prophecy,  and  time  specified
in  the  text.


Christ's  second  coming.  195

1st.  Their  history,  contained  in  Rev.  xi.  5 — 13,  inclu-
sive. Let  me  read  and  explain.  5th  verse,  "  If  any  man
will  hurt  them,  fire  proceedeth  out  of  their  mouth,  and
devoureth  their  enemies  ,  and  if  any  man  will  hurt  them,
he  must  in  this  manner  be  killed."  If  any  man  shall  add
or  take  away  from  the  hook  or  revelation  of  God,  "  God
shall  take  away  his  part  out  of  the  book  of  life,  and  out
of  the  holy  city ; "  and  "  God  shall  add  unto  him  the
plagues  that  are  written  in  this  book."  This  verse  has
been  verified  in  our  day  in  the  history  of  deistical  France.
The  rulers  of  France,  in  the  revolution,  proclaimed  a
war  of  extermination  against. the  fishermen's  Bible,  as
they  were  pleased  to  term  it ;  and  within  six  years  they
exterminated  themselves,  the  republic,  and  almost  their
principles.  The  kingdom  was  deluged  in  blood  ;  anarchy
was  the  law  of  the  land  ;  and  the  judgments  deaounced
by  this  word  were  literally  accomplished,  so  that  deists
themselves  stood  appalled  at  the  horror  and  confusion
their  own  principles  had  brought  upon  their  heaven-
daring  crimes.

6th  verse,  "  These  have  power  to  shut  heaven,  that  it
rain  not  in  the  days  of  their  prophecy."  Allusion  is  here
had  to  "  the  three  years  and  a  half,"  in  the  days  of  Elijah,
when  the  heavens  were  shut  up,  Luke  iv.  25,  which  is
the  same  time  the  witnesses  prophesy  clothed  in  sack-
cloth, 1260  days,  forty-two  months,  thirty  days  to  a
month;  that  being  common  time,  and  this  prophetic.
The  Scriptures  are  the  means  which  God  has  made  use
of  to  convert  sinners  from  error  to  truth,  from  sin  to
righteousness,  and  to  convey  the  knowledge  of  grace,
(which  in  this  verse  is  compared  to  rain,)  to  a  lost  and
perishing  world.  During  the  reign  of  anti-Christ,  1260
years,  the  church  in  the  wilderness,  and  the  two  wit-
nesses clothed  in  sackcloth  the  same  1260  years,  the
doctrine  of  grace  in  Jesus  Christ  was  but  partially
taught.  Much  of  the  professedly  Christian  world  have
been  taught  that  doing  penance,  purchasing  indul-
gences, obeying  the  holy  Catholic  church,  or  performing
some  outward  act  for  pardon,  would  answer  them  heaven
and  happiness.  But  when  the  Scriptures  began  to  be
read  and  understood,  and  where  the  doctrine  of  grace  in


196  LECTURE   XIII.

Jesus  Christ  has  been  published  by  the  translation  and
circulation  of  the  word  of  God,  how  different  the  scene  !
Now,  we  can  hardly  find  a  Roman  Catholic  who  will  pre
tend  that  heaven  is  purchased  by  infliction  of  bodily  tor-
ture, by  doing  penance,  or  by  a  monastic  seclusion  from
the  world;  neither  do  we  see  them  selling  indulgences,
and  promising  the  holders  pardon  for  the  most  abomina-
ble crimes.  And  but  rarely  do  we  hear  the  infallibility
of  the  mother,  or  holy  Catholic  church,  advanced  from
pulpit  or  press.  Why  this  mighty  change  in  public  sen-
timent ?  Because  the  reign  of  grace  is  not  withheld ;
the  two  witnesses  are  no  longer  clothed  in  sackcloth ;
"  Michael  has  stood  up,  that  standeth  for  the  children  of
thy  people."  And  the  "angel  is  flying  through  the
midst  of  heaven,  having  the  everlasting  gospel  to  preach
to  them  that  dwell  on  the  earth."  "  And  have  power
over  the  waters  to  turn  them  to  blood."  By  ivateis,  we
understand  people  ;  and  by  blood,  wars.  This  text  has
been  amply  fulfilled  in  the  wars  of  Europe,  fighting  for
religious  tenets  and  ecclesiastical  power,  claiming  their
prerogatives  from  the  two  witnesses,  and  wresting  and
perverting  the  word  of  God  to  their  own  destruction.
"  And  from  thence  come  wars,  tumults,  fightings,"  be-
cause they  understand  not.  "  And  to  smite  the  earth
with  all  plagues,  as  often  as  they  will."  In  Old  Testa-
ment times,  it  was  the  word  of  God,  through  Moses  and
Aaron,  that  smote  Egypt  with  the  ten  plagues,  and
through  Joshua  the  Canaanites.  So,  in  New  Testament
times,  the  seven  last  plagues,  and  the  three  woes,  are
denounced  against  the  anti-Christian  beast,  who  dwells
on  and  has  great  power  over  the  earth.  "  As  often  as
they  will,"  meaning  as  often  as  they  have  prophesied  of
them,  so  often  will  the  plagues  be  sent.  Not  one  jot  or
tittle  of  the  word  of  God  will  fail.

7th  verse,  "  And  when  they  shall  have  finished  their
testimony,"  that  is,  when  the  1260  years  are  about  ful-
filled, the  "beast  that  ascendeth  out  of  the  bottomless
pit ; "  this  beast  is  the  same  as  the  little  horn,  Papal
Rome,  and  is  said  to  ascend  out  of  the  bottomless  pit,
because  it  is  founded  on  error.  The  principles  taught
by  this  beast  were  first  Paganism,  and  ended  in  Deism,


Christ's  second  coming.  197

which  are  not  built  on  the  word  of  God ;  and,  therefore,
have  no  foundation,  and  may  truly  be  said  to  be  "  bottom-
less." "  Shall  make  war  against  them."  The  govern-
ments, under  the  authority  of  Papal  Rome,  shall  en-
deavor to  exterminate  the  "  two  witnesses,"  the  word  of
God.  "  And  shall  overcome  them,  and  kill  them ; "  have
power  over  them,- pass  laws  or  edicts  against  them,  and,
by  this  means,  destroy- their  usefulness,  life,  and  activity.
For  where  the  Scriptures  are  not  read,  and  believed  in,
they  become  a  dead  letter;  but  when  read,  and  believed,
"  they  are  spirit,  they  are  life,"  John  vi.  63.

8th  verse,  "  And  their  dead  bodies  shall  lie  in  the
streets  of  the- great  city,  which  spiritually  is  called
Sodom  and  Egypt,  where  also  our  Lord  was  crucified."
This  verse  teaches  us,  that  the  word  of  God  would  be
made  a  dead  letter,  by  the  authority  of  one  of  the  prin-
cipal kingdoms  out  of  one  of  the  ten  into  which  the  Ro-
man government  was  divided,  and  that  they  would  be
guilty  of  the  same  sins  that  Sodom  and  Egypt  were
guilty  of;  and,  also,  of  crucifying  our  Lord,  that  is,  in  a
spiritual  sense.  This  will  apply  to  France  in  particular.
France,  previous  to,  and  in  the  French  revolution,  was
guilty  of  Sodomitish  sins;  she  also  had  held  in  bondage,
like  Egypt,  the  people  of  God ;  and,  in  France,  Christ
had  been  crucified  afresh  in  his  people,  on  St.  Bartholo-
mew's eve,  A.  D.  1572,  when  50,000  Huguenots  were
murdered  in  one  night  The  people  of  God  are  called
Christ's  spiritual  body,  1  Peter  ii.  5,  Col.  i.  24.

9th  verse,  "  And  they  of  the  people,  and  kindreds,  and
tongues,  shall  see  their  dead  bodies  three  days  and  a
half,  and  shall  not  suffer  their  dead  bodies  to  be  put
in  graves."  This  decree,  or  edict,  should  be  generally
known  among  all  nations ;  and  although  they  could  not
prevent  the  witnesses  from  lying  in  the  streets  of  the
great  city  three  years  and  a  half,  yet  the  nations  about
them  would  prevent  the  Scriptures  from  being  buried,
or  put  out  of  sight.

10th  verse,  "  And  they  that  dwell  upon  the  earth  shall

rejoice  over  them,  and  make  merry,  and  shall  send  gifts

one  to  another,  because  these  two  prophets  tormented

them  that  dwelt  upon  the  earth."     We  learn  by  this  text

17*


198  LECTURE   Xfitl.

that  the  nation,  who  would  suppress  the  reading  of  the
word  of  God,  would  make  great  rejoicings  upon  this  oc-
casion, and  congratulate  each  other  upon  the  destruction
of  the  Bible,  as  they  would  suppose,  for  this  reason,  be-
cause the  doctrine  and  precepts  of  the  Bible  would  be
hateful  and  disagreeable  to  them.

11th  verse,  "And  after  three  days  and  a  half,  [years,]
the  spirit  of  life  from  God  entered  into  them,  and  they
stood  upon  their  feet ;  and  great  fear  fell  upon  them
which  saw  them."  After  the  Bible  would  be  dormant
three  years  and  a  half,  God  would  so  order  in  his  provi-
dence, that  they  would  again  be  permitted  to  be  read
and  enjoyed  as  usual,  and  the  Bible  would  again  stand
upon  its  own  foundation,  or  merits,  and  would  again
have  their  bearing  on  the  hopes  and  fears  of  mankind,
and  the  governments  of  the  world,  and  their  enemies
would  see  it  and  tremble.

12th  verse,  "  And  they  heard  a  great  voice  from
heaven,  saying  unto  them,  Come  up  hither ;  and  they  as-
cended up  to  heaven  in  a  cloud,  and  their  enemies  be-
held them."  This  verse  shows  us  that  many  voices
would  unite  in  calling  for  a  general  spread  of  the  Bible
through  the  world,  and  that  the  Bible  would  be  exalted
among  the  nations,  and  great  multitudes  of  them  circu-
lated, and  the-  enemies  of  the  word  of  God  could  not
prevent  it.  Here  we  have  a  plain  and  distinct  prophecy
of  the  Bible  societies.

13th  verse,  "And  the  same  hour  was  there  a  great
earthquake,  and  the  tenth  part  of  the  city  fell,  and  in  the
earthquake  were  slain  of  men  [names  or  titles]  seven
thousand,  and  the  remnant  were  affrighted,  and  gave  glo-
ry to  the  God  of  heaven."  At  the  same  hour  the  wit-
nesses would  be  slain,  there  would  be  a  great  revolu-
tion, and  one  of  the  ten  kingdoms,  which  had  given  their
power  and  support  to  the  Papal  beast,  would  fall ;  and
seven  thousand  names,  or  titles  of  nobility,  in  chnrch
and  state,  would  be  destroyed;  and  this  revolution
would  produce  great  fear  among  the  nations,  and  some
would  acknowledge  that  the  word  was  fulfilling,- and  God
was  producing  these  wonderful  events^  Here  we  again
see  exactly  depicted  the  French  revolution,   and  its  ef-


Christ's  second  coming.  199

fects ;  and  we  cannot  but  see  that  the  whole  of  this
prophecy  has  been  literally  fulfilled.

In  the  beginning  of  the  sixth  century,  about  A.  D.  538,
Justinian,  emperor  of  Constantinople,  in  his  controversy
with  the  Arians,  and  other  schismatics  in  the  Greek
church,  constituted  the  bishop  of  Rome  head  over  all
others,  both  in  the  western  and  eastern  churches,  who,
by  his  authority,  suppressed  the  reading  of  the  Bible  by
laymen,  pretending  that  they  could  not  read  and  under-
stand without  the  assistance  of  the  clergy.  About  this
time,  too,  the  Latin  language  ceased  to  be  spoken  in
Italy,  and  the  Greek  and  Latin  both  became  dead  lan-
guages. The  Bible  at  that  time  not  being  written  or
translated  into  any  other  languages  in  Europe,  it  became
an  easy  task  for  the  bishop  to  obscure  the  doctrine  and
discipline  of  the  word  of  God,  so  far  as  suited  his  con-
venience, and  to  obtain  universal  power  over  the  minds
and  consciences  of  men,  and  clothe  the  Scriptures  in
sackcloth.  If,  then,  the  Scriptures  were  first  clothed  in
sackcloth  in  A.  D.  538,  and  were  to  prophesy  1260  years
in  this  situation,  their  prophecy  would  end  in  1798.
About  the  close  of  the  eighteenth  century,  in  conse-
quence of  the  abominable  corruptions  of  the  church  of
Rome  being  exposed  to  public  view,  the  men  of  the
world  began  to  treat  revelation  as  a  fiction,  and  religion
as  priestcraft ;  and  instead  of  searching  for  the  pillar
and  ground  of  the  truth,  "  their  imaginations  became
vain,  and  their  foolish  minds  were  darkened."  They
declared  war  against  the  Bible,  the  "  two  witnesses,"
which  war  became  general  all  over  Europe  and  America,
Some  of  the  most  eminent  and  principal  writers  in  this
controversy  were  in  France,  the  principal  kingdom
among  the  ten,  into  which  Rome  had  been  divided  at
the  close  of  the  fifth  century ;  and  so  successful  were
these  writers,  that  almost  the  whole  nation  of  the  French
became  Deists,  or  Atheists,  in  a  short  time.  This  na-
tion had  long  been  guilty  of  the  abominations  of  the
anti-Christian  beast,  the  sins  of  Sodom  and  Egypt,  and
the  persecution  of  those  who  protested  against  her  na-
tional corruptions  :  the  slaying  of  the  witnesses ;  their
lying  in  a  dead  state  three  years  and  a  half  in  the  street


300  LECTURE    XIII.

of  the  great  city ;  the  revolution  spoken  of  in  this  proph-
ecy —  all  happened  in  the  French  revolution,  between
the  years  1793  and  1798.  A  decree  was  passed  by  the
council  and  directory  of  France,  prohibiting  the  Bible
to  be  read  in  pub]ic,  in  any  of  the  chapels  in  France  ,
and  Bibles  were  gathered  in  heaps,  and  bonfires  were
made  of  them,  and  great  rejoicings  were  had  all  ovei
the  kingdom  at  the  downfall  of  priestcraft,  as  they  called
it ;  and  particularly  at  Lyons,  where  the  Scriptures  were
publicly  dragged  through  the  streets,  with  circumstances
of  the  greatest  contempt,  and  other  things  transacted  in
the  exultation  of  their  triumph,  which  are  too  shocking
to  narrate.  Let  it  suffice,  then,  to  say,  that  after  three
years  and  a  half  the  Bible  was  again  permitted  to  be
read,  and  religion  had  free  toleration  in  France ;  and
what  is  equally  as  remarkable,  is,  that  the  same  year  a
few  individuals  in  London  established  what  has  since
been  styled  the  Bible  society,  which  has  been  instru-
mental in  sending  Bibles  among  all  nations,  and  of  trans-
lating them  into  more  than  150  languages  since  that  pe-
riod ;  and  almost  all  the  writers,  who  acknowledge  the
Bible  to  be  the  two  witnesses,  do  agree  that  the  events,
prophesied  of  in  this  passage,  were  literally  accom-
plished in  the  French  revolution.  Now,  the  Bible  is
more  than  restored  to  its  former  state  in  society  ;  it  is
exalted,  and  every  person  can  have,  and  read,  and  ex-
amine for  themselves  into  its  sacred  truths.  It  is  also  a
fact,  that  the  progress  of  the  Bible  society  has  exceeded
the  most  sanguine  expectations  of  its  advocates  ;  and  the
Atheists  and  Deists  of  our  day  appear  to  be  perfectly
confounded  at  these  events.  Instead  now  of  declaring
open  war  against  the  Bible,  they  make  pretence  at  least
of  drawing  their  rules  of  morality  from  this  blessed
book ;  and  the  man  who  should  now  undertake  to  write
down  the  word  of  God,  would  be  considered  either  a
madman,  or  a  fool.  One  thing  more :  In  the  French
Revolution,  the  names  or  titles  of  men  were  abolished  ;
and  it  is  said  by  some  writers,  that,  in  the  long  list  of
titled  nobility,  and  the  great  catalogue  of  priestly  orders,
there  were  seven  thousand  destroyed  at  once.  Well
might  the  remnant  be  affrighted,  and  give  glory  to  the
God  of  heaven !


Christ's  second  coming.  201

Let  us  now  for  a  moment  see  what  follows  the  nistory
of  the  two  witnesses.

14th  verse,  "  The  second  woe  is  past,  and  behold,  the
third  woe  cometh  quickly."  The  second  woe  began  by
the  civil  wars  in  France  and  Germany,  and  ended  in  the
French  revolution ;  and  the  third  woe  will  come  quickly.
It  is  the  last  great  woe  denounced  against  the  woman
sitting  upon  the  scarlet-colored  beast,  and  against  the
earth,  which  she  hath  filled  with  her  sorceries,  and  the
kingdoms  of  this  world,  which  must  all  be  destroyed  un-
der this  woe.

15th  verse,  "And  the  seventh  angel  sounded,  and
there  were  great  voices  in  heaven  saying,  The  kingdoms
of  this  world  are  become  the  kingdoms  of  our  Lord  and
his  Christ,  and  he  shall  reign  forever  and  ever."  The
third  woe  and  seventh  trumpet  are  both  the  same  thing,
(see  Rev.  viii.  13 ;)  and  the  seventh  trumpet  is  the  last
trump,  when  the  dead  shall  be  raised.  See  1  Cor.  xv.
52.  It  is  evident,  also,  that  we  are  carried  into  the
eternal  state  forever  and  ever.

16th  verse,  "  And  the  four  and  twenty  elders,  which
sat  before  God  on  their  seats,  fell  on  their  faces  and
worshipped  God."  By  the  four  and  twenty  elders,  I
understand  the  true  ministers  of  Christ,  alluding  to  the
twenty-four  courses  of  the  priesthood  appointed  by
J>avid,  I  Chron.  xxiv.

17th  verse,  "Saying,  We  give  thee  thanks,  O  Lord
God  Almighty,  which  art,  and  wast,  and  art  to  come,  be-
cause thou  hast  taken  to  thee  thy  great  power,  and  hast
reigned."  This  is  the  language  of  every  humble  and
devoted  minister  of  Jesus  Christ,  who  makes  the  word  of
God  his  study,  and  believes  in  the  overruling  hand  of
God  as  accomplishing  the  great  designs  therein  revealed.

18th  verse,  "  And  the  nations  were  angry,  and  thy
wrath  is  come,  and  the  time  of  the  dead,  that  they  should
be  judged,  and  that  thou  shouldest  give  reward  unto  thy
servants  the  prophets,  and  to  the  saints,  and  them  that
fear  thy  name,  small  and  great,  and  shouldest  destroy
them  which  destroy  the  earth."

This  verse  shows  us  what  takes  place  at  the  sounding
of  the  seventh  trumpet  and  third  woe,  which  the  angel


202  LECTURE   ^III.

says  will  come  quickly  after  the  French  revolution,  if  1
am  right  in  my  explanation  of  the  two  witnesses.  It  is
morally  certain  that  the  word  of  God  is  not  now  in  an
obscure  state ;  it  is  not  hid  from  the  world,  neither  is
clothed  in  sackcloth.  It  is  true  that  many  voices  have
united  in  the  Bible  societies  to  spread  the  knowledge  of
the  word  of  God  ;  and  that  it  is  translated  into  about  all
the  known  languages  in  the  world.  It  is  almost  abso-
lutely certain  that  the  French  people  are  the  nation  that
is  compared  to  Sodom  and  Egypt,  in  the  passage  we
have  been  examining ;  and  likewise  the  earthquake  spo-
ken of  is  the  French  revolution.  Then  if  the  two  wit-
nesses are  the  Old  and  New  Testament,  we  are  certain
the  third  woe  is  coming  quickly,  and  the  seventh  trump
must  shortly  begin  to  sound,  as  I  have  already  proved  in
my  lecture  on  the  trumpets,  in  the  year  1839.  You
have  undoubtedly  seen,  my  friends,  that  we  are  likewise
brought  down  to  the  judgment,  when  God  will  reward  the
righteous,  and  destroy  the  wicked,  who  have  persecuted
the  saints  and  trampled  them  under  foot.

And  once  more  let  me  inquire  how  it  stands  with  you,
my  dear  hearer.  Are  you  prepared  for  that  great  and
solemn  day?  Are  you  ready  to  meet  the  judgment?
The  two  witnesses  will  appear  for  or  against  you.  Their
testimony  will  not  fail.  Do  you  believe  them  ?  He  that
believeth  shall  be  saved,  and  he  that  believeth  not  shall
be  damned.  "  The  word  that  I  have  spoken,"  says
Christ,  "  the  same  shall  judge  you  in  the  last  day."  Why
will  you  not  be  warned  ?  If  half  the  evidence  that  I
have  brought  of  our  being  on  the  end  of  this  dispensa-
tion, was  brought  to  prove  there  was  a  great  treasure  hid
in  your  .field,  how  soon  would  you  search  and  how  dili-
gently would  you  seek  until  you  found  it!

In  this  book,  of  which  we  have  now  been  speaking,
are  durable  riches,  gold  tried  in  the  fire,  seven  times
purified.  "  Search  for  it  as  for  hidden  treasures ;  seek
and  you  shall  find."  Can  you  tell  me  where  the  word
of  God,  the  Bible,  has  failed  of  being  accomplished  lit-
erally, and  in  the  time  specified  ?  Many  events  have
been  foretold,  the  times  given,  and  not  one  failed.  How
can  you  disbelieve  ?     How  can  you  shut  your  eyea


Christ's  second  coming.  203

against  so  much  light  ?  Where  will  you  have  an  ex-
cuse in  the  day  of  judgment  ?  I  have  repeatedly  brought
you  down  to  this  time,  and  shown,  by  Scripture  proof,  the
judgment  must  commence  immediately.  You  are  in
your  hearts  convicted  that  what  has  been  declared  con-
cerning the  two  witnesses,  in  this  discourse,  is  true.
And  if  so,  your  reason  must  teach  you  that  what  follows
under  the  third  woe  must  be  equally  as  true.  "  And  the
nations  were  angry,  and  thy  wrath  is  come,  and  the
time  of  the  dead,  that  they  should  be  judged,  and  that
thou  shouldest  give  reward  unto  thy  servants  the  proph-
ets, and  to  the  saints,  and  them  that  fear  thy  name,  small
and  great ;  and  shouldest  destroy  them  which  destroy
the  earth."


LECTURE    XIV


REV.  xii.  6.


And  the  woman  fled  into  the  wilderness,  where  she  hath  a  place
prepared  of  God,  that  they  should  feed  her  there  a  thousand  two
hundred  and  threescore  days.

The  history  of  the  church,  in  all  ages  of  this  present
world,  is  but  a  history  of  persecution  and  blood,  when  we
follow  her  through  all  dispensations  from  Adam  to  Moses,
and  from  Moses  to  Christ ;  so  likewise  from  Christ's  first
coming  down  to  his  second  appearance,  the  church  have
experienced,  and  according  to  the  whole  tenor  of  Scrip-
ture, must  expect  to  realize  from  ihe  kingdoms  and  men
of  this  world,  this  one  promise  at  least,  "In  the  world
ye  shall  have  tribulation."  These  facts  are  so  plain  and
obvious,  that  it  has  given  rise  to  a  common  saying
among  almost  all  writers,  that  "  the  blood  of  martyrs  is
the  seed  of  the  church."  Yet  there  is  a  bright  side  to
her  history  ;  for  she  has  come  out  of  all  her  persecutions
more  purified,  more  faithful,  and  with  more  energy,  to
prosecute  the  Avork  her  divine  Master  has  left  her  to
perform.  And  one  other  thing  is  certain  — God  has  pre-
served her,  whether  in  the  wilderness  or  among  the
nations  of  the  earth,  in  an  extraordinary  and  miraculous
manner  ;  even  her  enemies  themselves  being  her  judges.
Where  has  a  kingdom  stood  when  all  the  nations  about
them  have  conspired  their  overthrow  ?  Where  is  the
Assyrian  and  populous  Nineveh  ?  Where  is  Chaldea,
the  queen  of  nations  ?  Where  is  the  Grecian  empire,
once   the  colossus  of  the  world  ?     Where  is  imperial


Christ's  second  coming.  205

Rome?  Gone,  gone,  by  the  power  of  earthly  foes.
But  behold  the  church  of  Christ  and  of  God,  delivered
first  from  Egyptian  bondage  by  the  mighty  arm  of
the  God  of  Jacob,  led  by  miracles  through  the  wilder-
ness forty  years,  brought  into  the  promised  land,  although
all  the  nations  of  the  earth  were  her  enemies,  preserved
as  a  nation  through  the  rise  and  fall  of  mighty  empires,
and  experiencing  a  reverse  of  fortune  only  when  she
courted  the  aid  of  worldly  kingdoms,  or  suffering  dimi-
nution only  when  she  adopted  the  more  popular  worship
of  heathen  idolatry.  Yet  in  her  lowest  estate,  God  told
his  servant  the  prophet,  that  "he  had  reserved  seven
thousand  that  had  not  bowed  the  knee  to  Baal."  And
if  men  would  reason  on  the  subject  of  religion  as  they
do  on  other  subjects,  there  could  not  be  an  infidel  in  the
world.  For  nothing  is  or  can  be  more  manifest  than
the  miraculous  interposition  of  Providence  in  the  preser-
vation of  his  people  through  the  most  severe  trials,  heav-
iest afflictions,  and  deadliest  hatred  of  all  men,  that  men
or  societies  ever  endured.

Our  present  discourse  will  show  us  the  history  of  the
church  by  prophecy,  through  the  darkest  age  the  church
has  ever  been  permitted  to  experience  since  the  days  of
Abraham.

I.  I  shall  show  what  we  may  understand  by  "  the
woman  "  in  our  text.

II.  I  shall  show  what  we  are  to  understand  by  the
great  red  dragon  and  beast.

III.  I  shall  give  the  history  of  the  woman  given  in  the
chapters  of  our  text.

IV.  The  time  specified  in  the  text,  1260  days,  their
beginning  and  end.

I.  What  may  we  understand  by  ivoman  in  our  text?

I  answer,  We  must  understand  the  people  of  God,  in
all  ages  of  the  church,  whether  among  the  Jew  or  Gen-
tile: she  is  called  a  woman  because  she  is  the  spouse  of
Christ ;  she  is  likewise  called  a  woman  because  of  her
dependence  on  Christ  for  all  things.  As  a  man  is  the
head  of  the  woman,  so  is  Christ  the  head  over  all  things
to  the  church,  says  the  apostle.  As  the  woman  depends
on  her  husband  for  a  name,  for  food,  and  for  raiment,  so
18


206  LECTURE    X.V

likewise  the  church  on  Christ,  for  a  name  —  "  And  thou
shalt  be  called  by  a  new  name,  which  the  mouth  of  the
Lord  shall  name,"  Isa.  lxii.  2 — 5.  "  And  they  were
called  Christians  first  at  Antioch."  For  food,  our  text
says,  "  that  they  should  feed  her  there,"  &c.  The
prophet  Isaiah  says,  xl.  11,  "  He  shall  feed  his  flock  as  a
shepherd."  John  vi.  53,  "  Except  ye  eat  the  flesh  of
the  Son  of  Man,  and  drink  his  blood,  ye  have  no  life  in
you."  For  raiment,  the  psalmist,  speaking  of  the  church,
says,  "She  shall  be  brought  to  the  king-  in  raiment  of
needlework;  her  clothing  is  wrought  gold."  The  angel
to  the  seven  churches  says,  "  He  that  overcometh,  the
same  shall  be  clothed  in  white  raiment."  And  again,
"  I,  John,  saw  the  holy  city,  New  Jerusalem,  coming
down  from  God,  out  of  heaven,  prepared  as  a  bride
adorned  for  her  husband."  This  shows  conclusively
that  the  people  of  God  are  compared  to  a  woman.  And
now  let  me  show,

II.  What  we  may  understand  by  the  great  red  dragon
and  beast  that  persecuted  the  church,  or  woman  that  fled
into  the  wilderness.

The  red  dragon  is  the  same  power  as  Daniel's  fourth
kingdom,  the  Roman,  for  the  description  is  the  same,
having  ten  horns  ;  his  character,  too,  is  the  same.  Dan-
iel says  he  should  break  in  pieces  the  whole  earth,  and
stamp  the  residue  with  his  feet ;  that  he  should  work
deceitfully,  &c.  John  says  that  the  dragon  drew  a
third  part  of  the  stars  of  heaven,  and  did  cast  them
to  the  earth,  and  that  he  deceiveth  the  whole  world.
The  Roman  government,  then,  must  be  the  apocalyptical
red  dragon  beast,  having  seven  heads  and  ten  horns.
The  Roman  power  is  called  red,  either  because  of  their
persecuting  and  bloody  spirit,  or  on  account  of  their
emperors  wearing  purple  robes,  when  dressed  in  state ;
either  might  be  sufficient  to  entitle  them  to  the  appella-
tion "  red."  "  Dragon  "  is  undoubtedly  given  the  Ro-
man government  from  the  fact  that  the  Romans  changed
their  forms  of  government  so  often,  having  seven  dif-
ferent forms  in  about  five  hundred  years,  and  from  their
deceitful,  cunning,  intriguing  manner  by  which  they  ob-
tained power  over  the  nations  around  them,  that  they


Christ's  second  coming.  207

were  properly  a  nondescript;  and  could  not  be  described
by  Daniel  or  John  by  any  thing-  seen  on  earth  j  and
therefore  they  took  one  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  bot-
tomless pit,  "  the  dragon,"  to  describe  to  us  by  figure
this  dreadful,  persecuting,  and  bloody  power.  The  red
dragon  is,  therefore,  used  as  a  figure  to  denote  Pagan
Rome,  and  the  woman  sitting  on  the  scarlet-colored  beast
to  denote  the  church  of  Rome,  or  Papal  Rome  ;  and  both
together,  civil  and  Papal,  make  the  anti-Christian  abom-
ination, which  would  drive  the  church  of  Christ  into  the
wilderness,  where  she  would  be  fed  1260  days,  or  time,
times,  and  half  a  time.     I  shall,

IIT.  Give  the  history  of  the  woman,  as  in  the  twelfth
chapter  of  Revelation.

Verse  1,  "  And  there  appeared  a  great  wonder  in
heaven," — John  saw  this  wonderful  sight  as  transpiring
under  the  gospel  day,  or  government  of  God,  with  his
people  in  the  gospel,  the  circle  in  which  the  church
moves,  here  called  heaven,  —  "a  woman  clothed  with
the  sun,"  the  church  adorned  with  gospel  light ;  as
the  natural  sun  gives  light  to  the  world,  so  does  the
gospel  the  church,  —  "and  the  moon  under  her  feet."
This  shows  us  that  John  had  a  view  of  the  church  while
it  was  in  its  Jewish  state.  For  the  moon  represents  the
ceremonial  law,  which  was  typical  of  the  gospel,  like
the  moon  shining  in  a  borrowed  light,  and  liable  to
change  when  the  Shiloh  should  come.  "Under  her
feet,"  shows  that  she  walked  or  stood  on  the  ordinances
of  God's  house,  which,  like  the  moon,  pointed  to  the
sun  both  before  and  after  Christ.  "  And  upon  her  head
a  crown  of  twelve  stars,"  —  first  the  twelve  patriarchs,
afterwards  the  twelve  apostles,  Eph.  ii.  20.  Like  stars
they  are  smaller  lights  in  the  government  of  God,  and
teachers  under  the  law  and  gospel.

Verse  2,  "And  she,  being  with  child,"  —  having  the
promise  that  the  seed  of  the  woman  should  bruise  the
serpent's  head,  —  "  cried  travailing  in  birth,"  —  denoting
prayer  in  faith,  —  "  and  pained  to  be  delivered,"  —  that  is,
an  anxious  and  deep  longing  for  the  advent  of  the  prom-
ised Messiah,  when  she  expected  deliverance  from  bon-
dage, sin,  and  all  her  foes,  Matt.  xiii.  17.


208  LECTURE    XIV.

Verse  3,  "  And  there  appeared  another  wonder  in
heaven,"  —  another  sight  or  view  of  God's  government  of
the  world  in  connection  with  the  gospel,  —  "  and  behold,  a
great  red  dragon"  —  a  figurative  representation  of  the
Roman  kingdom.

Verse  4,  "  And  his  tail  drew  a  third  part  of  the  stars
of  heaven,  and  did  cast  them  to  the  earth."  Judea  be-
came a  Roman  province  before  the  Messiah's  advent,
which  is  figured  by  the  tail,  and  the  Jews  had  for  a  num-
ber of  years  been  governed  by  tetrarchs  or  kings  of  the
Romans'  appointment.  The  Jews  were  governed  by
three  different  offices,  figuratively  called  stars  —  kings,
high  priest,  and  sanhedrim,  or  the  seventy  elders.  When,
therefore,  the  Jews  were  deprived  of  their  right  to  ap-
point their  own  kings,  one  third  part  of  their  rulers  fell
to  the  Roman  power,  in  this  passage  called  "  earlli?  —
"  And  the  dragon  stood  before  the  woman  which  was
ready  to  be  delivered,"  —  Herod  was  then  king  of  the
Jews,  at  the  birth  of  Christ,  a  representative  of  the
Romans,  because  he  was  supported  by  their  authority,  —
"  for  to  devour  her  child  as  soon  as  it  was  born."
Herod  sought  the  young  child's  life,  to  destroy  him.
See  Matt  ii.  13.

Verse  5, "  And  she  brought  forth  a  man  child,"  —  J  esus
Christ,  born  of  a  virgin.  "  For  unto  us  a  child  is  born,
unto  us  a  son  is  given,"  &c.  Isa.  ix.  6,  7,  "  Who  was
to  rule  all  nations  with  a  rod  of  iron,"  denoting  the
power  of  Christ  to  break  in  pieces  and  subdue  all  the
kingdoms  of  the  earth.  Psalms  ii.  9.  Rev.  xix.  15, —
"  and  her  child  was  caught  up  to  God  and  his  throne."
Christ  has  ascended  up  on  high,  and  is  seated  at  the
right  hand  of  the  Father  until  he  makes  his  enemies  his
footstool."     See  John  vi.  62.  Eph.  iv.  8—10.

Verse  6,  "  And  the  woman  fled  into  the  wilderness,
where  she  hath  a  place  prepared  of  God."  The  church
had  grown  weary  of  the  protection  of  the  Roman  power,
for  she  found,  by  woful  experience,  that  whenever  she
placed  herself  under  the  protection  of  this  red  dragon,
he  destroyed  some  of  her  blessed  privileges,  and  brought
in  a  flood  of  errors,  which  caused  divisions  and  subdivis-
ions in  the  church.     The  Jews  had  tried  their  friendship


Christ's  second  coming.  209

and  protection  for  more  than  two  hundred  years  before
and  after  Christ,  and  the  event  proved  the  destruction  of
their  nation  and  place.  The  Christians,  too,  had  tried
the  friendship  of  the  same  power,  under  Constantine  and
succeeding-  emperors,  for  little  more  than  two  hundred
years,  beginning  A.  D.  313,  and  ending  in  A.  D.  538,  as
we  shall  show  ;  which  so  corrupted  the  Romish  church
that  she  became  the  anti-Christian  abomination,  and  the
true  children  of  God  were  driven  into  the  wilderness  out
from  her  connection  with  the  anti-Christian  church,  "  the
city  of  the  nations,"  as  she  is  called.  But  God  took  care
"  that  they  should  feed  her  there  a  thousand  two  hundred
and  threescore  days,"  which  is  1260  years,  from  A.  D.
538  until  1798,  during  which  time  a  free  toleration  of  re-
ligious rights  were  not  permitted  in  any  of  the  kingdoms
which  formerly  composed  the  Roman  empire ;  but  God
raised  up  teachers  among  them,  who  retained  in  a  good
degree  the  doctrine  and  purity  of  the  word  of  God,  and
practised  the  ordinances  as  they  were  delivered  to  the
saints  in  the  apostles'  days :  yet  but  little  is  known  of
them  for  six  or  seven  hundred  years.

Verse  7,  "  And  there  was  war  in  heaven."  After  the
prophet  John  had  given  us  a  history  of  the  church,  as  in
the  preceding  verses,  he  now  goes  back  to  bring  up  the
history  of  the  dragon,  the  Roman  kingdom,  and  begins
his  history  in  the  days  of  Christ  and  his  apostles.  "  Mi-
chael and  his  angels  fought"  —  Christ  and  his  apostles.
See  Matt.  x.  34,  "  Think  not  I  am  come  to  send  peace
on  earth  :  I  came  not  to  send  peace,  but  a  sword  "  —
"  against  the  dragon,"  against  principalities  and  powers,
and  wickedness  in  high  places.  — "  And  the  dragon
fought,  and  his  angels,"  imperial  Rome  and  worldly  men.

Verse  8,  "And  prevailed  not,  neither  was  their  place
found  any  more  in  heaven."  Rome  could  not  prevail
against  the  kingdom  of  Christ  or  the  gospel ;  for  it  differed
materially  from  the  Jewish  mode  of  worship ;  and  al-
though Rome  in  her  Pagan  state  could  find  easy  access
into  the  Jewish  sanctuary,  because  of  the  similarity  of
their  worship,  yet  when  Christ  set  up  his  gospel  kingdom
they  were  excluded,  for  none  could  enter  this  kingdom
without  regeneration,  faith,  and  repentance.
18*


210  LECTURE    XIV.

Verse  9, "  And  the  great  dragon  was  cast  out," —  Rome
Pagan  was  deprived  from  having  any  authority  in  the
gomel  kingdom,  as  Christ  says  in  John  xii.  31,  "  Now
shall  the  prince  of  this  world  be  cast  out  "  —  "  that  old
serpent," —  Rome  Pagan  is  compared  to  the  old  serpent
because  he  works  deceitfully  and  deceives  the  church,
{ivoman,)  as  the  serpent  did  Eve,  the  woman  in  the  gar-
den, —  "  called  the  devil,"  because  they  devour  and  per-
secute with  a  devilish  spirit,  —  "-and  Satan,"  because
satan-like  he  claims  power  over  all  kingdoms  of  the
world  — "which  deceiveth  the  whole  world."  —  This
may  be  said  of  Rome,  for  she  conquered  more  nations
by  deceit  and  flattery  than  by  fair  warfare.  —  u  He  was
cast  out  into  the  earth,  and  his  angels  were  cast  out
i,vith  him."  This  was  literally  fulfilled  when  Christ  cut
off  the  Jews  and  all  unbelievers  ;  when  he  said,  "  My
kingdom  is  not  of  this  world  ; "  when  he  excluded  the
kingdoms  of  this  earth  from  participating  in  the  spiritual
kingdom  which  they  claimed  on  account  of  their  author-
ity among  men.

Verse  10,  "  And  I  heard  a  loud  voice  saying  in  heav-
en,"—  many  voices  in  the  church  under  the  gospel  dis-
pensation,—  "Now is  come  salvation,  and  strength,  and
the  kingdom  of  our  God,  and  the  power  of  his  Christ."  —
This  represents  the  grand  chorus  of  all  the  saints,  when
they  discover  the  true  principle  on  which  the  kingdom
of  God  is  built.  This  was  literally  true  at  theE,  day  of
Pentecost  —  "  For  the  accuser  of  our  brethren  is  cast
down,  which  accused  them  before  our  God  night  and
day."  The  Romans  had,  by  drawing  the  Jews  into
idolatry,  caused  them  to  sin  against  God  in  all  their
evening  and  morning  sacrifices.  And  by  these  means,
they  were  accused  before  God,  that  is,  God  was  angry
with,  them,  and  destroyed  our  brethren,  the  Jews.

Verse  11,  "And  they  overcame  him  by  the  blood  of
the  Lamb,"  —  by  the  blood  of  atonement,  all  believers  in
Christ  do  finally  overcome  the  powers  of  darkness  and
princes  of  this  world,  — ■ "  and  by  the  word  of  their  testi-
mony," —  preaching  and  testimony  of  the  apostles.  —
"And  they  loved  not  their  lives  unto  the  death"  —


Christ's  second  coming.  211

suffered  martyrdom.  This  was  fulfilled  in  the  death  of
the  apostles  and  others.

Verse  12,  "  Therefore  rejoice  ye  heavens,  and  ye  that
dwell  in  them."  It  was  a  matter  of  great  joy  among  the
primitive  Christians,  to  be  counted  worthy  to  suffer  per-
secution for  Christ's  sake.  "  Woe  to  the  inhabitants  of
the  earth,"  —  those  who  live  under  the  Roman  govern-
ment,—  "  and  of  the  sea,"  —  meaning  the  principal  king-
dom among  the  ten  kingdoms.  France  is  generally
meant  by  sea  in  this  prophecy.  "  For  the  devil  is  come
down  unto  you,  having  great  wrath,  because  he  knoweth
that  he  hath  but  a  short  time."  The  devil  means
destroyer,  and  the  three  woes,  and  seven  last  plagues,
were  all  to  be  sent  upon  the  earth  and  sea,  which  denote
wars,  revolutions,  and  changing  of  governments.  These
things  would  prevail  in  the  close  of  this  Roman  king-
dom, and  war  would  be  the  closing  up  of  the  earthly
scene  of  this  fourth  kingdom  which  Daniel  saw  and
John  has  been  describing  under  the  figure  of  the  "  great
red  dragon."

Verse  13,  "  And  when  the  dragon  saw  that  he  was
cast  unto  the  earth,"  —  when  the  Roman  government
saw  they  could  have  no  control  in  the  things  of  Christ's
kingdom,  they  hated  the  church  and  the  doctrine  that
taught  that  Christ's  kingdom  was  not  of  this  world,  and
they  "  persecuted  the  woman  that  brought  forth  the  man
child,"  which  is  the  church  that  had  a  Savior  born  unto
her,  Christ  Jesus,  the  Lord  of  life  and  glory.

Verse  14,  "And  to  the  woman  was  given  two  wings
of  a  great  eagle,"  —  by  which  wings  I  understand  the
means  God  used  between  the  Arian  and  Papal  contro-
versy, at  the  time  of  the  division  of  the  Greek  or  eastern
church  from  the  west  or  Roman  church,  which  happened
in  the  reign  of  Justinian,  emperor  of  the  east,  about  A.
D.  538,  when  the  controversy  arose  concerning  the
worshipping  of  departed  saints,  images,  and  the  infallibil-
ity of  the  church  at  Rome.  In  this  controversy,  many
privately  withdrew  themselves,  and  settled  in  the  north-
west part  of  Asia  and  in  the  north-east  part  of  Europe,
and  after  a  number  of  years  colonies  were  sent  by  them


212  LECTURE    XIV.

into  Piedmont  and  valleys  of  the  Alps,  where  it  is
supposed  the  true  worship  of  God  was  retained  during
the  dark  ages  of  Papal  ignorance,  bigotry,  and  super-
stition. (See  Milners  Church  History,  and  Benedict's
History  of  the  Baptists.) — "that  she  might  fly  into  the
wilderness,  into  her  place,"  —  a  separation  from  the
world,  as  says  the  voice  from  heaven,  "  Come  out  of  her,
my  people,  that  ye  be  not  partakers  of  her  sins,  and  that
ye  receive  not  of  her  plagues,"  Rev.  xviii.  4.  —  "  where
she  is  nourished  for  a  time,  times,  and  half  a  time,"  —  fed
and  nourished  by  the  spirit  and  word  of  God  1260  years,
"from  the  face  of  the  serpent" — from  the  knowledge
of  Papal  Rome.

Verse  15,  "  And  the  serpent  cast  out  of  his  mouth  wa-
ters as  a  flood  after  the  woman," — -ivaters,  in  prophecy,
means  people,  Rev.  xvii.  15.  Therefore  I  understand
this  prophecy  to  have  been  fulfilled  when  the  Pope,  the
head  of  Papal  Rome,  sent  forth  his  armies  and  inquisition
to  subdue  the  heretics,  as  he  called  them,  who  dwelt  in
the  valleys  of  the  Alps,  which  was  about  the  beginning
of  the  thirteenth  century,  —  "  that  he  might  cause  her  to
be  carried  away  of  the  flood"  —  exterminated  and  de-
stroyed by  his  armies  and  inquisition.

Verse  16,  "  And  the  earth  helped  the  woman,  and  the
earth  opened  her  mouth  and  swallowed  up  the  flood
which  the  dragon  cast  out  of  his  mouth."  This  verse
was  fulfilled  in  the  wars  which  followed  the  above-
mentioned  time  of  persecution,  in  which  the  Gel-man
princes  helped  their  subjects  against  the  armies  of  the
Pope,  and  destroyed  and  swallowed  up  many  of  the  Pa-
pal armies,  from  the  thirteenth  to  the  fifteenth  century.
Or,  as  some  authors  have  supposed,  the  waters  which
the  dragon  cast  out  of  his  mouth  was  the  flood  of
errors  which  arose  about  the  time  of  the  French  revolu-
tion, under  the  name  of  Deism,  which  was  calculated  to
destroy  the  doctrine  of  the  gospel,  as  they  vainly
supposed,  backed  up  by  the  republican  armies  of  France,
and  afterwards  by  the  power  of  Bonaparte,  who  was
finally  subdued  by  the  combinations  of  the  kings  of  the
earth.     But,  as  this  transaction  seems  to  me  to  be  too


Christ's  second  coming.  213

late  to  affect  the  woman  in  her  exiled  state,  I  have  in-
clined, in  my  humble  opinion,  to  my  first  exposition  of
these  texts.

Verse  17,  "  And  the  dragon  was  wroth  with  the  wo-
man," —  Papal  Rome  was  angry  with  the  true  church,  —
"  and  went  to  make  war  with  the  remnant  of  her  seed."
This  war  has  not  yet  come  ;  for  it  is  evident  by  the  ex-
pression "  remnant  of  her  seed,"  that  it  means  the  last  of
the  church  "  who  keep  the  commandments  of  God,  and
have  the  testimony  of  Jesus  Christ."  This  is  the  last
struggle  of  this  anti- Christian  beast,  and  is  described  in.
many  places  as  the  last  great  battle,  or  the  supper  of  the
great  God.  Such  expressions  as  "  and  went,"  as  though
this  power  would  go  to  some  place  out  of  their  own
territory,  and  "  the  kings  of  the  east  might  be  prepared,"
show  that  they  will  go  west  I  am,  therefore,  con-
strained to  believe  that  this  battle  of  the  dragon's  last
power  will  be  in  America;  and  if  so,  it  must  be  mainly
in  these  United  States.  It  will  be  a  battle  on  political
principles,  as  we  may  learn  by  the  passage  in  Rev.  xvi.
13 — 16,  "And  I  saw  three  unclean  spirits  like  frogs
come  out  of  the  mouth  of  the  dragon,  and  out  of  the
mouth  of  the  beast,  and  out  of  the  mouth  of  the  false
prophet ; "  —  the  "  unclean  spirits  "  shows  that  it  is  politi-
cal principles;  and,  like  the  frogs  in  Egypt,  it  will  per-
vade all  the  departments  of  life  —  the  social,  civil,  and
religious.  By  "  dragon,"  we  must  understand  the  kings
of  the  earth ;  by  the  "  beast,"  Papal  principles,  or  the
church  of  Rome ;  by  the  "  false  prophet,"  Mahometan
power  ;  —  "  for  they  are  the  spirit  of  devils,  working  mira-
cles,"—  that  is,  spirit  of  deceit,  separating  friends,  divi-
ding kingdoms,  states,  societies,  churches,  and  families,
and  crumbling  every  man-made  institution,  and  levelling
to  the  dust  all  law,  order,  and  bond  of  union,  which  the
wisdom  of  man  may  have  invented,  —  "  which  go  forth
unto  the  kings  of  the  earth  and  of  the  whole  world."
This  shows  the  universal  spread  of  this  fanatical  spirit
of  disorganization,  and  it  will  finally  lead  to  "  gather
them  to  the  battle  of  that  great  day  of  God  Almighty."
"Behold,  I  am  come  as  a  thief.  Blessed  is  he  that
watcheth  and  keepeth  his  garments,  lest  he  walk  naked


214  LECTURE    XIV.

and  tney  see  his  shame."  We  are  here  notified  that
nis  coming  will  be  like  a  thief  to  those  who  are  engaged
in  this  political  warfare,  and  in  those  popular  and  men-
made  societies  of  the  day ;  and  we  are  told  that  those
will  be  blessed  who  watch,  that  is,  for  his  coming,  and
the  signs  of  the  times,  and  that  keepeth  his  garments
unspotted  from  these  worldly  institutions,  which  engen-
der strife  and  animosity  among  brethren.  Be  warned,
dear  Christian,  "  enter  into  thy  chamber,  and  hide  thy-
self for  a  little  moment,  until  the  indignation  be  over
and  past,  that  ye  need  not  be  ashamed  before  him  at  his
coming."  It  will  also  be  a  battle  of  religious  principles,
as  is  evident  by  the  following  scripture,  Rev.  xix.  11 — 16,
u  And  I  saw  heaven  opened,  and  behold,  a  white  horse ;
and  he  that  sat  upon  him  was  called  Faithful  and  True,
and  in  righteousness  he  doth  judge  and  make  war.  His
eyes  were  as  a  flame  of  fire,  and  on  his  head  were  many
crowns ;  and  he  had  a  name  written  that  no  man  knew
but  he  himself,  and  he  was  clothed  with  a  vesture
dipped  in  blood  ;  and  his  name  is  called  The  Word  of
God.  And  the  armies  which  were  in  heaven  followed
him  upon  white  horses,  clothed  in  fine  linen,  white  and
clean.  And  out  of  his  mouth  goeth  a  sharp  sword,  that
with  it  he  should  smite  the  nations ;  and  he  shall  rule
them  with  a  rod  of  iron ;  and  he  treadeth  the  wine-press
of  the  fierceness  and  wrath  of  Almighty  God."  This
passage  proves  that  there  will  be  at  the  close  of  this  dis-
pensation, immediately  preceding  the  marriage  of  the
Lamb  to  his  bride,  a  great  and  last  struggle  between
error  and  truth,  between  infidelity  and  the  word  of  God.
And  you  may  inquire,  perhaps,  and  with  propriety  too,
How  shall  we  know  on  which  side  we  are  engaged  in
this  great  war  of  principle  ?  I  answer,  "  In  righteous-
ness," he  doth  make  war.  But,  say  you,  we  are  so  prone
to  follow  tradition  or  prepossessed  notions,  and  think  we
are  right,  that,  like  Paul,  we  may  be  found  at  last  fighting
against  God.  You  must  see  to  it,  that  you  are  "  faithful
and  true,"  have  faith  in  his  name,  "  and  his  name  is  The
Word  of  God."  This  is  your  only  rule  —  The  Word  of
God.  Be  careful;  lay  yourselves  on  this  word.  Try
yourselves  by  this  standard.    If  your  life,  faith,  experi


Christ's  second  coming.  215

ence,  and  hope,  are  built  on  this  foundation,  you  can
never  fail ;  for  he  that  is  The  Word  of  God,  is  «  KING
OF  KINGS,  AND  LORD  OF  LORDS."  Again:  it
is  to  be  a  literal  battle  with  the  sword,  for  Christ  says,
"  He  that  taketh  the  sword  shall  die  by  the  sword."
And  king-s,  Papal  Rome,  and  the  Mahometans,  have
ruled  the  world  by  the  sword,  and  their  swords,  during
all  the  days  of  their  power,  have  been  red  with  the  blood
of  their  subjects,  and  the  innocent  victims  of  their  hate.
And  in  Rev.  xix.  17 — 20,  it  is  evident,  by  the  "fowls"
spoken  of  in  the  17th  verse,  is  meant,  warriors  in  favor
of  liberty  who  are  to  "  eat  (destroy)  the  flesh  (strength  or
power)  of  kings,  and  the  flesh  of  captains,  and  the  flesh
of  mighty  men,  and  the  flesh  of  horses,  and  them  that  sit
on  them,  (armies  are  undoubtedly  meant  in  this  passage,)
and  the  flesh  of  all  men,"  who  are  engaged  in  favor  of
kings,  papal  Rome,  or  false  prophet,  "  both  free  and  bond,
both  small  and  great."  "  And  I  saw  the  beast  and  the
kings  of  the  earth,  and  their  armies,  gathered  together
to  make  war  against  him  that  sat  on  the  horse,  and
against  his  army."  "  And  he  gathered  them  together
into  a  place  called  in  the  Hebrew  tongue  Armageddon,"
(awake  to  the  spoil,)  Rev.  xvi.  16 — 21.

These  will  be  the  means  the  dragon  will  use  in  his
last  great  struggle  to  gain  ascendency  over  the  minds,
consciences,  and  bodies  of  men.  He  will  fan  up  their
political  animosities ;  he  will  stir  up  strife  and  division
among  religious  communities  ;  and,  last  of  all,  and  not
least,  he  will  encourage  an  intolerable  thirst  for  blood.
In  which  battle  Christ  will  come,  chain  the  dragon,  give
his  body  to  the  burning  flame,  confine  the  spirits  of  all
who  worship  the  dragon,  beast  or  false  prophet,  in  the
pit  of  woe ;  raise  the  saints,  purify,  cleanse,  and  glorify
them  with  his  own  glory.

IV.  We  are  to  speak  of  the  time  the  saints,  or  church,
were  to  be  in  the  wilderness,  "  one  thousand  two  hun-
dred and  threescore  days."  I  believe  all  commenta-
tors agree  that  these  days  are  to  be  understood  years;
and,  as  I  have  proved  this  point  in  a  former  lecture,  I
need  not  stop  to  argue  this  given  principle  at  this  time,
out  will  proceed  to  give  some  proof  when  this  time  be-


216  LECTURE    XIV.

gan  and  when  it  ended.  The  time  given  in  our  text  is
the  same  length  of  time  as  given  by  Daniel  for  the  reign
of  the  little  horn.  See  Daniel  vii.  25.  It  is,  also,  the
same  time  John  has  given  for  the  image  beast  to  have
power  "  to  continue  forty  and  two  months."  Thirty  days
to  a  month  is  1260  days,  Rev.  xiii.  5.  It  is,  also,  the
same  length  of  time  that  was  given  the  Gentiles  to  tread
the  holy  city  under  foot.  See  Rev.  xi.  2.  Also  for  the
witnesses  to  prophesy,  clothed  in  sackcloth.  Rev.  xi.  3.
And  there  can  hardly  be  a  shadow  of  a  doubt  but  that
all  these  times  had  their  beginning  and  ending  at  one
and  the  same  time.  If  so,  then  the  arguments  used  here-
tofore may  have  their  proper  bearing  in  this  place.

But  let  us  consider  a  few  things  in  addition  to  our
former  reasons.  1st.  What  may  we  understand  by  the
woman  "  fleeing  into  the  wilderness,"  and  "from  the  face
of  the  serpent."  We  must  consider  it  in  a  state  of  ob-
scurity ;  this  was  true  in  the  time  we  have  stated,  A.  D.
538.  Historians  tell  us  but  little  about  any  regular
church  but  the  Roman  church,  and  this  has  never  been
in  an  obscure  state  ;  of  course  the  Roman  is  not  the
church  in  the  wilderness.  But  they  do  tell  us  that,  in
the  days  of  Justinian,  emperor  of  Constantinople,  there
were  many  schismatics,  as  they  were  called,  who  opposed
the  power  of  the  bishop  or  pope  of  Rome,  and  doings  of
councils  in  the  east  and  west,  and  a  large  share  of  the  lat-
ter part  of  Justinian's  life  was  spent  in  religious  broils
and  expelling  from  his  kingdom  these  schismatics  ;  and
the  code  of  laws  which  he  published  about  A.  D.  533,
forbade  any  Christians  any  rights  or  privileges  as  citizens
in  his  empire  who  would  not  acknowledge  the  bishop  of
Rome  as  head.  And  in  these  laws  he  gave  the  bishop
power  to  hold  courts  and  try  all  matters  of  faith  within
his  kingdom.  These,  and  other  things  of  like  import,
drove  all  true  followers  of  the  word  of  God  to  seek  a
rest  out  of  the  jurisdiction  of  the  city  of  nations ;  and,
of  course,  became  outlaws  to  the  Roman  government.
Then,  if  we  fix  the  beginning  of  the  exile  of  the  church
at  the  same  time  of  setting  up  anti-Christ,  A.  D.  538,
then  the  church  was  in  its  exiled  state  until  A.  D.  1798,
which  would  be  the  1260  years.     It  is  here  worthy  of


Christ's  second  coming.  217

remark,  that  the  code  of  laws  passed  by  Justinian  were
in  full  force  in  the  kingdoms  belonging  to,  or  under  the
control  of,  the  pope  of  Rome,  respecting  the  rights  and
privileges  of  those  who  might  differ  from  the  Catholic
faith,  until  the  French  took  Rome,  in  1798,  and  declared
Italy  a  republic ;  when  free  toleration  was  given  for  any
religious  opinion  or  privilege  whatsoever.  Here,  then,
the  church,  in  whatever  form  she  might  appear,  was  per-
mitted to  enjoy  the  rights  and  privileges  of  citizens,  and
to  worship  God  as  their  conscience  might  dictate.  This
is  the  first  time,  during  the  1260  years,  that  free  tolera-
tion of  religion  was  granted  in  any  kingdom  where  the
Catholic  church  had  power ;  and,  although  Catholic
princes  and  popes  have  since  had  rule  in  Italy  and
France,  yet  they  have  never  dared,  as  yet,  to  pursue
their  former  intolerant  course  of  conduct  towards  Prot-
estants. And  it  is  very  evident,  my  dear  friends,  that
the  church  is  now  out  of  the  wilderness  ;  that  is,  if  she
ever  was ;  for  there  never  has  been  a  time  since  the
days  of  the  apostles,  no,  nor  even  then,  that  the  church,
in  all  its  several  branches,  has  enjoyed  greater  privileges
than  for  nearly  forty  years  past  She  has  spread  her
wings  over  every  land,  and  carried  the  news  of  salvation
into  every  language  on  the  known  world.  Her  reapers
have  followed  the  sowers  of  seed,  and  there  is  handsfull
of  corn  in  the  tops  of  all  the  mountains  ;  but  the  harvest
is  short.  The  church  has  had  rest  as  long  as  she  has
ever  had  since  Christ  left  her  and  ascended  to  his  Fa-
ther. The  dragon  begins  to  show  his  anger ;  the  trum-
pet begins  to  sound  to  the  onset ;  the  armies  of  the
beast  begin  to  muster  for  the  battle,  they  are  furbishing
their  swords  for  the  slaughter ;  the  kings  of  the  earth
are  combining  against  the  freedom  of  their  subjects;
the  great  men  and  nobles  are  riveting  closer  the  chains
of  their  vassals ;  tyrants  are  braiding  in  firmer  knots
their  scorpion  whips  for  their  slaves ;  expediency  has
taken  the  room  of  moral  law,  and  anarchy  has  crowded
order  from  his  seat ;  mobs  have  taken  the  place  of  judges,
and  law  is  popular  will ;  the  liberty  of  the  press  is  but
the  nod  of  demagogues,  and  the  freedom  of  speech  is
19


218  LECTURE    XIV.

called  fanaticism.  Division  seems  to  be  the  order  of
the  day,  and  our  valuable  institutions  are  tottering  to
their  base.  Be  warned,  then,  O  my  friends,  to  seek
safety  under  the  banner  of  the  gospel  before  the  armies
are  rilled  up.  "And  the  dragon  was  wroth  with  the
woman,  and  went  to  make  war  with  the  remnant  of  her
seed  which  keep  the  commandments  of  God,  and  have
the  testimony  of  Jesus  Christ."  "  The  spirit  of  proph-
ecy "


LECTURE    XV.


REV.  xvi.  17.


And  the  seventh  angel  poured  out  his  vial  into  the  air  ;  and  there
came  a  great  voice  out  of  the  temple  of  heaven,  from  the  throne,
saying,  It  is  done.

This  text  is  the  account  we  have  in  the  word  of  God
of  the  last  plague  that  will  ever  visit  our  world,  or  the
inhabitants  who  hereafter  will  be  permitted  to  dwell
thereon.  That  is  evident,  because  it  is  the  seventh  of
the  last  seven.  For  John  says,  Rev.  xv.  1,  "  And  I  saw
another  sign  in  heaven,  great  and  marvellous,  seven  an-
gels having  the  seven  last  plagues ;  for  in  them  is  filled
up  the  wrath  of  God."  And  the  wrath  of  God  is  filled
up,  that  is,  the  cup  of  God's  wrath  of  which  he  will  make
all  nations  drink ;  and  he  will  give  unto  Babylon  "  the
cup  of  the  wine  of  the  fierceness  of  his  wrath."

Then  it  cannot  be  uninteresting  to  those  who  wish  or
who  may  desire  to  learn  where  and  when  the  last  plagues
have  been  poured  out,  and  how  many  yet  remain  for  us
to  experience.  These  seven  last  plagues  have  had  their
shadows  in  the  plagues  which  God  sent  on  slave-holding
Egypt,  when  he  delivered  his  people,  the  Jews,  from  their
Egyptian  bondage,  the  least  of  which  plagues  destroyed
Pharaoh  and  his  host,  just  in  the  moment  when  Israel
were  shouting  deliverance  on  the  banks  of  the  Red  Sea.
So  likewise,  in  the  seven  last  plagues,  they  are  poured
out  upon  spiritual  Egypt,  slave-holding  Babylon,  who
has  enslaved  the  people  of  God  for  centuries,  and  has
trafficked  in  the  bodies  and  souls  of  men.     She,  like


220  LECTURE    XV.

Egypt,  has  appointed  task-masters  over  the  church,  and
has  endeavored  to  strangle  her  children  in  the  birth.
She  has  commanded  the  kings  and  rulers  of  the  earth  to
destroy  the  children  of  the  church,  as  did  the  Egyptians
the  Hebrew  midwives ;  but  the  church  has  found  favor
in  the  eyes  of  some  of  the  kings  and  princes  of  the  earth,
and  the  earth  has  helped  the  woman,  and  her  children
are  not  all  dead.  And  their  cry  has  gone  up  to  the  Lord
of  Sabaoth,  and  he  has  come  down  in  these  seven  last
plagues  to  deliver  his  people  from  the  hand  of  the  spoiler,
and  from  the  power  of  the  beast,  the  anti- Christian
abomination ;  and  when  this  last  vial  is  poured  into  the
air,  all  the  doctrines  of  men  and  devils,  and  all  the  the-
ories of  men  and  the  wisdom  of  this  world  will  be  con-
founded and  brought  to  nought.  The  Lord  will  over-
whelm with  the  red  and  fiery  wrath  of  his  last  judgment
the  kings  of  the  earth,  the  beast  or  Catholic  church  of
abomination,  the  false  prophet  and  all  his  followers,  the
great  men  of  the  earth,  mighty  men  and  captains,  ty-
rants, slave-holders,  rich  and  poor,  bond  and  free:  all
who  have  worshipped  the  beast  or  his  image,  will,  like
the  host  of  Pharaoh,  be  destroyed  in  the  general  confla-
gration of  the  world,  and  the  saints  will  shout  deliver-
ance in  the  New  Jerusalem  state.     I  shall,  therefore,

I.  Give  the  history  of  the  seven  last  plagues,  or  the
seven  vials  of  wrath.

II.  Show  what  may  be  understood  by  "  It  is  done."

I.  Then  we  are  to  give  the  history  of  the  seven  vials
or  last  plagues ;  and  for  this  purpose  we  must  give  a  com-
ment on  the  sixteenth  chapter  of  Revelation.  Verse  1,
u  And  I  heard  a  great  voice  out  of  the  temple,  saying  to
the  seven  angels,  Go  your  ways,  and  pour  out  the  vials
of  the  wrath  of  God  upon  the  earth."  This  verse  shows
us  that  these  plagues  are  poured  upon  the  earth  at  the
command  of  him  who  sits  in  the  temple  of  God.  Verse
2,  "  And  the  first  went,  and  poured  out  his  vial  upon  the
earth;  and  there  fell  a  noisome  and  grievous  sore  upon
the  men  which  had  the  mark  of  the  beast,  and  upon  them
which  worshipped  his  image."  This  first  vial  was  poured
upon  the  earth,  meaning  the  kingdom  of  the  beast  or  the
Roman  government.     A  noisome,  a  grievous  sore,  indi-


Christ's  second  coming.  221

cates  the  dissolution  of  the  body  afflicted,  and  that  the
constitution  is  laboring  under  some  inward  disease,  or
affected  by  contagion  from  without.  It  is  therefore  a  fit
emblem  to  represent  the  exposure  of  the  corruptions  of
the  church  of  Rome,  and  breaking  out  of  those  loath-
some diseases  of  internal  abominations  which  had  been
hid  for  ages  from  the  world  by  the  cunning  craftiness
of  this  Papal  beast.  The  men  spoken  of  in  this  passage
are  those  who  worship  the  beast,  and  who  are  the  pro-
fessed followers  of  this  corrupt  society,  and  all  who  live
under  the  influence  and  control  of  the  idolatrous  city  of
nations,  and  who  traffic  in  her  indulgences  and  abomi-
nable practices.  This  vial  then  began  to  be  poured  out
when  the  Protestants  first  published  to  the  world  the
corruptions  and  abominable  practices  of  the  church  of
Rome,  when  the  world  began  to  see  the  noisome  and
grievous  sores  that  covered  the  men  who  pretended  to
preach  or  proclaim  the  doctrine,  laws,  or  commands  of
this  beast.  And  of  course  this  plague  was  sent  on  the
Romish  church  about  the  year  A.  D.  1529,  under  the
preaching  of  Luther,  Calvin,  and  others  who  opposed  and
exposed  the  corruptions  of  the  church  of  Rome.

Verse  3,  "  And  the  second  angel  poured  out  his  vial
upon  the  sea,  and  it  became  as  the  blood  of  a  dead  man ;
and  every  living  soul  died  in  the  sea."  The  sea,  in
prophetic  language,  is  the  centre  of  some  great  nation,
or  society  of  men,  as  in  a  restless  and  turbulent  state ;
and  the  things  living  in  the  sea,  are  the  persons  living
under  the  power  or  control  of  this  nation,  or  society.
Living  soul  denotes  those  persons  who  have  been  born
of  the  Spirit,  and  are  in  possession  of  that  living  faith
in  God,  and  love  for  all  men.  "  As  the  blood  of  a  dead
man."  There  is  something  very  striking  in  this  figure  —
not  an  ordinary  figure  of  blood,  which  denotes  war  and
mortal  controversy,  but  cold,  congealed  blood  ;  the  blood
of  a  dead  man  denoting  a  massacre  in  cool  blood,  with-
out any  resistance  on  the  part  of  those  murdered.  This
vial  was,  then,  poured  out  in  France,  the  principal  king-
dom in  the  Roman  ten  horns,  in  the  year  A.  D.  1572,  at
the  massacre  of  the  Huguenots  on  St.  Bartholomew's
eve,  when  50,000  were  slain  in  one  night,  and  the  streets
19*


222  LECTURE    XV.

ran  blood,  as  Sully  tells  us,  in  some  places  ankle  deep,
in  the  city  of  Paris.  This  massacre  was  in  cold  blood ;
for  the  same  historian  tells  us,  that  the  king  stood  in  hk
balcony,  and  shot  down  his  naked  and  defenceless  sub-
jects as  they  were  fleeing'  through  the  streets*  This
happened  in  France,  the  stoutest  of  the  Papal  horns  — ■
the  chief  instrument  in  establishing,  building  up,  and
supporting  that  cruel,  murderous  power  of  Papacy.

Verse  4,  "  And  the  third  angel  poured  out  his  vial  up-
on the  rivers  and  fountains  of  waters,  and  they  became
blood."  By  "  rivers  and  fountains  of  water,"  I  under-
stand the  nations  and  states  who  live  around  the  centre,
or  sea,  as  it  was  called  in  the  preceding  vial.  By  "  blood,"
I  understand  destructive  war,  "  And  I  heard  the  angel
of  the  waters  say,  Thou  art  righteous,  O  Lord,  which
art,  and  wast,  and  shalt  be,  because  thou  hast  judged
thus.  For  they  have  shed  the  blood  of  saints  and
prophets,  and  thou  hast  given  them  blood  to  drink,  for
they  are  worthy.  And  I  heard  another  out  of  the  altar
say,  Even  so,  Lord  God  Almighty,  true  and  righteous
are  thy  judgments."  In  these  verses  we  have  the  rea-
sons given,  why  they  were  visited  with  this  scourge  of
war,  because,  in  the  preceding  vial,  they  had  shed  the
blood  of  saints ;  which  proves  that  the  exposition  of  that
vial,  which  I  have  already  given,  is  correct,  This  vial,
then,  was  poured  out  upon  the  nations  that  had  given
their  strength  and  their  power  to  the  beast ;  and  the
governments  were  filled  with  war  and  blood.  This  vial
was  poured  out  about  A.  D.  1630,  and  lasted  nearly  fifty
years.  Spain  and  Portugal  carried  on  a  bloody  and  de-
structive war  for  more  than  thirty  years  of  this  time.
France  was  torn  by  civil  and  intestine  wars  during  a
long  period.  The  civil  wars  in  England  began  under
king  Charles  L,  1642,  which  lasted  with  but  little  cessa-
tion, until  king  George  I.  ascended  the  throne,  in  1714.
Germany  was  filled  with  blood,  between  the  contentions
of  the  Evangelical  league  and  Catholic  league,  "  which
gave  rise  to  a  ruinous  war,  which  lasted  thirty  years."
See  Guthrie,  vol.  i.,  page  443.  This  war  was  headed,  on
the  part  of  the  Protestants,  by  Gustavus  Adolphus,  king
of  Sweden,  who  was  killed  at  the  battle  of  Lutzen,  A,


D.  1632,  which  war  lasted  until  the  peace  of  Minister
1648.  The  other  kingdoms  of  the  ancient  empire  of
Rome  were  more  or  less  drenched  in  blood,  and  civil
wars,  on  account  of  their  religious  tenets,  and  conten-
tion of  their  rulers  and  sovereign  princes.  These  were
the  heavy  judgments  which  God  saw  fit  to  inflict  upon
the  kingdoms  and  states  of  the  church  of  Rome,  for  the
innocent  blood  which  she  had  shed  of  the  Protestants
who  had  protested  against  her  cruel  and  blasphemous
practices.  "  For  they  have  shed  the  blood  of  saints  and
prophets,  and  thou  hast  given  them  blood  to  drink,  for
they  are  worthy."  "  And  the  fourth  angel  poured  out  his
vial  upon  the  sun,  and  power  was  given  unto  him  to
scorch  men  with  fire.  And  men  were  scorched  Avith
great  heat,  and  blasphemed  the  name  of  God,  which  hath
power  over  these  plagues  ;  and  they  repented  not  to  give
him  glory."  The  sun  is  the  great  source  of  light  and
heat,  and,  in  prophetic  language,  is  an  emblem  of  the
gospel,  as  explained  in  the  19th  Psalm,  4 — 10.  "  Their
line  has  gone  out  through  all  the  earth,  and  their  words
to  the  end  of  the  world.  In  them  hath  he  set  a  taberna-
cle for  the  sun,"  &c.  To  "  scorch  men  "  with  fire,  signifies
to  make  men  angry  ;  "  great  heat,"  uncommonly  angry,
vengeful,  malicious.  This  vial  was  poured  out  in  the
last  century,  when  the  gospel  was  proclaimed  in  these
kingdoms  of  the  beast.  Now,  during  the  greater  part
of  the  last  century,  and  in  all  the  kingdoms  where  the
gospel  was  preached,  there  were  manifested  insidious
attempts  and  a  systematic  opposition  against  the  gospel
of  Jesus  Christ,  or  the  Holy  Scriptures.  This  opposi-
tion was  headed  by  Frederick,  king  of  Prussia,  and  aided
by  all  the  wits,  men  of  genius  and  learning,  as  they
boasted,  of  all  Europe  and  America ;  and  in  their  secret
assemblies,  or  clubs,  they  went  so  far  as  to  calculate
about  what  length  of  time  it  would  take  for  them  to  de-
stroy and  exterminate  the  religion  of  the  "  Galilean  and
his  twelve  fishermen  ;  "  and  no  writers  that  ever  wrote
took  such  unwearied  pains,  showed  so  much  virulence
and  anger,  blasphemed  the  name  of  God  to  such  a  de-
gree, as  these  writers  ;  and  none,  either  before  or  since3
have  ever  dared  to  exhibit  the  like.     "  And  they  re-


224  LECTURE    XV.

pented  not  to  give  him  the  glory."  I  believe  it  is  not
known,  that  any  of  these  principal  deistical  writers  were
converted  to  the  religion  of  Jesus  Christ  before  their  death,
to  give  God  the  glory.  Yet  I  think  we  have  some  ac-
count of  many  of  them  dying  in  horror,  at  the  frightful
view  of  the  future,  in  consequence  of  their  blasphemous
lives  against  the  majesty  of  the  King  of  kings.  There-
fore, in  the  history  of  the  Deists  in  the  eighteenth  cen-
tury, we  have ..the  history  of  the  plague  of  the  fourth
vial.  "  And  the  fifth  angel  poured  out  his  vial  upon  the
seat  of  the  beast ;  and  his  kingdom  was  full  of  darkness,
and  they  gnawed  their  tongues  for  pain,  and  blasphemed
the  God  of  heaven,  because  of  their  pains  and  their
sores,  and  repented  not  of  their  deeds."  "  The  seat  of
the  beast"  must  mean  those  ten  kingdoms  on  which  the
woman  sitteth,  which  is  ancient  Rome.  "  Full  of  dark-
ness "  must  mean  full  of  wickedness,  confusion,  and
every  evil  work.  "  Gnawed  their  tongues  for  pain "
shows  shame,  disgrace,  and  disappointment.  This  vial
was  poured  out  in  the  French  revolution,  about  1798.
When  Bonaparte  began  his  extraordinary  career,  exalted
to  the  pinnacle  of  power,  he  dethrones  the  pope,  (whose
power  and  authority  had  made  kings  and  emperors  quail
at  his  feet,  who  had  ruled  over  the  nations  with  despotic
sway  for  more  than  1200  years,)  and  makes  Rome  the
second  city  of  France ;  conquers  the  ancient  monarchies  ;
deluges  every  country  with  blood ;  masters  every  king ;
gathers  spoils  from  every  land,  and  humbles  cities  in  the
dust;  changes  the  laws  of  kingdoms,  and  destroys  the
most  sacred  constitutions  of  the  Roman  states.  In  this
revolution  among  the  Roman  kingdoms,  and  under  this
vial,  the  bastile  was  demolished,  the  inquisition  destroyed,
torture  suppressed,  and  the  power  of  the  Papal  clergy
restrained.  Their  kingdoms  were  full  of  darkness  ;  they
were  troubled,  chafed,  and  grieved;  a  thousand  plots
were  laid ;  many  times  they  confederated  against  him,
the  master  spirit  of  the  times ;  but  they  prevailed  not,
until  this  vial  had  its  accomplishment  on  the  seat  of  the
beast  Yet,  after  all  this  wonderful  display  of  God's
judgments  upon  the  beast  and  kingdoms  of  ancient
Rome,  they  repented  not,  but,  Pharaoh-like,  they  bias-


Christ's  second  coming,  225

phemed  God,  because  of  their  pains  and  their  sores,
"  And  the  sixth  angel  poured  out  his  vial  upon  the  great
river  Euphrates ;  and  the  water  thereof  was  dried  up,
that  the  way  of  the  kings  of  the  east  might  be  pre-
pared." The  scene  has  now  changed  from  Europe  to
Turkey.  The  "  river  Euphrates  "  means,  in  prophecy,  the
people  of  that  country  bordering  on  the  river,  and,  of
course,  refers  to  the  Turkish  power,  as  I  have  formerly
shown  in  my  lecture  on  the  fifth  and  sixth  trumpet
"Water  thereof  was  dried  up,"  is  an  emblem  of  the
power  and  strength  of  that  kingdom  being  diminished,
or  taken  away.  This  vial  was  poured  out  on  Turkey,
by  the  loss  of  a  great  share  of  the  empire  ;  first,  Russia  on
the  north,  in  her  last  war  with  the  Turks,  took  away  a
number  of  provinces  ;  then,  by  the  revolt  of  Ali  Pacha;
then,  by  the  rising  of  the  Greeks ;  since,  by  the  Albani-
ans and  Georgians,  and  other  distant  parts  of  the  em-
pire, becoming  disaffected ;  which,  all  together,  have  so
wasted  the  power  of  the  Turks,  that,  now,  it  is  very
doubtful  whether  she  can  maintain  her  power  against
her  own  intestine  enemies ;  and,  to  compare  her  now
with  her  former  greatness,  would  be  like  comparing  a
fordable  stream  with  the  great  river  Euphrates  ;  so  that
the  way  now  appears  to  be  prepared  for  the  king-s  to
come  up  to  the  battle  of  the  great  day,  in  which  the
false  prophet  is  now  to  take  his  part,  as  Ave  shall  see  in
our  next  verse.

"  And  I  saw  three  unclean  spirits  like  frogs  come  out
of  the  mouth  of  the  dragon,  and  out  of  the  mouth  of  the
beast,  and  out  of  the  mouth  of  the  false  prophet ;  for
they  are  the  spirits  of  devils  working  miracles,  which  go
forth  unto  the  kings  of  the  earth  and  of  the  whole  world,
to  gather  them  to  the  battle  of  the  great  day  of  God
Almighty."  Now,  if  we  can  decipher  this  passage,  we
can  tell  what  are  now  and  what  will  be  the  signs  of  the
times.  "  Three  unclean  spirits,"  By  this  we  must  un-
derstand three  wicked  principles.  "  Frogs"  I  understand
to  show  us  that  it  is  political.  As  frogs  came  over  the
land  in  the  judgment  on  Egypt,  and  pervaded  every
house,  even  the  palace  of  the  king,  so  do  politics,
"  Mouth  "  denotes  orders  or  commands,     The  dragon  ia


226  LECTURE    XV.

a  figure  of  the  kings  of  the  earth.     The  beast  is  used  to
represent  Papacy.     The  false  prophet  evidently  repre-
sents  Mahometanism.     These   have   all  the   spirit  of
devils.     The  devil  pretends  to  claim  power  over  all  the
kingdoms  of  the  world,  (see  Rev.  xii.  9,)  there  called  the
devil.     Papacy  is  said,  in  Rev.  xiii.  2,  to  receive   its
power  from  the  dragon,  and  to  come  out  of  the  bottom-
less pit,  and  shall  go  into  perdition ;  of  course,  must  be-
long to  Satan's  kingdom.     The  false  prophet,  too,  is  to
be  "  cast  alive  into  a  lake  of  lire  burning  with  brim-
stone."    All  these  powers  have  pretended  to  work  mira-
cles, to  establish  their  authority  over  the  bodies  and
souls  of  men.     But  what  are  the  principles  which  each
of  these  teach  their  political  followers  ?     The   dragon
and  his   political  party,  in  whatever  nation  they  may
appear,  (as  all  three  of  these  political  principles  must
pervade  the  whole  earth,)  will  support  tyranny,  slavery,
and  aggrandizement  of  the  few  at  the  expense  of  many.
The  beast  and  his  political  party  will  be  known  only  by
their  hypocrisy,  bigotry,  and  superstition.     Their  princi-
pal object  will  be  to  operate  on  the  hopes  and  fears  of
men,  and  so  gain  an  ascendency  over  the  minds  of  the
individuals  who  may  be  so  unfortunate  as  to  be  found  in
their  ranks.     The  false  prophet  will  fill  his  party  with
notions  of  infidelity,  lust,  and  conquest.     And  the  spirit
of  all  these  parties,  working  at  one  and  the  same  time,
in  all  nations,  and  among  all  people,  will  produce  an  ef-
fect which  only  can  be  known  to  mortals  in  experiencing
the  conflict.     "  Behold,  I  come  as  a  thief.     Blessed  is  he
that  watcheth,  and  keepeth  his  garments,  lest  he  walk
naked,  and  they  see  his  shame."     This  verse  gives  us
notice  of  the  near  approach  of  him  who  hath  all  power
in  heaven  and  earth.     "  For  when  they  say,  Peace  and
safety,  then  sudden  destruction  cometh  upon  them,  and
they  shall   not  escape.     But  ye,  brethren,  are  not  in
darkness,  that  that  day  shall  overtake  you  as  a  thief."
Watch,  therefore,  for  if  ye  have  put  on  the  Lord  Jesus
Christ,   keep   your   garment,   and   let  none  take  your
crown,  that  you  may  be  found  of  him  without  spot  and
blameless.     "  And  he   gathered  them  together  into  a
place  called,  in  the  Hebrew  tongue,  Armageddon ;"  that


Christ's  second  coming.  227

is,  "Where  the  Lord  will  declare  his  precious  fruit."
This  gathering  is  the  same  spoken  of  in  Matt  xxv.  32,
"  And  before  him  shall  be  gathered  all  nations  ;  and  he
shall  separate  them  one  from  another,  as  a  shepherd  di-
videth  his  sheep  from  the  goats."  In  the  place  Arma-
geddon, the  Lord  will  manifest  who  are  his ;  he  will
separate  the  chaff  from  the  wheat,  the  wicked  from  the
just  The  wheat  he  will  gather  into  his  garner ;  they
will  be  caught  up  to  meet  the  Lord  in  the  air,  while  the
chaff  will  be  burnt  with  unquenchable  fire.  His  own
right  hand  shall  save  us  while  his  last  plague  shall  be
poured  out  upon  the  head  of  his  enemies.  "  And  the
seventh  angel  poured  his  vial  into  the  air ;  and  there
came  a  great  voice  out  of  the  temple  of  heaven  from  the
throne,  saying,  It  is  done."  The  seventh  and  last  vial
of  God's  wrath  will  be  poured  into  the  air  about  the
year  1840,  if  my  former  calculations  are  correct,  when
this  judgment  will  have  a  quick  and  rapid  circulation
over  the  whole  globe.  Like  the  air,  it  will  pervade
every  kingdom,  circulate  into  every  nation,  sow  the  seeds
of  anarchy  in  every  society,  and  disorganize  every
bond  of  union  among  men,  except  the  gospel.  "  And
there  were  voices,  and  thunders,  and  lightnings,  and  a
great  earthquake,  such  as  was  not  since  men  were
upon  the  earth,  so  mighty  an  earthquake,  and  so  great."
Voices,  political  strife.  Thunders  is  an  emblem  of  di-
visions. Ldghtning  is  a  representation  of  anger  and
war.  Great  earthquake  denotes  a  great  revolution.
And  there  will  be,  when  this  vial  is  poured  out,  political
strife  among  all  nations,  divisions  among  all  sects,  socie-
ties, and  associations  of  men  upon  earth.  Anger,  war,  and
bloodshed  will  fill  the  countries  with  horror  and  dismay  ;
and  a  great  revolution,  such  as  was  not  since  men  were
upon  earth,  so  mighty  a  revolution  and  so  great  "  And
the  great  city  was  divided  into  three  parts,  and  the  cities
of  the  nations  fell ;  and  great  Babylon  came  in  remem-
brance before  God,  to  give  unto  her  the  cup  of  the  wine
of  the  fierceness  of  his  wrath."  The  great  city  is  the
woman  which  reigneth  over  the  kings  of  the  earth,  says
the  angel,  Rev.  xvii.  18.  And  the  woman  is  Papacy.
Papacy  must  also  be  divided  into  three  parties,  to  show


228  LECTURE    XV.

her  dissolution.  And  the  cities  of  the  nations  fell.  As
city  denoted  the  papal  power  and  religion,  so  does  cities
represent  the  power  and  religion  of  all  other  nations.
Therefore  all  the  power,  and  all  national  religion,  will
fall  in  and  under  this  vial,  and  the  anti-Christian  power
will  be  judged ;  all  their  sins,  cruel  persecutions,  and
bloody  deeds,  will  be  brought  into  judgment  into  re-
membrance before  God,  and  he  will  fill  to  her  the  cup
which  she  has  made  others  drink,  and  she  in  her  turn
must  drink  the  dregs.  "  And  every  island  fled  away,
and  the  mountains  were  not  found,"  Islands  and  moun-
tains are  figures  of  great  and  small  kingdoms  and  gov-
ernments. This  text  alludes  to  the  same  time  and
circumstances  which  Nebuchadnezzar's  dream  does,
Daniel  ii.  35,  45  —  when  the  stone  cut  out  without
hands  shall  smite  the  image  upon  his  feet,  and  all  the
kingdoms  of  the  earth  be  carried  away,  tbat  no  place
shall  be  found  for  them.  In  this  verse  it  is,  the  "  moun-
tains were  not  found."  "And  there  fell  upon  men  a
great  hail  out  of  heaven,  every  stone  about  the  weight
of  a  talent,  and  men  blasphemed  God  because  of  the
plague  of  the  hail ;  for  the  plague  thereof  was  exceed-
ing great."  This  closes  the  history  of  the  seven  last
plagues,  and  this  storm  of  hail  is  the  last  part  of  the
seventh  vial ;  it  is  the  closing  up  of  the  judgments  of  God
on  an  ungodly  world.  Whether  we  are  to  understand
this  hail  figuratively  or  literally,  I  am  not  able  to  say  ;
but  my  prevailing  opinion  is,  that  we  are  to  understand
it  literally,  for  this  reason  —  I  have  never  been  able  in  the
word  of  God  to  find  any  figurative  explanation,  although
it  is  used  in  a  number  of  places  with  particular  reference
to  the  last  day.  Isa.  xxviii.  17,  "  Judgment  also  will  I
lay  to  the  line,  and  righteousness  to  the  plummet,  and
the  hail  shall  sweep  away  the  refuge  of  lies,  and  the
waters  shall  overflow  the  hiding-places."  xxx.  30,
"  And  the  Lord  shall  cause  his  glorious  voice  to  be
heard,  and  shall  show  the  lighting  down  of  his  arm,
with  the  indignation  of  his  anger,  and  with  the  flame  of
a  devouring  fire,  with  scattering,  and  tempest,  and  hail-
stones." Ezek.  xiii.  11,  13,  "Say  unto  them  which
daub  it  with  untempered  mortar,  that  it  shall  fall ;  there


Christ's   second   coming.  229

shall  be  an  overflowing  shower ;  and  ye,  O  great  hail-
stones, shall  fall ;  and  a  stormy  wind  shall  rend  it.
Therefore,  thus  saith  the  Lord  God,  I  will  even  rend  it
with  a  stormy  wind  in  my  fury  ;  and  there  shall  be  an
overflowing  shower  in  mine  anger,  and  great  hail-stones
in  my  fury,  to  consume  it"  Ezek.  xxxviii.  22,  "  And
I  will  plead  against  him  with  pestilence  and  with  blood ;
and  I  will  rain  upon  him,  and  upon  his  bands,  and  upon
the  many  people  that  are  with  him,  an  overflowing  rain,
and  great  hail-stones,  fire  and  brimstone."  Also,  Rev.
xi.  19,  "  And  there  were  lightnings,  and  voices,  and
thunderings,  and  an  earthquake,  and  great  hail."

By  reading  the  connection  of  these  texts,  you  cannot
but  be  struck  with  the  agreement  of  the  prophets  in  their
descriptions  of  this  last  and  dreadful  judgment  of  God
upon  the  world.  All  of  them  evidently  fix  it  on  the  last
day ;  all  call  it  apparently  a  rain  of  great  hail-stones,
like  those  which  fell  upon  Egypt  in  the  days  of  Moses.
Exodus  ix.  23 — 25,  "  And  Moses  stretched  forth  his  rod
toward  heaven ;  and  the  Lord  sent  thunder  and  hail,  and
the  fire  ran  along  upon  the  ground  ;  and  the  Lord  rained
hail  upon  the  land  of  Egypt.  So  there  was  hail,  and
fire  mingled  with  the  hail,  very  grievous,  such  as  there
was  none  like  it  in  all  the  land  of  Egypt  since  it  be-
came a  nation.  And  the  hail  smote  throughout  all  the
land  of  Egypt,  all  that  was  in  the  field,  both  man  and
beast ;  and  the  hail  smote  every  herb  of  the  field,  and
brake  every  tree  of  the  field."  This,  it  is  evident,  is  the
type  of  the  last  part  of  the  seventh  plague.

And  now,  my  friends,  will  you  believe  ?  Six  of  these
plagues  have  been  accomplished  in  as  literal  a  manner
as  we  could  expect,  after  a  fair  and  scriptural  explana-
tion of  the  figures  and  metaphors  used.  And  again  I
ask.  Do  you  believe  ?  You  think,  perhaps,  you  will  wait
until  you  see  the  hail  come,  and  then  you  will  believe.
But  will  you  not  recollect  that  our  text  says,  "  And  they
blasphemed  God  because  of  the  plague  of  the  hail "  ?
Will  you  thus  tempt  God  through  six  successive  judg-
ments, and  wait  for  the  last  before  you  will  believe  ?
What  hope  or  prospect  have  you  that  the  seventh  will
do  what  the  six  preceding  could  not  do  —  that  is,  make


230  LECTURE     XV.

you  believe  ?  Is  there  one  rational  conviction  that  you
will  be  then  convinced  ?  No,  not  one.  Then  will  you
not  see  and  learn  wisdom  by  what  is  gone  before  ?
Pharaoh  had  no  space  for  repentance  under,  or  even  just
before  the  last  plague.  And  so  it  will  be  with  you  ;  the
door  will  have  been  shut  before  any  part  of  the  seventh
vial  will  be  poured  out,  for  then  will  be  heard  a  great
voice  reverberating-  through  the  upper  vault  of  heaven,
and,  sounding  even  to  the  dark  cells  of  the  pit  of  woe,
shaking  the  middle  air  with  its  deep-toned  thunder,  and,
like  the  lightning,  darting  its  vivid  flash  of  fire  from  east
to  west,  Avill  pierce  the  deafest  ear,  and  make  the  hardest
heart  to  break,  although  a  thousand  fold  more  hard  than
the  adamantine  rock,  saying,  "  It  is  done"  This  brings
me  to  show,

II.  What  we  may  understand  by  "  It  is  done."
The  first  question  which  naturally  arises  on  the  mind
is,  What  is  done  ?  When  Christ  was  about  expiating
for  the  sins  of  the  world ;  when  he  was  closing  up  the
work  which  his  Father  gave  him  to  do  on  earth  in  the
flesh ;  when  the  spirit  was  about  leaving  the  tenement
of  clay  which  it  had  inhabited  through  a  life  of  thirty-
three  years  of  pain,  sufferings,  deprivations,  sorrows,
groans,  and  tears,  made  more  acute  by  temptations  try-
ing as  the  arch-demon  of  hell  could  invent ;  suffering
reproach  from  the  haughty  Pharisee,  and  the  more  ob-
stinate Sadducee,  and  contempt  and  ridicule  from  the
base  rabble  of  his  own  people;  persecuted  even  until
death  by  the  envy,  malice,  and  hatred  of  those  who  had
received  boons  and  blessings  of  life  at  his  hands,  —  he  had
saved  them  from  disease,  death,  and  the  rage  of  demons  ;
yet,  in  this  moment  of  great  need,  he  was  forsaken  of
all ;  they  stood  afar  off;  and  when  he  was  about  giving
up  the  ghost,  he  cried,  "  It  is  finished  !  "  and  bowed  his
head,  and  died.  The  fratricide  man  could  do  no  more ;
he  had  followed  him  to  death ;  beyond  that  the  envy  of
his  brother  could  not  reach  him.  The  rabble,  who  a
few  days  before  had  cried,  Hosannas  to  the  Son  of  Da-
vid !  this  day  were  crying,  Crucify  him !  crucify  him !
now  could  cry  no  more,  but  with  downcast  looks,  re-
turned into  the  city.  The  Pharisees  and  rulers  could
do  no  more ;  they  had  plotted  his  death,  and  obtained


Christ's  second  coming.  231

their  object ;  but  into  the  dark  recess  of  the  tomb
they  dare  not,  they  would  not,  follow.  The  great  red
dragon  (the  Roman  power)  had  sought  his  life  when  a
child,  but  the  hour  had  not  come.  Herod  sought  his  life
when  a  man,  but  he  could  not  succeed  until  the  last  day
of  the  seventy  weeks  should  be  accomplished.  Then
the  powers  of  earth,  wicked  men,  and  devils,  could  com-
bine to  take  the  life  of  the  Lord  of  glory.  Then,  while
these  powers  had  control,  the  heavens  hid  their  face ;
nature  stood  back  aghast,  and  the  material  world  shud-
dered with  a  groan.  Then,  at  that  awful,  fitful  period,
he  who  had  been  the  object  of  all  this  malice,  cried
with  a  loud  voice,  "  It  is  finished  ! "  The  work  on  earth
in  the  flesh  is  finished ;  the  temptations  of  Satan  are
finished ;  the  persecution  of  his  brethren  are  finished ;
envy,  malice,  and  hatred  towards  the  person  of  Christ  are
finished  ;  the  power  of  earth,  hell,  and  wicked  men  to  do
any  thing  with  him,  is  finished  ;  death  has  no  more  ter-
rors over  him.     It  is  finished.

Although  Christ  had  finished  his  work,  and  had  endured
all  the  sufferings  which  he  was  to  finish  ;  yet  in  his
spiritual  body,  the  church,  the  measure  of  his  sufferings
was  to  be  filled  up.  His  people  must  pass  through  the
same  scenes  in  the  world  as  their  divine  Master  had  ex-
perienced from  satanic  temptations  and  the  hatred  of  the
world.  "  The  world  will  hate  you  and  persecute  you
for  my  name's  sake,  even  as  they  hated  me  before  they
hated  you,"  says  our  blessed  Redeemer.  Therefore  the
same  manifestations  of  cruelty,  contempt,  persecution,
and  death,  were  to  be  acted  over  again  in  the  church
until  the  2300  years  should  be  accomplished,  when
Christ  would  come  again,  receive  home  his  weary,  per-
secuted people,  conquer  death,  and  him  that  had  the
power  of  death,  which  is  the  devil.  "  And  there  came  a
great  voice  out  of  the  temple  of  heaven  from  the  throne,
saying,  It  is  done."  The  power  of  earth,  hell,  and  wick-
ed men  over  the  dear  people  of  God,  is  done.  Their
temptation  in  the  flesh  is  done ;  their  trials,  persecutions,
sufferings,  darkness,  fears,  and  death  itself,  are  done.
As  the  sufferings  of  the  head  was  finished  in  Christ,  so
will  all  the  pains  of  the  body  be  completed  when  the
seventh  and  last  vial  shall  be  poured  into  the  air,  and


232  EECTURE   XV.

cleanse  the  atmosphere  from  all  noxious  vapors,  pes-
tilence, and  death.  "  Then  shall  the  sanctuary  be
cleansed,"  and  then  will  the  great  voice  from  the  throne
say,  It  is  done.  These  old  heavens  and  this  old  earth
will  have  passed  away,  and  the  New  Jerusalem  come
"  down  from  God  out  of  heaven,  prepared  as  a  bride
adorned  for  her  husband,"  Rev.  xxi.  3 — 6.

"  And  I  heard  a  great  voice  out  of  heaven,  saying,  Be-
hold, the  tabernacle  of  God  is  with  men,  and  he  will  dwell
with  them,  and  they  shall  be  his  people,  and  God  himself
shall  be  with  them  and  be  their  God,  and  God  shall  wipe
away  all  tears  from  their  eyes ;  and  there  shall  be  no
more  death,  neither  sorrow  nor  crying,  neither  shall  there
be  any  more  pain,  for  the  former  things  are  passed  away.
And  he  that  sat  upon  the  throne  said,  Behold,  I  make  all
things  new.  And  he  said  unto  me,  Write ;  for  these
words  are  true  and  faithful.  And  he  said  unto  me,  It  is
done."  Here  we  have  the  same  expression  as  in  our
text,  having  the  same  identical  meaning,  the  same  "  great
voice,"  in  one  as  in  the  other ;  the  same  throne,  and  the
same  voice  speaking,  alluding  to  the  same  period  of  time
when  the  old  things  are  done  away  and  the  new  heavens
are  finished,  to  the  same  point  in  prophecy,  "  the  end."
Therefore,  as  we  have  passed  the  sixth  vial,  the  seventh
and  last  hangs  trembling  in  the  air.  The  drops  of  this
vial  are  already  contaminating  the  minds  of  men ;  already
wo  see  the  unclean  spirit  going  forth  ;  the  great  city  is
being  divided,  and  the  signs  of  the  heavens  denote  a
moral  conflict,  and  on  the  earth  a  speedy  revolution.

Then,  my  friends,  let  us  be  wise ;  let  us  make  peace
with  Him  who  has  power  to  save  or  to  destroy.  For  we
learn  by  our  subject  that  the  world  and  worldly  scenes
are  passing  away;  every  vestige  of  mortal  grandeur,
every  form  of  carnal  pride,  every  fashion  of  human  glory
will  soon  be  eclipsed  by  the  grandeur  of  that  great  white
throne  from  whose  face  the  heavens  and  earth  will  flee
away,  and  the  great  voice  from  the  throne  will  sound
the  last  requiem,  "  It  is  done."

11  Yet  when  the  sound  shall  tear  the  skies,

And  lightning  burn  the  globe  below,
Saints,  you  may  lift  your  joyful  eyes  ;

There's  a  new  heaven  and  earth  for  you."


LECTURE    XVI.


MATT.  xxv.  1.


Then  shall  the  kingdom  of  heaven  be  likened  unto  ten  virgins
which  took  their  lamps  and  went  forth  to  meet  the  bridegroom.

Parables  are  always  given  to  illustrate  some  doc-
trine or  subject  which  the  speaker  wishes  to  communi-
cate, and  is  an  easy  or  familiar  manner  of  making  his
hearers  or  readers  understand  the  subject,  and  receive
a  lasting  impression.  Nothing  has  so  good  an  effect  on
the  mind  as  to  teach  by  parables  moral  precepts  or
spiritual  truths.  In  this  way  we  are  taught  by  visible
things,  or  familiar  objects,  to  realize,  in  some  measure,
the  truths  and  subjects  presented.  This  was  the  man-
ner Christ  taught  his  disciples  and  followers,  that  their
memories  might  the  more  easily  retain,  and  be  often
refreshed,  when  they  beheld  any  scene  like  the  repre-
sentation of  the  parable ;  and  in  this  way,  they  might
always  keep  in  view  the  important  truth  that  is  likened
to  the  parable.  A  parable,  rightly  applied  and  clear-
ly understood,  gives  good  instruction,  and  is  a  lasting
illustration  of  the  truth.  But  if  we  apply  the  parable
wrong,  if  we  put  on  a  false  construction,  it  will  serve
to  lead  us  into  an  error,  and  blind  us,  instead  of  produ-
cing light, —  as  Christ  said  of  the  Pharisees,  he  spa.ke
to  them  in  parables,  that,  "  seeing,  they  might  see  and
not  perceive,  and  hearing,  they  might  hear  and  not  un-
derstand." Men  often  explain  parables  by  fancy,  to
suit  their  own  notions,  without  any  evidence  but  their
own  ingenuity ;  and  bv  this  means  there  will  be  as  many
20  *


234  LECTURE    XVI.

different  explanations  as  there  are  ingenious  men.  But
I  dare  not  trifle  thus  with  the  word  of  God:  if  we  can*
not,  by  the  word  of  God,  explain,  we  had  better  leave
the  same  as  we  find  it,  and  not  attempt  what  must  only-
result  in  guess-work  at  last ;  but  follow  Scripture  rule,
and  we  cannot  get  far  from  the  truth.  Christ  has  given
us  rules  by  which  to  explain  parables,  by  explaining
some  himself.  The  explanations  given  by  Christ  of  the
parable  of  the  tares  and  the  wheat,  is  a  rule  that  will
bear  in  about  all  cases.  That  he  has  given  rules,  is
very  evident  in  his  answer  to  his  disciples,  when  they
asked  him  concerning  his  parables.  Mark  iv.  13,  "And
he  said  unto  them,  Know  ye  not  this  parable  ?  How,
then,  will  ye  know  all  parables  ?"  That  is,  if  ye  under-
stand how  I  explain  this  parable,  you  will  know  how  to
explain  all  others ;  but  if  you  do  not  understand  how  I
explain  this,  you  cannot  explain  all  others."  This  is  the
rule.  Christ  made  all  the  prominent  parts  of  a  parable
figures ;  such  as  the  sower,  Son  of  man ;  good  seed,
children  of  the  kingdom ;  tares,  children  of  the  wicked
one  ;  harvest,  end  of  the  world ;  reapers,  the  angels  ;  "  as,
therefore,  the  tares  are  gathered  and  burned,  so  shall
it  be  in  the  end  of  the  world,"  &c.  Here  is  a  sample ;
good  seed,  tares,  harvest,  and  reapers,  are  figures  rep-
resenting other  things,  as  we  have  shown.  "  But  how,"
say  you,  "  shall  we  always  know  what  these  figures  rep-
resent ?  "  I  answer,  By  the  explanation  given  in  other
parts  of  the  Bible.  For  the  word  of  God  is  its  own
expositor,  or  it  can  be  of  no  manner  of  use  to  us ;  for
if  we  have  to  apply  to  any  other  rule,  to  explain  the
Bible,  then,  the  other  rule  would  be  tantamount,  and
have  a  precedence,  and  the  Bible  must  fall  of  course.
But  it  is  not  so.  Then,  to  explain  our  subject,  I
shall,

I.  Show   what  is  meant  by  the  figures  used  in  the
parable.

II.  The  time  to   which  this   parable   is   applicable,
and,

III.  Make  an  application  of  our  subject.

I.   I  will  explain  the  figures  in  the  parable ;  and,  1st,
tt  kingdom  of  heaven"  means  the  gospel  day,  or  circle


Christ's  second  coming.  235

of  God's  government  under  the  gospel  dispensation,
This  I  shall  prove  by  the  word  of  God.  Matt.  iii.  I,  2,
"  In  those  days  came  John  the  Baptist,  preaching  in  the
wilderness  of  Judea,  and  saying,  Repent  ye,  for  the
kingdom  of  heaven  is  at  hand."  That  is,  the  gospel
day  is  come.  Again :  "  Jesus  came  into  Galilee  preach-
ing the  gospel  of  the  kingdom  of  God,  saying,  The
time  is  fulfilled,  and  the  kingdom  of  God  is  at  hand."
Luke  xvi.  16,  "  The  law  and  the  prophets  were  until
John;  since  that  time  the  kingdom  of  God  is  preached."
That  is,  the  gospel  day  commenced  with  John,  since
which  time  the  gospel  is  preached.

"  Ten  virgins  "  means  mankind  in  general,  in  a  pro-
bationary state,  liable  to  be  wooed  and  betrothed  to  the
Lord,  under  the  gospel,  and  during  the  gospel  day.  See
Isaiah  lxii.  1 — 5,  "  For  as  a  young  man  marrieth  a  vir-
gin, so  shall  thy  sons  marry  thee  ;  and  as  the  bridegroom
rejoiceth  over  the  bride,  so  shall  thy  God  rejoice  over
thee."  It  is  evident,  by  the  second  verse,  that  Gentiles
and  Jews  are  both  included  in  this  prophecy.

"Five  wise  virgins"  is  a  figure  of  believers  in  God,
or  the  children  of  the  kingdom.  Psalms  xlv.  13,  14,
"  The  king's  daughter  is  all  glorious  within ;  her  cloth-
ing is  of  wrought  gold.  She  shall  be  brought  unto  the
king  in  raiment  of  needle- work ;  the  virgins,  her  com-
panions that  follow  her,  shall  be  brought  unto  thee."
"  That  I  might  comfort  thee,  O  virgin  daughter  of  Zion."
Lam.  ii.  13.

"  Five  foolish"  represents  the  unbelieving  class  of  man-
kind, while  in  this  probationary  state,  under  the  means
of  grace.  This  will  be  sufficiently  proved  by  the  fol-
lowing passages  —  Isa.  xlvii.  1,  "Come  down, and  sit  in
the  dust,  O  virgin  daughter  of  Babylon ;  sit  on  the
ground ;  there  is  no  throne,  O  daughter  of  the  Chal-
deans." Jer.  xivi.  11,  "O  virgin,  the  daughter  of
Egypt :  in  vain  shalt  thou  use  many  medicines ;  for
thou  shalt  not  be  cured."  These  texts  prove,  beyond
a  doubt,  that  the  wicked  class  of  men  are  called  virgins
by  the  Scriptures.

"  Lamps  "  is  a  figure  of  the  word  of  God ;  for  that
only  can  tell  us  about  the  New  Jerusalem :   that  only


236  LECTURE     XVI.

can  inform  us  when  Christ  will  come  again  to  the  mar-
riage supper  of  the  Lamh.  The  word  of  God  is  the
means  of  moral  light,  to  light  our  steps  through  moral
darkness,  up  to  the  coming  of  the  bridegroom  to  receive
the  bride  unto  himself.  This  I  shall  prove  by  the  cxix.
Psalm,  I  05,  "  Thy  word  is  a  lamp  to  my  feet,  and  a  light
to  my  path."  Also,  Prov.  vi.  23,  "  For  the  command-
ment is  a  lamp,  and  the  law  is  light ;  and  reproofs  of
instruction  are  the  way  of  life."

"  Oil "  is  a  representation  or  emblem  of  faith ;  as  oil
produces  light  by  burning,  so  does  faith,  in  exercise  by
the  fire  of  love,  produce  more  light,  and  gives  comfort
in  adversity,  hope  in  darkness,  love  for  the  coming
bridegroom ;  and  the  light  of  faith  assists  us  to  watch
for  his  coming,  and  to  know  the  time  of  night,  and  to
go  out  to  meet  him :  such  are  called  the  children  of
light,  because  they  are  believers,  children  of  faith,
"  sons  of  oil."  "  Because  of  the  savor  of  thy  good  oint-
ments, thy  name  is  as  ointment  poured  forth ;  therefore
do  the  virgins  love  thee,"  Sol.  Song,  i.  2.  "Faith
works  by  love."  See  1  John  ii.  27,  "  But  the  anointing
which  ye  have  received  of  him,  abideth  in  you ;  and  ye
need  not  that  any  man  teach  you;  but  as  the  same
anointing  teacheth  you  of  all  things,  and  is  truth,  and  is
no  lie,  and  even  as  it  hath  taught  you,  ye  shall  abide  in
him."  It  is  evident,  that  the  anointing  here,  and
elsewhere  spoken  of,  means  fai|h,  faith  in  his  name,
&c.

"Vessels"  represent  the  persons  or  mind  that  be-
lieves or  disbelieves  in  the  word  of  God,  as  in  1  Thess.
iv.  4,  "That  every  one  of  you  should  know  how  to  pos-
sess his  vessel  in  sanctification  and  honor."  Also,  2
Tim.  ii.  21,  "  If  any  man,  therefore,  purge  himself  from
these,  he  shall  be  a  vessel  unto  honor."

" Bridegroom"  is  the  figurative  name  for  Christ;  as
the  prophet.  Isaiah  says,  "And  as  a  bridegroom  rejoiceth
over  the  bride,  so  shall  thy  God  rejoice  over  thee."  And
Christ  says,  "  How  can  the  children  of  the  bride-cham-
ber mourn,  while  the  bridegroom  is  with  them  ?  "  alluding
to  himself.  This  proves  that  Christ  means  himself,  in
person,  by  the  bridegroom  in  the  parable.


Christ's  second  coming.  237

"  The  door  was  shut,"  implies  the  closing  up  of  the
mediatorial  kingdom,  and  finishing  the  gospel  period.
1  shall  prove  this  by  Luke  xiii.  25 — 28,  "  When  once
the  master  of  the  house  is  risen  up,  and  hath  shut  to  the
door,  and  ye  begin  to  stand  without,  and  to  knock  at  the
door,  saying,  Lord,  Lord,  open  unto  us ;  and  he  shall
answer  and  say  unto  you,  I  know  ye  not  whence  ye  are
Then  shall  ye  begin  to  say,  We  have  eaten  and  drunken
in  thy  presence,  and  thou  hast  taught  in  our  streets.
But  he  shall  say,  I  tell  you  I  know  you  not  whence  ye
are ;  depart  from  me,  all  ye  workers  of  iniquity  ;  there
shall  be  weeping  and  gnashing  of  teeth."

"  Marriage  "  is  the  time  when  Christ  shall  come  the
second  time  without  sin  unto  salvation  ;  gather  his  elect
from  the  four  winds  of  heaven,  where  they  have  been
scattered  during  the  dark  and  cloudy  day ;  when  he
comes  to  be  glorified  in  his  saints,  and  to  be  admired  in
all  them  that  believe ;  when  the  bride  hath  made  herself
ready,  and  the  marriage  of  the  Lamb  is  come,  then  he
will  present  her  to  his  Father  without  spot  or  wrinkle,
and  there  marry  the  bride  before  his  Father  and  the  holy
angels  ;  removes  her  into  the  New  Jerusalem  state,  seats
her  upon  the  throne  of  his  glory,  where  she  will  ever  be
with  the  Lord.  When  this  takes  place,  the  whole  body
will  be  present;  the  whole  church  must  be  there,  not  a
member  missing,  not  a  finger  out  of  joint.  She  will  be
perfect  in  beauty,  all  over  glorious.  See  Rev.  xix.  7 — 9,
"  Let  us  rejoice  and  be  glad,  and  give  honor  to  him,  for
the  marriage  of  the  Lamb  is  come,  and  his  wife  hath
made  herself  ready.  And  to  her  was  granted  that  she
should  be  arrayed  in  fine  linen,  clean  and  white,  for  the
fine  linen  is  the  righteousness  of  saints.  And  he  said
unto  me,  Write,  Blessed  are  they  which  are  called  to  the
marriage  supper  of  the  Lamb."  Daniel  says,  "  Blessed
is  he  that  waiteth  and  cometh  to  the  1335  days."  John
says,  "  Blessed  and  holy  is  he  that  hath  part  in  the  first
resurrection."  All  these  are  at  one  and  the  same  time ;
and  how  can  we  expect  to  be  free  from  sorrow,  mourning,
and  tears,  until  the  bridegroom  comes  and  moves  us  into
the  beloved  city  ?  Rev.  xxi.  2 — 4,  "  And  I  John  saw  the
holy  city,  New  Jerusalem,  coming  down  from  God  out


238  LECTURE    XVI.

of  heaven,  prepared  as  a  bride  adorned  for  her  husband.
And  I  heard  a  great  voice  out  of  heaven,  saying,  Behold,
the  tabernacle  of  God  is  with  men,  and  he  will  dwell
with  them,"  &c.

"  Midnight  cry  "  is  the  watchmen,  or  some  of  them,
who  by  the  word  of  God  discover  the  time  as  revealed,
and  immediately  give  the  warning  voice,  "  Behold,  the
bridegroom  cometh ;  go  ye  out  to  meet  him."  This  has
been  fulfilled  in  a  most  remarkable  manner.  One  or  two
on  every  quarter  of  the  globe  have  proclaimed  the  news,
and  agree  in  the  time  —  Wolf,  of  Asia ;  Irwin,  late  of
England ;  Mason,  of  Scotland ;  Davis,  of  South  Carolina ;
and  quite  a  number  in  this  region  are,  or  have  been,  giv-
ing the  cry.  And  will  not  you  all,  my  brethren,  examine
and  see  if  these  things  are  so,  and  trim  your  lamps,  and
be  found  ready  ?

"  Trimming  the  lamps."  You  will  recollect,  my
friends,  that  the  word  of  God  is  the  lamp.  To  trim  a
lamp  is  to  make  it  give  light,  more  light,  and  clearer
light.  In  the  first  place,  to  translate  the  Bible  would
make  it  give  light,  in  all  languages  into  which  it  should
be  translated.  Then,  to  send  to  or  give  every  family  in
the  known  world  a  Bible  would  make  the  Bible  give
more  light.  And  thirdly,  to  send  out  true  servants  of  God
who  have  made  the  Bible  their  study,  and  true  teachers,
who  would  teach  the  holy  precepts  and  doctrines  con-
tained therein,  and  to  employ  many  Sabbath  school
teachers,  would  in  the  hands  of  God  be  the  means  of  its
giving  clearer  light.  This  would  be  trimming  the  lamp ;
and  so  far  as  the  foolish  virgins  assisted  in  translating
the  Scriptures,  in  sending  them  among  all  nations,  and
employing  missionaries  and  teachers  to  teach  mankind
its  principles,  so  far  would  they  trim  their  lamp  ;  but  if
they  had  no  faith  in  it,  their  light  would  be  darkness,
and  the  lamp  to  .them  would  go  out.  If  the  friend  of
the  bridegroom  should  proclaim  the  approach  of  him
whom  they  all  expected,  and  should  prove  it  ever  so
plain  by  the  lamp,  but  having  no  faith,  the  lamp  would
go  out ;  they  would  not  be  ready  to  enter  in  to  the  mar-
riage supper,  and  the  door  would  be  shut  This  is  un-
doubtedly the  meaning  which  Christ  intends  to  convey
in  this  parable.     I  shall,  therefore,  show.


Christ's  second  coming.  239

II.   The  time  this  parable  is  applicable  to.

In  the  chapter  previous  our  Savior  had  answered  three
questions  which  his  disciples  had  put  to  him  on  the
mount  of  Olives,  when  they  came  to  him  privately,  "say-
ing, Tell  us,  when  shall  these  things  be  ? "  That  is,
when  Jerusalem  should  be  levelled  with  the  ground.
"  And  what  shall  be  the  sign  of  thy  coming  ?  "  That  is,
his  second  coming  in  the  clouds  of  heaven  with  power
and  great  glory,  as  he  had  before  informed  them,  which
is  yet  future.  "  And  of  the  end  of  the  world,"  or,  as  some
translate  it,  "  end  of  the  age,"  to  which  I  am  perfectly
willing  to  agree  ;  but  what  age  ?  is  the  question.  1
answer,  The  gospel  age,  or  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  See
14th  verse,  "  This  gospel  of  the  kingdom  shall  be
preached  in  all  the  world  for  a  witness  unto  all  nations ;
and  then  shall  the  end  come."  "  The  law  and  the
prophets  were  until  John,  since  which  time  the  kingdom
of  heaven  is  preached."  The  Jewish  economy  is  no
where  called  the  kingdom  of  heaven ;  but  this  expres-
sion belongs  exclusively  to  the  gospel ;  and  of  course  any
age  in  which  the  gospel  or  kingdom  of  heaven  is  preached
can  never  be  applied  to  the  Jewish  age.  Any  nov-
ice in  Scripture  interpretation  must  readily  admit  this.
These  were  the  questions  proposed  by  the  disciples  to
their  divine  Master,  and  were  answered  in  the  following
manner :  From  the  4th  to  the  14th  verses  inclusive  of
the  24th  chapter  of  Matthew,  Christ  informs  his  disciples
of  the  troubles,  trials,  persecutions,  and  distress  which
they  and  his  followers  should  suffer,  down  to  the  end  of
the  gospel  age.  He  also  informs  them  by  what  means
they  must  suffer  —  by  false  brethren,  by  deceit,  by  Avars,
rumors  of  wars,  clashing  of  nations,  earthquakes,  afflic-
tions, death,  hatred,  offences,  betrayals,  false  prophets,
coldness,  iniquity,  famines,  and  pestilence,  and  these  to
the  end  of  the  gospel  age.  From  the  15th  to  the  22d
inclusive  he  alludes  to  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem,  and
particularly  gives  his  followers  warning  of  what  they
shall  suffer,  and  informs  them  what  to  do  at  that  time ;
he  tells  them  what  to  pray  for,  and  how  to  escape  from
the  siege,  and  how  to  avoid  certain  consequences  which
must  follow  this  great  tribulation.


240  LECTURE    XVI.

From  the  23d  to  the  28th  inclusive,  he  warns  his  dis-
ciples against  the  error  that  false  teachers  would  promul-
gate, that  Christ  did  or  would  come  at  the  destruction  of
Jerusalem.  He  told  them  plainly  to  "  believe  it  not,"  for
his  second  coming  would  be  as  visible  as  the  lightning,
and  then  every  man  would  be  gathered  to  his  own  com-
pany ;  so  there  would  be  no  room  for  deceit.

In  the  29th  verse  he  prophesies  of  the  rise  of  anti-
Christ,  the  darkness  and  fall  of  many  into  superstition
and  error,  and  the  persecution  of  the  true  church.  30th
and  31st  verse,  He  gives  a  sign  of  his  coming,  the
mourning  of  the  tribes  of  the  earth,  and  then  speaks  of
his  coming  and  what  he  will  do.  32,  Is  the  parable  of
the  figtree.  33,  He  enforces  it  by  saying,  "  So  likewise
ye,  when  ye  shall  see  all  these  things,  know  that  it  is
near,  even  at  the  door."  34th  and  35th  verses,  He  gives
his  disciples  a  comfortable  promise,  which  was  to  this
amount,  that  his  children  should  not  be  all  destroyed
from  the  earth.  But  "  this  generation  shall  not  pass  till
all  these  things  be  fulfilled."  To  prove  the  word  gener-
ation is  so  used,  I  will  refer  you  to  Psalm  xxii.  30,  "  A
seed  shall  serve  him ;  it  shall  be  accounted  to  the  Lord
for  a  generation."  1  Peter  ii.  9,  "  A  chosen  generation,
a  royal  priesthood,  a  holy  nation."  The  word  genera-
tion, in  the  Scriptures,  when  used  in  the  singular,  I  be-
lieve almost  invariably  means  the  children  of  one  parent ;
as  the  generation  of  Adam,  children  of  Adam,  chosen
generation,  children  of  God,  generation  of  vipers,
children  of  the  devil.  So  Christ,  talking  to  his  children,
and  instructing  them  only,  says,  "  This  generation  shall
not  pass  till  all  these  things  be  fulfilled.  Heaven  and
earth  shall  pass  away,  but  my  words  shall  not  pass
away."  His  kingdom  shall  not  be  destroyed  nor  given
to  another  people,

36th  verse,  He  informs  his  disciples  that  the  day  and
hour  of  his  coming  is  known  only  to  God,  has  never  been
revealed,  meaning  day  and  hour  only,  whether  at  mid-
night, at  cock  crowing,  or  in  the  morning.

Verses  37 — 44,  inclusive,  He  informs  them  that  his
coming  will  be  like  the  deluge ;  unexpected  to  the
wicked,  as  then.     He  tells  them  the  manner  ;  that  he  will


Christ's  second  coming.  241

separate  the  righteous  from  the  wicked ;  one  shall  be
taken  and  another  left.  He  then  gives  them  a  charge  to
watch,  and  repeats,  "  they  know  not  the  hour."  Christ
illustrates  his  warning  by  the  figure  of  the  good  man  of
the  house,  and  then  charges  them  to  be  also  ready,  as
the  good  man  would,  if  he  knew  in  what  watch  the  thief
would  come,  showing  us  plainly  that  all  true  believers
will  know  near  the  time,  as  Paul  says,  "  But  ye,  brethren,
are  not  in  darkness,  that  that  day  shall  overtake  you  as
a  thief."

From  45 — 47,  he  tell  us  of  the  faithful  and  wise  ser-
vant who  watches  and  gives  warning  of  his  coming,  and
speaks  of  the  blessings  that  servant  shall  inherit  when
he  comes  and  finds  him  so  doing.

48 — 51,  Christ  gives  us  the  marks  of  an  evil  servant :  1st
mark,  he  will  "  say  in  his  heart,  My  Lord  delayeth  his
coming."  He  may  not  preach  or  speak  against  Christ's
coming ;  no,  he  will  only  say  it  to  himself.  But  he  will
not  say  he  will  never  come  ;  no,  he  will  only  think  in  his
heart,  "My  Lord  delayeth  his  coming."  When  he
hears  the  voice  of  the  faithful  servant  saying,  "  Behold,
the  bridegroom  cometh,"  he  will  say  nothing  in  public
against  it ;  no,  not  so  bad  as  that.  Neither  will  he  say
any  thing  in  favor  of  the  cry  ;  but  mutter  in  his  heart,
"  My  Lord  delayeth  his  coming."  The  second  mark,
"  And  shall  begin  to  smite  his  fellow-servants."  It  does
not  say  he  will  beat  and  bruise  his  fellow-servants,  or
the  faithful  servant  who  watches  and  cries ;  but  he  shall
begin  to  smite,  &c,  meaning  he  will  begin  the  persecu-
tion, set  others  on,  and  himself  he  will  keep  back,  in  his
heart  deceitful.  3d  mark,  a  And  to  eat  and  drink  with
the  drunken."  To  eat  and  drink  with  the  drunken —  it
does  not  say  he  gets  drunk ;  no,,  it  only  says  he  eats  and
drinks  with  them  that  are  so.  By  this  I  understand  he
fellowships  with  them,  and  is  engaged  in,  and  employs
his  time,  his  talents,  his  mind,  to  build  up  some  popular
and  worldly  object,  which  men  of  the  world  would  be
pleased  in  promoting.  He  courts  popular  applause ;  he
seeks  to  please  men  more  than  God.  "  The  Lord  of  that
servant  will  come  in  a  day  when  he  looketh  not  for  him,
and  in  an  hour  he  is  not  aware  of.  And  shall  cut  him
21


242  LECTURE    XVI.

asunder,  and  appoint  him  his  portion  with  the  hypocrites ;
there  shall  be  weeping  and  gnashing  of  teeth."

"  Then  shall  the  kingdom  of  heaven  be  likened  unto
ten  virgins,  which  took  their  lamps  and  went  forth  to
meet  the  bridegroom."  I  think  we  cannot  be  mistaken
in  the  application  of  this  parable.  "  Then,"  that  is,  at
the  time  when  the  wise  servants  are  looking  for  and
proclaiming  his  coming,  and  when  the  evil  servant  says
in  his  heart,  My  Lord  delayeth  his  coming.  Then,  too,
when  he  will  come,  and  they  that  are  ready  go  in  to  the
marriage,  and  the  door  is  shut.  This  must  mean  the
time  when  Christ  comes  to  judgment,  for  he  cuts  off  the
evil  servant,  and  appoints  him  his  portion,  and  shuts  the
door  against  the  foolish  virgins  ;  and  when  they  knock,  he
opens  not,  bat  tells  them,  I  know  you  not.

Where,  then,  is  the  millennium  ?  say  some.  After  the
judgment  sits,  and  not  before;  after  the  bridegroom
comes,  and  the  beloved  city  is  completed ;  when  Christ
shall  move  his  saints  home,  and  live  and  reign  with  them
on  the  new  heavens  and  new  earth,  wherein  dwelleth
righteousness.  If  there  could  have  been  a  millennium
before  Christ  should  come  and  gather  his  saints  into  one
body,  it  must  be  a  very  imperfect  one.  A  part  of  the
body  in  heaven,  a  part  in  the  earth,  and  the  remainder
under  the  earth ;  separated,  divided,  wounded,  and  torn
by  enemies  and  death,  absent  from  our  head.  No,  it
cannot  be ;  if  in  this  life  only  we  have  hope,  we  are  of
all  men  most  miserable.  If  we  are  to  have  a  temporal
millennium,  why  did  not  our  Savior  mention  it  on  the
mount  of  Olives,  as  preceding  his  coming?  He  did
not,  neither  has  any  of  the  apostles ;  but  all  speak  of
troublous  times,  departure  from  the  faith,  iniquity
abounding,  and  the  love  of  many  waxing  cold  in  the
latter  days.  Our  parable,  to  which  we  are  now  attend-
ing, says,  at  midnight  there  was  a  cry  made,  Behold,  the
bridegroom  cometh  ;  go  ye  out  to  meet  him.  "At  mid-
night;" this  teaches  us  that  at  the  time  of  his  coming
there  will  be  much  apathy  and  darkness  on  this  subject;
that  is  the  coming  of  the  bridegroom.  The  parable  im-
plies the  same.  "  For  while  the  bridegroom  tarried,  they
all  slumbered  and  slept."     Can  we  not  bear  witness  that


Christ's  second  coming.  243

tkni  has  been  the  true  state  of  the  church  fox  a  number
of  /ears  past  ?  The  writers  on  the  word  of  God  have
adopted  in  their  creeds,  that  there  would  be  a  temporal
millennium  before  Christ  would  come.  I  call  it  temporal,
because  they  have  all  of  them  taught  that  it  would  be  in
this  state  of  things,  not  in  an  immortal  state,  neither  in
a  glorified  state  ;  and  that  Christians  would  have  all
kingdoms  under  their  control ;  that  is,  in  a  temporal
sense  ;  and  that  they  would  be  married  and  given  in
marriage,  until  the  coming  of  Christ  after  this  1000
years,  or,  as  some  say,  360,000  years.  This  has  been,
and  is  yet,  the  prevailing  opinion  among  our  standard
writers  and  great  men.  No  wonder,  Christ  says,  they
will  say  in  their  hearts,  My  Lord  delayeth  his  coming,
and  that  the  wise  and  foolish  are  all  sleeping  and  slum-
bering on  this  important  subject.  For  while  we  look
for  a  temporal  kingdom,  behold,  he  cometh  and  destroys
all  that  is  perishable,  all  that  is  temporal,  and  erects
upon  these  a  new  heaven  and  a  new  earth,  which  is  im-
mortal, and  that  fadeth  not  away,  eternal  in  the  heavens.
I  shall  now,

III.  Make  an  application  of  our  subject.  And,
1st  The  time  of  the  fulfilment  of  this  parable  i?
evidently  come,  in  part  at  least.  The  world  for  a  num-
ber of  years  have  been  trimming  their  lamps,  and  the
wise  and  foolish  have  been  engaged  in  translating  the
word  of  God  into  almost  every  language  known  unto  us
upon  the  earth.  Mr.  Judson  tells  us  that  it  has  been
translated  into  one  hundred  and  fifty  languages  within
thirty  years  ;  that  is,  three  times  the  number  of  all  the
translations  known  to  us  before.  Then  fourfold  light
has  been  shed  among  the  nations,  within  the  short  period
of  the  time  above  specified  ;  and  we  are  informed  that  a
part  if  not  all  of  the  word  of  God  is  now  given  to  all
nations  in  their  own  language.  This,  surely,  is  setting
the  word  of  life  in  a  conspicuous  situation,  that  it  may
give  light  to  all  in  the  world.  This  has  not  been  done
by  the  exertions  of  Christians  or  professors  only,  but  by
the  aid  of  all  classes  and  societies  of  men.  Kings  have
opened  their  coffers,  and  favored  those  engaged  in  the
work :  nobles  have  used  their  influence,  and  have  cast


244  LECTURE    XVI.

into  the  treasury  of  the  Lord  of  their  abundance ;  rich
men  have  bestowed  of  their  riches  ;  and  in  many  cases
the  miser  has  forgot  his  parsimony,  the  poor  have  re-
plenished the  funds  of  the  Lord's  house,  and  the  widow-
has  cast  in  her  mite.  How  easy  to  work  the  work  of
the  Lord  when  the  hearts  of  men  are  made  willing  by  his
power  I  But  shall  we  forget  those  who  have  forsaken
the  land  of  their  fathers,  the  home  of  their  nativity,  and
have  spent  lonesome  years  of  toil  among  strangers,  yes,
worse  than  strangers,  among  heathen  idolaters,  and  the
savage  of  the  wilderness,  in  the  cold  regions  of  the
north,  and  under  the  scorching  rays  of  a  vertical  sun,
among  the  suffocating  sands  of  the  desert,  or  in  the
pestilential  atmosphere  of  India ;  who  have  risked  their
lives  to  learn  a  language,  and  prepare  themselves  to
trim  a  lamp  for  those  who  sit  in  darkness  and  the  shadow
of  death  ?  No,  we  will  not  forget  them ;  the  prayers
of  thousands  have  ascended  before  the  golden  altar,
morning  and  evening,  on  their  behalf,  and  Israel's  God
has  been  their  protector.  Surely  we  may  hope  that
these  have  oil  in  their  lamps,  who  have  sacrificed  so
much  to  bestow  a  lamp  upon  others.  But  remember,
my  brethren,  the  Lord  he  is  God,  and  let  him  have  all
the  glory.  This  is  the  time,  and  the  same  time  that
G  abriel  informed  Daniel,  "  many  should  run  to  and  fro,
and  knowledge  should  increase."  This,  too,  is  the  same
time  when  the  angel  flying  through  the  midst  of  heaven
had  the  everlasting  gospel  to  preach  to  them  who  dwelt
upon  the  earth.  Here  are  Christ's  words  fulfilled,  where
he  says,  "  And  this  gospel  of  the  kingdom  shall  be
preached  in  all  the  world  for  a  witness  unto  all  nations  ;
and  then  shall  the  end  come."

2dly.  It  is  plain  to  any  diligent  observer  of  the  signs
of  the  times,  that  all  the  societies  for  moral  reform  in
our  world  at  the  present  day  are  parts  of  the  fulfilment
of  the  parable,  giving  more  light.  What  of  our  Bible
societies?  Are  not  these  trimming  the  lamp  for  mil-
lions of  human  beings  ?  Thirty  years  past,  more  than
three  fourths  of  the  families  in  what  we  call  Christian
lands  were  without  the  lamp  of  life,  and  now  nearly  all
supplied.    Many  of  those  who  sat  in  heathenish  dark-


Christ's  second  coming.  ^45

ness  then,  are  now  rejoicing  in  the  light  of  God's  b*ook,
And  much  of  this  has  been  performed  through  the  in-
strumentality of  Bible  societies,  and  not  only  through
the  agency  of  the  church,  but  political  men,  men  of  the
world,  the  great  men,  merchants  of  the  earth  and  those
who  trade  in  ships,  all  who  live  under  the  influence  of
the  gospel,  the  "  kingdom  of  heaven,"  have  engaged  in
the  work.  Will  not  the  most  skeptical  acknowledge,
that  this  society  has  succeeded  beyond  the  most  sanguine
expectation  of  its  most  ardent  advocates  ?  And  is  not
this  strong  circumstantial  evidence  that  the  Bridegroom
is  near,  even  at  the  door  ?

3d.  The  missionary  societies  of  all  sects  and  denom-
inations, which  have  been  established  within  forty  years,
have  a.s  far  exceeded  all  former  exertions  of  this  kind  as
the  overflowing  Nile  does  the  waters  of  the  brook  Kid-
ron.  See  the  missionary  spirit  extending  from  east  to
west,  and  from  north  to  south,  warming  the  breast  of  the
philanthropist,  giving  life  and  vigor  to  the  cold-hearted
moralist,  and  animating  and  enlivening  the  social  cir-
cle of  the  pious  devotee.  Every  nation,  from  India  to
Oregon,  from  Kamtschatka  to  New  Zealand,  have  been
visited  by  these  wise  servants  (as  we  hope)  of  the  cross,
proclaiming  "  the  acceptable  year  of  the  Lord,  and  the
day  of  vengeance  of  our  God,"  carrying  the  lamp,  the
word  of  God  in  their  hands,  and  oil,  faith  in  God,  in
their  hearts.  All  classes  of  men  are  engaged  in  this
cause,  from  the  gray  hairs  of  old  age  down  to  the
sprightly  youth  of  ten  years.  Who,  then,  can  doubt  but
that  the  virgins  in  this  sense  have  and  are  trimming
their  lamps,  and  the  bride  is  making  herself  ready  ?
"  Go  ye  out  to  meet  him."

4th.  The  Sabbath  schools  and  Bible  classes  are  but  a
part  of  the  fulfilment  of  the  parable,  yet  clearly  an  evi-
dence that  the  virgins  are  now  trimming  their  lamps.
This  system  of  teaching  the  young  and  ignorant  took  its
rise  between  forty  and  fifty  years  since,  at  the  very  time
that  the  Christian  world  were  praying,  and  ardently
praying,  for  the  coming  of  Christ,  before  that  part  of  the
Savior's  prayer  was  forgotten,  "  Thy  kingdom  come."
From  a  little  fountain  this  stream  of  water  has  be-
21*


346  LECTURE    XVI.

coirfe  a  great  river,  and  encompassed  the  whole  land.
Every  quarter  of  the  globe  are  drinking  at  this  fountain
or  stream  of  knowledge,  and  the  youth  are  taught  to
trim  their  lamps.  And  when  the  bridegroom  shall  come,
may  we  not  reasonably  hope  that  the  thousands  of  the
young  men  and  young  women  who  have  assisted  in
giving  light  to  others,  may  be  found  having  oil  in  their
vessels,  and  their  lamps  trimmed  and  burning,  and  they
looking  and  waiting  for  the  coming  of  their  Master,  that
when  he  comes  they  may  rise  to  meet  him  in  the  air,
with  ten  thousand  of  their  pupils,  who  will  sing  the  new
song  in  the  New  Jerusalem  forever  and  ever  ?  Search
diligently,  my  young  friends,  and  see  to  it  that  ye  be-
lieve in  this  word,  "which  is  able  to  make  you  wise
unto  salvation."

5.  Tract  societies  are  of  much  use,  and  are  an  efficient
means  to  help  trim  the  lamps ;  like  snuffers  that  take
away  the  preventives  to  the  light,  so  are  tracts.  They
take  away  from  the  mind  the  prejudice  that  thousands
have  against  reading  the  word  of  God.  They  remove
those  rooted  and  groundless  opinions  which  many  have
that  they  cannot  understand  the  Bible ;  they  serve  to
excite  the  mind  to  this  kind  of  reading ;  they  enlighten
the  understanding  into  some  scriptural  truths  ;  they  are
pioneers,  in  many  instances,  to  conversion ;  they  can  be
sent  where  the  word  of  God  cannot  at  first  be  received ;
in  one  word,  they  are  the  harbingers  of  light,  the  fore-
runners of  the  Bible.  And  in  this,  too,  all  men  in  this
probationary  state  seem  to  be  more  or  less  engaged,
from  the  king  on  the  throne  down  to  the  poor  peasant
in  the  cottage,  writing,  printing,  folding,  transporting,
paying,  or  reading,  these  silent  little  messengers  of  the
virgins'  lamp.  "Then  all  those  virgins  arose  and
trimmed  their  lamps."  Has  not  God's  hand  been  seen
in  all  this  ?  Yes,  glory  be  to  him  who  hath  disposed
the  hearts  of  men  to  work  the  work  that  God  bids  them,
and  to  fulfil  the  blessed  word  which  he  hath  given
them.  This  institution  took  its  rise  about  the  same
time  with  the  Bible  society.

6.  Temperance  societies.  These  serve  one  purpose
in  trimming  the  lamps  and  preparing  the  way  for  the


Christ's  second  coming.  247

virgins  to  go  out  and  meet  the  Bridegroom.  Our  world,
twenty  years  ago,  might  be  called  a  world  of  fashionable
drunkards;  almost  all  men  drank  of  the  intoxicating
bowl,  and  thought  it  no  harm.  But  when  the  lamp  began
to  dart  its  rays  around  our  tabernacles,  it  was  found  by
woful  experience  that  those  who  drank  of  the  poisonous
cup  were  totally  and  wholly  unprepared  to  receive  the
warning  voice,  or  hear  the  midnight  cry,  "  Behold,  the
bridegroom  cometh."  No,  "they  that  were  drunken,
were  drunken  in  the  night,"  says  the  apostle.  "  There-
fore let  us  watch  and  be  sober."  And  Peter  tells  us,
"  But  the  end  of  all  things  is  at  hand  ;  be  ye  therefore
sober,  and  watch  unto  prayer."  How  foolish  would  it
have  been  for  a  drunken  man  to  be  set  on  a  watch,  or  a
praying  man  to  be  found  drunk !  Therefore,  in  order
that  men  might  be  in  a  suitable  frame  of  mind  to  receive
instruction  at  the  close  of  this  dispensation,  and  be  in  a
situation  to  listen  to  the  midnight  cry,  God  ordered  the
virgins,  and  they  arose  and  trimmed  their  lamps  ;  and  in
all  human  probability  thousands  who  would  have  met  a
drunkard's  grave  if  this  society  had  not  arose,  are  now
watching,  with  their  lamps  trimmed  and  burning,  ready
to  meet  the  Bridegroom  at  his  coming.  Perhaps  this
temperance  society  is  the  virgins'  last  resort.  The
Judge  stands  at  the  door ;  go  ye  out  to  meet  him.  This
society,  like  the  others  before  mentioned,  is  a  general
thing,  and  all  sects,  denominations,  and  classes  of  men
are  engaged  in  it,  and  it  has  an  important  influence
upon  all  men  who  are  in  this  probationary  state,  and
who  may  be  termed,  as  in  our  text,  "  virgins."  This
society  is  of  later  origin  than  the  others,  and  seems  to
be  a  rear  guard  to  wake  up  a  few  stragglers  which  the
other  societies  could  not  reach.  And  now,  drunkards,
is  your  time ;  Wisdom  stands  at  the  door  and  knocks  ;
let  go  the  intoxicating  bowl,  be  sober,  and  hear  the
midnight  cry,  "  Behold,  the  bridegroom  cometh."  For
your  souls'  sake  drink  not  another  draught,  lest  he  come
and  find  you  drunken,  "  and  that  day  come  upon  you
unawares,  and  find  you  sleeping."  O,  be  wise,  ye  in-
temperate men,  for  they  only  went  in  to  the  marriage
who    were   found  ready,  "and   the  door  was  shut*'


248  LECTURE    XVI.

"  Then  came  also  the  other  virgins,  saying,  Lord,  Lord,
open  to  us.  But  he  answered  and  said,  Verily,  I  say
unto  you,  I  know  you  not.  Watch,  therefore,  for  ye
know  neither  the  day  nor  the  hour  wherein  the  Son  of
Man  cometh."  "  But  the  Avise  shall  understand,"  says
Daniel,  xii.  10.

And  now,  my  Christian  friends,  let  me  inquire,  Are
your  lamps  trimmed  and  burning  ?  And  have  you  oil
in  your  vessels  ?  Are  you  prepared  for  the  coming
Bridegroom  ?  And  are  you  awake  to  this  important  sub-
ject ?  What  say  you  ?  If  this  parable,  to  which  I
have  directed  your  minds,  has  reference  to  the  last  day
and  the  coming  of  Christ ;  if  the  "  virgins  "has  reference
to  ail  men  in  this  probationary  state,  and  dividing  them
into  two  classes,  wise  and  foolish  ;  if  the  "  lamp  "  is  the
word  of  God,  and  "  oil"  means  faith  in  his  word,  or  grace
in  the  heart,  as  some  say,  —  then  my  conclusions  are
just,  and  the  evidence  is  strong  that  we  live  at  the  end
of  the  gospel  kingdom,  and  upon  the  threshold  of  the
glorified  state  of  the  righteous.  Then  examine  your
Bibles,  and  if  you  can  as  fairly  prove  any  other  exposi-
tion of  this  parable,  as  I  have  this,  then  believe  yours,
and  time  must  settle  the  issue  ;  but  if  you  can  find  noth-
ing in  the  Scriptures  to  controvert  plainly  my  explana-
tion, then  believe,  and  prepare  to  go  out  to  meet  the
Bridegroom;  for  behold  he  cometh.  Awake,  ye  fathers
and  mothers  in  Zion ;  you  have  long  looked  and  prayed
for  this  day.  Behold  the  signs !  He  is  near,  even  at
the  door.  And,  ye  children  of  God,  lift  up  your  heads
and  rejoice,  for  your  redemption  draweth  nigh.  For
these  things  have  begun  to  come  to  pass.  And  ye,
little  lambs  of  the  flock,  remember  Jesus  has  promised
to  carry  you  in  his  arms,  and  that  he  will  come  and
take  you  to  himself,  that  where  he  is  there  ye  may  be
also.  But  remember,  all  of  you,  the  wise  had  oil  in
their  lamps,  and  they  were  trimmed  and  burning.  Search
deep  ;  examine  yourselves  closely,  be  not  deceived  ;  and
may  the  Spirit  which  searcheth  all  things,  and  knoweth
what  is  in  the  mind  of  man,  assist  you.

But,  my  impenitent  friends,  what  shall  I  say  to  you  ?
Shall  I  say,  as  the  master  in  the  parable,  "  Behold,  the


Christ's  second  coming.  249

bridegroom  cometh :  go  ye  out  to  meet  him  "  ?  Prepare
to  meet  your  Judge.  Now  he  has  given  you  a  time  for
repentance  ;  you  have  had  a  probationary  season,  and
possibly  now  the  sceptre  of  mercy  is  held  out  to  you.
Repent,  or  it  will  soon  be  said  to  you  as  Jeremiah  said
to  the  virgin,  the  daughter  of  Egypt,  "  In  vain  shalt
thou  use  many  medicines  ;  for  thou  shalt  not  be  cured  ; "
or  as  in  the  parable,  "  I  know  you  not."  Have  you  no
oil  in  your  lamps  ?  Delay  not  a  moment ;  believe  the
gospel,  and  you  will  live  ;  believe  in  the  word  of  God ;
receive  the  love  of  the  Bridegroom,  and  make  no  delay  ;
for  while  they  went  to  buy,  the  bridegroom  came ;  and
they  that  were  ready  went  in  with  him  to  the  marriage,
and  the  door  was  shut  O,  think  what  must  be  the
exercise  of  your  minds  when  these  things  shall  be  real;
when  you  will  stand  without  and  knock,  saying,  Lord,
Lord,  open  unto  us.  Again  I  ask,  Will  you  repent,  be-
lieve, and  be  saved  ?  Are  you  determined  to  resist  the
truth  until  it  is  too  late  ?  Say,  sinner,  what  think  ye  ?
"  We  will  risk  the  consequence.  We  do  not  believe
in  your  day  you  tell  us  of.  The  world  is  the  same  it
always  was ;  no  change,  nor  ever  will  be ;  but  if  it
should  come,  it  will  not  this  ten  thousand  years  ;  not  in
our  day,  certainly.  You  do  not  believe  yourself.  If  you
did,  we  should  call  you  a  fool."

Are  these  your  arguments,  sinner  ?  Yes.  Well,  if  I
had  brought  no  more,  no  stronger  arguments  than  these,
I  would  not  blame  you  for  not  believing,  for  not  one  of
yours  can  you  or  have  you  supported  with  a  particle  of
proof.  They  are  mere  assertions  ;  your  believing  or  not
believing  will  not  alter  the  designs  of  God.  The  antedi-
luvians believed  not.  The  citizens  of  the  plain  laughed
at  the  folly  of  Lot.  And  where  are  they  now  ?  Suffer-
ing the  vengeance  of  eternal  fire.


LECTURE    XVII


LEVITICUS  xxvL  23,  24.

And  if  ye  will  not  be  reformed  by  me  by  these  things,  bat  will
walk  contrary  unto  me,  then  will  I  also  walk  contrary  unto  you,
and  will  punish  you  yet  seven  times  for  your  sins.


We  are  in  the  habit  of  reading  the  judgments  and
threatening  in  the  word  of  God,  as  denunciations  against
some  other  people  but  ourselves.  We  are  very  fond  of
throwing  back  upon  the  Jews  what,  upon  the  principle
of  equity  and  justice,  would  equally  belong  to  us  Gen-
tiles. By  this  mode  of  reasoning,  wicked,  unbelieving
idolaters,  murderers,  whoremongers,  adulterers,  and  all
liars,  may  and  do  resist  the  force  of  God's  word,  and  flat-
ter themselves,  in  their  lustful  career,  that  the  judgment
is  past,  and  that  they  may  go  on  in  sin  with  impunity.
But  it  is  not  only  this  abominable  class  of  mankind  who
pervert  the  word  of  God  to  their  own  condemnation,
but  many  of  those  who  profess  to  be  pious,  and  even
teachers  and  expounders  of  the  word,  do  take  the  same
unholy  ground,  to  limit  the  Holy  One  in  his  justice  and
judgment.  And  by  this  means  they  not  only  wrest  the
Scriptures  to  their  own  condemnation,  but  others,  who
follow  their  pernicious  ways,  are  led  into  the  same  er-
rors, and  the  way  of  truth  is  evil  spoken  of.

This  manner  of  expounding  Scripture  has  been  used
as  the  last  resort  against  my  appeals  to  the  heart  and
consciences  of  sinners,  to  prepare  to  meet  God  in  judg-
ment. Let  me  use  what  passage  I  please  in  the  Scrip-
tures, whether  in  the  Old  or  New  Testament,  these


Christ's  second  comins,  251

wicked,  lustful  flatterers  of  mankind,  are  ready,  with  a
host  of  learned  commentaries,  to  show  that  it  was  applied
to  the  Jews,  and  to  them  only  ;  and  then  taunt  me  with
this  witty  saying  —  "What!  you,  an  unlearned  man,
think  to  teach  us,  contrary  to  our  great  and  learned
commentators!"  This,  my  friends,  is  the  only  argu-
ment that  has  ever  been  produced  against  my  warnings,
and  proofs  of  God's  near  approach  to  judge  the  world  in
righteousness.  And  here,  too,  I  pledge  myself  to  show
that  many,  and  perhaps  that,  in  many  cases,  a  major  part,
of  these  commentators  are  on  my  side  of  the  question.
I  know  that,  in  the  subject  now  about  to  be  presented,
this  argument  will  be  used  —  "O!  that  had  reference  to
the  Jews  only ; "  and  you  will,  like  the  wicked  Jews,
put  far  off  the  evil  day,  until  you  are  caught  in  the  snare,
and  perish  in  the  pit.  The  Jews  in  the  days  of  the
prophets  said,  Ezek.  xii.  27,  "  The  vision  that  he  seeth
is  for  many  days  to  come,  and  he  prophesieth  of  the
times  that  are  far  off"  You  see,  in  this  sample  given
us  of  the  Jews,  that  the  same  ungodly,  wicked  pervert-
ing, putting  off  on  to  others  what  belongs  to  us  in  the
visions  and  threatening^  of  God  against  sin,  was  mani-
festly the  character  of  the  Jews  in  that  day,  as  it  is
in  ours.  The  difference  is  only  circumstantial.
They  put  it  off  a  great  while  to  come  ;  we,  a  great  while
back.  They  cast  it  forward  on  to  the  backs  of  the  Gen-
tiles ;  we  throw  it  back  into  the  faces  of  the  Jews.
This  is  the  wicked  disposition  of  man  m  his  natural
(state —  self-righteous  and  self-justificatory.  Therefore,
use  this  weapon  if  you  please;  it  will  only  discover  to
angels  and  men  your  true  character,  and  God's  justice
in  your  condemnation.  "He  that  covereth  his  sins
shall  not  prosper ;  but  whoso  confesseth  and  forsaketh
them  shall  have  mercy,"  Prov.  xxviii.  13.  Yet  we  shall
find  some  things,  at  least,  true, —  that  the  law  of  God
and  punishment  for  sin  are  the  same  in  all  ages,  and
will  be  the  same  in  all  eternity.  If  the  sins  of  the  old
world  brought  the  flood  and  destruction  upon  the  un-
godly, so  will  the  sins  of  the  present  world,  if  committed
in  the  same  ungodly  spirit,  bring  down  similar  judgments


252  LECTURE    XVII.

and  destruction  upon  us.  If  Sodom  and  Gomorrah,  and
the  cities  of  the  plain,  were  destroyed  for  their  abuse  of
the  blessings  which  God  had  given  them,  so  shall  we  be
destroyed  for  our  abuse  of  similar  ones.  And  if  the
Jews,  for  their  pride,  arrogance,  self-sufficiency,  idolatry,
and  departure  from  the  known  commands  of  God's  house,
were  punished  with  the  sword,  pestilence,  captivity  and
persecution ;  so,  most  assuredly,  will  the  people  of  God,
in  every  age,  whether  under  Jews  or  Gentiles,  suffer  the
like  or  similar  judgments.  This  can  be  proved  abun-
dantly in  all  parts  of  the  word  of  God,  and  in  the  history
of  the  church  in  every  age.  And  did  we  not  pervert
the  word  of  God  to  support  our  sectarian  principles,  and
to  gratify  our  lustful  appetites,  we  might  foresee  the
consequence  of  apostasy  from  God,  his  laws  and  com-
mands ;  as  we  can  foresee  the  effects  of  any  or  all  the
laws  of  nature,  with  which  we  are  so  well  acquainted.
When  leaves  put  forth  we  know  that  summer  is  nigh.
When  the  wind  blows  long  from  the  south  we  know  it
will  bring  rain.  Just  so  true  are  all  the  moral  laws  of
God.  Sin  will  bring  death,  and  pride  must  bring  a  fall.
The  laws  of  God's  house  are  equally  as  permanent  as
the  laws  of  nature ;  and  grace  or  mercy,  call  it  which
you  please,  are  founded  upon  the  law  of  cause  and  ef-
fect as  strong  as  the  laws  of  adhesion  and  repulsion.
Go  where  you  will,  —  climb  up  to  heaven,  or  dig  into
the  depths  of  hell,  —  you  will  find  an  immovable,  fixed,
and  an  eternal  law  of  cause  and  effect.  Let  a  man  love
his  Maker,  obey  his  laws,  and  he  is  happy.  Let  him
love  self  only,  and  disobey  the  laws  and  commands  of
God,  and  misery  is  the  lot  of  his  inheritance,  although
the  world  was  at  his  command.  Here,  then,  is  the  great
secret,  that  mankind  must  be  reformed,  or  they  can
never  be  happy ;  in  one  word,  they  must  be  born  of  the
Spirit,  or  they  cannot  enter  the  kingdom  of  God.

The  text  is  a  prophecy  of  God  himself,  given  to  Mo-
ses, and  by  him  revealed  to  the  people;  and  is  a  part  of
those  lively  oracles  which  has  been  continued  as  bind-
ing upon  us,  who  live  under  the  gospel  light,  as  upon
them  who  lived  in  the  days  of  the  typical  priesthood.


Christ's  second  coming.  253

It  is  a  prophecy  of  what  would  happen  to  the  people  of
God  as  a  punishment  for  conduct  therein  specified.  I
shall,  therefore,  in  explanation  of  our  subject,  show,

I.  For  what  the  people  of  God  are  punished  ;

II.  Show  how  they  are  punished  ;  and,

III.  The  time  they  will  be  punished.

I.  First,  then,  we  are  to  examine  the  cause  of  their
punishment.  The  text  tells  us  that  it  is  because  they
"  will  not  be  reformed  by  me  by  these  things,  but  will
walk  contrary  unto  me;"  that  is,  unto  God.

1st.  A  perverse  will.  We  should  suppose  that  a  man
who  has  had  his  will  subdued  by  the  love  and  Spirit  of
God,  could  not  be  in  possession  of  a  will  so  diametri-
cally opposed  to  the  will  of  God.  Yet  history  and  fact3
show  us  plainly  that  it  is  so.  David,  a  man  after  God's
own  heart,  did  perform,  by  his  own  will,  that  which  was
strictly  forbidden  in  the  law  and  commands  of  God.
Peter,  too,  after  his  Lord  told  him  he  was  every  whit
clean,  and  after  he  boldly  asserted  that,  if  all  men  should
forsake  Christ,  he  would"  not,  immediately  and  willingly,
as  it  is  implied,  cursed  and  swore,  and  said  he  knew  not
the  man.  I  am  aware  that  the  theory  of  the  present  day
is  contrary  to  the  idea  that  the  Christian  has  two  wills,
carnal  and  spiritual ;  but,  upon  this  theory,  I  cannot  ac-
count for  the  idea  of  Christians  being  punished  at  all,
either  on  the  principle  of  justice  or  equity.  Therefore  I
am  constrained  to  believe  that,  in  the  heart  of  a  Chris-
tian, there  are  two  wills.  Sometimes  he  is  in  subjection
to  the  will  of  God,  and  enjoys  the  sweets  of  reconcilia-
tion ;  and  again  his  own  will  governs  and  controls  his
acts;*and  he  must  feel  the  chastising  rod  of  his  heavenly
Father  for  his  wilful  disobedience  or  neglect  of  his  reli-
gious duty.  It  cannot  be  the  will  of  God  that  his  peo-
ple "will  not  be  reformed  by  him."  Here  is  another
idea  conveyed  in  our  text,  which  shows  that  the  heart  of
a  Christian  is  not  wholly  pure,  —  "  will  not  be  reformed
by  God;"  showing  the  same  independent  spirit  that  our
primitive  father  and  mother  did  in  the  fall,  "to  be  as
gods."  We  cannot  bear  the  idea  of  being  dependent
on  God  for  our  reformation.  Let  us  have  the  power  of
doing  it  ourselves,  and  we  will  not  reject  it ;  but  to  say
22


254  LECTURE    XVII.

we  are  wholly  dependent  on  God  is  a  hard  doctrine:  we
will  not  subscribe  to  such  humiliating  terms.  How  can
we  tell  sinners  to  reform,  if  they  cannot  do  it  ?  "  Where
is  my  guilt?  If  I  cannot  reform  myself,  surely  God
would  be  unjust  to  condemn  me  for  not  doing  what  1
cannot  do."  And  thus  you  argue,  throwing  all  the
blame  upon  God,  when  all  that  God  has  required  in  the
text,  is,  that  you  should  be  willing  that  he  should  do  the
work  of  reformation  for  you.  And  surely  God  must  be
the  best  workman  of  the  two.  God  says  he  punishes  us,
for  "ye  will  not  be  reformed  by  me."  This,  my  Chris-
tian friend,,  is  our  crime,  for  which  the  church  has  been
and  will  be  punished  seven  times.  "  And  if  ye  will  not
be  reformed  by  me  by  these  things."  What  does  God
mean  by  «  these  things  "  ?  I  answer,  It  is  God  does  the
work,  and  he  means  his  people  shall  give  him  the  glory ;
and  when  they  have  passed  through  the  furnace  of  af-
fliction, and  when  seven  times  has  passed  over  them,  as
it  did  over  Nebuchadnezzar,  then  will  the  church,  like
that  proud  monarch,  learn  that  God  rules  in  heaven  and
earth.  But  could  we  be  willing  to  learn  this  lesson
without  this  punishment,  «  by  these  things,"  that  is,  by
the  word  of  God,  by  the  preached  gospel,  by  the  mercies
of  God,  by  blessings  of  heaven  from  above,  by  blessings
of  the  earth  beneath,  by  the  love  of  God,  by  the  death
of  Christ,  by  the  ministry  of  angels,  by  the  strivings  of
the  Holy  Spirit ;  in  one  word,  by  all  the  means  of  grace ;
if  all  these  things  could  teach  us  that  God  was  the  Au-
thor and  Finisher  of  our  faith,  and  make  us  willing  to
be  reformed  by  him,  —  then,  indeed,  he  would  not  have
punished  us.  But,  alas !  without  chastisements  we
should  be  "  bastards,  and  not  sons."  Therefore  the
cause  why  the  Christian  must  be  punished,  —  to  subdue
their  proud,  rebellious  wills,  to  humble  their  haughty
and  selfish  hearts.  They  must  suffer  all  that  wicked
men  or  devils  can  heap  upon  them,  they  must  fill  up  the
measure  of  Christ's  sufferings  in  his  body,  which  is  the
church,  in  order  to  make  them  fit  for  heaven  or  happi-
ness. They  must,  like  gold,  be  seven  times  purified.
As  I  have  before  said,  all  the  mercies  of  God,  and  bless-
ings of  heaven  and  earth,  could  not  save  the  church


Christ's  second  coming.  255

without  the  curse  and  punishment  denounced  in  the
word  of  God.  And  these,  too,  must  be  managed  by  that
all-powerful  Arm,  the  great  Jehovah,  who,  by  his  wisdom
and  power,  by  his  grace  and  rod,  will  make  all  things
work  for  the  good  of  his  church,  and  will  finally  redound
to  his  glory.  And  at  last  it  will  be  said,  "  These  have
come  through  great  tribulation,  having  washed  their
robes  and  made  them  white  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb.

II.  I  am  to  show  how  they  are  punished.

1st.  They  are  punished  by  their  own  deeds.  David
went  with  broken  bones  to  his  grave ;  and  Peter,  when
his  Lord  looked  upon  him,  went  out  and  wept  bitterly.
Paul  had  a  thorn  in  his  flesh  lest  he  should  be  exalted
above  measure.  The  Jews  courted  an  alliance  with
Babylon,  and  by  that  means  were  led  into  bondage  and
captivity  many  years.  They,  contrary  to  God's  express
command,  afterwards  made  a  league  with  the  Romans,
and  by  them  was  their  city  and  sanctuary  destroyed,
and  their  nation  scattered  to  the  four  winds  of  heaven.
The  church,  after  the  Christian  era,  courted  the  popular
favor  of  the  kings  of  the  earth,  and  immediately  suffered
the  ten  persecutions.  She  afterwards  sought  for  secular
power  for  her  bishops,  and  by  the  same  power  was
driven  into  the  wilderness,  and  passed  through  a  thou-
sand two  hundred  and  sixty  years  of  torture,  darkness,
and  death.  The  church,  recently,  has  been  courting
popularity  from  the  world,  raising  up  a  learned  ministry,
worshipping  at  the  shrine  of  ancient  and  modern  philos-
ophy ;  and  already  her  ranks  are  broken,  her  piety  on
the  wane,  her  efforts  paralyzed,  and  infidelity  gaining
ground.

2d.  By  wicked  and  designing  men.  Let  us  remem-
ber how  Balaam  taught  Balak  to  cast  stumbling-blocks
before  the  children  of  Israel.  Witness  the  false  proph-
ets in  the  days  of  the  kings  of  Israel ;  also  the  wicked
and  designing  men  in  the  days  of  Jeremiah  and  the
prophets ;  and,  finally,  the  division  and  subdivision  by
wicked  men  at  the  final  destruction  of  Jerusalem.  See
some,  also,  in  the  apostles'  days  — "  false  apostles,  de-
ceitful workers,  transforming  themselves  into  the  apos-
tles of  Christ,  2  Cor.  xi.  13 ;  some,  also,  "  who  subvert-


256  LECTURE    XVII.

ed  whole  houses,  teaching  things  they  ought  not  for
filthy  lucre's  sake,"  Titus  i.  11;  others,  who  crept  into
houses,  leading  captive  silly  women  laden  with  divers
lusts ;  some,  teaching  the  doctrines  and  commandments
of  men,  bringing  in  damnable  heresies,  and  denying  the
Lord  that  bought  them.  And  from  that  day  unto  this,
in  every  age,  and  in  every  church,  division,  wounds,  and
putrefying  sores,  have  been  experienced  through  false,
wicked,  and  designing  professors.

3d.  The  church  has  been  punished  by  the  kings  and
rulers  of  this  world.  There  was  a  season,  in  the  days
of  David  and  Solomon,  and  after  her  deliverance  from
Egyptian  bondage  under  Moses  and  Joshua,  and  so  on
down  to  the  days  of  Manasseh,  when  the  church,  the
people  of  God,  were  governed  by  their  own  rulers  and
laws  in  a  great  measure.  But  since  the  days  of  Ma-
nasseh not  a  moment  has  she  enjoyed  of  respite,  but  has
been  scattered  among  the  kingdoms  of  the  world,  as
Jeremiah  the  prophet  has  prophesied  she  would.  Jer
xv.  4,  "  And  I  will  cause  them  to  be  removed  into  all
kingdoms  of  the  earth,  because  of  Manasseh,  the  son  of
Hezekiah,  king  of  Judah,  for  that  which  he  did  in  Jeru-
salem." Here  began  the  "  scattering  of  the  power  of
the  holy  people,"  and  when  seven  times  shall  be  accom-
plished, then  all  "  these  things"  shall  be  finished ;  that
is,  the  church  will  then  have  passed  the  ordeal  of  trial
and  chastisement.  "  Manasseh  made  Judah  and  the  in-
habitants of  Jerusalem  to  err,  and  to  do  worse  than  the
heathen."  "  Wherefore  the  Lord  brought  upon  them  the
captains  of  the  host  of  the  king  of  Assyria,  which  took
Manasseh  among  the  thorns,  and  bound  him  with  fetters,
and  carried  him  to  Babylon.  And  when  he  was  in  af-
fliction, he  besought  the  Lord  his  God,  and  humbled
himself  greatly  before  the  God  of  his  fathers,"  2  Chron.
xxxiii.  9 — 12.  We  learn  in  this  passage  the  cause  and
effect.  The  cause  of  their  captivity  was  their  errors
and  wicked  conduct  The  effect  was  their  captivity  to
the  kings  of  Babylon,  and  their  humility  in  their  afflic-
tion. And  although  Manasseh  was  restored  to  his  king-
dom again  after  his  humiliation,  yet  the  children  of  Ju-
dah and  Jerusalem  were  never  free  from  the  Babylonish


CHRIST  S    SECOND    COMING.  257

yoke  again  while  the  kingdom  of  Babylon  stood,  but  had
to  pay  them  tribute  until  the  Medes  and  Persians  con-
quered Babylon,  which  was  about  one  hundred  and  forty
years  after  the  first  captivity  in  Babylon  of  Judah  and
Jerusalem.  Then  the  Medes  and  Persians  reigned
over  the  Jews,  and  made  them  pay  tribute,  and  put
a  yoke  of  bondage  upon  them,  until  Alexander  the
Grecian  conquered  them,  about  two  hundred  and  two
years  afterwards ;  when  the  Grecians  became  the  mas-
ters of  Judea,  and  continued  the  yoke  of  bondage,  car-
rying away  into  captivity  many  of  the  principal  citizens
of  Jerusalem,  and  obliging  them  to  pay  tribute,  and  their
young  men  to  serve  as  soldiers  in  their  armies ;  destroy-
ing their  riches,  defiling  their  sanctuary,  and  compelling
them  to  worship  their  gods,  and  sacrifice  to  their  idols.
This  government  lasted  one  hundred  and  seventy-seven
years,  when  the  Romans  made  the  Grecian  general
Bacchides  withdraw  his  army  from  Jerusalem,  and  never
trouble  the  Jews  any  more,  as  Maccabees  tells  us  in
his  first  book,  viii.  31,  32 ;  also,  ix.  1,  72,  73.  This  was
one  hundred  and  fifty-eight  years  before  Christ;  the
Babylonians,  Medes  and  Persians,  and  Grecians,  having
each  in  their  turn  ruled  over  and  led  into  captivity,
robbed  and  spoiled  the  children  of  Judah  and  Jerusalem,
and  scattered  them  among  all  the  nations  of  the  earth,
as  Moses  and  all  the  prophets  had  foretold ;  in  all,  from
the  captivity  of  Manasseh,  five  hundred  and  nineteen
years.

No  man  can  read  this  prophecy,  from  which  our  text
is  taken,  and  the  other  prophets  who  have  spoken  of
these  things,  and  understand  them  literally,  and  then
read  the  history  of  the  world,  and  compare  them  together
carefully,  and  let  reason  decide,  and  be  an  infidel.  It
would  be  impossible.  The  devil  knows  this  ;  and,  there-
fore, he  uses  all  the  art  he  is  master  of  to  prevent  those
whom  he  wishes  to  destroy  from  reading  the  prophecies.
He  tells  them  they  are  dark  and  intricate.  And  if  this
argument  succeeds  it  is  well ;  he  is  sure  of  his  prey.
But  if  they  reason  on  the  subject,  and  say,  "  If  God  has
revealed  himself  by  the  prophets,  it  must  be  for  our
good  ;  and  if  God  is  wise,  as  all  agree  he  is,  if  there  is
22*


258  LECTURE    XVII.

a  God,  then  it  must  be  in  the  best  possible  manner  for
man  to  understand.  I  will  examine  and  see."  He  then
tells  them  it  is  presumption  to  look  into  futurity.  "  If
you  succeed  in  discovering  the  things  to  come,  it  will
only  make  you  miserable."  Should  this  temptation  pre-
vent you  from  reading  and  trying  to  understand,  still  he
is  sure  of  his  prey.  You  "  will  not  be  reformed  by  these
things."  But  suppose  you  let  reason  work,  and  think,
"If  God  is  speaking  by  his  prophets  to  us,  surely  it
would  be  sin  not  to  hear ;  for  he  has  a  legal  right  to  our
ears  and  attention ;  and  only  if  our  equal  speaks  to  us,  on
any  good  or  interesting  subject,  it  is  a  piece  of  ill  manners
not  to  listen.  I  will  read  and  hear  what  God  says  by
the  mouth  of  his  servants."  Then  the  devil  will  tell
you  that  it  is  a  sealed  book,  —  not  to  be  understood  un-
til it  is  fulfilled.  But  reason  will  tell  you,  What  God
has  given  for  our  faith  and  hope  cannot  be  sealed  in
this  sense;  for  it  would  all  be  lost  labor  in  the  prophets
of  God,  and  perfect  folly  in  the  Giver ;  for  the  history
itself  would  reveal  it  as  soon  and  as  well  as  the  proph-
ecy could.  And,  in  that  case,  says  reason,  faith  and
hope  would  have  no  food ;  for,  without  prophecy,  neither
the  one  nor  the  other  could  be  exercised ;  for  in  what  we
know,  how  can  it  be  said  we  have  faith  ?  or,  in  what  is
past,  how  can  it  be  said  we  hope  for  it  ?  Then,  if  these
temptations  do  not  prevent  you  from  reading  and  trying
to  understand  the  prophecies,  Satan  has  one  more  weap-
on, and  it  is  his  last  resort.  "  But,"  says  the  arch  ene-
my, "  if  you  are  but  prepared  for  happiness  or  heaven,
it  is  no  matter  whether  you  understand  prophecy  or  not."
This  secures  and  chains  down  the  hypocrite  and  Phari-
see forever ;  this  is  turning  things  upside  down  at  once.
For  there  never  were  hypocrites  or  Pharisees  but  what
vainly  imagined  that  they  were,  of  all  men,  best  pre-
pared for  heaven;  and  so  they  will  neither  try  their
faith,  nor  examine  their  hope,  if  they  follow  this  temp-
tation, until  they  awake  in  eternity,  forever  too  late.
While,  on  the  other  hand,  there  never  were  real  chil-
dren of  God,  but  what  considered  themselves  unfit  for
heaven,  the  vilest  of  the  vile  ;  and  if  they  should  take
up  with  this  device  of  Satan,  they  must  finally  end  in


Christ's  second  coming.  259

despair ;  for  they  could  gain  no  additional  evidence  of
their  faith  or  hope,  only  by  a  diligent  study  of  God's
prophetic  word.  So  that  I  can  boldly  say,  that  reason
itself  would  teach  us  that  we  ought  to  apply  ourselves
diligently  and  faithfully  to  try  our  faith  by  every  word
of  God,  and  examine  our  hope  in  every  possible  way  in
searching  deep  into  the  revealed  truths,  whether  prom-
ises or  prophecies,  that  the  day  of  vengeance  may  not
overtake  us  unawares.

But  not  only  the  church  under  the  Jewish  dispensa-
tion must  pass  through  her  scenes  of  tribulation,  but  so,
also,  must  the  church  under  the  gospel ;  for  John  saw
not  only  the  elect  Jews  in  his  vision  of  the  glorified
state,  but  also  a  great  number,  which  no  man  could
number,  from  among  all  nations  and  languages  under
heaven,  "  who  had  come  through  great  tribulation,  and
who  had  washed  their  robes  and  made  them  white  in
the  blood  of  the  Lamb."  And,  again,  it  is  also  evident
that,  like  the  Jews,  they  must  suffer  persecution  from
the  kings  and  rulers  of  the  earth,  and  from  spiritual
wickedness  in  high  places.  For  John  "  saw  the  beast,
and  the  kings  of  the  earth,  and  their  armies,  gathered
together  to  make  war  against  him  that  sat  on  the  horse,
and  against  his  army,"  Rev.  xix.  19.  And  Daniel  saw
the  same  beast  "  make  war  with  the  saints,  and  prevailed
over  them  until  the  Ancient  of  days  came,  and  judg-
ment was  given  to  the  saints  of  the  Most  High ;  and  the
time  came  that  the  saints'  possessed  the  kingdom.  Thus
he  said,  "  The  fourth  beast  is  the  fourth  kingdom  upon
earth,"  Dan.  vii.  21 — 23,  meaning  the  Roman  kingdom.

We  must  also  notice  that,  like  the  Jews,  they  must  be
scattered  among  all  the  nations  of  the  earth ;  for  here
they  are  to  have  no  continuing  city,  for  they  seek  one
which  is  to  come,  whose  Builder  and  Maker  is  God,"
Hebrews  xi.  10 ;  that  is,  the  New  Jerusalem,  which  cometh
down  from  God  out  of  heaven.  The  proof  I  bring  you
that  the  church  among  the  Gentiles  were  like  the  Jews,
you  will  find  in  the  prophecy  of  the  high  priest,  when
our  Savior  was  crucified,  John  xi.  52,  "  And  not  for  that
nation  only,  (that  is,  the  Jews,)  but  that  also  he  should
gather  together  in  one  the  children  of  God  that  were


S60  LECTURE   XVII.

scattered  abroad.1'  Also  it  is  said,  Mark  xiv.  27,  "  smite
the  shepherd,  and  the  sheep  shall  be  scattered."  And
when  Christ  comes  to  judge  the  saints,  at  the  resurrec-
tion of  the  just,  he  sends  his  angels  into  the  uttermost
parts  of  the  earth,  and  under  the  uttermost  part  of
heaven,  and  gathers  together  his  elect,  who  have  been
scattered  by  the  kings  and  beasts  of  the  earth  during  the
dark  and  cloudy  day  of  persecution,  from  his  crucifixion
to  his  second  coming.

And  if,  in  view  of  all  that  Christ,  the  prophets,  and
apostles,  have  said  in  relation  to  this  subject,  there  is
one  doubt  remaining  on  your  mind  as  to  the  truth  of
these  remarks;  I  beg  of  you  to  read  but  the  past  history
of  the  church,  and  you  cannot  but  acknowledge,  that,
thus  far,  it  has  been  literally  fulfilled.  How  soon  after
the  Romans  had  crucified  the  Lord  of  glory,  did  they
attack  his  church ;  and  for  nearly  three  hundred  years
the  apostles  and  eminent  servants  of  Christ  suffered  all
the  horrors  of  persecution  by  the  authority  of  the  Roman
emperors  and  kings  of  the  earth.  They  suffered  in  all
manner  of  ways  which  the  prophets  had  foretold  they
would  —  by  the  sword,  by  wild  beasts,  by  flame,  by  cap-
tivity, and  by  spoil.  This  was  almost  constantly  until
the  days  of  Constantine,  who  for  a  little  season  put  a  stop
to  these  bloody  scenes ;  but  it  was  but  short ;  for  in  the
days  of  Julian  the  Apostate,  it  was  renewed,  and  con-
tinued until  the  barbarians  of  the  north  overran  Italy,
and  conquered  the  Roman  empire.  Then  the  church  suf-
fered the  same  trials  under  her  new  masters,  the  ten
kings,  until  they  were  converted  to  the  Christian  faith,
when  she  enjoyed  another  respite  of  about  thirty  years
after  the  downfall  of  Paganism,  and  before  the  rise  of
Papacy,  between  the  years  A.  D.  508  and  538.  But  now
arose  the  little  horn,  (Papacy,)  which  was  to  make  war
against  the  saints,  and  prevail  over  them  until  the
Ancient  of  days  should  come,  and  the  judgment  should
sit.  This  little  horn  was  to  rule  over  the  kings  of  the
earth,  a  time,  times,  and  a  half,  or  1280  years ;  all  which
has  been  accomplished  to  the  letter.

III.  I  shall  now  show  what  is  meant  by  "  seven  times,"
in  the  text


Christ's  second  coming.  261

1st.  "  Seven  times,"  in  Nebuchadnezzar's  dream,  was
fulfilled  in  seven  years.  Nebuchadnezzar,  for  his  pride
and  arrogancy  against  God,  was  driven  among  the  beasts
of  the  field,  and  was  made  to  eat  grass  as  oxen,  until
seven  times  passed  over  him,  and  until  he  learned  that
the  Most  High  ruled  in  the  kingdoms  of  men,  and  gave
it  to  whomsoever  he  would.  This  being  a  matter  of
history,  and  as  an  allegory  or  sample  to  the  people  of
God  for  their  pride  and  arrogancy,  in  refusing  to  be  re-
formed by  God,  and  claiming  the  power  and  will  to  do
these  things  themselves,  —  they,  too,  like  Nebuchad-
nezzar, must  be  driven  among  the  beasts  of  the  field,
(meaning  the  kingdoms  of  the  world,)  until  they  learn  the
sovereignty  of  God,  and  that  he  dispenses  his  favors
to  whomsoever  he  will.  That,  being  a  matter  of  history,
and  a  sample  only,  was  fulfilled  in  seven  years  ;  but  this,
being  a  prophecy,  will  only  be  fulfilled  in  seven  prophet-
ic times,  which  will  be  7  times  360  years,  which  will
make  2520  years  ;  for  one  half  of  7  times,  that  is,  3  times
and  a  half,  is  called,  in  Rev.  xii.  6, 1260  days,  (fulfilled  in
so  many  years.)  See  also  Rev.  xii.  14.  xiii.  5.  Forty-two
months  is  the  one  half  of  2520,  for  twice  1260  is  2520.
Therefore  the  sum  and  substance  of  the  whole  is,  that
the  people  of  God  would  be  among  the  beasts,  or  kings
of  the  earth,  seven  times,  which  is  2520  years,  one  half
of  which  time  they  would  be  under  literal  Babylon,
which  means  the  ruling  kings  of  the  earth,  viz.  1260
years ;  and  the  other  half  under  mystical  Babylon,  the
mother  of  harlots,  the  abomination  of  the  whole  earth,
1260  years;  making  in  all  2520  years.  Therefore
seven  times  would  the  people  of  God  be  punished  for
their  sins,  to  fill  up  the  measure  of  the  sufferings  of
Christ,  before  they  would  be  delivered  from  all  their
enemies,  and  come  into  possession  of  the  glorified  king-
dom which  was  prepared  for  them  from  the  foundation
of  the  earth.  And  Ezekiel  alludes  to  the  same  "  seven
times,"  Ezek.  xxxix.  9,  10,  "  And  they  that  dwell  in  the
cities  of  Israel  shall  go  forth,  Jerem.  xv.  1 — 3,  and  shall
set  on  fire  and  burn  the  weapons,  Jer.  v.  14,  both  the
shields  and  the  bucklers,  the  bows  and  the  arrows,  and
the  handstaves  and  the  spears,  and  they  shall  burn  them


362  LECTURE    XVII.

with  fire  seven  years ;  so  that  they  shall  take  no  wood
out  of  the  field,  nor  cut  down  any  out  of  the  forests  ;  for
they  shall  burn  the  weapons  with  fire  ;  and  they  shall
spoil  those  that  spoiled  them,  and  rob  those  that  robbed
them,  saith  the  Lord  God."  Ezekiel  here  gives  us  to
understand  that,  by  means  of  the  people  of  God  being
driven  out  of  their  cities,  and  by  the  word  of  God,  they
would  be  enabled  to  destroy  or  be  destroying  their  ene-
mies, and  to  spoil  those  who  had  been  spoiling  them,
and  rob  those  who  had  robbed  them;  and  this,  too,  would
take  seven  years,  or  2520  days;  and,  Ezekiel  being
commanded  to  reckon  each  day  for  a  year,  iv.  4 — 6,  then
it  would  be  2520  years.

The  proper  question  would  now  be,  "  When  did  those
years  begin  ?  "  I  answer,  They  must  have  begun  with
the  first  captivity  of  the  tribe  of  Judah,  the  inhabitants
of  Jerusalem,  in  Babylon;  for  all  the  prophets  agree
in  this  thing,  that  Babylon  would  be  the  kingdom  which
would  carry  the  Jews  into  captivity.  See  Jeremiah  xv.
4.  "  And  I  will  cause  them  to  be  removed  into  all  the
kingdoms  of  the  earth,  because  of  Manasseh,  the  son  of
Hezekiah  king  of  Judah,  for  that  which  he  did  in  Je-
rusalem." Also  let  those  who  wish  to  read  more  on
this  subject,  read  Jeremiah,  chapter  21st  to  the  29th,  in-
clusive ;  and  the  prophecy  of  Ezekiel,  from  the  beginning
of  the  1st  chapter  to  the  end  of  the  39th  chapter ;  also
the  chapter  in  which  is  our  text; — and  we  cannot  for
a  moment  doubt  but  that  Babylon  is  the  nation  which
was  to  make  desolate  Judah  and  Jerusalem.

Then,  if  Babylon  was  the  nation  which  was  to  scatter
the  people  of  God,  and  this,  too,  in  the  days  of  Manasseh,
1  ask,  When  was  this  captivity  ?  I  answer,  In  the  year
677  before  Christ ;  see  2  Chron.  xxxiii.  9 — 13;  see  also
the  Bible  chronology  of  that  event ;  this  being  the  first
captivity  of  Judah  in  Babylon.  Then  take  677  years,
which  were  before  Christ,  from  2520  years,  which  in-
cludes the  whole  "seven  times,"  or  "seven  years,"
prophetic,  and  the  remainder  will  be  1843  after  Christ ;
showing  that  the  people  of  God  will  be  gathered  from
among  all  nations,  and  the  kingdom  and  greatness  of
the   kingdom  will  be  given  to  the  saints  of  the  Most


Christ's  second  coming.  263

High ;  mystical  Babylon  will  be  destroyed  by  the
brightness  of  his  coming ;  and  sin,  and  suffering  for
sin,  will  be  finished  to  those  who  look  for  his  coming.
"  And  this  spake  he  not  of  himself :  but  being  high  priest
that  year,  he  prophesied  that  Jesus  should  die  for  that
nation ;  and  not  for  that  nation  only,  but  that  also  he
should  gather  together  in  one  the  children  of  God  that
were  scattered  abroad,"  John  xi.  51,  52.

Yes,  dear  hearer,  to  them  that  look  for  his  appearing,
Christ  will  come  the  second  time  without  sin  unto  sal-
vation. "  And  can  it  be  possible,"  says  the  dear  child
of  God,  "  that  that  day  is  so  near  as  1843  ?  It  is  too
good  news  for  me  to  believe.  Yet  the  evidence  is  very
strong ;  it  seems  clear.  I  really  believe  I  shall  watch  for
it  with  a  good  deal  of  anxiety.  And  if  it  should  not
come,  I  shall,  I  feel  now,  be  somewhat  disappointed."
Yes,  1  am  satisfied,  this  is  the  language  of  every  Chris-
tian heart.

"  But,"  says  another,  "  it  is  all  visionary.  I  do  not
believe  it.  And  if  I  had  any  idea  that  it  would  be  so,
I  could  not  take  another  moment's  comfort  of  my  life.
What,  the  judgment  day  within  seven  years  ?  *  I  cannot
bear  the  thought  ?  I  will  drive  such  thoughts  from  my
mind.  To  you,  whoever  you  are,  whether  professor  or
non-professor,  who  in  your  heart  think  such  thoughts  as
these,  I  have  one  word  to  say.  Your  standing  is  des-
perate indeed.  I  am  bold  to  tell  you,  you  love  not
Jesus.  Every  moment,  then,  you  delay  coming  to  God
through  Jesus  Christ,  may  be  big  with  eternal  conse-
quences, even  as  the  day  of  judgment,  for  aught  you  or
I  can-tell.  For  instance,  this  may  be  the  last  moment
the  Holy  Spirit  will  ever  strive ;  it  may  be  the  last
moment  of  reason;  it  may  be  the  last  moment  of  life ;
it  may  be  the  last  moment  of  time  ;  and  you  unprepared  !
O  God,  reform  these  blinded  souls,  "  who  will  not  be
reformed  by  thee,  nor  by  these  things,"  or  everlasting
punishment  will  be  their  doom.

*  These  Lectures  were  first  published  in  1836.


LECTURE   XVIII.


SOLOMON'S  SONG  viii.  5.

Who  is  th  s  that  cometh  up  from  the  wilderness,  leaning  upon  her
beloved  ?


The  text  is  a  passage  of  divine  inspiration,  which
strikes  the  mind  of  the  hearer  or  reader  with  more  than
ordinary  power  and  force ;  and  is  propounded  by  way
of  question,  as  though  in  the  answer  we  might  receive
much  instruction  and  useful  knowledge.  It  is  truly  so ;
and  may  the  Spirit  of  God  assist  us  to  gather  honey  from
this  beautiful  flower  from  the  wilderness.  We  find  it  in
the  Songs  of  Solomon,  which  are  highly  figurative  and
allegorical,  and  were  when  composed  presented  in  poems
or  songs  ;  but  by  reason  of  the  translation  they  have
come  to  us  in  prose.

Some  have  supposed,  that  when  Solomon  composed
this  Song,  or  Songs,  they  were  composed  for  dramatical
performances,  either  as  preludes,  interludes,  or  epi-
logues. But  I  am  of  opinion  that  it  was  composed  for  a
prophetic  song  of  Christ  and  his  church.  But  be  that  as
it  may,  they  certainly  do  represent,  in  rich  and  beautiful
figures,  the  character  and  love  of  Christ  for  his  church ;
likewise,  her  character  and  love  towards  her  divine  Mas-
ter, her  connection  to  him,  and  her  dependence  upon
him  in  this  state  of  trial.  That  the  church  has  been,  and
will  be,  in  a  state  of  trial  as  long  as  she  remains  imper-
fect, cannot  be  doubted  by  any  man  of  common  reflec-
tion, perception,  or  knowledge.

She  has  enjoyed  her  seasons  of  prosperity ;  and  has
been  strongly  tried  in  scenes  of  adversity.    In  tracing


Christ's  second  coming.  265

her  history  from  the  patriarch  Abraham  to  the  present
day,  we  find  her  variable  as  the  wind,  and  changeable  as
the  weather.

To-day,  she  is  coming  up  out  of  the  wilderness  lean-
ing on  the  arm  of  her  beloved  ;  to-morrow,  "  like  a  young
roe  leaping  upon  the  mountains,  and  skipping  upon  the
hills."

Now  she  is  seen  among  the  trees  of  the  woods ;  next
in  a  palace  of  silver  inclosed  in  boards  of  cedar.

There  we  saw  her  in  the  clefts  of  the  rock ;  here  we
behold  her  in  the  broad  way,  in  the  streets  of  the  great
city.

Again  we  find  her  among  the  foxes  of  the  desert ;
and  anon  we  perceive  her  seeking  him  whom  her  soul
loveth.

She  is  asleep  on  her  bed  by  night;  and  the  same
night  the  watch  finds  her  in  the  city.

Behold  her  Lord,  knocking  at  the  door  for  admittance,
while  she  is  too  indolent  to  arise  and  let  him  in.  The
next  moment  she  is  opening  to  her  beloved  ;  but  he  had
withdrawn  himself.  At  one  time  the  voice  of  her  be-
loved sounding  over  the  hills,  and  echoing  among  the
mountains  like  the  roar  of  distant  thunder,  has  no  impres-
sion ;  next  the  soft  whisper  of  love  gains  all  her  atten-
tion.

Here  blows  the  rough  north  wind  and  strong  south
wind  upon  her  spices ;  yet  they  put  forth  no  fragrancy.
And  there  the  lightest  breeze  makes  her  roses  blossom,
and  all  the  air  is  perfume.

See  her  countenance  to-day  black  as  the  tents  of  Ke-
dar ;  and  to-morrow  comely  as  the  daughters  of  Jerusa-
lem, and  fair  as  the  purple  curtains  of  Solomon.  To-
day she  is  "  a  garden  barred,  a  spring  shut  up,  a  foun-
tain sealed;"  to-morrow  "a  garden  open,  a  well  of  liv-
ing waters,  and  streams  from  Lebanon."  Now  she  is
weak  as  a  babe ;  a  single  watchman  can  "  smite,  wound,
and  take  away  her  vail ; "  and  then  she  is  courageous
and  valiant,  "terrible  as  an  army  with  banners."  To-
day she  is  made  to  keep  another's  vineyard ;  to-morrow
ehe  is  realizing  a  thousand  pieces  of  silver  from  her  own.
She  is  truly  a  changeable  being,  carried  about  by  the
23


%66  LECTURE   XVJIL

slightest  circumstances.  This  is  the  description  of  tb.6
church,  as  given  to  us  in  this  Song  of  Solomon's.  I  shall
therefore  show  in  explanation  of  our  subject,

I.  What  has  been  the  general  character  of  the  church
in  the  wilderness  ;

II.  Her  character  when  out  of  the  wilderness;  and,
then,

III.  Make  an  application  of  our  subject,  by  sho wing-
in  what  state  the  church  may  be  considered  at  the  pres-
ent  time.

I,   The  church  in  the  wilderness.

It  appears  by  the  word  of  God,  that  for  some  wise  pur-
pose, God  has  called  his  people  into  the  wilderness  state,
time  and  again.  1st.  Abraham  was  called  to  go  out  from
the  land  of  his  fathers  "  into  a  strange  land,  not  knowing
whither  he  went ;  and  he  obeyed  God,  sojourning  in  the
land  of  promise  as  in  a  strange  country,  dwelling  in  tab-
ernacles with  Isaac  and  Jacob,  the  heirs  with  him  of  the
same  promise  ;  for  he  looked  for  a  city  which  hath  foun-
dations, whose  Builder  and  Maker  is  God."  By  this
means,  Abraham  obtained  the  name  of  the  Father  of  all
them  that  believe.  We  learn  by  the  history  of  Abra-
ham, that  the  first  seed  of  the  church  was  called  into  the
wilderness  as  a  place  of  promise  ;  where  God  took  spe
cial  care  of  them,  saying  to  the  kings  and  princes  of  this
world,  "Touch  not  mine  anointed,  and  do  my  prophets  no
harm."  We  see  them  supported  and  kept  through  all
the  trials  of  life  ;  and,  in  the  midst  of  idolatrous  nations,
among  whom  they  sojourned,  not  one  of  them  lost  their
faith,  or  became  impure  in  their  worship ;  but  God  was
with  them,  preserving  them  in  war,  famine,  and  the  heavy
judgments  of  God  upon  the  nations  with  whom  they  so-
journed.

The  next  account  we  have  of  the  church  being  called
into  the  wilderness  was  in  the  days  of  Moses,  when  the
children  of  Israel  were  delivered  from  Egyptian  slavery,
and  brought  out  by  the  mighty  and  powerful  hand  of  God
into  the  wilderness,  where  she  was  fed,  clothed,  and  shod
by  miracle,  and  preserved  by  manna  from  heaven,  and
flesh  from  the  desert ;  where  the  cloud  of  his  presence
overshadowed  them  by  day,  and  the  pillar  of  fire  by  night.


Christ's  second  coming.  267

The  angel  of  the  covenant  accompanied  them  through
all  the  wilderness,  "  gave  them  drink  as  out  of  the  great
depths.  He  brought  streams  also  out  of  the  rock,  and
caused  waters  to  run  down  like  rivers."  "  He  made  his
own  people  to  go  forth  like  sheep,  and  guided  them  in  the
wilderness  like  a  flock.  He  led  them  on  safely,  so  they
feared  not ;  but  the  sea  overwhelmed  their  enemies.  He
brought  them  to  the  border  of  his  sanctuary,  even  to  the
mountain  his  right  hand  had  purchased.  He  cast  out  the
heathen  also  before  them,  divided  them  an  inheritance
by  line,  and  made  the  children  of  Israel  to  dwell  in  tents."
Thus  sang  the  sweet  psalmist  of  Israel.  And  what  could
God  have  done  more  than  he  did  for  his  people  in  the
wilderness  ?

The  next  and  last  proof  we  have  that  God  calls  his
people  into  the  wilderness,  you  will  find  in  Rev.  xii.  6,
14,  "  And  the  woman  fled  into  the  wilderness,  where
she  hath  a  place  prepared  of  God,  that  they  should  feed
her  there  a  thousand  two  hundred  and  threescore  days."

"  And  to  the  woman  were  given  two  wings  of  an  ea-
gle, that  she  might  fly  into  the  wilderness  into  her  place,
(take  notice,  the  wilderness  is  here  called  "  her  place")
where  she  is  nourished  for  a  time,  and  times,  and  half  a
time,  from  the  face  of  the  serpent ; "  that  is,  away  from
the  power  of  the  Roman  beast,  or  power  which  is  here
called  the  serpent.  The  prophet  Hosea,  in  his  vision  of
the  wilderness  state  of  the  church  under  the  gospel  dis-
pensation, says,  "  Therefore,  behold,  I  will  allure  her  and
bring  her  into  the  wilderness,  and  speak  comfortably  unto
her;  and  I  will  give  her  her  vineyards  from  thence,  and
the  valley  of  Achor  for  a  door  of  hope,  and  she  shall  sing
there  as  in  the  days  of  her  youth,  as  in  the  day  when
she  came  up  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt,"  Hosea  ii.  14,
&c.  We  might  quote  you  more  of  this  prophecy,  and
show  you  how  exactly  every  word  has  been  literally  ful-
filled in  time  and  manner,  as  John  has  told  us  in  Reve-
lation ;  but  I  have  sufficiently  proved  that  God  has  called
his  church  into  the  wilderness,  for  purposes  of  good  to
the  churches.  I  will  now,  2dly,  show  what  object  God
had  in  view,  so  far  as  he  has  revealed  his  object  in  his
word,  in  calling  his  church  into  the  wilderness.    Moses


268  LECTURE    XVIII.

says,  Deut.  viii.  16, 17,  "Who  fed  thee  in  the  wilderness
with  manna,  which  thy  fathers  knew  not,  that  he  might
humble  thee,  and  that  he  might  prove  thee,  to  do  thee
good  at  thy  latter  end,  lest  you  should  say  in  your  hearts,
My  power,  and  the  might  of  mine  hand,  hath  gotten  me
this  wealth."

Surely,  my  brethren,  if  we  would  read  this  passage
and  apply  it  home,  we  must  see,  unless  we  are  wilfully
blind,  that  if  we  are  in  the  wilderness  at  this  time,  the
object  of  God  is  lost  upon  us.  We  are  not  humble
enough  to  believe  that  God  is  the  Author  and  Finisher
of  our  faith,  or  that  salvation  is  of  God.  Are  we  not  say-
ing, not  only  in  our  hearts,  but  also  in  doctrine,  words,
and  action,  that  we  can  do  great  things  ;  our  might,  our
wisdom,  our  hands,  have  gotten  us  this  great  wealth  ?

Do  we  not  see  our  benevolence  trumpeted  forth  in
every  publication  of  the  present  day,  and  our  contribu-
tions spread  far  and  wide  ?  For  what  ?  To  feed  the  hun-
gry and  clothe  the  naked  ?  No,  not  literally,  but  mentally.
Yes,  and  do  we  not  see  that  instead  of  feeding  the  pub-
lic mind  with  wholesome  food,  with  the  sincere  milk  of
the  word,  we  have  almost  surfeited  them  with  our  tarts
and  spices,  until  the  public  mind  has  become  so  heated,
nothing  satisfies  unless  it  has  been  highly  spiced  with
some  agitated  question  to  more  inflame  the  public  pulse.
More  than  three  quarters  of  all  our  contributions  are  used
to  bloat  each  other  up  in  self-righteousnes  and  pride  ;  or
to  pull  each  other  down,  with  our  excited  questions  of
right  and  wrong.  The  moral  code  which  God  gave  to
man  for  his  happiness  here  and  hereafter  is  demolished ;
and  Judge  Lynch  is  the  order  of  the  day,  as  well  in  mor-
als as  in  our  civil  affairs.  Where  in  the  word  of  God
are  we  commanded  to  have  our  gifts  for  charitable  pur-
poses published,  either  before  or  behind  us,  by  a  public
gazette  or  a  brazen-mouthed  trumpet  ?  Yet  at  the  pres-
ent day,  we  glory  in  our  pride,  and  excuse  ourselves  in
the  manner  of  doing  it ;  for  the  end,  say  we,  justifies  the
means.  Why,  then,  did  not  our  Savior  justify  the  Phar-
isees in  the  same  means  for  the  very  same  object — tc
make  proselytes  ?

The  wilderness  then,  under  existing  circumstances,  is


Christ's  second  coming.  269

calculated  as  the  best  place  to  keep  the  church  humble,
teach  her  her  dependence  on  God,  and  to  give  her  a
grateful  heart  For  there  she  mixes  not  with  the  world,
there  she  is  not  wholly  engaged  after  the  riches,  honors,
wisdom,  and  fashions  of  this  world.  In  the  wilderness
she  depends  more  on  the  manna  of  God's  word  for  her
daily  food  ;  but  in  the  great  city,  she  seeks  for  the  pop-
ular learning  of  the  world,  the  vain  philosophy  of  the
ancients,  or  the  wisdom  of  men.  There  God  feeds  her
with  spiritual  bread,  living  water,  and  sincere  milk  of
the  word ;  but  here  she  feeds  on  the  old  corn  of  the
land  ;  she  mixes  her  wine  with  strong  drink,  until  it
sparkles  in  the  cup;  she  pours  out  her  milk  as  a  drink-
offering  to  her  idols,  and  mingles  the  doctrine  of  God's
word  with  the  doctrines  of  devils.  There  she  learns,  by
a  rich  experience,  her  dependence  on  her  divine  Master  ;
here  she  forgets  all  his  mercies,  and  ascribes  all  ner
blessings  to  her  idol  gods,  or  worship  of  her  own  hands.

There  the  daily  presence  of  God  prevents  her  wor-
shipping the  idols  of  the  world,  or  following  after  the
gods  which  are  no  gods ;  but  here  the  presence  of
worldly  objects  draws  her  attention  from  the  one  living
and  true  God  ;  and  she  has  lords  many  and  gods  many.

In  the  wilderness,  the  teachers  in  the  church  are  more
pure ;  there  is  nothing  to  tempt  their  cupidity,  or  foster
their  pride ;  they  feed  the  flock  of  God  instead  of  them-
selves ;  the  church  is  not  rich  in  worldly  things  to  tempt
the  wolf,  or  the  fox  to  enter  her  folds.  But  among  the
citizens,  she  must  expect,  while  man  is  wicked,  that  the
false  and  designing  teachers  will  rush  into  her  ministry,
to  subserve  their  own  interest,  and  draw  off  followers
after  them.  In  the  wilderness,  the  church  has  but  few
temptations  for  the  honors  and  emoluments  of  the  politi-
cal world,  for  she  is  nourished  away  from  the  face  of
this  wily  serpent,  which  has  coiled  his  folds  around  the
heart  of  many  a  professor  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  destroyed
all  that  piety  of  heart  and  life,  which,  separate  from  po-
litical strife,  they  once  enjoyed.

Moses,  sp  eaking  of  the  church  in  the  wilderness,  says,
Deut.  xxxii.  9 — 12,  »  For  the  Lord's  portion  is  his  peo-
ple ;  Jacob  is  the  lot  of  his  inheritance.  He  found  him
93*


270  LECTURE    XVIII.

m  a  desert  land,  and  in  the  waste,  howling  wilderness
he  led  him  about,  he  instructed  him,  he  kept  him  as  the
apple  of  his  eye.  As  an  eagle  stirreth  up  her  nest,  flut-
tereth  over  her  young,  spreadeth  abroad  her  wings,
taketh  them,  beareth  them  on  her  wings,  so  the  Lord
alone  did  lead  him,  and  there  was  no  strange  god  with
him."  If  the  above  is  a  true  description  of  God's  care
and  protection  of  his  people  in  the  wilderness,  surely
this  must  be  a  desirable  state  for  the  church.

Isaiah,  in  his  vision  of  the  church  in  the  wilderness,
says,  (xxxv.  I,  2,)  "  The  wilderness  and  the  solitary  place
shall  be  glad  for  them,  and  the  desert  shall  rejoice  and
blossom  as  the  rose.  It  shall  blossom  abundantly,  and
rejoice  even  with  joy  and  singing ;  the  glory  of  Leba-
non shall  be  given  unto  it,  the  excellency  of  Carmel  and
Sharon ;  they  shall  see  the  glory  of  the  Lord,  and  the
excellency  of  our  God."  If  the  church  had  been  in  the
city,  instead  of  beholding  the  glory  of  God,  her  eyes
might  have  been  dazzled  with  the  glory  of  the  world,
and  excellency  of  her  great  men,  or  with  the  gods  of  the
men  of  the  world ;  so  that,  while  in  this  state  of  trial
and  temptation,  while  imperfection  is  found  in  the
church,  the  wilderness  is  a  place  of  greater  security
from  inbred  lust  and  outward  foes.

Perhaps  we  have  been  in  the  habit  of  fixing  in  our
minds  quite  a  different  idea  of  the  wilderness  state  o£
the  church,  from  what  ideas  I  have  given,  or  from  what
might  be  proved  by  the  writings  of  the  prophets  and
apostles.     Examine  for  yourselves,  and  see.

II.  We  are  to  learn  the  character  of  the  church  when
it  may  be  said  she  is  out  of  the  wilderness.

1st.  What  does  the  church  enjoy  when  she  is  out  of
the  wilderness?  I  answer,  She  enjoys  possessions,
privileges,  and  laws  among  the  kingdoms  and  political
nations  of  the  earth ;  kings  are  her  nursing  fathers,  and
queens  her  nursing  mothers.  "  They  shall  bow  down  to
thee,  with  their  face  to  the  earth,  and  lick  up  the  dust  of
thy  feet,"  says  Isaiah,  xlix.  23.  That  is,  the  church,
when  in  this  situation,  receives  the  courtly  smiles  of
the  great,  and  the  sycophantic  cringing  of  the  political
demagogue.     But  let  the  church  remember,  although


Christ's  second  coming.  271

kings,  queens,  and  great  men  of  the  world  may  bow
down,  court,  and  idolize  her,  and  may  descend  to  lick  the
dust  from  her  feet,  yet  it  is  only  to  flatter  and  to  betray ;
for  their  "faces  "  are  not  Zion-ward,  but  to  the  "  zarttu"
Their  motives  are  earthly,  devilish.  It  is  a  serpent  still ;
they  feed  on  the  food  of  serpents,  the  dust  of  your  feet.
"  They  eat  the  sins  of  my  people  as  they  eat  bread."
Some  suppose  it  will  be  a  goodly  time,  when  kings  and
queens  wilJ  be  fathers  and  mothers  in  Zion.  But  no,
my  brethren  ;  the  true  church  have  but  one  father,  which
is  God  ;  and  but  one  mother,  which  is  not  of  this  world,
but  she  is  the  New  Jerusalem,  the  mother  of  us  all,
which  cometh  down  from  above.  Christ  himself  says,
"  The  prince  of  this  world  cometh,  and  hath  nothing  in
me ; "  as  much  as  if  he  had  said,  By  and  by  the  kings
and  princes  of  this  world  will  come  and  court  you  ;  they
will  pretend  to  great  friendship  for  you  ;  they  will  offer
to  nurse,  feed,  and  clothe  you  ;  but  remember  they  have
nothing  in  me.  You  must,  if  you  wish  to  win  the  crown
of  glory,  "  contend  against  principalities,  against  powers,
against  the  rulers  of  the  darkness  of  this  world,  against
spiritual  wickedness  in  high  places ;  for  he  hath  nothing
in  me."  Again,  Daniel  says,  ii.  43,  "  They  (the  people
of  God)  shall  mingle  themselves  with  the  seed  of  men,
(kings  and  queens,  for  fathers  and  mothers,)  but  they  shall
not  cleave  one  to  another,  even  as  iron  is  not  mixed  with
clay."  Let  this  suffice  to  show  that  it  is  the  duty  of  the
church  of  Christ  to  keep  themselves  unspotted  from  the
world  ;  to  be  separate,  and  touch  not  the  unclean  thing.
What  is  the  unclean  thing  ?  I  answer,  It  is  the  policy
of  worldly  governments ;  in  one  word,  it  is  a  political
spirit ;  that  spirit  which  is  not  peaceable,  pure,  easy  to
be  entreated.  Who,  I  ask,  ever  saw  a  political  partisan
have  these  fruits  while  prompted  by  that  spirit?  "  First
pure,  then  peaceable,  easy  to  be  entreated."  A  political
man,  if  he  had  any  conscience,  would  blush  with  shame
to  claim  these  appellations.  And  where,  in  all  the  his-
tory of  the  church,  from  the  days  of  the  apostles  until
now,  have  kings,  queens,  or  rulers  of  this  world  under-
taken to  nurse  the  church,  and  lord  it  over  God's  heri-
tage, but  that  they  have  proved,  in  the  end,  a  curse  in-


272  LECTURE  xvm.

stead  of  a  blessing  ?  I  am  bold  to  say,  Nowhere !  And
one  thing  more  I  am  bold  to  say  —  That  kind  of  morality
which  requires  the*  aid  of  the  political  world  to  enforce
it,  is  a  harlot  in  disguise,  and  her  path  is  the  way  to
death  ;  in  her  secret  chambers  you  will  find  war,  rapine,
and  murder,  and  in  her  train  will  be  seen  revenge,  ha-
tred, envy,  and  division.  These  are  the  temptations  of
the  church  when  in  the  city  of  the  nations.

2dly.  What  has  been  her  character  when  in  the
city  ?  Answer :  When  the  Jews  left  the  wilderness,  and
entered  into  Canaan,  their  manna,  with  which  they  had
been  fed  while  travelling  in  the  wilderness,  ceased,  and
they  fed  on  the  old  corn  of  the  land.  This  manna  was
a  type  of  the  spiritual  food  given  by  God  to  his  children,
while  under  his  immediate  control  and  care.  See  Rev.
ii.  17.  Old  corn  is  a  fit  resemblance  of  the  worldly
rights,  privileges,  and  possessions  among  the  nations  of
the  earth.  The  Jews,  almost  immediately  after  they
took  possession  of  the  land  of  Canaan,  began  to  mix
themselves  with  the  inhabitants  around  them,  and  be-
came men  pleasers,  and  a  nation  of  idolaters  ;  and  the
very  things  which  Moses  charged  them  against,  became
the  common  occurrences  of  the  day ;  and  on  account
of  which  God  suffered  their  enemies  to  bring  them  into
bondage,  and,  from  a  powerful  people,  that  had  made
kings  tremble  even  upon  the  report  of  them  while  in  the
wilderness,  now  became  a  weak  and  degraded  people,  a
tributary  nation,  a  band  of  slaves  to  their  enemies ;  and
the  prophecy  of  Moses,  Deuteronomy  xxxii.  15 — 20,  was
literally  accomplished  in  about  twenty  years  after  they
took  possession  of  their  goodly  land.  "  But  Jeshurun
waxed  fat  and  kicked :  thou  art  waxen  fat,  thou  art
grown  thick,  thou  art  covered  with  fatness  ;  then  he
forsook  God  which  made  him,  and  lightly  esteemed  the
Rock  of  his  salvation.  They  provoked  him  to  jealousy
with  strange  gods ;  with  abominations  provoked  they  him
to  anger.  They  sacrificed  unto  devils,  not  to  God;  to
gods  whom  they  knew  not,  to  new  gods  that  came  newly
up,  whom  your  fathers  (while  in  the  wilderness)  feared
not  Of  the  Rock  that  begat  thee  thou  art  unmindful,
and  hast  forgotten  God  that  formed-  thee."    The  word


Christ's  second  coming.  273

tells  us,  Judges  ii.  11,  12,  "  The  children  of  Israel  did
evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord,  and  served  Baalim ;  and
forsook  the  Lord  God  of  their  fathers,  which  brought
them  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt,  and  followed  other  gods,
of  the  gods  of  the  people  that  were  round  about  them,
and  bowed  themselves  unto  them,  and  provoked  the
Lord  to  anger."  They  dwelt  among  the  Canaanite3,
and,  as  it  is  said,  Judges  iii.  6,  "  they  took  their  daugh-
ters to  be  their  wives,  and  gave  their  daughters  to  their
sons,  and  served  their  gods."

This  was  the  character  and  practice  of  the  Jews,  God'a
ancient  covenant  people.  They  ate,  they  drank,  and
rose  up  to  play.  They  were  proud,  rebellious,  and  un-
godly. They  obeyed  not  the  commands  of  God,  and
heeded  not  the  warning  voice  of  the  Almighty.  They
regarded  not  the  teaching  of  the  true  prophets,  but
followed  in  the  train  of  the  popular  prophets  of  Baal.
They  persecuted  and  drove  into  the  wilderness  the
true  servants  of  Jehovah,  while  they  fed,  clothed,  and
schooled  hundreds  of  the  servants  of  Baalim.  They  be-
came a  stiff-necked  and  hard-hearted  people  to  their  own
God,  and  bowed  their  necks,  and  were  subservient  to
the  nations  and  their  gods  around  them.  They  forsook
or  demolished  the  altars  erected  for  the  worship  of  the
true  God,  and  erected  under  every  green  tree  altars  to
Baalim  and  Ashtaroth.  They  waxed  rich  in  corn,  wine,
and  oil,  yet  were  poor  and  scanty  in  their  first  fruits  to
God.  They  multiplied  in  cattle,  silver,  and  gold,  and  for-
got that  it  was  God  who  gave  them  power  to  get  wealth.

This,  we  must  acknowledge,  is  the  character  of  the
Jews,  as  given  unto  us  by  the  sacred  historians.  These
were  the  people  whom  God  had  chosen  out  of  all  the  na-
tions of  the  earth,  to'be  his  peculiar  people  —  a  people
who  had  seen  and  experienced  the  salvation  of  God  in  a
most  miraculous  manner ;  from  Egyptian  bondage,  from
drought  and  famine  in  the  wilderness,  and  from  the  pow-
er of  the  nations  who  sought  to  impede  their  progress,  or
hinder  their  possessing  the  promised  land.  They  had
enjoyed  the  visible  presence  of  the  angel  of  the  covenant
forty  years  in  the  wilderness.  They  had  heard  the  audi-
ble voice  of  Jehovah  on  the  mountain ;  they  saw  his  pow-


274  LECTURE    XVIII.

er  and  glory  on  Sinai.     Yet  the  next  generation  afte*
Joshua,  had  become  so  deeply  corrupted,  by  unbelief,  in
gratitude,  and  rebellion,  that  they  gave  all  the  glory  to
works  of  their  own  hands,  and  worshipped  idols  of  stocks
and  stones.

This,  you  say,  is  a  dark  picture  of  man,  and  could  not
have  applied  to  any  other  people  but  the  Jews.  I  will
agree  that  no  other  nation  were,  at  that  time,  placed  in
like  circumstances  with  them.  But  dark  as  the  picture,
and  hideous  as  the  detail,  it  is  but  a  shadow  of  our  day.
a  type  of  the  Christian  church  in  the  times  in  which  we
live.

"  Who  is  this  coming  up  from  the  wilderness,  leaning
upon  her  beloved  ?"  The  text  does  not  tell  us  she  is  out
of  the  wilderness,  hut  coming  out ;  as  though  in  the  wil-
derness, and  while  she  is  coming  out,  she  leans  upon  her
lord.  Her  affections  were  not  yet  contaminated  by  a
love  for  the  world,  nor  her  faith  weakened  by  her  vanity
and  self-esteem.  Thus  was  it  with  the  Jews  ;  and  so  has
it  been  with  the  church  in  ages  past.     Then  let  me,

III.  Make  an  application  of  our  subject,  by  showing
what  may  be  considered  the  present  state  of  the  gospel
church.

I  believe  all  writers  and  commentators  on  the  Apoca-
lypse agree  that  the  church  of  Christ  has  been  in  the
wilderness  more  than  twelve  centuries  past.  Some  have
fixed  the  time  of  the  church  entering  into  her  wilderness
state  as  early  as  A.  D.  534,  when  the  great  controversy
between  the  orthodox  and  Arians,  which,  in  the  days  of
Justinian,  shook  the  religious  world  into  two  great  divis-
ions, like  the  two  "  wings  of  an  eagle,"  from  the  convul-
sions of  which  many  of  the  true  servants  of  God,  or  all
of  them,  disgusted  with  the  spirit  shown  by  both  of  the
contending  parties,  who  both  claimed  and  used  the  civil
authority  to  exterminate  or  conquer  their  heterodox
brethren,  fled  into  the  north-east  part  of  Europe,  away
"  from  the  face  of  the  serpent,"  —  the  emperors  of  the  east,
and  the  more  powerful  bishops  of  Rome  —  where  for
numbers  of  centuries  they  lived  unknowing  and  unknown.

Other  writers  say  that  it  was  as  late  as  A.  D.  606,  when
the  Pope,  by  the  concessions  of  Phocas,  obtained  civil


Christ's  second  coming.  275

and  ecclesiastical  power,  and  that  he  came  out  publicly
wearing-  two  swords.  Between  these  two  points  I  be-
lieve all  writers  fix  the  time  of  the  church  entering  into
her  wilderness  state,  "  a  place  prepared  of  God,  that  they
should  feed  her  there  1260  days;"  or,  "to  the  woman
were  given  two  wings  of  a  great  eagle,  that  she  might
fly  into  the  wilderness,  into  her  place,  where  she  is  nour-
ished for  a  time,  and  times,  and  half  a  time,  from  the
face  of  the  serpent,"  Rev.  xii,  6th  and  14th  verses',
1260  days  being  the  same  as  time,  times  and  a  half —
three  years  and  a  half,  or  1260  prophetic  days  —  which,
according  to  my  former  proof,  must  mean  1260  years.

The  question  now  remains  to  be  settled,  Where  and
when  this  wilderness  state  began,  in  order  for  us  to
understand  the  present  state  of  the  church.

And  first,  let  us  inquire,  What  are  the  Scripture  marks
of  the  beginning  of  this  period  ?  I  answer,  in  the  Apoca-
lypse, xi.  2,  "  But  the  court  which  is  without  the  temple
leave  out,  and  measure  it  not,  for  it  is  given  unto  the
Gentiles  ;  and  the  holy  city  shall  they  tread  under  foot
forty-two  months."  This  is  the  same  time,  three  years
and  a  half,  or  1260  days,  as  before.  Again,  Rev.  xiii.  4,
5,  "And  they  worshipped  the  dragon,  which  gave  power
unto  the  beast ;  and  they  worshipped  the  beast,  saying,
Who  is  like  unto  the  beast?  Who  is  able  to  make  war
with  him  ?  And  there  was  given  him  a  mouth  speaking
great  things  and  blasphemies ;  and  power  was  given
him  to  continue  forty  and  two  months"  —  the  very  same
time  mentioned  again.  And  we  learn,  by  this  passage,
that  this  beast,  which  would  persecute  and  drive  into
the  wilderness  the  church,  would  receive  his  power  from
the  dragon,  — the  same  as  in  Rev.  xii.  4,  "stood  before
the  woman,  which  was  ready  to  be  delivered,  for  to
devour  her  child  as  soon  as  it  was  born," —  and  must,  of
necessity,  be  the  Roman  power.  See  Rev.  xvii.  12,  13.
"And  the  ten  horns  which  thou  sawest  are  ten  kings,
which  have  received  no  kingdom  as  yet;  but  receive
power,  as  kings,  one  hour  with  the  beast.  These  have
one  mind,  and  shall  give  their  power  and  strength  unto
the  beast"  This  text  plainly  proves  that  the  kings  of
the  Roman  power  gave  their  power  and  authority  to


276  LECTURE    XVIII.

this  beast,  which  was  to  drive  into  the  wilderness  the
church,  "and  tread  her  under  foot  forty  and  two
months."

We  must  look,  then,  for  some  law,  passed  by  some
Roman  emperor,  and  sanctioned  by  the  ten  kings,  (for
they,  too,  had  the  same  mind  to  give  "  their  power  and
strength  unto  the  beast,"  meaning,  as  I  understand  it,
Rome  Papal,)  in  order  to  find  the  commencement  of  the
church  in  the  wilderness.

We  find  that  Justinian,  emperor  of  Constantinople,
formed  a  code  of  laws  about  A.  D.  534,  which  were
published  and  sanctioned,  in  the  Western  Empire  at
Rome,  about  four  years  afterwards ;  on  which  code  of
laws,  the  Pope  has  claimed  his  authority  to  rule  over
kings,  and  punish  heretics  with  confiscation  of  their
goods,  imprisonment  or  torture  of  body,  and  even  death ;
which  laws  continued  in  force  until  1260  years  afterwards,
in  the  year  1798,  when  the  French  people,  under  General
Bonaparte,  abolished  the  laws,  and  constituted  Italy  a
republic.

Then,  in  the  year  1798,  the  church  began  to  come  up
out  of  the  wilderness.  "  What,"  says  the  objector,  "has
Bonaparte  or  the  wars  of  France  to  do  with  the  church
coming  out  of  the  wilderness  ?  "  I  answer,  Much ;  for
the  same  power  that  gave  the  anti-Christian  beast  his
authority,  must  take  it  away.  The  political  river  Jor-
dan must  be  parted  asunder;  the  law  of  outlawry
against  the  church  must  be  abolished,  before  she  could
enjoy  rights  and  privileges  in  the  great  city  of  nations.
In  this  war,  under  the  modern  dragon,  the  emperor  of
the  French,  the  barriers  were  broken  down.  And  now,
the  church  is  permitted  to  exist  in  almost  all  kingdoms
in  the  known  world.

This  is  "  coming  up  out  of  the  wilderness,"  for  she  is
now  permitted  to  publish  the  gospel  of  her  beloved
among  all  nations.  She  can  now  translate  his  word  into
every  language,  and  send  his  servants  into  every  quarter
of  the  globe.  By  this  were  the  armies  of  Christ  to  con-
quer his  enemies  by  the  "  sharp  sword  which  proceedeth
out  of  his  mouth."  And  as  the  Jews  overran  and  con-
quered a  large  share  of  the  promised  land,  after  they


Christ's  second  coming.  277

came  out  of  the  wilderness,  even  so,  in  these  days,  the
church  is  extending  her  banners  over  a  large  sLare  of
the  earth,  the  promised  land  of  the  Christian,  See
Psalm  xxxvii.  22,  28,  29,  and  34.  Prov.  ii.  21,  22.  x.  30.
Matt.  v.  5.  For  the  apostle  Paul  tells  us,  1  Cor.  x.  11,
"  Now  all  these  things  happened  unto  them  for  examples^
(or  types,)  and  they  are  written  for  our  admonition,  upon
whom  the  end  of  the  world  is  come."  It  is  very  evident
that  the  apostle,  in  this  passage,  is  speaking  of  the  travel
of  the  children  of  Israel  through  the  wilderness,  and
their  entrance  into  the  promised  land,  or  their  coming
out  of  the  wilderness,  as  a  type  or  resemblance  of  the
Christian  church  in  these  last  days.

Therefore,  we  are  allowed  by  the  inspired  apostles  to
use  their  journey  and  acts,  to  illustrate  and  show  the
present  state  of  the  church,  if  we  can  gain  any  instruc-
tion thereby.

The  Jews  had  a  promise  that  they  should  inherit  the
land  of  Canaan ;  the  Christian,  that  he  shall  inherit  the
earth  —  "  For  the  meek  shall  inherit  the  earth ; "  and
"  The  kingdom,  and  greatness  of  the  kingdom  under  the
whole  heaven,  shall  be  given  to  the  people  of  the  saints
of  the  Most  High."  The  Jews  used  carnal  weapons  in
their  wars  with  the  inhabitants ;  the  church  are  com-
manded to  use  spiritual  ones,  to  the  pulling  down  of  the
strong-holds,  &c.  They  were  led  by  their  temporal
Joshua;  the  church,  by  her  spiritual  leader.  The  Jews
conquered  by  sending  out  their  chosen  and  expert  men
with  the  sword ;  the  church  has  sent  forth  her  chosen
missionaries,  expert  men  with  the  sword  of  the  Spirit,
which  is  the  "word  of  God."

The  Jews  had  great  success  in  conquering  their
enemies  when  they  first  came  out  of  the  wilderness ;
even  so  the  church  has  had  her  unexpected  success  in
her  missionary  efforts.  The  Jews,  within  twenty  years,
became  a  proud,  haughty,  and  an  idolatrous  people,  ascrib-
ing all  their  success  to  their  own  power ;  and  mingling
themselves  with  the  nations  around  them,  they  began  to
bow  down  to  their  gods,  and  worship  Baalim,  and  Ash-
taroth ;  just  so,  and  in  about  the  same  time,  since  the
cause  of  missions  began  to  succeed,  has  the  church
24


278


LECTURE     XVIII.


become  proud  and  haughty,  publishing  her  donations
upon  the  house-top,  mixing  her  moral  questions  with
the  political  partizans  of  the  day,  and  courting  the
applause  of  men  more  than  obeying  the  voice  of
God :  she  is  preparing  for  a  sudden  overthrow,  a  signal
defeat.

The  church  is  evidently  worshipping  her  god  Baalim ;
her  teachers  are  seeking  to  be  called  by  great  names,
such  as  A.  B.,  A.  M.,  B.  D.,  D.  D.,  or  Rev.,  &c  ;  to
lord  it  over  each  other,  and  to  be  called  master.  See  the
meaning  of  the  word  Baalim,  idols,  masters,  false  gods.
It  is  equally  as  evident,  that  she  is  bowing  herself  to  the
god  Ashtaroth,  flocks,  the  sheep,  riches.

Where,  in  the  history  of  the  church,  can  we  find  a
time  that  the  people  called  Christians  were,  appa-
rently, engaged  after  the  riches  of  this  world  as  now  ?
Then,  the  agreement,  in  almost  every  thing,  between  the
Jews,  when  they  came  out  of  the  wilderness,  and  the
church  at  the  present  day,  holds  good,  and  proves  clear-
ly to  me  that  the  church  is  now  out  of  the  wilderness.
If  it  is  not  so,  When,  I  ask,  since  the  apostles'  days,  has
the  church  been  out  of  the  wilderness  ?  Instead,  then,
of  being  in  the  wilderness  only  1260  years,  she  evidently
has  been  1800  years  in  the  wilderness;  and  this
prophecy  has  failed,  or  has  no  meaning.

What  greater  privileges  did  the  church  ever  enjoy
than  now  ?  Were  their  privileges  among  the  nations  of
the  earth  greater,  even  in  the  days  of  the  Roman  em-
perors, under  the  nursing  care  of  Constantine  and  his
sons  ?  I  answer,  No.  Then,  surely,  the  church  is  now
out  of  the  wilderness,  and  has  been  nearly  or  quite  forty
years.  If  so,  then  the  1260  years  of  the  reign  of  anti-
Christ  to  give  the  court  of  the  Gentiles  to  be  trodden
under  foot  have  ended.

Then,  the  two  witnesses,  prophesying,  clothed  in
sackcloth,  1260  years  have  ended.  Then,  also,  has  the
civil  power  of  the  anti-Christian  beast,  to  rule  over  the
kings  of  the  earth  forty-two  months,  been  taken  from
the  beast.

Then,  also,  has  the  "  time,  times  and  a  half,"  men-
tioned in  Daniel  vii.  25,  and  xii.  7,  had  its  fulfilment,


Christ's  second  coming.  279

"  to  the  end  of  these  wonders."  And  now,  the  anti-
Christian  beast  will  no  longer  be  able  to  deceive  the
nations  with  her  false  miracles,  or  make  the  kings  of
the  earth  acknowledge  her  power  as  supreme.  They
have  eaten  her  flesh ;  they  have  made  her  drink  her
own  blood ;  her  great  men  have  departed  from  her ;  they
are  casting  dust  on  their  heads,  crying,  "  Alas !  alas !  that
great'city  Babylon,  that  mighty  city !  for  in  one  hour  is  thy
judgment  come."  "And  when  she  shall  have  accom-
plished to  scatter  the  power  of  the  holy  people,  all  these
things  shall  be  finished,"  Dan.  xii.  7.  This  beast  has  but
one  more  work  to  perform  —  "  to  scatter  the  power  of  the
holy  people  ;  to  divide,  that  she  may  conquer.  It  is  the  last
gasp  of  the  expiring  monster  ;  it  is  the  dying  struggle  of
the  man  of  sin.  And,  for  a  little  moment,  they  will  succeed.
For  the  church  must  be  humbled;  she  has  departed
from  her  Lord,  she  has  grown  proud  of  her  worldly
connections,  she  has  become  haughty,  and  lording  it
over  the  heritage  of  the  Lord.  She  must  be  divided.
She  is  already.  She  must  be  scattered,  shaken  like
grain  in  the  winnowing-fan,  that  that  which  cannot  be
shaken  may  remain.  She  will  be  delivered  when  her
Lord  returns  to  the  wedding,  and  sends  forth  his  angels
to  gather  his  elect  from  the  four  winds  of  heaven,  where
they  have  been  scattered  in  the  dark  and  cloudy  day.
Then  will  he  destroy  the  man  of  sin  by  the  brightness
of  his  coming.  Then,  too,  will  the  little  horn  cease
making  war  with  the  saints,  and  no  longer  prevail
against  them.  The  Ancient  of  days  will  come,  and
judgment  will  be  given  to  the  saints  of  the  Most  High ;
and  the  time  will  have  come  when  the  saints,  in  union
with  their  spiritual  Joshua,  will  enter  into  thut  eternal
Sabbath  of  rest  which  remains  for  the  people  of  God.

Nothing  can  be  more  clear,  or  self-evident,  than  that
the  church  is  combating  the  great  natural  and  moral
evils,  which  men  in  this  state  of  sin  are  prone  to  commit
What  shall  we  make  of  all  these  societies  which  the
church  have  instituted  since  she  came  out  of  the  wilder-
ness, but  so  many  attacks  upon  the  enemies  of  the  land  ?

The  Bible  society,  instituted  since  1798.  This  has
proved  a  powerful  weapon  to  expel  the  moral  darkness


280  UECTURE     XVIII.

from  the  mind  of  the  unenlightened,  to  open  the  prison
of  the  votaries  of  superstition,  and  to  knock  off  the
shackles  of  bigotry.  We  have  seen,  in  our  day,  Deism
humbled  from  a  haughty  tyrant  to  a  cringing  sycophant
We  have  seen  Romanism,  from  a  monarch  ruling  over
the  souls  and  bodies  of  men  with  an  absolute  sway,  be-
come a  slave,  a  follower  in  the  wake  of  Protestants,
in  publishing  and  circulating  the  Scriptures.  The  De-
ists, a  few  years  since,  had  the  control  of  nine  tenths  of
all  Europe ;  now,  not  a  petty  kingdom  under  their  con-
trol :  the  Roman  church,  for  centuries  past  the  mistress
of  most  of  the  kings  of  Europe,  now  a  poor  dependant
on  the  breath  of  kings.

Our  missionary  societies  have  carried  the  banners  of
the  cross  where  hope  never  smiled  before,  nor  faith
ever  lighted  the  cheerless  sky  of  the  heathen's  land.
And  we  have  seen  nations  hearing  the  word  of  God,  and
islands  converted  to  the  faith  of  the  gospel  of  Christ

Temperance  societies.  We  have  seen  the  attack  upon
intemperance,  the  Anakim  of -our  world,  and  we  have
heard  the  shout  of  triumph  from  every  quarter  of  the
globe.  Rapid,  indeed,  was  the  march  to  victory  !  Again,
our  moral  reform  societies,  our  Sabbath  schools,  Bible
classes,  &c.  &c,  are  all  so  many  attacks  on  moral  evil,
which  have  produced,  in  many  cases,  wonderful  effects  ;
so  much  so,  that  it  has  astonished  even  the  projectors
themselves.

These  aggravated  sins  are  falling  before  the  all-con-
quering weapon  of  God's  word,  like  the  walls  of  Jericho
before  the  blasts  of  the  trumpets ;  and  it  will  go  on  con-
quering and  to  conquer,  until  tyranny,  oppression,  and
slavery,  in  every  form,  shall  be  destroyed.  Perhaps  no-
thing, at  the  present  time,  impedes  the  progress  of  these
things  so  much  as  the  popular  spirit,  the  pride,  and  arro-
gance of  the  church  herself.  She  is,  more  or  less,  court-
ing the  applause  of  the  world.  She  is  mingling  her  holy
religion  with  the  opinions  and  principles  of  men.  She
is  proud  and  self-sufficient,  doting  upon  her  own  works,
and  forgetting  her  dependence  on  God.  If  this  should
be  the  true  state  of  the  church,  God  may  suffer  tyrants
to  remain  as  a  scourge  to  the  church,  "  as  a  rod  for  the
fool's  back."


Christ's  second  coming.  281

This  was  literally  the  case  with  the  Jewish  church,
after  she  came  out  of  the  wilderness  ;  and  every  appear-
ance seems  to  betoken  the  like  spirit  in  the  church  at
the  present  day.  O  that  we  could  be  wise,  and  learn,
by  the  example  set  us  by  the  Jews,  that  pride  and  self-
sufficiency  are  always  before  a  fall!

I  know  the  objector  will  say,  How  can  it  be  true,  that
the  church  is  spreading  her  banners  over  a  large  portion
of  the  world,  sending  her  missionaries  and  the  Bible  in-
to every  nook  and  corner  of  the  habitable  globe,  con-
quering and  to  conquer  ;  and,  at  the  same  time,  growing
more  and  more  impure  herself,  becoming  haughty,  self-
righteous,  and  ungrateful,  corrupt  and  lukewarm  in  her
faith  and  practice,  idolatrous  in  her  worship,  and  cold  and
indifferent  to  her  first  love  ?  This,  say  they,  is  para-
doxical.

I  answer,  Paradoxical  as  it  may  seem,  it  is  no  less
true.  Have  I  not  shown  that  the  Jews  were  thus  para-
doxical, when  they  entered  the  promised  land?  Do
not  the  description  Solomon  hath  given  us  of  the  church
in  his  Songs,  the  Epistles  of  Paul  to  the  Corinthians
and  Galatians,  and  the  history  of  the  church  in  the
days  of  Constantine,  all  go  to  show,  that  when  the
church  has  been  most  prospered  in  her  worldly  standing
with  the  nations,  with  whom  she  may  come  in  contact,
she  has  the  more  deeply  corrupted  herself?

This  does  not  argue  that  she  ought  not  to  spread  her
banners,  send  her  missionaries,  translate  and  circulate
Bibles,  educate  the  rising  generation,  establish  her  moral
societies,  and  do  all,  and' every  work,  which  God  in  his
word  has  commanded  ;  but  it  argues  that  the  church  is
imperfect,  and  that,  in  times  of  prosperity,  she  ought  to
consider,

1st.  Her  proneness  to  idolatry,  her  liability  to  self-
righteousness,  her  excessive  love  for  the  world,  the
temptations  on  every  hand.

2dly.  She  ought  to  consider  that  adversity  is  set  over
against  prosperity,  that  her  faith  may  be  tried,  her
motives  sifted,  the  body  purified,  and  the  sanctuary
cleansed.

3d.  She  ought  to  consider  that  the  designs  of  God
24*


282  LECTURE    XVIII.

will  be  accomplished,  that  the  work  must  be  executed,
that  all  power  centres  in  him ;  and,  although  the  church
may  be  proud,  self-righteous,  and  deeply  corrupted  by
unbelief  and  sin,  yet  God  will  eventually  be  glorified,
his  kingdom  established,  his  will  done  in  earth  as  in
heaven ;  and  the  time  is  at  hand,  when  the  saints  will
possess  the  kingdom  forever,  even  forever  and  ever.

Amen.


LECTURE    XIX


MATT.  xvi.  3.
But  can  ye  not  discern  the  signs  of  the  times  i

Our  text  is  a  question  proposed  by  Christ  to  the  Phar-
isees and  Sadducees,  at  a  time  when  they  came  to  him,
tempting  him  for  a  sign  from  heaven ;  and  is  a  reproof
upon  them  for  their  unbelief  in  the  signs  already  given
by  the  Old  Testament  writers,  which  they  professed  to
believe,  and  which  were  actually  fulfilling  before  their
eyes,  yet  disregarded.  The  Pharisees  and  Sadducees
were  two  of  the  most  learned  and  popular  sects  among
the  Jews ;  many  of  them  were  scribes,  lawyers,  doctors,
and  tochers  of  the  law ;  yet  so  perfectly  blinded,  that
they  could  not  or  would  not  apply  the  most  simple  rules"
of  interpretation  to  the  law  or  prophets.  They  would
apply  the  rules  of  common  observation  and  common
sense  to  the  weather,  but  neither  the  one  nor  the  other
were  used  in  understanding  the  Scriptures.  They  were
well  versed  in  the  skill  to  tell  the  weather  for  the  mor-
row, but  had  no  skill  in  the  promises,  prophecies,  and
word  of  God.  "  When  it  is  evening,  ye  say  it  will  be
fair  weather,  for  the  sky  is  red  ;  and  in  the  morning,  it
will  be  foul  weather  to-day,  for  the  sky  is  red  and  low-
ering. O  ye  hypocrites !  ye  ean  discern  the  face  of  the
sky,  but  can  ye  not  (by  the  same  simple  rule)  discern  tfie
signs  of  the  times  ?  "

All  the  signs  given  in  the  word  of  God,  concerning
the  first  coming  and  person  of  the  Messiah,  were  fulfil-
ling before  their  eyes ;  yet  they  were  demanding^more


284  LECTURE    XIX.

and  greater  signs  from  heaven.  Christ  had,  and  was
then  performing  miracles  which  no  man  on  earth  could
perform,  and  they  ascribed  it*  to  the  power  of  Beelzebub.
No  evidence  had  or  could  be  presented,  which  they
were  not  ready  to  evade  or  deny  ;  and  yet  they  claimed
all  the  learning,  all  the  wisdom,  and  all  the  piety  of  that
day.  This  was  the  character  of  those  whom  Christ  calls
hypocrites,  and  to  whom  he  addresses  the  question,  "  But
can  ye  not  discern  the  signs  of  the  times  ?  "  And  happy
would  it  have  been  for  us,  who  live  in  this  day  of  gospel
light,  when  the  gospel  shines  with  greater  effulgence
than  at  any  other  period  of  time  since  the  world  began,
if  hypocrisy  had  died  with  the  Pharisees  and  Sadducees ;
but  it  was  not  so.  Any  man,  of  common  capacity  of
mind,  who  can  divest  himself  of  prejudice,  or  who  will
try  to  see  the  character  of  man  as  developed  at  the  pres-
ent day  in  matters  of  faith,  will  discover  the  same  unbe-
lief, the  same  disregard,  the  same  taunting,  tempting
spirit,  concerning  the  second  coming  of  the  Messiah,  as
the  Pharisees  and  Sadducees  manifested  in  their  con-
duct and  conversation  with  our  blessed  Redeemer.  And
the  question  may  with  equal  propriety,  and  T  fear  with
tenfold  force,  be  put  to  us  at  this  day,  if  Christ  was  here,
as  then.  And  I  have  much  reason  to  fear,  that  many
may  be  found  among  our  great,  learned,  and  teachers  of
divine  things,  who  would  receive  from  our  divine  Master
the  same  reproof,  were  he  as  then  a  teacher  among  us.
"  Let  him  that  thinketh  he  stand eth  take  heed,  lest  he
fall."  I  shall,  then,  in  treating  on  this  subject,  use  my
text  as  a  reproof  to  us.

I.  I  shall  show  a  number  of  signs  which  the  Jews  had
in  that  day,  as  evidences  of  Jesus  being  the  true  Mes-
siah.

II.  Show  the  signs  that  Jesus  Christ,  the  prophets,  and
apostles  have  given  us  of  his  second  coming,  now  fulfil-
ling in  this  day  in  which  we  live.

Under  my  first  head,  the  signs  of  Jesus  being  the  true
Messiah,  were,

1.  The  universal  peace  at  his  birth.  Of  this  Isaiah
ii.  3,  4,  had  prophesied  760  years  before,  "  And  many
people  shall  go  and  say,  Come  ye,  and  let  us  go  up  to


Christ's  second  coming.  285

the  mountain  of  the  Lord,  to  the  house  of  the  God  of
Jacob  ;  and  he  will  teach  us  of  his  ways,  and  we  will
walk  in  his  paths ;  for  out  of  Zion  shall  go  forth  the
law,  and  the  word  of  the  Lord  from  Jerusalem.  And  he
shall  judge  among  the  nations,  and  shall  rebuke  many
people ;  and  they  shall  beat  their  swords  into  plough-
shares, and  their  spears  into  pruning-hooks.  Nation
shall  not  lift  up  sword  against  nation,  neither  shall  they
learn  war  any  more."  This  prophecy  was  accomplished
at  his  birth.  For  the  temple  of  Janus  was  shut  the  very
year  our  Savior  was  born,  which  denoted  universal  peace ;
and  this  must  have  been  known  to  the  Jewish  rulers.
Also  the  doctrines  of  Jesus  Christ  taught  th.3t  they
should  forgive  and  pray  for  their  enemies,  and  learn  war
no  more.  "  Peace  on  earth  and  good  will  to  men,"  was
sung  by  the  heavenly  band  when  they  announced  the
birth  of  the  Savior  in  the  city  of  David.

2.  The  star  that  appeared  and  guided  the  wise  men  to
the  place  of  his  nativity,  prophesied  of  by  Balaam,  Num.
xxiv.  17.     "  There  shall  come  a  star  out  of  Jacob,"  &c.

3.  A  root  out  of  Jesse.  Isa.  xi.  10,  "  In  that  day  there
shall  be  a  root  out  of  Jesse,  which  shall  stand  for  an  en-
sign of  the  people ;  to  it  shall  the  Gentiles  seek,"  &c.
That  he  was  a  descendant  of  David  was  well  known  to
the  Jews,  for  they  were  very  scrupulous  in  their  geneal-
ogies, and  from  the  fact  that  he  was  born  in  the  city  of
David  when  his  parents  went  up  to  be  taxed  where  their
names  were  enrolled.

4.  Born  of  a  virgin.  Isa.  vii.  14,  "  Therefore  the  Lord
himself  shall  give  you  a  sign.  Behold,  a  virgin  shall  con-
ceive and  bear  a  son,  and  shall  call  his  name  Immanuel."
This  was  evidently  fulfilled.

5.  At  Bethlehem.  Micah  v.  2,  "  But  thou,  Bethlehem
Ephratah,  though  thou  be  little  among  the  thousands  of
Judah,  yet  out  of  thee  shall  he  come  forth  unto  me  that
is  to  be  ruler  in  Israel,  whose  goings  forth  have  been  from
of  old,  from  everlasting."  This  was  fulfilled,  according
to  their  own  showing,  to  the  wise  men  from  the  east

6.  Herod  slaymg  all  the  children  in  Bethlehem,  from
two  years  old  and  under,  prophesied  of  by  Jeremiah,
xxxi.  15,  "  A  voice  was  heard  in  Ramah,  lamentation


286  LECTURE    XIX.

and  bitter  weeping,  Rachael  weeping  for  her  children,"
&c.     This  must  have  been  known  in  all  Judea.

7.  Land  forsaken  of  both  of  her  kings.  Isa.  vii.  16,
"  For  before  the  child  shall  know  to  refuse  the  evil  and
choose  the  good,  the  land  that  thou  abhorrest  shall  be  for-
saken of  both  her  kings."  Herod  and  his  successor  both
died  before  Jesus  was  of  the  common  age  to  refuse  the
evil  and  choose  the  good.

8.  Called  out  of  Egypt.  Hosea  xi.  1,  "  And  called  my
son  out  of  Egypt."

9.  His  forerunner  John.  Isa.  xl.  3,  "  The  voice  of  him
that  crieth  in  the  wilderness,  Prepare  ye  the  way  of  the
Lord,  make  straight  in  the  desert  a  highway  for  our  God."
All  Judea  and  Jerusalem  went  into  the  wilderness  to
John,  and  of  course  must  have  seen  this  sign.

10.  Coming  suddenly  to  his  temple.  Mai.  iii.  1,  "  And
the  Lord  whom  ye  seek  shall  suddenly  come  to  his  tem-
ple." For  the  fulfilment  of  this  prophecy,  read  John  vii.
11 — 14,  "Then  the  Jews  sought  him  at  the  feast,  and
said,  Where  is  he  ?  Now  about  the  midst  of  the  feast,
Jesus  went  up  into  the  temple  and  taught."

11.  The  gospel  preached.  Isa.  lxi.  1,  "The  spirit
of  the  Lord  God  is  upon  me ;  because  the  Lord  hath
anointed  me  to  preach  good  tidings  unto  the  meek ;  he
hath  sent  me  to  bind  up  the  broken-hearted,  to  proclaim
liberty  to  the  captive,  and  the  opening  of  the  prison  to
them  that  are  bound."

12.  The  covenant  confirmed  one  week  or  seven  years,
Daniel  ix.  27,  "And  he  shall  confirm  the  covenant  with
many  for  one  week."  J  ohn  preached  three  years  and  a
half,  and  Christ  three  and  a  half.

13.  The  blind  see.  Isa.  xlii.  7,  "  To  open  the  blind
eyes,  to  bring  out  the  prisoners  from  the  prison,  and  them
that  sit  in  darkness  out  of  the  prison-house."

14.  The  lame  walk.  Isaiah,  xxxv.  6,  "  Then  shall  the
lame  man  leap  as  a  hart,  and  the  tongue  of  the  dumb
sing."

15.  The  deaf  hear.  Isaiah  xxxv.  5,  "  Then  the  eyes
of  the  blind  shall  be  opened,  and  the  ears  of  the  deaf
shall  be  unstopped."

16.  The  dead  are  raised.  Isaiah  xxvi.  19,  "And  the
earth  shall  cast  out  the  dead."


Christ's  second  coming.  287

17.  His  humility  when  on  trial.  Isaiah  liii.  7,  "  He
was  oppressed,  and  he  was  afflicted ;  yet  he  opened  not
his  mouth.  He  is  brought  as  a  lamb  to  the  slaughter,
and  as  a  sheep  before  her  shearers  is  dumb,  so  he  opened
not  his  mouth."

18.  The  manner  and  circumstances  of  his  death.
Psalm  xxii.  13 — 18,  "They  gaped  upon  me  with  their
mouths  as  a  ravening  and  a  roaring  lion.  I  am  poured
out  as  water  and  all  my  bones  are  out  of  joint:  my  heart
is  like  wax ;  it  is  melted  in  the  midst  of  my  bowels.  My
strength  is  dried  up  like  a  potsherd,  and  my  tongue  cleav-
eth  to  my  jaws,  and  thou  hast  brought  me  into  the  dust
of  death.  For  dogs  have  compassed  me  ;  the  assembly
of  the  wicked  have  enclosed  me  :  they  pierced  my  hands
and  my  feet ;  I  may  tell  all  my  bones  ;  they  look  and  stare
upon  me.  They  part  my  garments  among  them,  and  cast
lots  upon  my  vesture."  This  Psalm  was  indited  more
than  ]0C0  years  before  Christ's  crucifixion,  and  yet  every
word  had  an  exact  and  literal  accomplishment  in  that
transaction,  and  the  Jews  saw  it.

19.  His  resurrection.  Psalm  xvi.  10,  "  For  thou  wilt
not  leave  my  soul  in  hell ;  neither  wilt  thou  suffer  thine
Holy  One  to  see  corruption."

20.  The  pouring  out  of  the  Holy  Spirit  on  the  day  of
pentecost.  Joel  ii.  28,  "  And  it  shall  come  to  pass  after-
ward that  1  will  pour  out  my  spirit  upon  all  flesh ;  and
your  sons  and  your  daughters  shall  prophesy;  your  old
men  shall  dream  dreams,  your  young  men  shall  see  vis-
ions." The  apostle  told  them  that  this  scripture  was
fulfilled  at  the  day  of  pentecost,  and  this  transaction  was
well  known  to  the  Jews.

21.  The  fulfilment  of  the  seventy  weeks  spoken  of  by
Daniel,  ix.  24 — 27,  which  I  have  shown  in  a  former  lec-
ture, was  accomplished  to  a  day.  And  the  Jews  well
understood  it ;  for  Caiaphas,  being  high  priest  that  year,
said  to  the  Jews,  "  Ye  know  nothing  at  all,  nor  consider
that  it  is  expedient  for  us  that  one  man  should  die  for  the
people,  and  that  the  whole  nation  perish  not.  And  this
spake  he  not  of  himself,  but  being  high  priest  that  year
he  prophesied  (or  taught  the  prophecy  in  Daniel)  that
Jesus  should  die  for  that  nation,  and  not  for  that  nation


288  LECTURE    XIX.

only,  but  that  also  he  should  gather  tog-ether  in  one  the
children  of  God  that  were  scattered  abroad."  John  xi.
49—52.

This  evidence  was  well  understood  among  the  rulers
of  the  Jews ;  yet  notwithstanding  all  this  scripture  was
fulfilled  before  their  faces,  and  all  these  signs  were  ac-
tually accomplished  in  the  short  space  of  thirty-five  years,
and  a  cloud  of  witnesses  testifying  to  all  these  facts,  and
they  themselves  had  to  consent  that  notable  miracles  had
been  done,  they  believed  not.  Well  may  you  say,  dear
hearer,  that  they  deserved  wrath,  and  God  was  just  in
destroying  their  nation  and  place.  But  how  is  it  with
us  ?  Do  Ave  believe  in  that  word  which  we  blame  them
for  rejecting?  Are  we  clear  of  the  sin  of  unbelief  ?  The
Jews  were  looking  for  a  temporal  king  and  kingdom.
And  are  not  we  looking  for  a  temporal  millennium  —  one
in  which  the  Christians  will  have  the  rule  of  the  world  ?
Let  us  see  to  it  that  we  do  not  stumble  at  the  same  stum-
bling-stone ;  possibly  we  may  have  carnal  notions  as
well  as  they.     Therefore,  let  us  inquire,

II.  What  signs  are  now  fulfilling,  which  are  given  us
by  Christ,  the  prophets,  or  apostles,  of  his  second  coming
and  glorious  reign  ?     And,

1.  Christ  tells  us,  Matt.  xxiv.  14,  "This  gospel  of  the
kingdom  shall  be  preached  in  all  the  world  as  a  witness,
and  then  shall  the  end  come."  Is  not  this  sign  already
accomplished  ?  Bible  translated  into  more  than  200  dif-
ferent languages ;  missionaries  sent  among  all  the  na-
tions known  to  us  on  the  globe,  and  reformation  succeed-
ing reformation  in  every  town,  nook  or  corner  in  this
land.  The  gospel  has  now  spread  over  the  four  quar-
ters of  the  globe.  It  began  in  Asia.  In  the  apostles*
days,  that  quarter  was  full  of  light.  From  thence  it
went  into  Africa ;  and,  for  a  number  of  centuries,  Africa
stretched  out  her  hands  unto  God,  Europe,  too,  has  had
a  long  visitation  of  gospel  blessings ;  and  now  America,
the  last  quarter  of  the  globe,  is  reaping  a  harvest  of
souls  for  the  last  day.  The  gospel,  like  the  sun,  arose
in  the  east,  and  will  set  in  the  west.

2.  The  pouring  out  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  last  reign
of  grace.    Daniel  tells  us,  after  Bonaparte  should  come


to  his  end,  and  none  should  help  him,  xii.  1,  "  And  at
that  time  shall  Michael  stand  up,  the  great  prince  which
standeth  for  the  children  of  thy  people."  This  1  have
shown,  in  a  former  lecture,  is  the  same  angel  that  stood
upon  the  waters  of  the  river,  clothed  in  linen,  Daniel  xii.
6 ;  also  the  same  angel  that  John  saw,  Rev.  x.  1 — 6,
standing,  his  right  foot  upon  the  sea,  and  his  left  upon
the  earth,  and  in  his  hand  a  little  book  open.  This  angel
told  John  that  he  must  "  prophesy  again  before  many
people,  and  nations,  and  tongues,  and  kings ; "  meaning
that  the  gospel  must  again  be  published,  as  it  had  been
in  the  apostolic  days.  And  then  would  this  angel  lift
his  hand  to  heaven,  and  swear  by  him  that  liveth  for-
ever and  ever,  that  time  should  be  no  longer.  Again,
James  says,  v.  7,  8,  "  Be  patient,  therefore,  brethren,  un-
to the  coming  of  the  Lord.  Behold,  the  husbandman
waiteth  for  the  precious  fruit  of  the  earth,  and  hath  long
patience  for  it,  until  he  receive  the  early  and  latter  rain.
Be  ye  also  patient ;  establish  your  hearts,  for  the  coming
of  the  Lord  draweth  nigh."  And  now,  can  any  man,
who  has  any  knowledge  of  the  present  times,  deny  that
God  has  poured  out  his  spirit,  in  a  remarkable  manner,
for  twenty  years  past  ?  Has  not  the  gospel  been  spread
in  as  rapid  and  extensive  a  manner,  as  in  the  apostolic
day?  Has  not  opposition  and  persecution  of  the  kings
of  the  earth,  of  the  woman  that  sitteth  on  many  waters,
the  sea,  been  in  a  great  measure  kept  in  check  and  pow-
erless, by  some  invisible  power,  some  mighty  arm,  until
the  servants  of  God  should  be  sealed,  the  latter  rain  of
grace  descend,  and  God's  purposes  completed  concern-
ing this  latter  day  ?  Here,  then,  we  have  a  clear  and
visible  sign,  that  the  coming  of  the  Lord  draweth  nigh.

3.  "  Many  running  to  and  fro."  This  is  another  im-
portant and  evident  sign  of  the  end.  Daniel  xii.  4,  "  But
thou,  O  Daniel,  shut  up  the  words  and  seal  the  book,
even  to  the  time  of  the  end.  Many  shall  run  to  and  fro."
Whether  the  prophet  means  to  be  understood,  "  many
shall  run  to  and  fro  "  in  a  religious  sense,  or  in  a  civil  or
temporal  sense,  or  whether  he  means  in  both,  is  perfect-
ly immaterial  for  my  purpose.  All  must  acknowledge,
that  this  text  is  remarkably  fulfilled  in  this  day,  in  either
25


290  LECTURE   XIX.

point  of  view.  If  it  means  missionaries  of  the  cross,  no
man  can  dispute  the  fulfilment  See  the  heralds  of  sal-
vation crossing  and  re-crossing  on  every  part  of  the  hab-
itable globe.  If  it  means  common  travellers,  or  the
rapid  means  of  travel,  still  oar  text  holds  good,  and  the
fulfilment  obvious.  No  man,  unless  he  is  wilfully  ig-
norant, can  deny  that  this  sign  is  not  actually  and  liter-
ally fulfilled.

4.  The  great  increase  of  knowledge  given  in  the  same
text  as  above.  "  Even  to  the  time  of  the  end  many  shall
run  to  and  fro,  and  knowledge  shall  be  increased."  View
this  in  any  point  you  please,  whether  theological  or  sci-
entifical,  it  is  literally  true ;  in  this  day  of  invention  and
improvement,  knowledge  increases.  What  of  the  fifty
different  moral  societies,  which  have  become  general  in
the  Christian  world  ?  Is  there  no  increase  of  knowledge
in  our  Bible  societies,  Sabbath  schools,  tract  societies,
temperance  societies,  and  a  catalogue  of  others  for  mor-
al reform  ?  What  can  we  say  of  all  the  inventions  in
the  arts  ?  What  of  all  the  improvements  in  science  ?
In  all  this,  is  it  not  very  evident  that  this  sign  is  now  ful-
filling to  the  very  letter  ?

5.  The-  great  increase  of  riches,  and  desire  for  laying
up  worldly  treasures,  as  described  by  James  v.  1 — 3,  "  Go
to,  now,  ye  rich  men,  weep  and  howl  for  your  miseries
that  shall  come  upon  you;  your  riches  are  corrupted,
and  your  garments  are  moth-eaten  ;  your  gold  and  your
silver  is  cankered,  and  the  rust  of  them  shall  be  a  wit-
ness against  you,  and  shall  eat  your  flesh  as  it  were
fire.  Ye  have  heaped  treasure  together  for  the  last
days."  When,  since  the  writer  of  this  epistle  was  on
our  earth,  has  there  been  such  an  increase  of  gold  and
silver,  and  treasures  of  this  life,  as  at  this  day  ?  Our
rich  men  are  laying  up  their  gold,  silver,  and  treasures
in  abundance.  But,  as  though  this  individual  exertion
for  riches  would  not  completely  fulfil  our  text,  they  have
entered  into  all  manner  of  companies  and  monopolies,
to  "heap  treasure  together."  When,  in  the  history  of
the  world,  can  there  be  shown  so  many  banking  insti-
tutions as  now  ?  When  so  much  insurance  capital  as  is
heaped  together  at  this  day  ?     Are  not  our  rich  men  per-


Christ's  second  coming.  291

fectly  infatuated  with  stocks  of  all  kinds  ?  And  mo-
nopoly is  the  order  of  the  day ;  to  grind  down  the  poor,
and  heap  treasure  together  for  the  last  days.  Can  any
man,  who  has  any  knowledge  of  these  things,  deny  that
this  sign  of  the  last  days  is  not  evidently  accomplished  ?
Go  to,  ye  rich  men,  weep  and  howl,  for  your  miseries  are
come  upon  you.

6.  The  unwillingness  of  men  to  hear  sound  doctrine,
taught  us  hy  Paul,  2  Tim.  iv.  1 — 4,  "  I  charge  thee,  there-
fore, before  God  and  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  shall
judge  the  quick  and  the  dead  at  his  appearing  and  his
kingdom.  For  the  time  will  come,  when  they  will  not
endure  sound  doctrine ;  but  after  their  own  lusts  shall
they  heap  to  themselves  teachers,  having  itching  ears ;
and  they  shall  turn  away  their  ears  from  the  truth,  and
shall  be  turned  unto  fables."  My  brethren,  need  I  say
one  word  on  this  passage  ?  There  is  none  of  you  so
blind,  but  you  see  that  this  passage  does  actually  de-
scribe the  most  fashionable  preaching  at  the  present  day.
How  many  thousand  do  run  after  that  kind  of  preaching
which  is  only  relating  fables,  and  that  doctrine  which
gives  all  power  to  man  ?

7.  Scoffers,  saying,  "  Where  is  the  promise  of  his
coming  ?  "  as  Peter  informs  us  in  his  2  Epistle,  iii.  3,  4,
"  Knowing  this  first,  that  there  shall  come  in  the  last  days
scoffers,  walking  after  their  own  lusts,  and  saying,  Where
is  the  promise  of  his  coming?  For,  since  the  fathers
fell  asleep,  all  things  continue  as  they  were  from  the  be-
ginning of  the  creation."  A  right  understanding  of  this
text  would  show  us,  at  once,  that  many  of  us,  who  fancy
we  are  in  the  highway  to  heaven,  are  belonging  to  this
class  of  scoffers.  First,  they  walk  after  their  own  lusts  ;
that  is,  after  their  own  carnal  notions  concerning  the
coming  of  Christ.  They  say  all  things  will  continue  a3
they  were  from  the  creation ;  they  must  have  a  temporal
millennium ;  man  must  be  married  and  given  in  mar-
riage ;  the  world  will  not  be  burnt,  and,  My  Lord  delay-
eth  his  coming,  some  say  a  thousand  years,  and  some  say
365,000  years,  and  all  the  moral  change  that  takes  place
on  our  earth,  will  be  performed  by  the  agency  of  man.
Therefore,  many  scoff  and  ridicule  the  idea,  that  Scrip-


292  LECTURE    XIX.

ture  tells  us  of  the  second  coming  of  Christ,  the  manner,
object,  and  time.  And  many  are  willingly  ignorant;
will  not  hear  or  read  on  this  subject.

8.  "  Perilous  times,"  as  described  in  2  Tim.  iii.  1 — 7,
"This  know,  also,  that,  in  the  last  days,  perilous  time?
shall  come ;  for  men  shall  be  lovers  of  their  own  selves,
covetous,  boasters,  proud,  blasphemers,  disobedient  to
parents,  unthankful,  unholy,  without  natural  affection,
truce-breakers,  false  accusers,  incontinent,  fierce,  despi3-
ers  of  those  that  are  good,  traitors,  heady,  high-minded,
lovers  of  pleasure  more  than  lovers  of  God,  having  the
form  of  godliness,  but  denying  the  power  thereof;  from
such  turn  away.  For  of  this  sort  are  they  which  creep
into  houses,  and  lead  captive  silly  women  laden  with
sins,  led  away  with  divers  lusts,  ever  learning,  and  never
able  to  come  to  the  knowledge  of  the  truth."

What  better  description  of  domestic  and  public  soci-
ety could  we  expect  from  the  most  close  observer  of
private  characters,  domestic  circles,  and  public  societies
of  our  times,  than  is  here  given  ?  One  would  conclude,
had  he  found  this  in  any  other  book  but  the  Bible,  that
it  was  a  modern  writer,  well  acquainted  with  the  human
heart,  and  the  generations  now  on  the  earth.

9.  "  Departing  from  the  faith,  giving  heed  to  seducing
spirits,  and  doctrines  of  devils,  speaking  lies  in  hypocri-
sy; having  their  conscience  seared  with  a  hot  iron;
forbidding  to  marry,  and  commanding  to  abstain  from
meats."  "Thus  Paul  tells  Timothy,  1  Epistle,  iv.  1 — 3,
"  Now  the  Spirit  speaket.h  expressly,  that  in  the  latter
times  some  shall  depart  from  the  faith,"  &c.  This,  we
must  acknowledge,  has  been,  and  is  now  fulfilling.  The
whole,  almost,  of  the  Christian  world  have  departed,  or
changed  their  faith  within  fifteen  years  ;  seducing  spirits
are  evidently  at  work  ;  hypocrites  are  multiplying  among
us ;  Roman  Catholics,  Shakers,  Pilgrims,  Fanny  Wright,
Owen,  and  others  forbid  to  marry.  Roman  Catholics,
and  many  others  among  us,  are  teaching  to  abstain  from
meats  and  drinks,  which  God  hath  created  to  be  received
with  thanksgiving  of  them  which  believe  and  know  the
truth.

10.  False  teachers,  making  merchandise  of  the  gos-


Christ's  second  coming.  293

pel.  See  2  Peter  ii.  1 — 3,  "  But  there  were  false
prophets,  also,  among  the  people ;  even  as  there  shall  be
false  teachers  among  yon,  who  privily  shall  bring  in
damnable  heresies,  even  denying  the  Lord  that  bought,
them,  and  bring  upon  themselves  swift  destruction ;  and
many  shall  follow  their  pernicious  ways,  by  reason  of
whom  the  way  of  truth  shall  be  evil  spoken  of;  and  through
covetousness  shall  they,  with  feigned  words,  make
merchandise  of  you,  whose  judgment  of  a  long  time
lingereth  not,  and  their  damnation  slumbereth  not."
The  apostle  then  goes  on  to  show,  that,  as  it  was  in
the  days  of  Noah  and  Lot,  so  it  would  be  in  the  days
of  these  false  teachers  ;  one  generation  would  not  pass
off  before  the  judgment  would  overtake  them,  who
make  merchandise  of  the  gospel,  and  like  Balaam,  who
loved  the  wages  of  unrighteousness.

11.  Jude  gives  us  a  sign,  4  to  19  verses,  inclusive,
"How  they  told  you  there  should  be  mockers  in  the
last  time,  who  should  walk  after  their  own  ungodly
lusts ;  these  be  they  who  separate  themselves,  sensual,
having  not  the  Spirit."  Some  preachers  deny  the  agen-
cy of  the  Spirit  in  regeneration.

12.  Christ  gives  a  sign  in  Luke  xxi.  25 — 28,  "  And
there  shall  be  signs  in  the  sun,  and  in  the  moon,  and  in
the  stars;  and,  upon  the  earth,  distress  of  nations,  with
perplexity ;  the  sea  and  the  waves  roaring ;  men's  hearts
failing  them  for  fear,  and  for  looking  for  those  things
which  are  coming  on  the  earth ;  for  the  powers  of  the
heavens  shall  be  shaken ;  and  then  shall  they  see  the
Son  of  Man  coming  in  a  cloud  with  power  and  great
glory.  And  when  these  things  begin  to  come  to  pass,
then  look  up,  and  lift  up  your  heads,  for  your  redemption
draweth  nigh.

13.  Christ  gives  another  sign  in  Matt  xxiv.  23,  24,
"  Then,  if  any  man  shall  say  unto  you,  Lo,  here  is
Christ,  or  there,  believe  it  not;  for  there  shall  arise
fake  Christs  and  false  prophets,  and  shall  show  great
signs  and  wonders,  insomuch  that,  if  it  were  possible,
they  shall  deceive  the  very  elect"  There  ca,n  be  po
doubt  of  this  sign  being  fulfilled,

25*


294  LECTURE   xrx.

14.  The  fulfilment  of  the  parable  of  the  ten  virgins
—  the  midnight  cry  has  gone  forth  from  every  quarter
of  God's  moral  vineyard,  "Behold,  the  bridegroom
cometh."  The  world  has  been,  and  are  now, "  trimming
their  lamps;"  witness  the  Bible  translated  into  all
languages ;  the  Bible  societies  sending  Bibles  to  every
nation  and  family  on  the  earth,  the  Sabbath  schools  and
Bible  classes  studying  its  sacred  precepts.

15.  The  scattering  of  the  holy  people  and  division
of  sects,  as  prophesied  of  by  Daniel,  xii.  7,  "And  when
he  shall  have  accomplished  to  scatter  the  power  of  the
holy  people,  all  these  things  shall  be  finished."  This
prophecy  is  now  fulfilling  in  a  remarkable  manner
Not  one  sect,  who  profess  holiness,  but  are  divided  and
subdivided  into  contending  schisms,  and  that,  too,  with
in  twenty  years.

16.  The  division  of  the  political  world,  as  prophesied
of  by  John,  Rev.  xvi.  12 — 16,  "And  I  saw  three  unclean
spirits,  like  frogs,  come  out  of  the  mouth  of  the  dragon,
and  out  of  the  mouth  of  the  beast,  and  out  of  the  mouth
of  the  false  prophet,  for  they  are  the  spirits  of  devils,
working  miracles,  which  go  forth  unto  the  kings  of  the
earth  and  of  the  whole  world,  to  gather  them  to  the
battle  of  the  great  day  of  God  Almighty" — and  19th
verse,  "And  the  great  city  was  divided  into  three  parts,
and  the  cities  of  the  nations  fell."  That  these  spirits
are  political,  is  evident,  from  the  fact  that  they  come
out  of  the  mouth  of  the  dragon,  (kings,)  and  beast,
(Catholic,)  false  prophet,  (Mahometan,)  and  unclean,
signifying  they  are  not  holy  things.  This  prophecy
is  now  accomplishing.  What  nation,  within  our  knowl-
edge, is  not  already  divided  into  three  political  parties  ?
None,  which  is  in  any  way  known  to  your  speaker.

17.  The  church  has  fulfilled  her  1260  years  in  the
wilderness,  spoken  of  in  Rev.  xii.  6,  14,  "  And  the
woman  fled  into  the  wilderness,  where  she  hath  a  place
prepared  of  God,  that  they  should  feed  her  there  a
thousand  two  hundred  and  threescore  days."  These
days  were  evidently  accomplished  in  1798,  since  which
time  the  Protestant  church  has  enjoyed  privileges  even


Christ's  second  coming.  295

in  the  city  of  nations,  the  Roman  empire ;  and,  according
to  Daniel,  forty-five  years  will  complete  the  whole  plan
of  redemption.

18.  The  two  witnesses  prove  that  the  1260  years  are
ended ;  for  it  is  evident  that  the  Old  and  New  Testa-
ment are  not  now  hid  nor  kept  from  the  common  people,
but  have  arisen  from  their  dead  state,  and  are  now  per-
forming the  office  God  designed  they  should,  conveying
light  to  the  world.  They  are  not  clothed  in  sackcloth,
but,  through  the  missionaries  of  the  cross,  and  Bible
societies,  are  testifying  to  the  world  of  Christ  and  his
second  coming.

19.  The  civil  power  of  anti-Christ  is  destroyed,  and
the  1260  years,  in  which  she  was  to  rule  over  kings,  and
tread  the  church  under  foot,  was  completed  in  1798,
when  the  French  army  took  the  Pope  a  prisoner,  and
erected  Italy  into  a  republic  ;  since  which  time  the  Pope
has  exercised  but  little  or  no  power  over  kings,  or  the
Protestant  church,  and  she  is  evidently  sinking  by  the
weight  of  her  own  corruptions.

20.  It  is  very  evident  that  the  sixth  trumpet  has
sounded,  and  the  391  years  will  be  completed  in  1839,
when  the  seventh  trumpet  will  begin  to  sound,  and  the
mystery  of  God  will  be  finished,  all  that  he  hath  de-
clared to  his  servants  the  prophets.  If  the  fall  of  the
Eastern  Empire  at  Constantinople  was  included  in  the
sixth  trumpet,  which  all  the  principal  commentators,
whom  I  have  consulted,  agree  in,  and  that  trumpet  was
prepared  to  sound  an  hour,  a  day,  a  month,  and  a  year,
which  makes,  according  to  the  reckoning  of  time  in
John's  prophecy,  391  years  and  15  days,  then  the  sixth
trumpet  is  almost  finished.  The  whole  appearance
strengthens  this  exposition  of  the  text;  for  the  power
of  the  Turks  has  diminished  more  rapidly  within  fifteen
years,  than  any  politician,  however  anxious  he  could
have  been  for  the  event,  could  have  anticipated.

21.  The  opening  of  the  sixth  seal,  revealed  in  the
6th  and  7th  chapters  of  Revelation,  was  opened  in  the
French  revolution,  and  carries  us  through  a  sealing  time
unto  the  opening  of  the  seventh  seal,  which  ushers  us
before  the  judgment  seat  of  God.    No  one  can  deny


296  LECTURE    XIX.

but  that,  since  the  revolution  in  France,  a  sealing  tim<a
has  passed;  many  have  been  born  into  the  spiritual
kingdom  of  Christ,  more  than  has  ever  been  known,  in
the  same  period  of  time,  since  the  apostles'  days.  This
seal,  then,  is  evidently  opened,  and  is  a  strong  evidence
that  the  book  of  life  will  soon  be  opened,  and  the  dead
will  be  judged  out  of  the  things  written  in  the  books.

22.  The  sixth  vial  was  poured  out  about  the  year
1822,  when  the  Ottoman  power  began  to  be  dried  up.
This  is  an  important  sign  that  we  are  on  the  brink  of
the  judgment  day.  Rev.  xvi.  12,  "And  the  sixth  angel
poured  out  his  vial  upon  the  great  river  Euphrates ;  and
the  waters  thereof  were  dried  up,  that  the  way  of  the
kings  of  the  east  might  be  prepared,"  This  preparation
is  for  the  last  great  battle,  which  will  take  place  at  the
pouring  out  of  the  seventh  vial,  in  the  year  1839  or  40,
At  the  pouring  out  of  the  seventh  vial,,  a  voice  from  the
throne  will  pronounce  the  word,  It  is  done.  The  king-
doms of  the  earth  and  governments  of  the  world  will
be  carried  away,  and  their  places  not  found.  Every
writer,  of  any  note,  will  and  have  applied  this  vial  to
the  Turkish  government,  and  of  course  must  acknowl-
edge that  this  vial  is  poured  out,  for  the  power  of  the
Turkish  government  is  but  little  more  than  a  name,  and
the  strength  of  the  Ottoman  power  dried  up.

23.  Another  evidence  is  Daniel's  resurrection  at  the
end  of  the  1335  days.  This  evidence  is  very  plain  and
evident,  for  Daniel  says,  xii.  11 — 13,  "And  from  the
time  that  the  daily  sacrifice  shall  be  taken  away,  and  the
abomination  that  maketh  desolate  set  up,  there  shall  be
a  thousand  two  hundred  and  ninety  days."  This  cannot
be  the  Jewish  sacrifice  ;  for  if  so,  then  it  must  have  been
fulfilled  about  five  hundred  years  past ;  and  as  no  event
took  place  then  which  would  warrant  us  in  so  under-
standing it,  I  can  see  no  rational  objection  to  understand
this  daily  sacrifice  to  mean  Pagan  rites  and  sacrifices,
which  was  the  original  beast  of  which  the  abomination
of  desolation  was  only  an  image,  and,  as  I  have  shown
in  a  former  lecture,  was  to  continue  six  hundred  and
sixty-six  years  ;  and  as  Paul  tells  us,  that  when  he  was
taken  out  of  the  way,  the  man  of  sin  would  be  revealed,


Christ's  second  coming.  297

agreeing  in  language  with  Daniel.  I  think  the  proof
is  strong  that  from  the  taking  away  of  Pagan  worship,
A.  D.  508,  to  the  end  of  the  Papal  civil  power,  would  be
1290  years,  which  would  end  in  the  year  1798,  and  thus
agree  with  all  of  John's  numbers  in  Revelation.  And
then  Daniel  says,  or  the  angel  to  Daniel,  "  Blessed  is  he
that  waiteth  and  cometh  to  the  thousand  three  hundred
and  five  and  thirty  days."  Thus  add  1335  to  508,  will
bring  us  down  to  the  year  A.  D.  1843.  "  But  go  thou
thy  way  till  the  end  be,  for  thou  shalt  rest  and  stand  in
thy  lot  at  the  end  of  the  days."  And  "  Blessed  and  holy
is  he  that  hath  part  in  the  first  resurrection."  Then
Daniel  will  stand  in  his  lot,  and  Job  will  stand  on  the
earth  in  the  latter  day.

24.  Daniel's  vision  of  2300  days  long.  I  have  in
some  former  lectures  shown  clearly  that  Daniel's  vision
concerning  the  four  great  monarchies  which  were  or
were  to  come,  included  the  whole  history  of  the  world,
so  far  as  God  saw  fit  to  reveal  it,  down  to  the  judgment
day,  and  the  coming  of  the  Son  of  Man  in  the  clouds.  I
then  showed  that  the  question  was  asked,  how  long
should  be  this  vision.  The  answer  was  given — 2300
days.  I  then  proved  that  days  were  to  be  counted  years,
by  the  command  of  God,  by  the  example  of  Jacob,  and
by  the  fulfilment  of  a  part  of  the  vision.  I  then  showed
you  when  this  vision  began  by  the  angel  Gabriel's  own
declaration  vno  was  commanded  to  instruct  Daniel  into
tb*1  Vision.  According  to  this  instruction  I  showed  you
that  490  years  were  accomplished  of  this  vision,  to  a  day,
at  the  crucifixion  of  Christ,  both  events  happening  on  the
12th  day  of  the  first  month,  490  years  apart.  And  then
I  inquired,  that  if  490  years  of  2300  was  fulfilled  when
our  Savior  was  crucified,  how  much  of  the  vision  re-
mained after  his  death.  1  answered,  1810  years.  1
then  inquired,  what  year  after  his  birth  that  would  be ;
and  the  answer  Avas,  in  the  year  1843.  1  then  begged
the  privilege,  and  do  now,  for  any  person  to  show  me
any  failure  of  proof  on  this  point,  or  where,  possibly,  ac-
cording to  Scripture,  there  may  be  a  failure  in  the  cal-
culation I  have  made  on  this  vision.  1  have  not  yet,  by
seventeen  years  study,  been  able  to  discover  where  I
might  fail.


298  LECTURE    XIX.

Lastly.  Another  sign  of  the  last  day  you  will  find
given  by  Paul,  1  Thess.  v.  2,  3,  "  For  yourselves  know
perfectly,  that  the  day  of  the  Lord  so  cometh  as  a  thief
in  the  night  For  when  they  shall  say,  Peace  and
safety,  then  sudden  destruction  cometh  upon  them,  as
travail  upon  a  woman  with  child;  and  they  shall  not
escape."     Compare  2  Pet.  ii.  17 — 22.

The  doctrine  of  peace  and  safety,  and  that  there  is
no  punishment  in  the  future  state,  had  but  few  or  no
advocates  until  very  recently.  I  am  not  certain  but
the  first  preacher  of  this  soul-destroying  doctrine  is  now
living ;  and  they  now  boast  of  their  multitudes  of  fol-
lowers and  advocates.  There  have  been,  in  past  ages,  a
few  who  preached  the  doctrine  of  the  restoration  of  all
men,  after  a  suitable  punishment  in  hell ;  but  to  modem
Universalists  belongs  the  invention  of  preaching  "peace
and  safety  when  sudden  destruction  cometh."  If  this
sign  is  not  fulfilled  in  the  preachers  of  this  order  at  this
time,  1  ask,  How  can  it  be  fulfilled  ?  and  what  must  the
doctrine  of  those  be  who  preach  "  peace  and  safety  "  ?
Surely,  no  human  being  can  invent  a  doctrine  so  full  of
(promised)  "  peace  and  safety "  to  the  wicked  as  this ;
and  no  other  denomination  on  our  globe  ever  have  op-
posed the  doctrine  of  the  coming  of  Christ,  the  judg-
ment day,  and  future  punishments,  but  the  modern  Uni-
versalists ;  and  if  this  is  the  doctrine  that  Paul  had
reference  to  in  our  text,  as,  I  am  fully  satisfied,  every
candid  and  religious  mind  must  and  will  allow,  then
we  may  reasonably  suppose  "  sudden  destruction  cometh
upon  them,  and  they  shall  not  escape."

Therefore,  my  dear  reader,  I  shall  now,  with  a  few
closing  remarks,  leave  you  to  your  own  reflections.

The  Jews  had  twenty-one  signs  in  the  Scriptures  given
them  of  the  first  coming  and  person  of  Jesus  Christ. ;  yet
many  rejected  him  as  an  impostor.  You  say,  if  you  had
lived  in  that  day,  you  would  have  believed ;  and  you  in
your  hearts  condemn  them  as  a  hardened  race  of  unbe-
lievers ;  and  notwithstanding  their  great  pretence  to  piety,
you  say  they  were  justly  denounced  by  our  Savior  as  a
generation  of  vipers  and  a  band  of  hypocrites.  But,  my
hearers,  be  careful  your  own  hearts  do  not  condemn  you


CHRIST'S    SECOND    COMING.  299

for  your  unbelief  in  the  signs  which  the  prophets,  Christ,
and  the  apostles  have  given  you  as  tokens  of  his  second
coming  and  the  judgment  day.  I  have  brought  from  the
word  of  God  twenty-five  signs  of  his  second  coming,  end
of  the  world,  and  judgment  day,  and  all  apparently  fulfil-
led within  the  age  of  many  present,  or  fulfilling  now  be-
fore your  eyes.  And  do  you  believe  ?  Many  of  you
profess  to  be  pious  ;  many  of  you  say,  Lord,  Lord  !  But
do  you  believe  his  word  ?  Are  you  willing  to  risk  your
life,  your  character,  your  all,  on  his  word  ?  or  are  you
fearful  and  unbelieving  ?  Now  is  the  time  to  try  men's
souls.  Now,  if  you  wish  to  be  sure,  examine  closely,  and
see  whether  your  faith  will  stand  in  the  day  of  trial  which
is  coming  ;  yes,  has  already  come,  in  a  thousand  ways,  to
draw  you  from  the  gospel  of  Christ  to  another  new  gos-
pel, which  is  not  the  gospel  of  God.  "  Can  ye  not  dis-
cern the  signs  of  the  times  ?  "  Let  me  give  you  one  rule
by  which  you  may  know  a  false  doctrine.  They  may
have  many  good  things  in  their  creeds,  they  may  be  very
plausible  in  their  arguments,  and  after  all  deceive  you.
But  examine  them  closely,  and  you  will  find  they  will
deny,  ridicule,  or  try  to  do  away  some  prominent  doctrine
of  the  Bible,  such  as  the  divinity  of  Christ,  his  second
coming,  office  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  eternal  punishment,
doctrine  of  grace,  election,  conviction  for  sin,  regene-
ration, repentance,  or  faith.  And  when  you  hear  or  see
them  make  light  or  scoff  at  any  thing  of  this  kind  in  the
word  of  God,  go  not  after  them,  nor  bid  them  God  speed.
"  Can  ye  not  discern  the  signs  of  the  times  ?  "

And  to  you,  impenitent  friend,  God  has  at  all  times
given  you  warning  of  his  approaching  judgments.  If
you  repent,  believe  his  word,  and  break  off  your  sins  by
righteousness,  he  is  faithful  and  just  to  forgive  you  your
sins.  Why  not  take  warning  by  the  past  ?  Is  there  no
example  for  you  ?  Look  at  the  antediluvian  world,
Sodom  and  Gomorrah,  Nineveh,  Babylon,  Jerusalem,  and
the  once  enlightened  Asia,  now  worse  than  in  heathen-
ish darkness.  Will  God  punish  nations,  and  not  indi-
viduals ?  This  cannot  be,  for  nations  are  composed  of
individuals ;  and  God  is  just,  for  he  hath  appointed  a
day  in  which  he  will  judge  the  world  in  righteousness.


300  LECTURE    XIX.

'■  Can  ye  not  discern  the  signs  of  the  times  ?  "  Will
God's  word  fail  of  being  accomplished  ?  Can  you  show
q,  single  instance  ?  Why  not  listen,  then,  to  the  warn-
ings and  admonitions,  to  the  calls  and  invitations,  to  the
examples  and  precepts  contained  therein  ?  "  Can  ye  not
discern  the  signs  of  the  times  ?  "  Will  God  cut  off  the
unbelieving  Pharisee  for  not  discerning  the  signs  of
the  times,  and  let  you,  with  twofold  more  light,  go  free  ?
No :  how  can  ye  escape,  if  you  neglect  this  great  salva-
tion ?  Watch,  then,  "  the  signs  of  the  times."  I  say,
Watch.


NOTE.

The  author  wishes  to  state  that  Lecture  VIII.  in  this
work  was  written  twelve  years  since ;  and  that  the  author-
ities he  then  consulted  fixed  the  rise  of  the  Turkish  empire
at  1298.  He  is  now  satisfied,  by  the  examination  of  other
authorities  on  the  subject,  that  the  foundation  of  that  em-
pire was  laid  in  1299.  Hence  the  things  mentioned'  in
Lecture  VII.  (p.  109,)  relative  to  persecutions,  &c,  and  to
the  coming  of  the  third  woe,  as  mentioned  in  Lecture  XIII.
(p.  202,)  which  he  supposed  would  take  place  in  1839,  ac-
cording to  the  first  computation^  will  not  be  realized  until
the  year  1840.


SUPPLEMENT


EXPOSITION   OF   MILLER'S   CHART

OF     THE

CHRONOLOGY   OF   THE    WORLD,   AND   OF
THE  PROPHETIC  PERIODS.

f3r  See  Chart,  at  the  end  of  the  book.


I.  The  scale  of  the  Chart  repre-
sents 6000  years  from  the  creation.

II.  The  first  space  on  the  Chart
represents  the  six  millenniums,  be-
fore the  "  Great  Sabbath  of  rest.''''
See  "  Miller's  Views,"  page  157,
Lecture  on  the  Great  Sabbath,
where  this  subject  is  fully  ex-
plained.

DC?"  This  space  is  also  divided  into
different  parts,  showing  the  chronol-
ogy of  the  most  important  events  in
the  history  of  the  world  and  the
church.*

1.  The  flood,  in  the  600th  year  of
Noah's  age.

2.  From  the  flood  to  the  Exode,
428  years.


Period

B.C.

A.  D.

6000

4157

1843

Bmi

d    .

O

o   t»

-3

Eg
CD
f-i

U3

o  «

a>

P  I

A

£   «3

B

o

pq  "5

Peri-

A.M.

B.  C.

ods.

1656

1656

2501

423

2084

2073

*  The  critical  student  will  readily  observe  the  different
periods  in  this  Exposition,  marked  on  the  twelve  Spaces  of
the  Chart,  so  that  we  have  no  need  to  make  distinct  reference
to  them  in  every  period  described.


2


SUPPLEMENT.


3.  The  Israelites  enter  Canaan —
470  years  from  the  Exode.

4.  Administration  of  Joshua,  and
the  Judges  began,  A.  M.  2554,  and
continued  473  years — ending

5.  Beginning  of  the  Temple  by
Solomon,  being  a  period  of  108
years  from  Samuel  the  prophet,  or
the  end  of  the  Judges.

6.  The  beginning  of  the  four
Monarchies  represented  in  Nebu-
chadnezzar's dream,  Dan.  ii.  31 —
35,  vii.  2 — 14.  At  this  period,  the
people  of  God  became  permanently
subject  to  the  kingdoms  of  the
world,  as  a  punishment  for  their
rebellion  against  God.  The  Ten
Tribes  were  carried  into  captivity
by  Esarhaddon,  king  of  Assyria,
and  were  broken,  scattered,  and
ceased  to  be  a  nation ;  Manasseh,
king  of  Judah,  was  carried  to  Baby-
lon in  fetters  of  iron :  making  a
period  of  345  years  from  the  foun-
dation of  the  Temple.

7.  The   seventy  years'   captivity
began  under  Jehoichim,  in  the  third
year   of  his    reign,    by   Nebuchad
nezzar,  king  of  Babylon.     This  in
eluded  a  period  of  70  years.     Here
the  Jubilees  of  the  Jewish  institu
tion  ceased.     From  the  time  of  the
keeping  of  the  last  Jubilee  by  the
Jewish  nation  to  1843,  is  just  49  Ju-
bilees, or  2450  years ;  which  brings
us  to  the  Grand  Jubilee  of  Jubilees.

8.  Seventy  weeks  of  Dan.  ix.  24 —
27,  begin.  The  time  of  the  going
forth  of  the  decree  of  Artaxerxes  (in
the  seventh  year  of  his  reign)  to  Ezra,


Period
470


473


108


345


70


A.  M.

2554


3027


3135


3480


3350


B.C.
1603


1130


1022


677


607


SUPPLEMENT.


to  restore  the  law  and  the  captives
under  the  administration  of  Ezra
and  JNehemiah,  the  walls  and  streets
were  built  in  troublous  times.  At
this  date  the  vision  of  the  Ram  push
ing — Persia  against  Grecia — com'
mences ; — it  being  a  period  of  150
years  from  the  great  captivity.

9.  Beginning  of  the  Roman  gov-
ernment, or  the  period  of  its  con
nexion  with  the  people  of  God,  by
the  league  formed.  A  period  of
299  years,  during  the  governments
of  Persia  and  Grecia.

10.  The  birth  of  Christ,  a  period
of  158  years  from  the  league  with
the  Romans.

1 1 .  The  crucifixion — Death  of  the
Messiah — a  period  of  33  years  from
his  birth.

12.  The  end  of  Pagan  Rome.
The  ten  kings  converted  to  the
christian  faith,  and  become  of  "  one
mind."  Here  the  daily  sacrifice,  or
Pagan  Rome,  was  taken  away. —
Daniel's  1290  days,  the  1335  days,
both  begin  at  this  period.  The
1335  days  carry  us  down  to  the
time  when  Daniel  will  "  stand  in  his
lot,"  in  the  "  first  resurrection."
Dan.  xii.  11—13.

13.  The  reign  of  the  ten  kings
"  one  hour,"  or  30  years,  in  the  Ro-
man empire.  Here  the  abomina-
tion that  maketh  desolate,  or  Papal
Rome,  was  set  up.  His  power  ori-
ginated in  the  "  Code  of  Laws "
established  by  Justinian,  the  empe-
ror of  Rome,  called  the  dragon;
who    "  gave   him   his  power,   and


Period

A.M.

150

3700

299

3999

158

4157

33

4190

475

4695

30

4735

B.C.


457

15S

A.  D.

33


508
508


seat,  and  great  authority;"  and
gave  him  a  mouth  speaking  great
things,  and  blasphemies ;  and  power
was  given  him  to  make  war  42
months,  or  1260  years.  (Rev.  xiii.
2 — 5.)  The  ten  kings  at  this  period
gave  up  their  power  and  strength  to
the  Papal  beast.  (Rev.  xvii.  13 —
17.)  The  blasphemous  power  of
Papacy  begins  and  continues  42
months,  or  1260  days,  meaning-
years.  (Dan.  vii.  25,  Rev.  xiii.  5.)
The  two  witnesses  clothed  in  sack-
cloth prophesying  1260  years.  (Rev.
xi.  3.)  The  church  fled  into  the
wilderness,  where  she  was  fed  1260
years.  (Rev.  xii.  6 — 14.)  A  period
of  761  years.

14.  Beginning  of  the  Ottoman
power,  under  the  Fifth  Trumpet.
In  Rev.  ix.  5 — 10,  we  have  the  his-
tory of  150  years  of  the  fifth  Trum-
pet, in  which  the  four  angels  were
bound  in  the  river  Euphrates  one
hundred  and  fifty  years.

15.  Sixth  Trumpet,  which  was
to  sound  391  years  and  15  days.
(Rev.  ix.  13—21.)  Here  the  four
angels  were  loosed,  viz.,  the  Turks,
Tartars,  Arabs  and  Saracens.  Me-
hemet  II.  attacked  the  Greek  em-
pire, and  in  the  year  1453  he  took
Constantinople,  and  constituted  it
the  capital  of  the  Ottoman  empire.

16.  The  Seventh  Trumpet.  Here
the  Ottoman  power,  or  the  great
River  Euphrates,  was  dried  up.  (See
Rev.  xvi.  12.)  And  the  seventh
trumpet  begins  to  sound.  (Rev.  ix.
15—19.


Penou  .ol.  4.,


m


150


391


5456


1299


5606


1449


5997


6000


1840


1843


CHRONOLOGICAL  CHART  OF  THE   WORLD.


,  (Gibbon,  vol.  4,  p.  299,>-or  tho


i     .      |


i    s


.


1    i      1


Jji-.us       '  |  Pagan  Home,!


il:;  :"■>,.


This  represents  Ihe  Sis  Thousand  V.:  .r,  l.rl.,r.  th,  ■  zi, .  n  S.L.I.mi,  (.f  r.e^t.


i\ A.  M.  ;i)34_J A,  M.  2554     [ A,  M. 3027     |aM:,i;.! '    V.  3  ISO  A  |'    B  |   3700

|J     wo    ann    30n    tm    500    noo    700    ^00    wo    10011  inn   1200   13011   1400   1500   leoo   1700  isoo  1900  Joo  2100  25)00  2300  2J00  2.500  Jot)  2700  2J00  2J00  3000  3100  3200  3300  3«


:  UlVso


l"i        A.M,


:  ■    ■     ■■■-       ■    ■  ■


t3  r  r

4SO0    4600    4700    4300    4900    5 .5 lull     321  -     ir.nil    ,-,n»i    :,; on     Wri"     ..Tun  .5-00      5900      600'


Ill


lit!
