Excavations at Carnac (Brittany): A Record of Archaeological Researches in the Bossenno and the Mont Saint-Michel
James Miln, 1877
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): Miln's 1877 Carnac excavation record — the first scientific digging among the Breton alignments: the founding field report of Carnac archaeology. Source: Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/excavationsatcar01milnuoft). This 1877 publication is in the public domain in the United States.

========================================================================

Bii£a2s£S2s:i:™-ijLij  m  S*^  Cor  Of 


'.W 


-  ^ 


OF  THE  ""^ 

BY 


nrvcuLf  IX. 


/Sf^ 


EXCAVATIONS    AT    CARNAC. 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 

in  2007  with  funding  from 

IVIicrosoft  Corporation 


http://www.archive.org/details/excavationsatcar01milnuoft 


>^. 


^rzjia 


EXCAVATIONS 


AT 


C  A  R  N  A  C 


(BRITTANY) 


A  RECORD  OF  ARCH^OLOGICAL  RESEARCHES  IN 


THE    BOSSENNO 
AND    THE    MONT    SAINT    MICHEL 


BY 


JAMES     MILN 


EDINBURGH 

DAVID  DOUGLAS,  No.  9  SOUTH   CASTLE   STREET 


MDCCCLXXVII. 


c 


Printed  by  R.  &  R.  Clark,  Edinburgh. 


PREFACE. 


In  the  summer  of  1873  I  went  on  a  tour  in  Brittany  for  the 
purpose  of  seeing  some  of  the  antiquities  for  which  it  is  so 
famous,  my  chief  object  being  to  visit  the  celebrated  align- 
ments of  Carnac. 

Landing  at  St.  Malo,  I  proceeded  by  the  beautiful  scenery 
of  the  Ranee  to  Dinan,  and  thence  on  to  Morlaix.  There  a 
few  days  were  pleasantly  passed  in  making  excursions  to  visit 
the  curious  churches  and  calvaries  of  St.  Thegonnec  and  St. 
Guimiliau,  and  in  examining  the  houses  of  the  fifteenth, 
sixteenth,  and  seventeenth  centuries,  which  are  still  to  be 
seen  in  the  Grande  Rue,  and  in  the  Rue  des  Nobles  at 
Morlaix.  These  picturesque  specimens  of  Breton  architecture 
usually  present  their  gable  ends  to  the  street,  each  successive 
storey  projecting  over  the  one  below  it,  and  they  are  often 
adorned  with  quaint  carving  on  the  woodwork. 

Proceeding  onwards  and  making  short  stoppages  at  Brest, 
Pleybe,  Quimper,  Concarneau,  Pontaven,  and  Quimperle,  I 
eventually  arrived  at  Auray,  where  carriages  can  always  be 
obtained  for  Carnac. 

Shortly  after  my  arrival  at  Carnac,  my  attention  was  drawn 
to  the  Mounds  of  the  Bossenno  by  a  French  archaeologist, 


vi  PREFACE. 

who  stated  that  he  had  discovered  and  intended  to  excavate 
them.  In  the  end  of  the  summer  of  1874  he  renounced  his 
intention,  and  I  then  undertook  the  work,  which  I  super- 
intended and  carried  on  at  my  own  expense.  On  becoming 
better  acquainted  with  Carnac  and  its  surrounding  country, 
I  found  that  these  Mounds  were  perfectly  well  known  by 
the  name  of  "  Caesar's  Camp,"  that  they  had  long,  attracted 
the  attention  of  antiquaries,  and  had  been  mentioned  in 
archaeological  works,  though  no  attempt  had  been  made  to 
ascertain  their  true  character  by  systematic  excavations. 

Foreseeing  the  advantages  to  be  derived  from  possessing 
the  ground  occupied  by  the  Mounds  of  the  Bossenno,  I 
endeavoured  to  purchase  it,  but  difficulties  too  numerous 
to  mention  compelled  me  to  abandon  the  idea.  Had  I 
succeeded,  many  difficulties  as  to  obtaining  permission  to 
excavate  would  have  been  obviated,  and  much  expense  in 
carting  away  the  excavated  materials  would  have  been  saved, 
as  the  stones  could  then  have  been  utilised  in  constructing 
a  wall  round  the  ruins,  so  as  to  preserve  them  from  injury. 

There  still  remains  much  to  be  done  at  the  Bossenno  to 
complete  the  excavations  described  in  the  following  chapters, 
and  I  may  perhaps  continue  these  excavations  if  the  necessary 
permission  can  be  obtained. 

In  compliance  with  the  wishes  of  friends  in  France,  the 
description  of  the  excavations  of  the  Bossenno  was  first  written 
and  printed  in  French.  Every  one  knows  the  difficulties 
and  disadvantages  of  writing  in  a  foreign  language ;  I 
therefore  had  recourse  to  my  friend  the  Count  de  M  artel, 
and  to  M.  le  Men,  Archeviste  of  Ouimper,  to  whom  I  am 


PREFACE.  vii 

indebted  for  revising  the  text  of  the  French  edition.  I  am 
also  indebted  to  M.  Paul  Gervais,  Professor  of  the  Museum 
of  Natural  History,  Paris,  for  classifying  the  bones,  and  to 
M.  H.  Cohen,  Attached  of  the  Bibliotheque  Nationale,  for 
classifying  the  coins  found  at  the  Bossenno. 

The  wood  engravings  in  this  work  have  been  executed  by 
M.  Emile  Nicolay;  the  pottery  is  mostly  produced  from 
drawings  by  MM.  Henri  Du  Cleuziou  and  Louis  Cappd ; 
while  the  plans,  landscapes,  and  statuettes  are  from  my  own 
drawings.  Although  the  woodcuts  introduced  as  vignettes  at 
the  end  of  the  several  chapters  in  the  text  of  this  volume  have 
no  direct  bearing  on  the  excavations  at  the  Bossenno,  the 
objects  thus  represented  are  generally  remarkable  for  their 
local  or  special  characteristics.  Amongst  these  I  may  notice 
the  Lech  at  Plouharnel,  as  an  example  of  a  peculiar  class  of 
sepulchral  monument,  believed  by  many  antiquaries  to  be 
the  intermediate  link  between  the  ancient  unsculptured 
menhir  and  the  sculptured  headstone  of  later  times. 

I  have  much  pleasure  in  expressing  my  obligations  to 
the  clergy  and  the  authorities  for  their  kind  offices,  to  the 
proprietors  of  the  ground  for  their  permission  to  excavate, 
and  to  the  worthy  proprietress  of  the  Hotel  des  Voyageurs 
at  Carnac  for  placing  all  the  resources  of  that  well-known 
establishment  at  my  disposal  throughout  my  stay  at  Carnac. 


CONTENTS. 


Preface 


I.— THE  BOSSENNO. 

Description  of  Camac — Occupation  of  Arinorica  by  the  Romans — Juxta- 
position of  Celtic  monuments  and  Roman  ruins — Researches  of  the  Poly- 
mathic  Society  of  Morbihan — Unexplored  Gallo-Roman  remains — The 
Bossenno,  a  group  of  mounds,  otherwise  called  "  Caesar's  Camp " — 
Etymology  and  legends  of  the  Bossenno  .         .  i-8 


II.— MOUND  A. 

Method  of  the  excavations — Discovery  of  a  ruined  dwelling — Its  plan  answer- 
ing to  the  villa  urbana — Description  of  the  rooms — Evidences  of  its 
pillage  and  destruction  by  fire — Traces  of  earlier  dwellings  on  the  same 
site — Description  of  the  relics  found — Stone  implements — Superstitious 
use  of  these — Objects  in  bronze,  iron,  and  glass — Food  refuse — Kitchen- 
midden  of  the  dwelling — Its  pottery — The  pottery  of  the  Dolmens — 
Recent  hand-made  pottery  of  the  Hebrides — Ornamentation  of  the 
pottery  of  the  Mound  A — Resemblance  to  Roman  pottery  found  in 
London — Head  of  Venus  in  terra  cotta         ....         9-24 


III.— MOUND  B. 

Description  of  the  excavation — Discovery  of  a  building  62  feet  by  47 — 
Description  of  its  eleven  rooms — Curious  hypocaust — Objects  found  in 


CONTENTS. 

it — Mural  decorations  in  fresco — The  aiMcida  or  sleeping  apartments 
of  the  mansion — Traces  of  earlier  buildings  on  the  same  site — Celtic 
brooch  in  bronze — The  kitchen  of  the  mansion — Concrete  floors — 
Relics  found  in  the  different  rooms — Objects  of  iron,  glass,  and  pottery 
— Roman  coins — Ornamentation  of  the  pottery  found — Its  persistence 
in  Brittany  to  the  present  day — Modern  Breton  pottery — Reconstruction 
of  the  ancient  vases  found  in  the  ruins.        ....         25-50 


IV.-MOUND  C. 

Its  connection  with  the  previous  mound — Discovery  of  the  ruins  of  a  Gallo- 
Roman  bath — Description  of  its  rooms,  furnaces,  and  general  arrange- 
ments— Cold  and  hot  baths — Ornamentation  of  the  ceiling  in  polychrome, 
and  geometric  patterns  of  shells  inserted  in  the  plaster — Reconstruction 
of  the  patterns — Objects  found :  Coins,  pottery,  bones,  beads,  armlet, 
whorls,  sinkers,  etc.  .         .         .         .         .  '       .         .  51-74 


v.— MOUND  D. 

Excavation  of  the  ruins  of  a  small  temple  or  Lararium — Description  of  its 
construction — Objects  found  in  it :  Statuettes  of  Venus  Genetrix  and 
Anadyomene,  pottery,  tooth  of  a  bear,  broken  stone  hammer,  beads, 
coins        ..........  75-86 


VI.— MOUND    E. 

Discovery  of  the  Ruins  of  the  villa  rt^rar/a— Description  of  its  five  rooms 
— Objects  found  in  them  :  Pottery  of  Celtic  type,  iron  implements, 
bronze  ornaments  and  engraved  signet-ring,  _glass,  potters'  stamps — 
Statuette  of  an  ox  in  bronze — Excitement  of  the  workmen  on  its  dis- 
covery^Description  of  "  The  Pardon  of  St.  Carnely " — Nocturnal 
processions    of  the  bestial  of  Breton  farms   to  the   Fountain  of  St. 

•  Carnely — Fete  of  the  Solstice — Passage  of  the  bestial  across  the 
fires  of  St.  John — Bonfire  on  the  Mont  St.  Michel         .         .      87-102 


CONTENTS.  xi 


VII.— MOUND    F. 

Description  of  the  ruins  excavated — Concrete  floors — Discovery  of  a 
Smith's  forge — Objects  found  in  the  different  buildings  :  Polished 
stone  axe,  objects  in  bronze,  pottery,  iron  implements,  etc., 
coins         ..........    103-112 


•  VIII.— MOUND   G. 

Evidences    of    conflagration — Objects    found    in    the    ruins — Modes    of 

sepulture — Excavation   of  an   alignment  of  small  Menhirs — Diggings 

.    in   a  ruined    Dolmen — Tiles,    Samian   ware,  and    flint    flake    found 

under    a    large    Menhir — Results    of   similar    researches    by    French 

archaeologists     .         .         .  .         .         .         .         .         .113-122 


IX.— MOUND   H. 

Discovery  of  the  wall  of  the  enceinte — Rude    construction    of  building — 
Objects  found  :  iron,  glass,  pottery,  coins     ....    123-128 


X.— SUMMARY  AND   CONCLUSIONS. 

Evidence  of  the  existence  of  a  Gallo-Roman  settlement  at  the  Bossenno — 
Characteristics  of  the  buildings — The  villa  urbana:  its  baths;  its 
Lararium — The  villa  agraria  :  its  dependencies — The  enceinie  or 
wall  of  defence — Deductions  from  the  relics  as  to  the  condition  of 
the  people — Their  food — Luxury  of  the  table — The  ceramics  of  the 
Bossenno — Modes  of  Manufacture  and  ornamentation — Intermixture 
of  objects  characteristic  of  two  civilisations,  Roman  and  Gaulish 
— Celtic  mythology — The  two  oxen  of  Hu-Gadam — The  Taurus 
Trigaranus — The  coins  of  the  Bossenno — Period  of  the  settlement 
fixed  by  them — The  Pagan  worship  of  the  Bossenno — Legend  of 
its  destruction  .         .         .         .         .         .         .129-144 


xii  CONTENTS. 


XL— MONT   ST.   MICHEL. 

Description  of  the  tumulus  of  the  Mont  St.  Michel — Its  excavation  by  M. 
Rene  Galles — Its  contents — Discovery  of  structures  at  its  base,  pre- 
viously unknown— Their  excavation — Description  of  the  ruins  L,  M, 
N,  and  O ;  and  objects  found  in  them — These  structures  not  Gallo- 
Roman,  but  probably  of  the  Middle  Ages — Resemblance  of  O  to 
the  primitive  Christian  churches  of  Brittany — The  Chapel  of  St. 
Agatha :  Fresco  in  it  of  Venus  rising  from  the  sea ;  described  in  the 
twelfth  century  as  "  Ecclesia  Sancti  Veneris  " — Saint  Vener — Vener 
as  the  Breton  name  of  Venus — Significance  of  the  superposition  of 
structures  of  such  different  ages  and  character  on  the  Mont  St, 
Michel — Traces  of  three  great  periods,  Celtic,  Roman,  and  Christian, 
in  Brittany 145-162 


LIST    OF    ILLUSTRATIONS. 


View  from  the  Bossenno 


Frontispiece. 


I.— THE   BOSSENNO. 


Plate     I.  Plan  of  the  country  round  Camac 
Plate    II.  View  of  the  Alignments  of  Kermario 
Plate  III.  General  Plan  of  the  Bossenno    . 
Croaz-ar-Guen  .... 


3 
4 
6 
8 


2.— MOUND   A. 


A.  Plate     I.  Plan  of  the  Dwelling  under  the  Mound  A 
A.  Plate    II.  Figure  i.  Stone  Burnisher 

„      2.  Flint  implement     . 
„      3.  Stone  Implement  cut  in  facets 
Bronze  Buckle 
Bronze  Ring 
Cup  in  red  lustrous  ware 

Do.  do. 

Dish  in  brown  earth 


A.  Plate  III.  Figure  i. 

.,      2. 

»      3- 

..       4- 

»      5- 

Fragment  of  Pottery  found  in  London 
A.  Plate  IV.  Chromo-lithograph  of  a  Vase 
Window  at  Bourgerel 


13 

16 


22 

22 
24 


LIST    OF    ILLUSTRATIONS. 


3.— MOUND   B. 

B.  Plate         I.  View  of  part  of  the  ruins  of  the  Mounds  B  and  C 
B.  Plate       II.  Plan  of  the  Villa  Urbana    .... 

Section  of  the  Villa  Urbana  from  north  to  south 
B.  Plate     III.  Figure  i.  Quern,  or  Hand-mill,  in  granite     . 

„       2.  Polished  Stone  Axe  in  diorite 

„       3.  Bronze  Brooch    .... 

„       4.  Fragment  of  gray  pottery 
B.  Plate     IV.  Chromo-lithograph,  Mural  Painting,  in  fragments 
B.  Plate       V.  Chromolithograph,  Mural  Painting,  do. 

B.  Plate     VI.   Figure  i .  Neck  of  an  Amphora    . 

„        2.  Antler  of  Deer 

„       3.  Ornament  in  bronze 

„       4.  Bronze  Ring,  incised    . 

„       5.  Painter's  Palette  . 

„       6.  Lagena,  with  two  handles 

„       7.     Do.       turbiniform,  without  handles 
B.  Plate   VII.  Figure  1.   Terrine        .... 

„       2.  Vase  ..... 

„       3.  Fragment  of  red  lustrous  ware 

„       4.  Do.  do. 

„       5.  Vase  in  brown  earth 
B.  Plate  VIII.  Figure  i.  Vase  .... 

„       2.  Bowl  .... 

„       3.  Twisted  Handle  . 

„       4.  Fragment  of  yellow  pottery 

„       5.       Do.       of  red  do. 

„       6.       Do.       of  black        do. 
Pone  of  Malansac       ...... 

B.  Plate     IX.  Figure  i.  Fragment  of  red  lustrous  ware 

,,       2.       Do.  do. 

„       3.       Do.       of  a  bowl 
B.  Plate       X.  Figure  i.   Vase  in  yellow  earth 

„       2.  Fragment  in  black  earth 

„       3.       Do.       in  gray  earth 
*-  „       4.       Do.  do. 

,,       5.       Do.  do. 


PAGE 

26 
28 


31 


32 


37 


38 


40 


41 


43 


45 


LIST    OF    ILLUSTRATIONS. 

B.  Plate     XI.  Figure  i.  Fragment  of  Vase,  with  engraved  letter 

or  sign 

„       2.       Do.         with  geometric  figures 

1,       3.       Do.  do. 

„       4.  Bone  Bodkin 

„       5.  Vertebra  of  a  Whale     . 

„       6.  Part  of  a  Hunting-call  in  bone 

„       7.  Hunting-call,  entire,  in  bone 
B.  Plate    XII.  Figure  i.  Grooved  Stone 

„       2.  Stone  Mortar 

„       3.         Do.  with  the  mark  IXII 

„       4.  Rim  of  a  Bowl  with  the  same  mark 
B.  Plate  XIII.  Figure  i.  Vase  in  gray  earth 

„        2.       Do.         do.  ... 

„       3.  Bowl  in  red  lustrous  ware 

„       4.   Fragment  of  a  Vase  in  the  same  ware 

,,       5.  Do.  do.  do. 

B.  Plate  XIV.  Figure  i.  Fragment  of  red  lustrous  ware 

„       2.  Bowl  ...... 

,,       3.  Part  of  a  Suet  Lamp  in  yellow  earth 

„       4.  Bowl  ...... 

Door  at  Bourgerel        ........ 


XV 

■•AGE 


46 


47 


I         48 


49 


SO 


C.  Plate  I. 
Conduit  Pipe  in 
C.  Plate  II. 
C.  Plate     III. 


C.  Plate  IV. 

C.  Plate  V. 

C.  Plate  VI. 

C.  Plate.  VII. 

C.  Plate  VHI. 


•      4.— MOUND    C. 

Plan  of  the  Baths  discovered  under  the  Mound  C 

brick  earth  .... 

General  View  of  the  Baths  . 

Figure  i.  Section  following  C  H 

2.       Do.  do.       E  F 

„       3.       Do.  do.       C  D 

4.       Do.  do.      AB 

View  of  the  Interior,  Hypocaust,  and  Baths 

Chromo-lithograph,  Fragment  of  Plaster,  decorated 

Do.  do.  do. 

Do.  Reconstruction   of  a  Window, 

and  Fragment  of  Plaster,  decorated  . 

Chromo-lithograph,  Fragment  of  a  rosace  in  fresco, 

and  reconstruction  ...... 


I 


53 
53 
54 

56 

58 
62 
6a 

62 

64 


XVI 


LIST    OF    ILLUSTRATIONS. 


C.  Plate     IX.  Chromo-lithograph,    Reconstruction   of  Border  in 

fresco     ........ 

C.  Plate       X.  Chromo-lithograph,  Reconstruction,  part  of  Ceiling 

in  fresco  ..... 

C.  Plate     XI.  Reconstruction,  design  of  Ceiling 
C.  Plate   XII.  Furnaces  beside  the  Baths  .... 
Implement  formed  of  deer's  horn  .         .         .  . 

C.  Plate  XIII.  Figure  i.  Iron  Window-bar  .         .  .  ■) 

„       2.  Bottom  of  a  Vase  with  three  legs  . 

„       3.  Bronze  Brooch  of  Celtic  type 

„       4.  Part  of  a  Drill      .... 

„       5.  Fragment    of    Pottery    with    geometric 
designs     ..... 

,,       6.       Do.       of  a  Vase  .  .         . ) 

Whorl  in  terra  cotta    ........ 

Tile  found  at  Carhaix  ....... 


64 

64 
64 
66 

70 


70 


71 
73 


5.— MOUND   D. 

D.  Plate     I.   Plan  of  the  Building  discovered  under  the  Mound  D 

D.  Plate  II.  Figure  i.  Iron  Compasses  ..... 
„  2.  Fragment  of  Pottery,  ornamented  in  relief 
,,  3.  Reconstruction  of  a  Bowl 
„  4.  Neck  of  a  Vase 
„       5.   Fragment  of  the  Handle  of  a  Vase 

D.  Plate  III.   Figure  i.  Upper  part  of  a  Vase 
„       2.  Tooth  of  a  Bear    . 
„       3.  Necklace  Bead 
„       4.  Reconstruction  of  a  Bowl 
„       5.  Do.  of  a  flat  Dish 

„       6.  Do.  do. 

Part  of  a  Stone  Hammer     .... 

D.  Plate  IV.  Statuettes  of  Venus  Genetrix 

D.  Plate    V.         Do.      of  Venus  Anadyomene 

D.  Plate  VI.  Fragments  of  the  same  . 

Lech  at  Plouharnel     ..... 


78 


80 


Si 
82 
82 
82 
86 


6.— MOUND   E. 

E.  Plate     I.  Plan  of  the  Building  discovered  under  the  Mound  E  89 

Brick  pierced  with  holes      ........  92 


LIST    OF    ILLUSTRATIONS. 


E.  Plate    II.  Figure  i.  Granite  Pestle 

„       2.  Reconstruction  of  a  Glass  Cup 
„       3.   Fragment  of  Celtic  Pottery 
„       4.  Orifice  of  a  Vase   . 

E.  Plate  III.  Figure  i.  Stone  Amulet  with  bronze  ring 
„       2.   Bronze  Ornament 
„       3.  Iron  Arrow-head 
„       4.  Iron  Hook 
„       5.  Iron  Knife 
„       6.  Bronze  Signet-ring 

Impression  of  the  Signet-ring 

Mark  of  the  Potter  Cassigneti 

E.  Plate  IV.  Figure  i .  Vase  of  hemispheric  form 
„       2.  Bowl  of  the  same  . 
„       3.   Fragment  of  a  Vase 
„       4.         Do  do. 

E.  Plate     V,  Figure  i .  Fragment  of  a  Vase 


2. 

Do. 

pierced  with  holes 

3- 

Do 

Gallo-Roman 

4- 

Do. 

do. 

5- 

Do. 

do. 

Potter's  Stamps  ....... 

E.  Plate    VI.  Chromo-lithograph.     Statuette  of  an  O 
E.  Plate  VII.  View  of  the  Fountain  of  St.  Camely 
Cross  on  the  Mont  St.  Michel      .... 


bronz 


xvii 
pace 

93 


95 

96 
96 

96 


97 


97 

98 

100 

lOI 


7.— MOUND   F. 


F.  Plate    I.  Plan  of  Buildings  discovered  under  the  Mound  F 


F.  Plate  II.  Figure 

I. 

Bronze  Ring             .... 

•■ 

»» 

2. 

Incised  Ornament  in  bronze 

»» 

3- 

Fragment  of  a  Bronze  Plate  pierced 
holes          ..... 

with 

• 

107 

»> 

4- 

Fragment  of  a  Vase  in  black  earth     . 

j> 

5- 

Bottom  of  a  Bowl  in  red  lustrous  ware 

»> 

6. 

Vase  reconstructed  .... 

. . 

Bullock  Shoe  in  iron 

109 

Cross  at  Coet-a-Tous 

. 

III 

'05 


XVlll 


LIST    OF    ILLUSTRATIONS. 


8.— MOUND   G. 


Vase  at  Mayenne  .... 
G.  Plate  I.  Section  of  a  large  Menhir 
Cross  at  Han  hon       .... 


PAGE 

ii6 
119 
121 


9.— MOUND    H. 

H.  Plate     I.  Plan  of  the  Buildings  discovered  under  the  Mound  H 

H.  Plate  II.   Figure  i.  Fragment  of  a  Clasp  in  bronze 

„       2.  Stone  Weight  or  Sinker  . 

„       3.  Fragment  of  a  Bronze  Buckle 

„       4.  Reconstruction  of  a  Vase 

„       5.  Do.                do. 

.,       6.  Do.                do. 

Door  at  Kergouellard  ...... 


J 


125 


I  26 


128 


10.— SUMMARY   AND   CONCLUSIONS. 
Clialice  cut  on  a  tombstone  ...... 


143 


II.— MONT   ST.   MICHEL. 

Plate      I.  View  and  Section  of  the  Mont.  St.  Michel    . 

Plate    II.  Plan  of  the  Mont  St.  Michel  and  excavated  buildings 

Plate  III.  Figure  i.  Whetstone 

,,      2.  Flint  Knife 

,,      3.  Stone  Celt,  polished    . 

„      4.  Whorl  in  brown  earth 

„      5.  Fragment  of  a  Vase    . 
Plate   IV.  Figure  i.  Neck  of  a  Vase 

„      2.  Handle  of  the  same  Vase 

„      3.   Fragment  of  a  Vase    . 

„      4.         Do.  do. 

Ground-plan  of  Chapel  of  St.  Agatha    . 
Cross  on  the  Mont  St.  Michel 


149 


y    152 


158 

160 
162 


THE    BOSSENNO. 


^ 


?. 


THE    BOSSENNO. 


The  little  town  of  Carnac,  situated  in  the  Department  of  the 
Morbihan,  about  nine  miles  to  the  south  of  Auray,  is  visited 
by  numerous  travellers  from  all  parts  of  the  world,  attracted 
thither  by  the  celebrity  of  its  alignments  and  other  stone 
monuments. 

In  following  the  road  from  Auray  to  Carnac,  a  striking 
difference  is  observed  in  the  appearance  of  the  country.  In 
approaching  the  coast  the  land  becomes  less  fertile ;  on  every 
hand  sterile  tracts  of  moorland  appear,  on  which  stand  the 
monuments  called  Celtic,  viz.  menhirs,"'  dolmens.t  and  tumuli, 
all  of  which  become  more  numerous  within  a  mile  of  Carnac. 

The  traveller's  first  impressions,  however,  are  not  favour- 
able ;  the  country  seems  flat  and  uninteresting,  and  his  expect- 
ations are  not  immediately  realised.  It  is  only  after  he  has 
remained  some  time  at  Carnac,  and  become  more  intimately 
acquainted  with  the  surrounding  country,  that  he  begins  to 
appreciate  the  number,  extent,  and  variety  of  the  Celtic  monu- 
ments and  Gallo- Roman  ruins  with  which  it  is  studded,  and 
to  realise  that  the  time  thus  devoted  to  the  examination  of 
these  in  detail  has  been  amply  repaid. 

*  Men-hir,  from  the  Breton  Men,  a  stone,  and  Mr.  long — literally  a  long 
stone. 

t  Dol-men,  from  the  Breton  Dol,  a  table,  and  men,  a  stone — literally  a 
stone  table. 


4  THE   BOSSENNO. 

According  to  Caesar's  Commentaries  this  country  was  in- 
habited before  the  Roman  Conquest  by  the  Veneti,  the  most 
powerful  people  of  Armorica. 

Its  occupation  by  the  Romans  until  the  year  409,  that  is 
for  more  than  four  centuries,  must  of  necessity  have  left  very 
marked  traces  of  the  masters  of  the  world.  These  are  to  be 
seen  in  the  numerous  Gallo-Roman  ruins  which  have  been 
explored  of  late  years,  and  in  the  Roman  tiles  and  pottery 
which  are  so  frequently  met  with  in  traversing  the  fields. 
During  all  this  lapse  of  time  the  country  was  inhabited  (accord- 
ing to  the  Roman  authors)  by  a  population  who  had  in  a  large 
measure  adopted  the  manners  and  customs  of  the  Romans. 

It  is  especially  on  the  sea-coast  of  Armorica  that  the  juxta- 
position of  Celtic  monuments  and  Gallo-Roman  ruins  attracts 
the  attention  of  the  observer,  and  suggests  questions  of  what 
had  led  to  this  juxtaposition  of  monuments  whose  origin  is  so 
different.  This  question  is  an  interesting  one.  Without  pre- 
tending to  solve  it,  I  may  be  permitted  to  cite  a  few  places 
where  this  proximity  may  be  easily  verified.  At  Locmariaker, 
Roman  ruins  are  found  alongside  of  the  Celtic  monuments ; 
at  Kerilio,  in  Erdeven,  the  same  may  be  seen  in  the  sandy 
downs  to  the  south  of  the  village ;  at  Carnac,  the  Roman 
ruins  of  the  Bossenno  are  surrounded  by  Celtic  monuments. 

It  is  owing  to  explorations  which  have  been  made,  during 
the  last  thirty  or  forty  years,  by  the  different  Archaeological 
Societies  in  Brittany,  and  also  by  private  individuals,  that 
numerous  Gallo-Roman  establishments  have  been  discovered 
in  that  province.  This  is  a  proof  of  the  progress  of  archaeo- 
logy in  Brittany,  for  at  that  time  several  antiquaries  held  that 
the  Romans  had  never  penetrated  to  the  extreme  point  of 
Armorica. 

The  Transactions  of  the  Polymathic  Society  of  the  Mor- 


THE  BOSSENNO.  6 

bihan,  for   1857,  contain  reports  on  the  exploration  of  the 
following  Gallo- Roman  establishments  : — 

At  St.  Christophe,  in  the  Commune  of  Eloen — description 
of  the  explorations,  and  plan.  At  Lodo,  in  the  Commune  of 
Arradon — description,  plan,  drawings  of  objects  found,  and 
account  of  Roman  coins  collected.  At  St.  Symphorien,  near 
Vannes — description  and  plan. 

In  the  Department  of  Finist^re  there  has  also  been  dis- 
covered, at  Parc-en-Croix,  near  Quimper,  a  Gallo-Roman 
military  post,  of  which  there  is  a  description  and  plan  in 
the  third  volume  of  the  Transactions  of  the  Archaeological 
Society  of  Finistere. 

At  Poulker,  near  the  embouchure  of  the  Odet,  on  the  left 
bank  of  the  river  of  Quimper,  Gallo-Roman  ruins  were  ex- 
plored in  1866,  for  the  Archaeological  Society  of  Finistere,  by 
M.  le  Men,  Archeviste  of  the  Department. 

"  M.  Fornier  has  also  published  a  description  and  plans  of 
his  explorations  at  Haut-Beeherel,  in  the  Commune  of  Cor- 
seul  (Cote  du  Nord). 

Numerous  other  discoveries  might  easily  be  cited,  but  it 
would  be  superfluous  to  do  so,  since  Gallo-Roman  remains 
have  been  found  almost  everywhere  in  Brittany,  thus  proving 
that  Armorica  was  occupied  as  long  and  as  fully  as  the  other 
parts  of  Gaul. 

Amongst  the  number  of  unexplored  Gallo-Roman  remains 
in  the  Department  of  the  Morbihan  several  works  on  archaeo- 
logy mention  certain  mounds"  called  "Caesar's  Camp,"  situated 
a  mile  to  the  east  of  Carnac,  and  near  the  village  of  Cru- 
Carnac,  their  origin  being  indicated  by  the  fragments  of  Roman 

*  Amongst  others,  the  Repertoire  Archeologique  du  Morbihan,  published 
by  M.  Rozenweig.  These  mounds  had  also  been  pointed  out  to  several 
archaeologists  by  M.  Charles  de  Kerenflech-Kevegne  before  i860. 


6  THE   BOSSENNO. 

tiles  strewn  on  their  surface.  Shortly  after  my  arrival  at 
Carnac  in  1873  these  mounds  were  pointed  out  to  me;  and 
the  more  I  saw  of  them,  the  more  I  desired  to  explore  them. 

These  mounds  are  situated  in  the  following  portions  of  the 
section  M,  second  subdivision  of  the  Cadastre.'"' 

No.  610.   Er  Vurten.  No.  649.   Bossenno. 

„     611.  Boceno.  „     651.   Bocenneu. 

„     612.   Boceno  Hir.  „     652.  Bocenneu. 

„     647.  Clos  Gurunne. 

These  portions  of  land  form  part  of  an  elevated  plateau, 
extending  from  them  towards  the  sea. 

The  etymology  of  the  word  Bossenno  appears  to  show 
that  it  is  derived  from  the  Breton  word  bossen  (a  mound  or 
heap)  in  the  plural  boceno,  bossenno,  or  bocenneu,  according  to 
the  different  dialects.  This  etymology  of  the  word  is  in 
harmony  with  the  character  of  the  objects  to  which  the  name 
is  given,  consisting  of  a  cluster  of  mounds  occupying  an  area 
which  may  be  estimated  at  6578  square  yards. 

Commencing  at  200  yards  to  the  east  of  the  village  of 
Cru-Carnac,  this  area  extends  eastward  to  the  edge  of  the 
valley  now  called  Ker-ine-goh,  but  in  the  old  titles  of  1740, 
Ker-guin-goh.^  These  old  titles  will  be  hereafter  alluded  to 
as  proving  that  the  sea  came  up  to  Ker-guin-goh  during  the 
last  century. 

A  talus  of  unequal  dimensions  stretches  along  the  north 

*  See  the  general  plan  of  the  Bossenno. 

+  This  word  signifies  the  old  town  of  Guen,  or  the  town  of  Old  Guen. 
A  curious  old  cross,  figured  at  the  end  of  this  chapter,  is  situated  about  500 
yards  to  the  north-west  of  Ker-guin-goli.  It  is  named  Croaz-ar-Guen.  The 
Breton  word  guen  or  van,  or  ban  in  the  Celtic,  signifies  white.  Guened  is 
the  town  of  Vannes,  and  Guenedi  the  Veneti.  The  most  common  names  of 
the  inhabitants  of  the  village  of  Cru-Carnac  are  Guen-ac  (whites),  and 
Baelagu  (priests). 


THE   BOSSENNO.  7 

side  of  this  ground,  and  appears  in  some  parts  also  on  the  south 
side.  When  making  several  trenches  across  the  northern 
talus,  I  found  the  remains  of  a  wall  measuring  5  ft.  in  breadth 
and  5  ft.  in  height,  built  with  large  undressed  stones  without 
lime,  similar  in  its  masonry  to  the  walls  of  the  Middle  Ages. 

From  the  commencement  of  the  work  at  the  Bossenno, 
this  talus  seemed  to  me  to  have  been  an  enceinte,  and  the 
discovery  of  the  stone  wall  strengthened  this  impression. 
This  destination  is  also  indicated  by  the  difference  of  level 
between  the  north  and  south  sides  of  the  talus :  on  the  north 
side  the  ground  is  fully  three  feet  lower  ;  and  this  leads  me  to 
suppose  that  on  this  side  a  moat  had  been  cast,  the  earth  from 
which  had  served  to  heighten  the  enceinte. 

The  legends  of  a  country  are  never  to  be  overlooked, 
especially  when  they  bear  upon  the  researches  in  which  one 
is  engaged. 

The  group  of  mounds  called  the  Bossenno  have  their 
legend,  and  it  has  a  certain  analogy  with  certain  facts  which 
the  excavations  there  have  brought  to  light.  The  tradition 
of  the  country  is  that  the  Bossenno  were  inhabited  by  the  red 
monks  (the  Templars)  who,  having  exasperated  the  country 
by  their  crimes,  drew  down  upon  themselves  a  terrible 
punishment,  their  neighbours  having  killed  them  and  burnt 
their  habitations  in  one  night.  It  will  be  afterwards  seen 
that  in  the  exploration  of  the  ruins  of  the  Bossenno  the 
unmistakable  proofs  were  everywhere  found  of  their  having 
been  destroyed  by  fire. 

These  mounds  have  an  evil  reputation  to  this  day.  The 
peasants  tell  you  "  those  who  pass  by  them  late  at  night  may 
happen  to  see  each  mound  illuminated,  and  sometimes  to  hear 
an  animated  conversation,  of  which  not  a  word  can  be  under- 
stood, for  it  is  in  Latin." 


8  THE   BOSSENNO. 

The  exploration  of  the  Bossenno  was  commenced  in  the 
beginning  of  September  1874.  The  excavation  of  each 
separate  mound  was  undertaken  successively.  Each  of  the 
mounds  so  excavated  is  distinguished  in  the  general  plan  by 
a  particular  letter.  Up  to  this  time  eight  mounds  have  been 
explored,  and  these  are  distinguished  in  the  following  pages 
by  the  letters  A,  B,  C,  D,  E,  F,  G,  H. 

I  shall  confine  myself  principally  to  the  description  of  the 
constructions  found  under  the  respective  mounds,  with  an 
enumeration  of  the  objects  collected  from  them,  reserving  for 
the  concluding  chapter  a  few  remarks  regarding  the  special 
nature  of  these  constructions,  and  the  time  when  they  had 
been  destroyed. 


CROAZ-AR-GUEN. 


II. 

EXCAVATIONS   IN    THE    MOUND  A. 


THE    MOUND    A. 


The  excavations  at  the  Bossenno  were  commenced  in  the 
early  part  of  September  1874,  on  the  mound  indicated  in  the 
general  plan  by  the  letter  A.  It  was  one- of  the  smallest  of 
several  artificial  eminences  in  the  field  649  Bossenno,  of  which 
it  occupied  the  south  end.  In  form  it  was  a  low  circular 
mound,  having  a  height  of  about  3  feet,  and  a  circumference 
at  the  base  of  about  1 30  feet. 

Before  proceeding  farther,  it  may  be  as  well  to  indicate  the 
method  which  was  followed  in  conducting  the  diggings,  not 
only  of  this  mound,  but  of  those  successively  explored. 

The  different  objects  brought  to  light  by  the  labours  of 
the  workmen — such  as  bricks,  tiles,  pottery,  metals,  bones,  etc. 
— were  carefully  laid  aside.  The  fragments  of  pottery  and  tiles 
were  first  of  all  submitted  to  a  preliminary  examination,  with 
the  view  of  finding  the  potters'  marks  or  names.  At  the  end 
of  each  day  the  more  interesting  objects  were  carried  to  the 
Hotel  des  Voyageurs  at  Carnac,  where  they  were  submitted 
to  a  more  careful  examination,  previous  to  being  classed  and 
ticketed,  so  that  no  errors  might  occur  as  to  the  precise 
position  in  which  they  had  been  found. 

The  workmen  commenced  digging  on  the  south  side  of  the 
mound,  and  were  not  long  in  turning  up  a  quantity  of  debris. 


12  THE    BOSSENNO. 

consisting  of  fragments  of  Roman  roofing  tiles  {Tegulce  and 
Imbrices),  also  sundry  fragments  of  Gallo-Roman  pottery  in 
red,  gray,  and  black  ware.  After  several  hours'  work  we  came 
upon  the  outside  of  the  north  wall. 

Here  some  unforeseen  difficulties  arose,  which  stopped  the 
work  for  several  days.  The  lessee  of  the  grazing  of  the  field 
set  up  a  claim  for  indemnity  which  he  had  not  previously 
required,  and  which  ultimately  had  to  be  submitted  to.  On 
the  other  hand,  the  proprietor  raised  a  still  greater  difficulty 
by  exacting  that  all  the  excavated  stones  and  rubbish  should 
be  carted  away  clear  of  his  fields.  Thanks,  however,  to  the 
kind  intervention  of  Dr.  de  Gressy  and  of  M.  Broux,  the 
Mayor  of  Carnac,  leave  was  obtained  to  deposit  these  on  the 
waste  land  below  Kercado,  about  a  mile  distant  from  the 
Mound  A,  and  upon  some  parts  of  the  old  road  which 
traverses  the  Bossenno  towards  the  Trinit6-sur-Mer.  As 
soon  as  these  arrangements  were  concluded,  the  diggings 
were  immediately  resumed. 

The  outside  of  the  wall  previously  mentioned  was  followed 
by  cutting  a  trench  along  it  lengthways  down  to  its  founda- 
tion. Several  days  were  passed  in  carrying  this  trench  round 
the  outside  of  the  dwelling  so  long  buried  under  the  Mound 
A.  When  finished  it  exposed  a  building  of  quadrilateral 
form,  each  of  its  sides  measuring  nearly  34  feet,  excepting  that 
on  the  south,  which  was  somewhat  less  than  the  others. 
This  irregularity  of  construction  is  not  uncommon  in  Gallo- 
Roman  buildings. 

The  walls  measured  2  feet  in  breadth,  and  were  con- 
structed with  small  cubic  stones,  carefully  laid,  and  bedded  in 
lime  mortar.  Some  of  the  neighbouring  peasants  who  came 
to  see  the  diggings  were  much  astonished  at  the  regularity  of 
the  courses  of  small  cubic  stones,  and  remarked  as  well  that 


Nord 


^-  V  -«— Kx-— -^--sjs^^j^:^^ 


LiiMii^m'i^^iN 


Metres  ^*^ 


"'    lirilish  Imp' Feet  ^ 

a 

JiiTfir.r  Miln  /ticHA 


12  3  0 

— I 


20 


:.»r:' 

"",,. 

,»j.«vi; 

"T 

i.V.r.v 

yftt- 

:•':: 

".^jiv,;; 

•i(>hv 

■■"" 

,..;.;:;•'"? 

•" . 

~f'L: 

""' 

, ,;,%. 

\" ','„„• 

..... 

■'•■.:„■•■ 

,r,,.;'.' 

;:;;*■''**' 

..M 

30 


E.  Mori^Hf  sc~ 


To  face  page  13. 


A,  PLATE   I.— PLAN   OF  THE   BUILDING. 


EXCAVATIONS   IN   THE  MOUND   A.  13 

the  breadth  of  the  walls  was  the  same  as  in  the  modern 
buildings  in  the  environs  of  Carnac. 

The  following  days  were  employed  in  clearing  out  the 
interior  of  the  building.  The  result  of  this  was  to  expose  a 
dwelling  of  four  rooms,  of  which  I  shall  now  give  the  descrip- 
tion, designing  each  by  the  number  it  bears  on  the  plan  A, 
plate  I. 

No.  I. — This  apartment,  by  far  the  largest,  measured  28 
feet  by  1 8,  and  occupied  all  the  east  side  of  the  house.  Two 
pieces  of  masonry  projected  from  the  inner  side  of  the  north 
wall,  and  marked  the  places  which  had  been  occupied  by  two 
constructions,  whose  remains  were  now  so  dilapidated  as  to 
afford  no  definite  indication  of  their  original  destination.  It 
was,  nevertheless,  agreed  by  all  who  saw  them,  that  they 
might  have  been  furnaces. 

Nos.  2  and  3. — The  first  of  these  rooms  formed  a  square, 
measuring  9  feet  on  each  side.  The  second  measured  9  feet 
by  7  feet. 

The  flooring  of  the  rooms  i,  2,  and  3,  was  formed  of  a 
thick  layer  of  concrete  cement. 

No.  4. — This  room  was  also  square,  and  measured  9  feet 
on  each  side.  It  had  been  paved  with  square  tiles,  but  these 
were  found  displaced  and  broken.  Other  fragments  of  tiles 
were  collected  here,  which  were  ornamented  with  diagonal 
lines  and  concentric  circular  markings.  Subsequent  expe- 
rience showed  that  these  tiles  had  been  sometimes  used  for 
decorative  purposes,  while  in  other  cases  the  hollow  lines  had 
served  to  make  the  plaster  adhere.  Three  paving  tiles  were 
found  which  bore  the  impression  of  the  feet  of  dogs,  which 
had  passed  over  them  when  the  clay  was  in  the  soft  state. 

The  floors  of  these  four  rooms,  which  have  just  been 
described,   were  covered  with   a   layer  of  cinders,  charcoal. 


14  THE   BOSSENNO. 

and  ashes,  mingled  with  pieces  of  iron,  scoriae,  and  even  of 
granite  vitrified.  The  impression  derived  from  the  presence 
of  these  objects,  and  from  the  consideration  of  other  circum- 
stances revealed  during  the  progress  of  the  diggings,  was  that 
the  building  had  been  destroyed  by  fire,  while  the  quantity  of 
broken  pottery"  found  within  its  precincts  renders  it  probable 
that  the  dwelling  had  been  previously  pillaged  ;  for  it  is  pro- 
verbial that  the  marauder  destroys  all  that  he  is  unable  to 
appropriate  or  does  not  care  to  carry  away. 

After  the  four  rooms  had  been  entirely  cleared  out,  trenches 
were  dug  across  the  floor  of  the  room  No.  i  from  north  to 
south,  and  also  all  round  the  base  of  the  walls  of  the  building 
on  the  inside. 

At  a  depth  of  1 2  inches  under  the  floor  the  workmen  came 
upon  a  layer,  4  inches  thick,  composed  of  bones  of  ruminants, 
shells  of  edible  molluscs,  ashes,  cinders,  charcoal,  and  fragments 
of  pottery.  Another  bed  of  the  same  nature  was  found  22 
inches  lower  still.  These  two  layers  seemed  to  be  the  evidences 
of  two  burnings  anterior  to  that  which  had  destroyed  the 
house  buried  under  the  Mound  A.  An  apparent  corrobora- 
tion of  this  view  is  found  in  the  fact  that,  as  we  got  deeper 
down  in  the  trenches,  the  forms  of  the  pottery  became  more 
simple,  and  showed  only  plain  edges. 

The  debris  which  was  carted  away  from  the  inside  of  the 
building,  was  composed  principally  of  small  cubic  building 
stones,  fragments  of  fiat  roofing  tiles  ( Tegulce)  and  of  ridge 
tiles  {Imbrices).  From  all  this  quantity  of  debris,  however, 
there  were  only  extracted  entire  one  fiat  roofing  tile  and  six 
ridge  tiles.  Subsequently,  when  exploring  the  other  mounds 
of  the  Bossenno,  a  considerable  number  of  both  Tegulce  and 

*  For  detailed  descriptions  of  the  pottery,  see  pp.  18-24. 


^/K 


Ta  face  page  15. 


A,   PLATE   II 


EXCAVATIONS   IN   THE   MOUND  A.  15 

Imbrices  were  found  entire,  so  that  I  was  enabled  to  recon- 
struct a  portion  of  the  roof,  which  was  deposited  and  may  be 
seen  in  the  newly-formed  museum  in  the  Mairie  of  Carnac, 
and  where,  it  is  to  be  hoped,  that  it  will  remain  after  the  ruins 
of  the  Bossenno  have  entirely  disappeared.* 

The  following  is  a  descriptive  list  of  the  most  important 
objects  found  in  clearing  out  the  inside  of  the  buildings  : — 

Several  large  pieces  of  querns  or  hand-mills  in  granite  and 
conglomerate  or  "  pudding  stone,"  reddened  by  the  action  of  fire, 
were  found  scattered  on  the  floor  of  the  room  No.  i. 

Part  of  a  broken  implement  in  yellow  sandstone,  cut  in 
facets,  polished  by  use.  This  appeared  to  have  been  a  hone 
or  sharpening  stone.     (A,  pi.  II.  fig.  3.) 

Several  fragments  of  implements  in  gray  slate  polished  by 
use,  which  appeared  to  have  been  used  as  rubbing  stones  or 
burnishers.     (A,  pi.  II.  fig.  i.) 

Several  worked  flakes  of  black  flint  similar  to  the  flint  of 
the  English  Channel  as  found  near  Dieppe. 

An  implement  in  gray  flint  unpolished,  and  measuring 
4^  inches  by  3  inches.     (A,  pi.  II.  fig.  2.) 

Mr.  Le  Guennec,  proprietor  of  the  field  in  which  the  mound 
A  was  situated,  discovered,  when  removing  the  ruins  of  a 
dolmen  from  one  of  his  fields  a  few  years  ago,  a  stone  axe  also 
in  gray  flint  and  of  the  same  form  as  that  here  described. 
Mr.  Le  Guennec  placed  his  axe  in  the  museum,  in  the  Mairie 
of  Carnac.  The  dolmen  in  which  it  was  found  was  situated 
in  a  meadow  field  near  the  village  of  Kerfraval,  distant  about 
half  a  mile  to  the  south  of  the  Bossenno. 

*  A  few  years  ago  there  was  discovered  near  Redon,  in  the  grounds  be- 
longing to  the  Eudiste  fathers  of  that  town,  a  Gallo-Roman  furnace,  having 
its  roof  constructed  with  Tegulce  and  Imbrices.  It  is  to  be  regretted  that  this 
interesting  monument  was  not  better  cared  for.     It  fell  in  ruins  in  1873. 


16  THE   BOSSENNO. 

It  happened  one  day  when  I  was  absent  during  the  dinner 
hour  of  my  workmen,  that  an  EngHsh  lady  and  her  son  came 
to  see  the  diggings.  The  latter  amused  himself  in  working 
with  a  pick  about  that  part  of  the  construction  in  the  room 
No.  I  which  resembled  a  chimney,  where  he  discovered  a 
polished  stone  celt  of  a  white  colour,  which  he  showed  to  his 
mother :  neither  of  them,  however,  was  aware  of  its  value, 
and  it  was  flung  aside  amongst  the  debris  to  be  carted  away. 
It  was  not  until  the  following  day,  when  I  happened  to  show 
them  the  polished  stone  celts  in  the  museum  at  Carnac,  that 
they  informed  me  of  their  discovery,  and  regretted  that  they 
had  not  known  better.  Exertions  were  made  to  recover  the 
lost  axe,  but  without  success.  This  discovery  of  a  stone  axe 
in  what  appeared  to  be  a  chimney  was  all  the  more 
interesting  from  its  correlation  with  a  custom  still  observed 
at  Carnac,  that  of  building  into  the  chimney  of  the  dwelling- 
house  a  stone  celt  which  is  supposed  to  preserve  the  house 
from  being  struck  by  lightning.  It  is  to  be  noted  also  that 
the  name  of  the  stone  axe  or  celt  in  the  Breton  language  is 
Mein-Gurun,  that  is  to  say,  the  Thunder  Stone. 

There  were  only  a  few  objects  in  bronze  found,  viz. — 

A  buckle  of  a  square  form.  (A,  pi.  III.  fig.  i,  natural 
size.) 

A  piece  of  wire  or  rod  measuring  4  inches  in  length,  and 
\  inch  in  breadth. 

A  ring  of  elliptic  form,  probably  part  of  the  buckle  of  a 
waist-belt.     (A,  pi.  III.  fig.  2,  natural  size.) 

The  head  of  a  nail  or  button  i;^  inch  in  diameter,  which 
may  have  been  mounted  either  on  leather  garments,  or  on 
harness.  The  zingaris  or  gipsies  of  Hungary,  and  the 
Wallachians,  to  this  day,  employ  similar  buttons  to  adorn  their 


o 


e./v. 


To  face  page  i6. 


A,    PLATE    III. 


EXCAVATIONS   IN   THE   MOUND  A.  17 

leather  vestments,  as  may  be  seen  by  referring  to  the  studies 
made  by  Valerio  in  Himgary  and  Wallachia.  The  Breton 
peasants,  in  many  communes,  still  wear  a  number  of  metal 
buttons  on  their  garments  which  are  disposed  more  for 
ornament  than  use. 

Lumps  of  iron  and  scoriae  were  found  in  considerable 
quantity  in  the  room  No.  i,  especially  near  the  construction 
which  has  been  indicated  as  resembling  a  forge.  Several  other 
pieces  of  iron,  which  appeared  to  have  been  parts  of  sword- 
blades  and  spear-heads,  were  also  found  on  the  floor,  but  they 
crumbled  away  after  extraction  and  exposure  to  the  air.  The 
only  objects  in  iron  obtained  entire  were  a  few  nails  2  to  3 
inches  in  length.  These  were  extracted  from  the  east  wall, 
where  the  lime  mortar  had  preserved  them. 

Among  the  few  fragments  of  glass  found,  some  were 
portions  of  cups  in  white  glass,  while  others  of  a  bluish-green 
colour,  ornamented  with  fluted  mouldings,  were  evidently 
parts  of  square-shaped  bottles  similar  to  the  Gallo- Roman 
bottles  exhibited  in  the  museums  of  Caen,  Quimper,  and 
Vannes.  These  fragments  were  found  in  the  rooms  Nos.  2, 
3,  and  4. 

There  were  also  found  in  these  rooms  some  fragments  of 
fine  clear  glass,  very  thin  and  pure,  and  a  large  piece  of  a  bowl 
in  fine  clear  glass,  ornamented  with  two  circular  lines  engraved 
not  quite  parallel. 

A  considerable  quantity  of  bones  and  teeth  of  oxen  of  a 
small  size  were  collected  here.  One  of  the  bones  had  clean 
incisions  on  it,  made  by  a  sharp  cutting  implement;  others 
bore  the  marks  of  the  teeth  of  carnivora  which  had  gnawed 
them.  Several  had  been  split  lengthways,  either  to  extract 
the  marrow,  or  as  the  first  step  in  the  process  of  fabricating 
them  into  implements. 


18  THE   BOSSENNO. 

There  were  also  found  bones  and  teeth  of  the  deer,  goat, 
sheep,  and  pig.  One  tooth  was  found  which  belonged  either 
to  the  dog  or  wolf. 

In  a  locality  so  close  to  the  sea,  it  was  to  be  expected  that 
the  remains  of  edible  molluscs  would  not  be  wanting,  and  so 
it  proved,  for  there  was  an  abundance  of  the  shells  of  oysters, 
clams,  ormers,  limpets,  and  mussels.  The  oyster-shells  were 
the  most  numerous.  On  comparing  these  with  shells  fresh 
from  the  Bay  of  Quiberon,  no  difference  could  be  observed 
either  in  the  enamel  or  in  the  dimensions. 

Besides  these,  there  was  found  in  the  trench  cut  on  the 
outside  of  the  east  wall  a  veritable  kitchen  midden,  composed 
of  shells,  bones,  and  fragments  of  pottery.  This  heap  appeared 
to  have  been  the  refuse  which  had  been  thrown  out  of  the 
dwelling. 

The  quantity  of  fragments  of  pottery  collected  during  the 
excavation  was  very  large  in  proportion  to  the  small  size  of 
the  dwelling,  and  thus  denoted  a  certain  amount  of  luxury. 
The  whole  of  the  fragments  when  collected  together  were 
sufficient  to  fill  three  baskets,  which  weighed  71  lbs.  net. 

I  attempted,  but  without  success,  to  reconstruct  complete 
vases  from  these  numerous  fragments.  It  was  with  the 
greatest  difficulty  that  two  or  three  fragments  were  found 
which  adapted  themselves  so  as  to  be  cemented  together,  and 
it  became  a  puzzle  to  ascertain  what  had  become  of  all  the 
other  fragments. 

But  the  principal  cause  of  astonishment  was  not  so  much 
the  abundance  of  these  fragments  as  the  extreme  diversity  of 
the  forms  of  the  vases  to  which  they  belonged.  This 
diversity  of  form,  when  taken  in  connection  with  their 
difference  of  texture  and  variety  of  ornament,  indicates  that 
they  must  have  belonged  to  very  different  epochs. 


EXCAVATIONS   IN  THE  MOUND  A.  19 

A  mere  cursory  inspection  is  in  fact  sufficient  to  show  that 
some  of  these  vases  had  been  fashioned  with  neither  taste 
nor  art,  and  from  rude  materials  collected  from  the  surface  of 
the  ground ;  whilst  others  indicate,  by  the  elegance  of  their 
forms  and  by  the  careful  preparation  of  their  material,  that 
the  makers  had  a  considerable  knowledge  of  the  ceramic  art. 

A  more  careful  examination  of  the  fragments  belonging  to 
the  first  of  these  two  categories  enables  one  to  perceive,  from 
their  irregularity  of  form  and  from  their  inequality  of  thick- 
ness, that  they  had  been  made  by  hand  without  the  aid  of  the 
potter's  wheel.  The  marks  of  the  fingers  are  plainly  visible 
on  many  of  these  fragments,  whilst  others  bore  a  sort  of 
ornament  formed  by  the  print  of  the  potter's  finger  round  the 
rim,  and,  judging  from  the  smallness  and  shape  of  these,  one 
would  say  that  they  had  been  made  by  women.* 

Their  paste  is  formed  of  earth,  consisting  of  the  debris  of 
primitive  rocks,  and  badly  worked,  in  which  one  can  easily 
distinguish,  without  the  aid  of  a  magnifying-glass,  small  frag- 
ments of  quartz,  felspar,  mica,  etc.  The  fracture  is  earthy,  and 
the  firing  imperfect  and  unequal.  They  have  in  this  respect 
a  remarkable  resemblance  to  the  funeral  vases  found  in  the 
dolmens  and  kistvaens  which  are  generally  regarded  as 
belonging  to  a  very  remote  period. 

It  may  be  as  well  to  add  that  in  pointing  out  this  striking 
similarity,  I  do  not  believe  myself  authorised  to  assign  the 
rude  pottery  of  the  Bossenno  to  the  remote  epoch  of  the 
dolmens ;  but  it  appears  to  me  to  be  shown  by  this  com- 
parison   that    the    resemblance   which   exists    between    the 

*  At  Rieux  and  at  Malansac,  which  are  villages  inhabited  by  potters, 
situated  in  the  Department  of  the  Morbihan,  it  is  the  women  who  make  all 
the  pottery  for  ordinary  use.  The  men  make  only  the  large  vases  called 
pones  or  charnias. 


20  THE   BOSSENNO. 

products  of  ages  so  far  apart  may  become,  in  many  cases,  a 
source  of  error,  and  that  great  caution  must  be  exercised 
when  rude  pottery  is  made  the  subject  of  a  chronological 
classification. 

The   following   narrative  is   adduced   in   support  of  this 
opinion : — 

I  happened  to  be  in  the  Hebrides  during  the  summer  of 
1868.  The  weather  was  tempestuous,  and  I  had  found  a 
shelter  from  a  thunderstorm  in  the  cottage  of  an  old  woman, 
originally  from  the  island  of  Tiree,  but  then  living  in  lona. 
Two  or  three  small  vases  that  were  placed  on  the  table 
attracted  my  attention.  They  were  so  like  the  ancient 
pottery  of  the  dolmens  or  kistvaens,  that  I  asked  where  they 
had  been  found.  To  my  surprise  the  old  woman  replied,  "  I 
did  not  find  them,  I  made  them  myself." 

"  That  must  be  impossible,"  I  said,  "  for  you  have  no 
furnace  to  fire  them." 

"  I  do  not  need  a  furnace  for  that,  and  if  you  like  I  will 
make  you  some." 

"  Do  so  by  all  means,  I  will  be  very  glad  to  have  two  or 
three  of  them." 

The  old  woman  went  immediately  out  to  her  garden,  and 
brought  back  a  quantity  of  argillaceous  earth.  She  then 
wetted  the  surface  of  the  table,  on  which  she  moulded  very 
neatly,  and  in  a  short  space  of  time,  three  small  vases,  which 
bore  the  impress  of  her  fingers  round  the  outside  of  the  neck, 
and  on  the  inside  of  the  rim  there  was  a  border  formed  with 
the  points  of  her  finger  nails.     She  then  said  to  me, 

"  I  cannot  proceed  further  just  now,  because  the  pots  must 
be  dried  before  they  are  put  on  the  fire.  Come  to-morrow 
•morning  at  ten  o'clock,  and  you  shall  see  that  I  do  not  require 
a  furnace  to  fire  them." 


EXCAVATIONS    IN   THE   MOUND  A.  21 

At  ten  o'clock  next  morning  I  returned  to  the  cottage. 
The  only  fireplace  was  a  slab  of  stone  in  the  centre  of  the 
room,  on  which  a  few  pieces  of  turf  were  burning.  The  old 
woman  placed  the  vases  on  the  fire,  poured  milk  into  them, 
and  allowed  them  to  remain  until  the  milk  had  boiled  for 
some  time.  When  this  operation,  which  did  not  much  exceed 
half-an-hour,  was  concluded,  the  vases  had  acquired  sufficient 
hardness,  and  had  all  the  appearance  of  the  ancient  pottery  of 
the  dolmens. 

Returning  to  the  description  of  the  pottery  of  the  Bossenno, 
several  fragments  of  coarse  gray  pottery  were  found  in  the 
Mound  A,  which  bore  a  more  elaborate  decoration  than  those 
described  in  the  preceding  pages.  This  decoration,  which  is 
by  some  authors  designated  geometric,  consisted  of  a  series 
of  hollow  black  lines  forming  chevrons  and  lozenges.  (See  C, 
pi.  XIII.  figs.  5  and  6.)  Several  very  fine  specimens  of  vases 
of  this  kind,  which  had  been  found  in  excavations  at  Arradon 
and  Carhaix,  are  exhibited  in  the  museums  of  Vannes  and 
Quimper.  Several  specimens  similar  to  these  are  to  be  seen 
in  the  museum  of  the  manufactory  at  Sevres.  These  had 
been  found  in  Egypt,  however,  and  they  are  figured  and 
described  by  Brogniart,^  as  of  the  time  of  the  Ptolemies, 
that  is  about  the  middle  of  the  third  century  before  the 
Christian  era.  Can  this  similarity  of  pottery  found  in  Egypt 
and  in  Brittany  be  accounted  for  by  the  fact  of  African  sol- 
diers having  been  stationed  in  the  Morbihan  and  in  Finistere  .■* 
The  Notitia  Dignitatutn  of  the  Empire  gives  the  principal 
military  stations  for  the  fourth  century,  and  mentions 
prefedus  milituni  Maurortim  Venetorum  Venetis,  and  again 
prefectus  militum  Maurorum  Osismiacorum  Osismiis. 

*   Traith  des  arts  Ceramiques  par  Alex.  Brogniart.     Tome  premier,  page 
503.   Paris,  Bechet  Seune;  1854. 


22 


THE   BOSSENNO. 


To  the  pottery  described  in  the  preceding  pages  there 
are  to  be  added  some  fragments  of  a  small  vase,  very  thin, 
well  fired,  and  having  a  fine  hard  sonorous  paste.  The  outer 
surface  was  covered  with  a  dark  metallic-looking  glaze,  with 
red  ornaments  in  relief.  The  Museum  of  St.  Germain-en- 
Laye  possesses  several  similar  vases  found  in  the  Department 
of  the  Lozere.  Three  fragments  of  vases  of  the  same  kind 
are  exhibited   in  the  Guild    Hall    Museum,   London,  which 


FRAGMENT  OF  POTTERY  FOUND  IN  LONDON. 

were  found  at  a  depth  of  42  feet  when  the  foundations  of 
the  Royal  Exchange  were  sunk.  In  my  subsequent  excava- 
tions in  the  Mounds  B  and  C,  numerous  fragments  of  this 
curious  class  of  pottery  were  discovered,  which  enabled  me 
to  reconstruct  the  vase  figured  in  the  accompanying  chromo- 
lithograph, A,  pi.  IV. 

The  greater  portion  of  the  pottery  found  in  the  Mound  A 
was  formed  of  common  yellow,  gray,  and  black  earth,  and 
consisted  of  fragments  of  diotae,  amphorae,  and  ordinary 
domestic  vessels.  I  succeeded  in  determining  the  forms  of 
two  flat  dishes,  in  common  gray  earth,  which  resemble  those 


PL.l. 


To/it:t  fat^  22. 


A,   PUVTE  IV. 
VASE  FOUND  IN   MOUND  C.    (Sep  p.  67.) 


L    Cappe   Del. 


Imp.  Leroy  ftRicKon .  Pans. 


EXCAVATIONS  IN   THE   MOUND  A.  23 

still  in  daily  use  at  Carnac,  called  in  the  Breton  dialect  of 
Vannes,  er  Cass.     (See  A,  pi.  III.  fig.  5.) 

Besides  these  fragments  in  gray,  yellow,  and  black  earth, 
the  progress  of  the  excavations  brought  to  light  some  frag- 
ments in  common  red  earth,  and  others,  not  so  numerous,  in 
the  fine  red  earth,  and  with  the  lustrous  glaze  commonly  called 
Samian.  From  the  latter  fragments  two  small  vases  were 
reconstructed,  one  5^-  and  the  other  3^  inches  in  diameter 
(See  A,  pi.  1 1 1.,  figs.  3  and  4.)  Some  of  these  latter  fragments 
appeared  to  me  to  belong  to  the  class  of  pottery  called  "  False 
Samian."  Birch  describes  this  variety  of  pottery  as  covered 
with  a  thin  red  glazing  due  to  a  solution  of  sulphate  of  iron 
in  which  it  had  been  plunged.  On  trying  to  wash  one  of 
these  fragments,  so  as  to  clear  off  the  adhesive  earth  which 
covered  it,  the  red  glazing  dissolved  in  the  water,  to  which  it 
imparted  a  bright  red  colour.  This  experience  showed  the 
inexpediency  of  washing  the  fragments  of  pottery,  even  after 
they  had  been  first  carefully  dried. 

This  enumeration  of  the  different  specimens  of  pottery 
found  in  the  Mound  A  may  now  be  concluded  by  mentioning 
a  number  of  rods  or  stalks  in  coarse  red  earth,  which  were 
scattered  about  the  floor  of  the  room  No.  i.  These  measured 
4  to  7  inches  in  length,  and  i  to  i^  inches  in  diameter.  It  is 
believed  by  many  antiquaries  that  these  rods  were  made  use 
of,  in  the  places  where  pottery  was  made,  to  support  the 
apodal  vases  and  pieces  with  round  bottoms  during  the  firing/' 
and  also  for  cleaning  the  hands  of  the  potter,  by  rubbing,  when 
too  much  empasted. 

Lamps  and  coins  are  generally  found  in  the  diggings  made 

*  To  this  day,  in  the  Breton  potteries,  unvarnished  vases  are  supported, 
whilst  enamelled  vases  are  isolated  by  little  rods  of  refractory  earth,  having 
different  forms,  called  pernctlcs. 


24 


THE   BOSSENNO. 


in  Gallo- Roman  establishments,  but  no  traces  of  either  of  these 
were  found  in  the  Mound  A. 

As  soon  as  the  diggings  were  completed  the  peasants  com- 
menced to  clear  away  the  ruins  which  had  been  exposed,  as 
they  wished  to  put  the  ground  under  pasture.  In  demolishing 
the  east  wall  they  discovered  a  small  head  of  Venus  in  terra 
cotta,  having  an  ornamant  round  the  forehead  formed  of  stars 
and  small  circles,  with  a  point  in  their  centre.  As  the  neck 
bore  the  evidence  of  having  been  freshly  broken,  I  caused 
a  search  to  be  made,  in  the  hope  of  finding  at  least  some 
other  portion  of  the  statuette,  but  without  success. 

The  season  was  too  far  advanced  to  think  of  attacking 
another  mound  this  year,  and  the  diggings  were  therefore 
adjourned  until  the  spring  of  1875. 


fryM 


WINDOW  AT  BOURGEREL. 


III. 

EXCAVATIONS    IN   THE    MOUND   B. 


THE    MOUND    B. 


The  results  obtained  from  the  excavation  of  the  small  mound, 
undertaken  in  the  month  of  September  1874,  were  so  far 
satisfactory  as  to  lead  me  to  look  for  still  better  results  from 
the  larger  mounds,  and  in  this  I  was  not  disappointed.  As 
soon  as  the  weather  permitted,  in  the  spring  of  1875,  the  dig- 
gings were  recommenced ;  and  with  a  dozen  of  workmen, 
most  of  whom  had  been  rendered  more  skilful  by  the  expe- 
rience of  the  previous  year,  an  attack  was  made  successively 
on  the  mounds  marked  in  the  plan  of  the  Bossenno  by  the 
letters  B  and  C.  Although  the  work  was  commenced  in 
reality  on  the  Mound  C,  still  it  will  render  the  description 
more  clear  to  the  reader  if  the  diggings  in  the  Mound  B  are 
first  described,  as  the  constructions  found  under  the  Mound 
C  were  only  a  dependence  of  the  habitation  found  under  the 
Mound  B. 

The  Mound  B  measured  from  north  to  south  82  feet  in 
length,  and  had  a  breadth  of  56  feet.  Its  average  height  was 
about  7  feet.  An  excavation  on  its  summit  indicated  that 
some  one  had  already  been  at  work  there.  My  workmen, 
who  belonged  to  the  locality,  stated  that  there  was  a  tradition 
to  that  effect  in  the  country. 

The  example  of  my  predecessors  was  not  followed  in  our 
commencing  operations  on  the  summit,  but  on  the  north  side, 


28  THE   BOSSENNO. 

where  we  soon  struck  on  a  wall,  at  the  base  of  which  was  a 
square  space  5  feet  1 1  inches  of  a  side,  paved  with  Roman 
roofing  tiles,  or  Tegulce.  These  tiles  had  their  crotchet 
edges  turned  downwards,  and  were  solidly  imbedded  in 
cement,  so  as  to  form  a  smooth  piece  of  pavement.* 

The  wall  was  followed  all  round  the  mound  until  the 
exterior  of  the  building  was  entirely  exposed  to  view,  after 
which  the  clearing  out  of  the  interior  was  proceeded  with. 

When  the  latter  operation  was  concluded,  we  had  exposed 
to  view  a  building  of  rectangular  form,  measuring  62  feet  in 
length  by  47  feet  in  breadth,  and  composed  of  eleven  sub- 
divisions— viz.,  three  large  apartments  and  a  passage,  Nos. 
2,  3,  4,  and  10  of  the  ground-plan.  These  occupied  the  centre 
of  the  building.  On  the  east  side  there  were  the  room  No.  1 1, 
and  the  corridor  No.  i.  On  the  west  side  there  was  a  suite 
of  small  rooms,  Nos.  5,  6,  7,  8,  9,  probably  cubicula.  The 
dilapidated  state  of  the  exterior  wall  on  the  west  side  pre- 
vented our  ascertaining  if  there  had  been  any  entrances  on 
this  side.  The  principal  entrance  of  the  building  is  indicated 
on  the  ground-plan. 

The  thickness  of  the  exterior  walls  was  24  inches,  and  that 
of  the  interior  20  inches. 

The  west  wall  was  prolonged  to  the  north  to  where  it 
joined  on  to  the  building  found  under  the  Mound  C  (the 
baths).  A  court,  which  measured  27  feet  in  breadth,  separated 
the  two  buildings. 

These  indications  being  sufficient  to  give  a  general  idea 

of  the  form,  character,  and  relations  of  the  two  buildings,  we 

now  proceed  to  give  a  more  detailed  description  of  each  of 

the  eleven  subdivisions  of  the  larger  structure,  all  of  which 
.* 

*  See  the  ground-plan  B,  pi.  II. 


!.T..-."<»,'.S 


H.vj,j,,..,./A'-.^„%<..  •■■.«,;^-..;,,„„...-.v:.^,,.^^      jjM  ■■••..„: - ;,,,■■  ''••-..I..  . 


•'V*>.. 


;.;v.T„..| 
liw..' 


I 

iii 


.'.'fir.,  ■' 
;.JEit;""r- 1 


..:i;sr,.i 


L 


..-(1^ ".  "•«/_■.. 


niMiii II  Mil  ■iiiiiiihii 


3       I 


11] 


"■•■o- J--;-' 


10 


s 


g|P|SS'  ^%W8Sf 


■^-^ -----     V— '*-^::--L--: 


\rv"  v!,-  ■!?--■- s^Rl 


11 


M«tr«»  I 


-«  •-  .<^ 


Dritiah  Imp'  FeM 


r- 


James  MUtv  f^cat. 


E  Jtoru'MySc. 


jiijer^ 


teg;;  ■  Bp^c;®!^.  ^^^«ek%s«"^ 

""3  ,N.  J  f|«io 


To/acipag,  j8.  If,   PLATE  II.-PLAN  AND  SECTION  OF  THE  BUILDING  IN  THE  MOUND  a 


EXCAVATIONS   IN   THE   MOUND    B.  29 

bore  marks  of  having  been  destroyed  by  fire.  Their  relative 
positions  and  dimensions  will  be  more  readily  understood  by 
reference  to  the  ground-plan  of  the  Mound  B. 

No.  I.  A  passage  42  feet  in  length,  by  7  feet  6  inches  in 
breadth.  The  height  of  what  remained  of  the  walls  was  on 
the  south  side  6  feet,  on  the  east  i  foot  3  inches,  on  the  west 
6  feet  6  inches. 

This  passage  had  a  doorway  on  the  east  side,  which 
appears  to  have  been  the  principal  entrance  to  the  building  ; 
whilst  on  the  north  it  opened  on  the  court  already  mentioned 
as  situated  between  the  buildings  B  and  C*  The  east  wall 
seemed  to  be  continued  until  it  joined  on  to  the  baths  under 
the  Mound  C  ;  but  this  could  not  be  verified,  as  the  tenant  of 
the  grazing  objected  to  the  diggings  being  carried  on  in  the 
little  bit  of  pasture  between  the  Mounds  B  and  C. 

Two  square  buttresses  measuring  i  foot  4  inches  on  each 
side  supported  the  west  wall  of  the  passage.  One  of  these 
buttresses  was  not  bonded  into  the  wall.  This  seemed  to 
indicate  that  it  had  been  added  to  the  building  after  its  con- 
struction. 

An  opening  to  the  south  of  these  buttresses  led  into  the 
interior  of  the  building  by  a  small  staircase  which  ascended 
from  the  passage  to  the  room  No.  2.  This  staircase  was  in  a 
very  dilapidated  condition,  and  fell  to  pieces  during  the 
excavation.  Underneath  it  were  found  the  traces  of  a  fur- 
nace, with  a  very  small  aperture,  which  had  served  to  heat 
the  hypocaust  under  the  room  No.  2. 

The  few  courses  of  masonry  that  remained  of  the  east  wall 
of  the  passage  were  in  a  very  dilapidated  condition. 

*  See  the  plan  of  the  Bossenno. 


30  THE   BOSSENNO. 

No.  2.     This  room  measured  21   feet  in  length  by  16  in 
breadth.     The   height   of  what   remained  of  the   walls   was 


ft. 

in, 

On  the  north  side 

0 

4 

„      south     „ 

2 

8 

„       east 

2 

5 

„      west      ,, 

2 

10 

This  room  appeared  to  have  been  the  principal  chamber 
of  the  mansion,  and  had  two  entrances ;  the  one  from  the 
staircase  above  mentioned,  the  other  from  another  passage, 
No.  3.  It  was  built  upon  a  hypocaust  of  a  very  remarkable 
construction.  The  ground-plan  shows  the  direction  of  the 
conduits  which  served  to  circulate  the  heated  air  under  the 
floor  of  the  apartment.  These  were  built  with  undressed 
stones  without  mortar,  and  formed  a  sort  of  St.  Andrew's 
cross,  in  the  axis  of  which  was  a  pillar,  of  similar  construction, 
measuring  2  feet  8  inches  in  length  by  1 1  inches  in  breadth. 
They  were  covered  with  large  slabs  of  granite,  except  at  the 
eastern  extremity  of  the  pillar,  where  a  large  brick  tile, 
measuring  3  feet  square  and  3  inches  thick,  and  pierced  with 
a  round  hole  at  one  of  its  corners,  had  been  substituted.  Two 
layers  of  cement  6  inches  thick  formed  the  floor  of  the  room, 
and  covered  the  hypocaust. 

The  walls,  and  also  the  covering  slabs  of  the  conduits, 
were  still  black  from  smoke,  whilst  the  interior  was  one-third 
full  of  soot  and  charcoal.  This  circumstance  leaves  no  doubt 
as  to  the  use  of  these  conduits.  They  had  evidently  been 
constructed  for  the  purpose  of  heating  the  apartment,  and  not 
to  act  as  drains.  In  the  Gallo-Roman  villa  discovered  at 
Mane-Bourgerel,  in   the   Morbihan,   a  similar  hypocaust  was 


To  face  pa^e  31, 


1!,   PLATE   III. 


EXCAVATIONS   IN   THE   MOUND   B.  31 

found,  of  which  De  Caumont  gives  the  plan  in  his  Ere  gallo- 
romaine.^ 

On  Hfting  the  covering  slabs  at  the  corners  of  the  apart- 
ment, we  were  surprised  to  find  on  the  ends  of  the  conduits 
the  following  objects,  which  appeared  to  have  been  placed 
there  intentionally  : — 

1.  At  the  north-east  corner  the  broken  fragments  of  a 
quern  or  hand-mill  in  granite,  i6  inches  in  diameter,  and  red- 
dened by  the  action  of  fire.  The  granite  of  Carnac  takes  this 
tint  after  being  burnt.     (B,  pi.  III.  fig.  i,  bis,  reduced,) 

2.  At  the  south-east  angle  a  polished  celt  in  diorite,  5^ 
inches  long,  and  beside  it  some  fragments  of  blue  glass,  and 
of  the  red  lustrous  ware  called  Samian.     (B,  pi.  III.  fig.  2.) 

3.  At  the  north-west  corner  fragments  of  common  pottery 
in  gray  and  black  earth. 

4.  At  the  south-west  corner  a  small  opaque  bead  of  a 
turquoise-blue  colour.  Several  similar  beads,  which  had 
apparently  formed  parts  of  a  necklace,  were  afterwards  found 
in  the  progress  of  the  diggings. 

These  objects,  it  may  be  repeated,  appeared  to  have  been 
placed  intentionally  in  the  places  where  they  were  discovered, 
and  possibly  in  conformity  with  some  superstition  which  is 

*  "  Villa  de  Man^-Bourgerel  (Morbihan). — Je  dois  k  M.  Jaquemet, 
inge'nieur  en  chef  des  ponts  et  chaussdes,  le  plan  d'un  autre  villa  decouverte  \ 
Man^-Bourgerel,  mais  on  n'a  reconnu  qu'une  partie  des  fondations  ;  il  en  reste 
d'autres  dansles  pieces  voisines,  de  sorte  que  je  me  borne  h.  prt5senter  (p.  392) 
le  plan  qu'k  bien  voulu  me  communiquer  M.  Jaquemet,  sans  essayer  d'indi- 
quer  la  destination  des  appartements.  La  pifece  J  ^tait  remarquable  par  un 
hypocauste  d'une  forme  particuli^re.  Le  plan  montre  la  direction  de  conduits 
qui  faisaient  circuler  la  chaleur  sous  le  sol ;  j'ai  vu  i  Vieux  un  hypocauste 
semblable  dont  les  conduits  t'taient  en  partie  creuse's  dans  la  roche  ailcaire 
au-dessous  du  pav^,  ce  qui  prouve  que  les  moyens  les  plus  simples  etaient 
quelquefois  employes." — Ere  gallo-romaine,  2'  etiit.,  p.  390. 


32  THE   BOSSENNO. 

now  unknown.  In  support  of  this  statement,  the  reader  is 
referred  to  the  description  given  in  the  account  of  the  excava- 
tions of  the  Mound  A  (page  i6),  of  a  very  ancient  custom  still 
existing  in  Brittany,  viz.  that  of  placing  a  polished  stone  celt 
in  the  chimney  to  preserve  the  house  against  lightning. 

As  fewer  roofing  tiles  were  found  when  clearing  out  the 
room  No.  2  than  in  the  other  apartments,  it  was  supposed 
that  it  might  have  been  the  atrium  of  the  dwelling,  but  after 
the  discovery  of  the  hypocaust  this  hypothesis  became  less 
admissible. 

No.  3  was  a  passage  communicating  with  the  vestibule 
No.  5,  and  with  the  apartments  Nos.  2  and  4.  It  measured 
22  feet  6  inches  in  length  and  4  feet  6  inches  in  breadth. 

A  red  band,  two  inches  broad,  had  been  painted  along  the 
plaster  which  covered  the  walls  at  a  height  of  2  feet  5  inches 
from  the  floor.  Other  remains  of  mural  decoration  were 
found  in  the  bottom  of  the  passage,  but  in  such  a  bad  state  of 
preservation  that  the  design  could  not  be  fully  made  out. 

No.  4. — One  of  the  principal  rooms  of  the  house  measured 
21  feet  in  length  and  16  feet  in  breadth.  The  entrance  to  it 
was  from  the  passage  just  described. 

The  average  height  of  the  walls  was  on  the  north  side 
3  feet;  on  the  south  3  feet  10  inches;  on  the  east  5  feet; 
and  on  the  west  4  feet. 

The  walls  of  this  room  had  been  covered  with  three  coats 
of  plaster,  each  half-an-inch  in  thickness.  Traces  of  mural 
decoration  in  red,  yellow,  dark  gray,  and  blue,  were  visible  on 
the  second  coat  of  plaster,  and  a  series  of  small  holes  had  been 
picked  in  it,  evidently  for  the  purpose  of  making  the  third 
coat  of  plaster  adhere.     This  also  bore  traces  of  having  been 


U 

a, 

•i 

i 


t 


c 

■< 


a. 


00 


a. 


•fi 

or 


a. 
B 


Hi 

w 
[^ 

5 

D 

u 
H 

< 

CL. 

b. 
O 

«: 

H 

S 

o 

< 
It 

u. 

I 
> 

< 


■5, 


EXCAVATIONS   IN   THE   MOUND   B.  33 

painted  in  similar  colours,  but  of  a  different  design.  (See  the 
section  of  the  Mound  B,  pi.  II.)  An  attempt  to  find  out 
the  complete  design  of  the  decoration  of  this  chamber  failed 
from  the  want  of  sufficient  data,  and  owing  to  the  small 
number  and  diminutive  size  of  the  painted  fragments  of  plaster 
which  remained  adhering  to  the  walls. 

No.  5. — This  little  room,  situated  at  one  end  of  the 
passage  No.  3,  appeared  to  have  been  a  vestibule,  and 
measured  12  feet  in  length  by  7  feet  in  breadth.  It  would 
seem  probable  that  there  must  have  been  an  opening  here  for 
communicating  with  the  exterior,  but  this  hypothesis  could 
not  be  verified,  as  only  the  foundations  of  the  west  wall 
remained. 

Nos.  6,  7,  8. — These  three  little  rooms  appeared  to  have 
been  the  sleeping  apartments,  cubicula,  of  the  mansion. 

The  first  of  these,  No.  6,  measured  14  feet  in  length  by 
1 1  feet  6  inches  in  breadth,  and  communicated  by  a  doorway 
with  No.  5.  Although  the  north  wall  was  in  a  very  dilapi- 
dated condition,  one  could  still  make  out  the  remains  of  a 
doorway  which  opened  on  the  court,  situated  between  the 
Mound  B  and  the  Mound  C  (the  baths). 

The  second  bedroom.  No.  7,  measured  14  feet  in  length 
by  1 1  feet  6  inches  in  breadth. 

The  third  bedroom.  No.  8,  measured  9  feet  in  length,  and 
10  feet  6  inches  in  breadth,  and  communicated  with  the  rooms 
No,  7  on  the  north  and  No.  9  on  the  south. 

Following  the  same  method  of  working  as  in  the  Mound  A, 
trenches  were  cut  under  the  floors  of  these  bedrooms  to  a 
depth  of  4  feet.  At  that  depth  we  found  traces  of  an  anterior 
building  and  diverse  objects,  amongst  which  were  a  circular 

D 


34  THE   BOSSENNO. 

bronze  brooch  of  Celtic  type  with  short  pin  (B,  pi.  III.  fig.  3, 
natural^  size) ;  fragments  of  a  cup  in  white  glass,  and  of  square 
formed  bottles  in  blue  glass  ;  several  iron  objects  very  much 
oxidised,  which  seemed  to  have  been  the  fastenings  of  doors  ; 
also  numerous  fragments  of  pottery,  in  gray  and  black  earth, 
of  simple  forms,  and  with  straight  rims. 

No.  9. — This  little  room,  measuring  8  feet  6  inches  by 
1 1  feet  6  inches,  communicated  with  the  rooms  No.  8  on  the 
north  and  No.  10  on  the  east  side. 

The  partition  walls  between  these  five  rooms,  Nos.  5, 
6,  7,  8,  9,  were  very  faintly  indicated  on  the  floor,  and  were 
difficult  to  make  out. 

No.  10. — This  room  measured  21  feet  in  length  by  18  feet 
in  breadth.  The  mean  height  of  the  walls  was  on  the  north 
4  feet;  on  the  south  3  feet  10  inches;  on  the  east  5  feet  5 
inches ;  and  on  the  west  side  5  feet  5  inches. 

It  communicated  by  a  doorway  with  No.  9.  The  floor 
was  1 2  inches  below  the  level  of  the  other  apartments. 

A  curious  construction  was  discovered  in  the  south-east 
corner,  shaped  like  a  beehive  or  baker's  oven,  and  roughly 
built  of  large  stones  of  irregular  shape.  Between  it  and  the 
north  wall  of  the  apartment  there  was  found  a  layer  of  large 
round  stones,  cemented  into  the  floor.  I  caused  a  hole  to  be 
dug  inside  this  beehive-like  structure  to  a  depth  of  6  feet 
below  the  level  of  the  floor,  but  the  excavation  yielded  nothing 
save  the  neck  of  a  bottle  in  blue  glass.  This  curiously  shaped 
structure  may  possibly  have  been  an  oven  or  furnace,  and  this 
conjecture  is  strengthened  by  the  fact  of  an  opening  having 
been  discovered  in  the  wall  of  No.  1 1  choked  up  with  rubbish 
which  might  have  answered  for  the  mouth  of  the  furnace. 


EXCAVATIONS   IN   THE   MOUND  B.  35 

The  large  quantity  of  bones,  shells  of  edible  molluscs, 
and  fragments  of  domestic  pottery,  found  in  the  room  No.  lo, 
leave  but  little  doubt  as  to  its  destination.  It  had  been  the 
kitchen. 

Besides  the  bones  and  shells  there  were  also  found  in  this 
room  several  round  discs  in  brick  earth,  and  some  weights  in 
polished  granite,  which  may  probably  have  been  used  as 
sinkers  for  nets. 

At  this  date  the  sea  does  not  come  within  a  mile  of  the 
Bosseno,  but  formerly  it  had  come  close  to  it.  The  proprietor, 
M.  le  Guennec  of  Kerfraval,  showed  me  one  of  his  titles  of 
that  holding,  dated  1 740,  which  proves  that  in  the  last  century 
the  sea  came  up  to  the  lower  fields  of  the  Bossenno.  This  title 
makes  mention  of  a  number  of  pieces  of  land,  one  of  which  is 
therein  described  as 

"  Une  piece  de  terre  sous  pature  Ker-guin-goh,  au  mette 
{sic)  de  laquelle  est  une  source  d'eau,  et  une  piece  de  terre 
sous  pature  et  jonc  qui  se  couvre  de  mer  aux  grands  eaux," 
etc.* 

No.  II. — This  room  measured  18  feet  in  length  by  7  feet 
6  inches  in  breadth. 

The  average  height  of  the  walls  was,  on  the  north  5  feet 
10  inches ;  on  the  east  3  feet ;  and  on  the  west  side  3  feet 
8  inches. 

This  room  seemed  to  have  been  made  use  of  as  an  annexe 
to  the  kitchen,  and  for  attending  to  the  furnace  above  men- 
tioned.    As  no  traces  of  even  the  foundations  of  a  stone  wall 


•  Description  et  declaration  par  mesurage  et  debomement,  fait  en  I'etude 
de  M.  Henry,  notaire  royal  registrateur,  controlee  \.  Auray  le  24  decembre 
1740,  \  litre  de  domaine  congc'able. 


36  THE  BOSSENNO. 

could  be  found,  it  must  be  supposed  that  it  had  been  closed  at 
the  south  end  by  a  barrier  or  wooden  partition. 

This  mansion,  of  which  we  conclude  a  detailed  descrip- 
tion by  that  of  the  room  No.  1 1,  had  been  very  carefully  built 
of  small  cubic  stones  of  equal  sizes,  the  courses  of  which  were 
regulated,  at  regular  intervals,  by  layers  of  tiles.  The  floors 
of  all  the  apartments  were  formed  of  thick  layers  of  cement, 
and  the  walls  were  covered  with  coats  of  plaster,  excepting 
the  room  No.  6,  which  had  none. 

The  site  had  been  fitly  chosen,  as  well  from  its  convenience 
as  for  the  pleasing  view  it  commanded  of  the  surrounding 
country.  The  Mont  Saint  Michel  had  sheltered  it  against 
the  west  winds  which  came  off  the  Bay  of  Biscay — to  this  day 
the  most  violent  in  Brittany.  Numerous  springs  of  good 
water  still  exist  all  round  the  Bossenno.  The  field  numbered 
665  in  the  map  of  the  Bossenno  bears  the  name  Er  goh  fetan 
tal pare piard  (the  old  fountain  near  the  stony  field).  Another 
fountain  (which  is  said  never  to  fail)  is  situated  in  a  field 
farther  to  the  east,  and  is  named  Fetan  ker  in  goh  (the 
fountain  of  the  old  town).  The  means  of  communication 
may  possibly  have  been  by  the  old  road  leading  from  Carnac 
to  the  Trinitd-sur-mer,  which  still  traverses  the  Bossenno. 
Tradition  points  it  out  as  having  been  a  road  before  the 
Roman  occupation. 

The  following  enumeration  contains  the  description  of  the 
different  objects  found  in  each  of  the  rooms  of  this  dwelling: — 

Iron  nails  of  different  sizes,  and  numerous  fragments  of 
Gallo- Roman  pottery  of  many  different  kinds  were  found  in 
all  the  rooms.  With  the  view  of  avoiding  repetition,  the  more 
noteworthy  objects  only  will  be  indicated  in  the  order  of  the 
numbers  of  the  apartments. 


To  face  page  37. 


B,    PLATE   VI. 


EXCAVATIONS    IN   THE   MOUND   B.  37 

In  the  passage  No.  i  were  found  many  fragments  of 
curious  pottery  in  fine  paste,  hard  and  sonorous,  ornamented 
in  relief  with  diagonal  bands  and  chains.  From  these  frag- 
ments several  vases  were  reconstructed,  similar  to  that  figured 
in  the  chromo-lithograph  A,  pi.  IV. 

Part  of  the  neck  of  an  amphora,  3^  inches  in  length,  in 
red  earth,  and  having  two  handles,  was  also  found  here.  (B, 
pi.  VI.  fig.  I.) 

In  the  room  No.  2,  one  of  the  antlers  of  a  deer  {Cervtis 
elapfms),  2  feet  8  inches  in  length,  was  discovered  near  the  door- 
way communicating  with  the  passage  No.  3.    (B,  pi.  VI.  fig.  2.) 

Near  the  antler  was  the  head  of  a  small  brooch  in  bronze 
(B,  pi.  VI.  fig.  3,  natural  size),  also  an  engraved  ring  in 
bronze  (B,  pi.  VI.  fig.  4,  natural  size),  and  a  small  brass  of 
Claudius  II.,  on  which  : — 

DIVO  CLAVDIO.  Head  radiated  and  turned  to  the 
right. 

Reverse  :  CONSECRATIO.  An  eagle  erect  and  turning 
to  the  left.  This  coin  had  been  struck  after  the  death  of  the 
Emperor  Claudius.     (Cohen,  49.) 

Several  pieces  of  iron  very  much  oxidised  were  scattered 
about  the  floor,  and  seemed  to  be  parts  of  sword-blades. 

Two  objects  in  stone  were  also  found  here.  The  one  was 
a  polisher  in  gray  schist,  similar  to  that  found  in  the  Mound 
A.  The  other  was  a  portion  of  a  painter's  palette  in  a  fine 
white  stone,  measuring  3  inches  in  length,  by  3  inches  in 
breadth.     (B,  pi.  VI.  fig.  5.) 

With  the  different  fragments  of  pottery  collected  in  this 
room  I  succeeded  in  reconstructing 

A  lagena,  diameter  7  inches,  in  yellow  earth,  having  two 
handles  and  a  straight  neck,  with  a  bourrelet  or  collar  in 
relief.     (B,  pi.  VI.  fig.  6.) 


38  THE   BOSSENNO. 

A  pear-shaped  lagena,  diameter  71  inches,  in  yellow  earth, 
without  handles,  having  two  parallel  bands  engraved,  the  neck 
wanting.     (B,  pi.  VI.  fig.  7.) 

A  terrine,  diameter  io|^  inches,  in  gray  earth,  with  a 
bourrelet  or  collar  in  relief  on  the  outer  rim,  and  having 
a  spout.     (B,  pi.  VII.  fig.  I.) 

A  vase  of  ovoid  shape,  height  9^  inches,  diameter  8^ 
inches,  in  coarse  grayish  brown  earth,  having  a  large  mouth, 
with  a  circular  rim  projecting  outwards,  and  twelve  horizontal 
bands  painted  black  superposed.     (B,  pi.  VII.  fig.  2.) 

In  the  passage  No.  3  the  upper  and  lower  stones  of  a 
quern  or  hand-mill,  in  lava,  14  inches  in  diameter,  were  found 
on  the  floor  opposite  the  doorway  of  the  room  No.  43,  and 
also  several  fragments  of  red  lustrous  ware,  two  specimens  of 
which  are  figured,  viz. — 

1.  Fragment  of  a  bowl  with  ornaments  divided  in  com- 
partments in  relief.  In  one  compartment  a  winged  figure,  in 
the  other  a  boar's  head.     (B,  pi.  VII.  fig.  3,  reduced  one  half.) 

2.  Fragment  of  the  same  kind  ornamented  with  a  circular 
band  of  vertical  lines,  stamped  hollow.  (B,  pi.  VII.  fig.  4, 
reduced  one  half) 

In  the  room  No.  4  : 

Fragment  of  a  deer's  horn  having  cuts  made  by  a  sharp 
instrument  on  its  base. 

A  bodkin  or  stylus  in  polished  bone,  similar  to  one  which 
was   afterwards   found  in  the  room   No.    10.     (B,  pi.  VIII. 

%•  4-) 

A  bead  of  a  turquoise-blue  colour,  opaque,  f  of  an  inch  in 

diameter,  probably  part  of  a  necklace. 

.;  A  small  brass  of  Tetricus  the  younger  : — 

CAIVS    PIVS.     ESV.    TETRICVS.     CAES.     (Caius 


Tc/ace/ngt  38. 


B,  PLATE  VII. 


EXCAVATIONS    IN   THE   MOUND   B.  39 

Pius  Esuvius  Tctricus  Cresar).      His  head  radiated,  turned  to 
the  right,  and  having  the  pakidamcntum. 

Reverse  defaced. 

A  second  brass  of  Gallienus  : — 

GALLIENVS.  AVG.  (Gallienus  Augustus) ;  head  turned 
to  the  right. 

Reverse:  LIBERO.  P.  CONS.  AVG.  (Libero  patri  con- 
servatori  Augusti.)  Panther  passing  to  the  left.  On  the 
exergue  B.     (Cohen,  337.) 

A  small  brass  of  Constantine  I. — 

CONSTANS.  NOB.  CAES.  (Constantius  nobilis  Cje- 
sar.)     The  bust  turned  to  the  right,  with  the  paludamentum. 

Reverse:  GLORIA  EXERCITVS.  Two  soldiers  hel- 
meted,  erect,  facing  each  other,  each  holding  a  spear  reversed 
and  leaning  on  a  shield  ;  between  them  a  staff  surmounted  by 
a  flag.     (Cohen,  131.) 

The  following  vases  were  reconstructed  from  the  various 
fragments  of  pottery  found  in  this  room  : — 

A  vase  in  brownish-gray  earth,  of  ovoid  form,  having  a 
large  mouth,  the  rim  projecting  outwards ;  on  the  shoulder 
three  parallel  lines  coarsely  engraved,  and  between  two  of 
these  a  line  of  hollow  points ;  diameter  6J  inches.  (B,  pi. 
VII.  fig.  5.) 

A  vase  of  the  same  form,  in  bluish-gray  earth,  very  large 
mouth,  ornamented  all  round  with  hollow  vertical  lines  in 
juxtaposition,  separated  at  the  shoulder  by  three  hollow 
horizontal  lines  painted  black ;  paste  fine  and  well  fired ; 
diameter  6^  inches.     (B,  pi,  VIII.  fig.  i.) 

A  bowl  in  grayish-brown  earth,  having  a  narrow  base; 
diameter  7  inches.  This  form  of  bowl  is  still  in  use  in  some 
parts  of  Brittany.     (B,  pi.  VIII.  fig.  2.) 

Three  other  fragments  of  pottery  ought  to  be  mentioned. 


40  THE   BOSSENNO. 

Part  of  the  handle  of  a  vase  ;  ornament  formed  by  twisting. 
(B,pl.  VIII.  fig.  3.) 

Fragment  of  a  vase  decorated  with  undulating  lines. 
(B,  pi.  VIII.  fig.  4.) 

Fragment,  in  red  earth,  of  the  neck  of  a  vase  having  the 
same  ornament ;  length  4^  inches.     (B,  pi.  VIII.  fig.  5.) 

The  persistence  of  an  ornamentation  similar  to  that  on 
the  two  fragments  just  described  is  very  remarkable,  and  may 
perhaps  be  sufficient  excuse  for  the  following  digression  : — 

Many  nations  have  made  use  of  these  undulating  lines  as 
the  symbol  of  running  water. 

We  find  it  in  the  eleventh  sign  of  the  Zodiac  ss 
Aquarius. 

The  ancient  form  of  the  Chinese  character  for  water  was 
similar  to  the  eleventh  sign  of  the  Zodiac,  and  the  symbol 
for  distress  consisted  of  the  same  sign  with  a  bar  across, 
S|;?  picturing  the  stoppage  of  the  irrigation  in  the  rice- 
field. 

It  is  also  found  in  the  symbols  employed  by  the  Egyptians 
to  represent  water  JWH'^-^  iriai  WCi  mou.  This  symbol 
conveyed  the  idea  of  freshness  or  flowing.  On  the  summit 
of  funeral  monuments  it  seemed  to  symbolise  the  flowing 
of  time.* 

The  persistence  of  this  ornamentation  in  the  Morbihan 

from   the   most   ancient  times  up   to   the  present  is  to  be 

remarked  under  very  many  conditions.     It  is  found  not  only 

on  the  drinking  cup  in   the  funeral  pottery  of  the  dolmens, 

but  also  on  the  monoliths  which  form  the  supports  of  these 

monuments.     One  is   tempted    to    compare   these   with    the 

rendering  of  the  Egyptian  symbol  just  alluded  to. 

*  See  the  Didionnaire  (TArcheologie  Egyptienne,  par  Paul  Pierret.    Paris, 
RoMin  and  Feuardent,  1875. 


B,   PLATE  VI 11 


EXCAVATIONS    IN   THE    MOUND    13.  41 

These  undulating  lines  are  to  be  found  on  nearly  all  the 
Breton  pottery  of  the  last  two  centuries.  They  are  to  this 
day  one  of  the  most  common  forms  of  ornament  used  by  the 
potters  of  Malansac,  who  fabricate  without  a  wheel,  that  is  by 
hand,  by  the  method  of  procedure  called  colombin,  large  vases 
called  charniers  or  pones. '^ 


PONE  OF  MALANSAC 

The  above  engraving  represents  one  of  these  pones  which 
I  drew  in  the  workshop  of  a  potter  at  Malansac.t 

Whilst  I  was  drawing  this  pone  I  asked  the  potter  if  he 
knew  the  meaning  of  these  ornaments,  and  why  he  applied 
them.     He  replied  to  me,  "  I  know  several  sorts  of  ornaments 

*  Vases  3  feet  6  inches  in  height,  used  for  washing  purposes,  on  which 
this  design  is  applied  in  relief.  For  the  manner  in  which  these  vases  are 
made,  see  the  Traite  dcs  Arts  Ceramiques,  par  Alex.  Brongniart,  Tome  i. 
page  391. 

\  This  pone  had  another  ornament,  which  is  shown  in  the  engraving, 
placed  above  the  undulating  lines.  This  sign  is  identically  the  same  with 
one  of  tlie  signs  of  the  dolmens,  classed  by  M.  de  Closmadeuc  as  the 
jugiform  siga  There  is  in  this  fact  another  proof  to  add  to  so  many 
others  of  the  persistence  of  customs  and  traditions  in  Brittany. — See  also 
Sculptures  Lapidaires  et  Signes  graves  des  Dolmens.    Vannes,  1873. 


42  THE   B0SSP:NN0. 

which  we  apply  to  different  vases  because  we  have  always 
done  so,  but  as  to  their  signification  I  know  nothing,  and  I 
never  heard  it  spoken  of." 

This  ornamentation  of  undulating  lines  is  also  to  be  seen 
engraved  on  the  arches  over  the  doors  of  houses*  (see  the 
drawing,  page  50),  and  on  the  tombstones  in  the  cemeteries, 
ancient  and  modern,  in  the  same  department. 

We  now  return  to  the  description  of  the  objects  found  in 
the  rooms  of  the  building  in  Mound  B. 

In  the  room  No.  5  nothing  of  any  importance  was  found. 

In  the  room  No.  6  : 

A  second  brass  of  Victorinus  : — 

IMP.  C.  VICTORINVS.  P.  F.  AVG.  (Imperator 
Caesar  Victorinus  Pius  Felix  Augustus.)  The  bust  radiated, 
turned  to  the  right,  with  the  paludamentum. 

Reverse:  PROVIDENTIA.  AVG.  (providentia  Augusti). 
Figure  of  Providence  erect  to  the  left,  holding  a  rod  and  horn 
of  plenty  ;  at  the  feet  a  globe.     (Cohen,  57.) 

Two  small  implements  in  yellow  flint  polished.  The 
cutting  face  of  one  of  these  is  notched  from  having  been  used. 

A  blue  bead  like  turquoise,  ^  inch  in  diameter. 

A  flat  dish  in  gray  earth,  8  inches  diameter,  reconstructed 
from  fragments,  and  of  the  same  description  as  the  one 
figured  A,  pi.  III.  fig.  5. 

In  the  room  No.  7  : 

A  small  brass  of  Tetricus  senior  : — 

*  I  owe  this  drawing  to  the  kindness  of  Mr.  Huray,  architect.  The 
curious  curve  of  the  arch,  reproduced  mathematically,  merits  attention. 


llllllUIJl     illt'     .;    r^ 


-^, 


£:/!/. 


To  face  f age  HI. 


B,   PLATE   IX. 


EXCAVATIONS    IN   THE   MOUND   B.  43 

CAIVS.  PIVS.  ESVVIVS.  TETRICVS. 

Reverse  defaced. 

Several  pieces  of  marble  pavement,  white  streaked  with 
red. 

A  stone  implement  of  a  yellowish  colour,  polished  by  use, 
2  inches  in  length,  of  the  same  kind  as  that  figured  A,  pi.  II. 

fig-  3- 

Several  dressed  mouldings,  in  a  fine  white  calcareous  stone 
not  found  in  the  Morbihan.  Several  other  dressed  stones  of 
the  same  nature  were  here  found,  which  seemed  to  have 
formed  parts  of  pillars,  and  which  bore  the  traces  of  a  thin 
coating  of  cement. 

The  archway  of  a  door,  constructed  of  white  stones, 
cement,  and  bricks,  placed  alternately,  lay  upon  the  floor  in 
the  middle  of  the  room.  These  stones,  the  quoins  for  the 
arch,  bore  the  marks  of  the  saw  with  which  they  had  been  cut 
from  the  block. 

Fragment  of  a  bowl  in  fine  black  earth,  slightly  glazed, 
.  having  two  letters  complete,  and  a  portion  of  a  third  skilfully 
engraved  after  the  firing.     (B,  pi.  VIII.  fig.  6,  natural  size.) 

In  the  room  No.  8  : 

Fragment  of  a  vase  in  fine  red  lustrous  ware,  ornamented 
with  zones  of  small  rectangular  figures  in  juxtaposition. 
Within  these  was  another  form  of  decoration,  consisting  of 
oblique  lines  and  points  in  relief,  obtained  by  pressure  in 
moulds.     (B,  pi.  IX.  fig.  I,  natural  size.) 

Fragment  of  the  same  nature,  ornamented  with  zones  of 
concentric  ovolos  or  festoonings,  also  obtained  by  moulding. 
(B,  pi.   IX.  fig.  2,  natural  size.) 


44  THE   BOSSENNO. 

In  the  room  No.  9  : 

A  granite  pestle,  5^  inches  in  length,  of  the  same  kind  as 
that  figured  E,  pi.  II.  fig.  i. 

A  small  hemisphere  in  bronze,  one  inch  in  diameter, 
probably  part  of  a  button  or  ornament  for  harness. 

Several  boars'  tusks. 

A  large  quantity  of  bones  of  ruminants  and  shells  of 
edible  molluscs,  especially  of  oysters.  On  submitting  the 
latter  to  the  inspection  of  Dr.  du  Gressy,  who  has  contributed 
so  largely  to  the  advancement  of  oyster-culture  in  the  Depart- 
ment of  the  Morbihan,  he  at  once  pronounced  them  to  be  of 
the  same  kind  as  the  oysters  of  Quiberon. 

There  were  also  found  here  a  great  many  fragments  of 
pottery  of  different  kinds. 

Rounded  discs  of  tile  from  2  to  4  inches  in  diameter. 

A  bottle,  reconstructed,  in  dark  yellow  earth,  turbiniform, 
with  narrow  neck  and  base,  and  furnished  with  a  handle 
inserted  in  the  neck  below  a  circular  band  in  relief,  orna- 
mented with  painted  dark  brown  horizontal  lines.  Over  all 
the  vase,  from  the  base  of  the  neck  downwards,  there  are 
horizontal  dark  brown  bands  in  relief  Its  height  is  8  inches, 
diameter  6^  inches.     (B,  pi.  X.  fig.  i.) 

Numerous  fragments  of  coarse  pottery  of  a  Celtic  type 
were  collected  in  this  little  room.  Of  these  the  following 
specimens  represent  the  most  noteworthy. 

Fragment  of  the  rim  of  a  bowl  in  brownish-black  earth, 
badly  fired,  decorated  with  horizontal  lines  in  relief;  below 
these  a  series  of  hollow  grain  markings  obtained  by  stamping. 
(B,  pi.  IX.  fig.  3,  natural  size.) 

Fragment  of  the  same  kind  having  a  large  band  of 
undulating  lines  finely  cut.     (B,  pi.  X.  fig.  2,  natural  size.) 


B,   PLATE  X. 


EXCAVATIONS   IN  THE   MOUND   B.  45 

Fragment  of  the  same  kind  decorated  with  circular  Hnes 
in  relief,  having  hollow  grain  markings  rudely  cut.  (B,  pi. 
X.  fig.  5,  natural  size.) 

Fragment  of  the  same  nature  decorated  with  five  hori- 
zontal bands  of  hollow  grain  markings.  The  middle  band  is 
composed  of  larger  elongated  hollows  of  an  oval  form 
irregularly  and  rudely  cut  by  hand.  Below  these  bands  an 
indication  of  fern-leaf  ornamentation  similarly  formed  by 
hand.     (B,  pi.  X.  fig.  4,  natural  size.) 

Fragment  of  the  same  sort  adorned  with  hollow  horizontal 
lines  ;  between  two  of  these  lines  a  large  band  of  hollow  grain 
markings  similar  to  those  in  the  preceding  fragments,  but 
arranged  obliquely  in  three  rows.  (B,  pi.  X.  fig.  3,  natural 
size.) 

Fragment  of  the  rim  of  a  bowl  in  dark  gray  earth  having 
a  letter  or  sign  (?)  engraved  after  the  firing.  (B,  pi.  XI.  fig.  i, 
natural  size.) 

Fragment  of  a  vase  decorated  with  geometric  figures  of 
different  kinds  stamped  hollow ;  paste  bluish  gray,  well  fired. 
(B,  pi.  XI.  fig.  2,  natural  size.) 

Fragment  of  the  handle  of  the  same  vase.  (B,  pi.  XI.  fig. 
3,  natural  size.) 

In  clearing  out  the  room  No.  10,  a  large  quantity  of  bones 
of  ruminants  and  other  animals,  also  numerous  shells  of  edible 
molluscs,  were  found,  as  in  the  room  No.  9. 

Besides  these  there  was  also  found  a  small  brass  attributed 
to  Constantine  the  Great  or  his  sons  : — 

VRBS  ROMA.  Bust  of  Roma  turned  to  the  left,  with 
the  imperial  mantle  and  helmet,  an  aigrette  on  the  helmet. 

Reverse  without  legend.     The  wolf  turnetl   to   the   left, 


46  THE  BOSSENNO. 

suckling  Romulus  and  Remus,  and  looking  at  them.     Above 
these  two  stars. 

A  bodkin  6  inches  in  length,  in  polished  bone,    (B,  pi.  XI. 

fig-  4-) 

The  vertebra  of  a  young  whale   5   inches   in   diameter, 

having  the  edges  rudely  cut,  so  as  to  make  it  serviceable  for  a 

pedestal  or  support.     (B,  pi.  XI.  fig.  5.) 

The  half  of  a  whistle  or  hunting  call  in  bone,  polished.  (B, 
pi.  XI.  fig.  6.)  This  call  is  similar  to  some  of  those  found 
in  the  forest  of  Brotonne  *  now  exhibited  in  the  Museum  of 
Caen  in  Normandy,  where  the  following  drawing  was  made. 
(B,  pi.  XI.  fig.  7.) 

A  round  stone,  polished,  in  nephrite,  called  "oeuf  de 
serpent,"  similar  to  those  found  in  the  Gallo- Roman  cemetery 
at  Saint  Jacques  de  Lisieux,  and  at  Saint  Symphorien,  near 
Vannes. 

Two  stones  of  ovoid  form,  in  polished  granite,  having  a 
groove  cut  all  round   in   their  longer  axis.     The  larger  of 

*  "  Les  OS  chez  les  Remains  e'taient  employes,  comme  chez  nous,  b.  la 
confection  d'un  grand  nombre  de  petits  ustensiles,  tels  que  des  cuillferes,  des 
epingles  h  cheveux,  des  poingons,  des  des,  etc.  On  sait  qu'on  en  fabriquait 
aussi  des  flutes.     Le  nom  latin  (I'h'a  est  dd  h.  cette  origine." 

No.  312.  "  Fragment  de  flute  long  de  10  centimetres,  perce  de  deux  trous. 
Tron§on  perce  d'un  seul  trou  circulaire  k  usage  de  siffiet.  Ces  deux  objects 
proviennent  des  fouilles  de  Jort  en  1852." 

No.  313.  "Deux  trongons  semblables  au  precedent,  dont  la  longueur 
n'excede  pas  25  millimetres,  provenant  des  fouilles  de  la  foret  de  Brotonne." 

"  Ces  sifilets  dont  il  est  facile  de  tirer  un  son  aigu,  en  bouchant  les  extre'- 
mites  de  la  fosse  meduUaire  avec  le  pouce  et  I'index,  e'taient  vraisemblable- 
nient  h  I'usage  des  chasseurs ;  cela  parait  d'autant  plus  incontestable  qu'ils 
ont  ete  trouves  avec  des  debris  de  comes  de  cerf  et  "de  dents  de  sangliers." — 
Catalogue  du  Musee  de  la  Societe  des  Aniiquaires  de  Normandie,  redige  par  M. 
Gervais,  p.  66.     Caen,  1864,  F.  Le  Blanc- Hardel. 


^yf. 


Toftutpagei^fh 


B,  PLATE  XI. 


£-.AC 


To/ace  ^agt  47- 


B,   PLATE  Xll. 


EXCAVATIONS   IN   THE   MOUND   B.  47 

these  measures  8  inches  in  length  by  6  inches  in  breadth, 
and  weighs  20  lbs.     (B,  pi.  XII.  fig.  i.) 

Several  discs  rudely  formed  from  brick,  3  to  5  inches  in 
diameter.  These,  and  the  two  preceding  ovoid -shaped 
stones  may  have  probably  been  used  by  fishermen  as  sinkers 
for  their  nets  ;  or  they  may  have  been  loom  weights.* 

A  flat-shaped  mortar  in  granite,  measuring  10  inches  in 
length  by  8  inches  in  breadth,  the  face  polished  by  use ;  had 
probably  been  used  for  bruising  grain  or  preparing  food. 
(B,  pi.  XII.  fig.  2.)  Similar  stones  are  to  this  day  used  by 
the  natives  of  Bengal  and  other  parts  of  India  for  preparing 
their  food. 

Another  stone,  in  every  respect  similar  to  the  former, 
except  that  on  the  face  the  mark  IX 1 1  was  engraved. 
(B,  pi.  XII.  fig.  3.)  Near  this  stone  was  found  the  fragment 
of  a  small  bowl,  having  the  same  mark  engraved  on  its  rim 
after  firing.  (B,  pi.  XII.  fig.  4.)  It  looked  as  if  the  two 
latter  objects  had  been  marked  for  some  special  service. 

Three  cylindrical  stones,  in  granite,  with  the  ends  rounded 

*  "  Rien  de  moins  d^montr^  que  la  v(Jritable  destination  de  ces  objets, 
ordinairement  en  brique,  quelquefois  en  pierre,  de  forme  conique  souvent 
tronquee  et  perctfs  dans  la  partie  sup^rieure  pour  donner  passage  h.  un  anneau 
ou  h.  une  corde. 

"  L'opinion  la  plus  nepandue  leur  attribue  la  destination  de  poids  k  peser. 
lis  ont  pu,  tout  aussi  bien,  servir  de  contre-poids  ;  ceux  en  pierre  que  posscde 
le  musee,  et  qui  ont  ete  trouv^s  h.  Vieux,  n'e'taient  certainement  que  des  poids 
d'immersion  pour  les  grands  filets  de  peche  connus  sous  le  nom  de  seines 
(sagaia)." 

"  La  pesanteur  inegale  de  ces  cones,  rend  fort  proble'matique  leur  emploi 
usuel  comme  poids  a  peser.  II  est  rare,  en  effet,  d'en  rencontrer  qui  corre- 
spondent au  poids  de  la  livre  romaine,  de  6, 1 44  grains,  et  h.  ses  multiples  ou 
divisions  de'cimales." — Ca/a/ogue  du  musee  de  la  Soa'ite  des  Aniiquaires  de  Nor- 
manJie,  p.  43,  riidige  par  M.  Gervais,  conservatcur.    Caen,  F.  Le  Blanc-Hardel. 


48  THE   BOSSENNO. 

off,  measuring  from  3  to  5  inches  in  length,  were  probably  the 
rollers  or  pestles  which  had  been  used  with  the  mortars  above 
described. 

Several  fragments  of  cups  in  fine  white  glass,  with  stris  in 
relief. 

A  vase  in  black  earth  (reconstructed),  having  the  form  of 
a  water  goblet,  the  mouth  widened  out  from  the  neck,  in  which 
the  handle  is  inserted.  At  the  base  of  the  neck  a  cord  in 
relief,  and  on  the  shoulder  at  the  junction  of  the  handle  a 
frieze  of  enrolled  ornamentation  engraved  hollow,  between 
two  circular  lines;  height  lof  inches,  breadth,  8f  inches. 
(B,  pi.  XIII.  fig.  I.) 

Another  vase  (reconstruction)  of  the  same  form  and 
description  save  that  the  ornament  on  the  shoulder  is  formed 
by  undulating  lines,  with  points  between  the  undulations. 
(B,pl.  XIII.  fig.  2.) 

A  deep  plate  or  vase  (reconstruction)  with  a  hollow  base, 
in  the  red  lustrous  ware  called  Samian  ;  diameter  lof  inches. 

(B,pl.  XIII.  fig.  3.) 

Fragment  of  the  same  sort  ornamented  with  small  diamond 
shaped  markings,  obtained  by  moulding.  (B,  pi.  XIII.  fig.  5, 
natural  size.) 

Fragment  of  a  bowl  in  the  same  ware,  having  palm  leaves 
finely  engraved.     (B,  pi.  XIII.  fig.  4.) 

Fragment  of  the  rim  of  a  vase  in  the  same  ware,  orna- 
mented with  undulating  lines  ;  engraved  free  hand.  This 
fragment  is  pierced  by  a  circular  hole,  which  appears  to  have 
been  drilled  after  the  firing.     (B,  pi.  XIV.  fig.  i.) 

Vases  pierced  in  this  way  with  holes  have  been  frequently 
found  in  diggings  on  Gallo- Roman  sites.  Different  uses  have 
been    assigned    to    these  vases,  viz.    for    making  cheese,  for 


^-*— ^^^B^ 


/«     ^     ^ 


To/attpnge  48. 


B,    PLATE   XIII. 


To  face  page  49. 


B,   PL.\TE  XIV. 


EXCAVATIONS   IN   THE   MOUND   B.  49 

brewing  beer,  and  for  cooking  purposes.  I  limit  myself  merely 
to  the  mention  of  these  conjectures. 

A  bowl  (reconstructed),  in  brown  earth,  of  hemispherical 
form,  having  a  circular  projection  lapping  over  from  the 
middle  ;  diameter  7  inches.     (B,  pi.  XIV.  fig.  2.) 

Fragment  of  a  lamp  for  burning  tallow  or  fat,  in  yellow 
earth,  having  an  exterior  rim  which  forms  a  socket.*  (B,  pi. 
XIV.  fig.  3.) 

No  traces  of  lamps  for  burning  oil  were  found.  This  at 
first  surprised  me,  but  I  afterwards  learned  that  they  have 
been  rarely  found  in  this  district  of  the  Morbihan. 

In  the  room  No.  11,  the  only  object  of  interest  that  was 
gathered  from  amidst  a  large  quantity  of  tiles  and  pottery,  was 
a  bowl  (reconstructed),  in  gray  earth,  7  inches  diameter,  having 
vertical  sides  and  a  conical  base.     (B,  pi.  XIV.  fig.  4.) 

After  the  digging  of  the  Mound  B  had  been  completed, 
and  when  the  different  objects  found  in  it  had  been  classed 
and  arranged,   the   curious   mixture  of  Celtic  and   Roman 

*  "  Mon  lampion  gaulois  a  ^t^  trouv^  dans  un  antique  champ  de  sepul- 
tures oil  on  a  enterrd  depuis  I'^poque  gauloise  (incineration,  fosses  ovo'ides), 
pendant  tout  le  moyen  age  et  jusqu'k  la  Revolution ;  il  est,  comme  son  con- 
frbe,  en  argile  bien  cuite,  jaune-rose,  models  au  tour ;  le  godet  porte  des 
traces  de  carbonisation,  et  en  dessous  une  vasque  formant  bob^che  et  portant 
ces  larges  poussees  qui  caracterisent  les  poteries  gauloises  dans  nos  contr^es, 
et  qui  se  sont  conservees  sur  les  chamiers  et  pones  k  lessive,  jusqu'k  nos  jours. 

"  J'ai  pu  constater  que  toutes  les  sepultures  gauloises  par  incineration,  du 
Poitou,  renfermaient  un  lampion  h,  suif.  Ces  lampions  se  distinguent  des 
lampes  h  huile  en  ce  qu'ils  ne  portent  pas  de  bees  pour  recevoir  la  mbche  : 
cette  distinction  a  ete  adoptee  par  I'habile  et  savant  directeur  du  Musee  de 
Sfevres,  M.  Riocreux." — Essai  sur  des  Poteries  antiques  de  Vouest  de  la  France, 
par  F.  Parenteau.     Nantes,  Henri  Charpentier,  1865,  p.  7. 

£ 


50 


THE   BOSSENNO. 


pottery  presented  a  striking  appearance,  and  represented  a 
remarkable  variety  of  forms,  especially  in  the  shapes  of  the 
rims. 

Seven    baskets    full   of  fragments   of  pottery  had   been 
collected  in  this  mound  which  weighed  159  lbs.  net. 


DOOR  AT  BOURGEREL. 

(From  Si  drawing  by  M.  Huray.) 


IV. 

EXCAVATIONS    IN    THE    MOUND   C. 


Metres  t 


British  hitf'  Fi)«t  t 


30 


■James  MUn-  fictt-. 


E.  Morie*u  sc 


To  face  page  53. 


C,  PLATE  I.— PLAN  OF  THE  BATHS,   MOUND  C 


THE    MOUND    C. 


As  has  been  already  mentioned  in  the  preceding  chapter,  the 
west  wall  of  the  habitation  discovered  under  the  Mound  B 
was  found  to  be  prolonged  northwards  until  it  joined  on  to 
another  mound  designated  in  the  plan  of  the  Bossenno  by  the 
letter  C. 

The  Mound  C  was  of  an  oval  form,  and  had  a  medium 
height  of  5  feet.  Its  greater  axis,  from  east  to  west,  measured 
82  feet,  and  its  lesser  axis,  from  north  to  south,  46  feet.  The 
exterior  coating  of  this  mound  consisted  of  stones,  earth,  frag- 
ments of  pottery,  bricks,  and  tiles.  We  commenced  work  on 
the  north  side. 

The  result  of  almost  the  first  few  blows  of  the  pick  was  to 
bring  to  light  a  quantity  of  the  shells  of  edible  molluscs,  viz. 
oysters,  whelks,  and  mussels.  Shortly  afterwards  a  hollow 
tile  or  conduit  brick,  18  inches  long,  ornamented  with  five 
grooves*  in  the  form  of  a  St.  Andrew's  cross,  was  turned  up. 


The  discovery  of  this  conduit  brick  was  very  pleasing,  for 

*  It  was  afterwards   seen  that  these  grooves  served  a  double  purpose — 
sometimes  as  ornaments,  at  others  for  the  adhesion  of  the  plaster  or  mortar. 


54  THE  BOSSENNO. 

it  at  once  gave  rise  to  the  hope  that  we  were  about  to  find  a 
Gallo-Roman  bathing  estabhshment  under  the  Mound  C. 
These  expectations  were  fully  justified  by  the  result  of  the 
diggings.  This  may  be  seen  on  referring  to  the  adjoining 
ground-plan  of  the  ruins  discovered  under  the  Mound  C. 

On  making  a  careful  examination  of  this  building  it  be- 
comes evident  that  it  contains,  and  in  their  proper  order,  all 
the  rooms  which,  according  to  Messrs.  de  Caumont  and  Rich, 
were  required  for  a  Balneum,  viz.,  ist,  the  Apodyterium ;  2d, 
the  Tepidarium;  3d,  the  Sudatorium;  4th,  the  Caldarium;  5th, 
the  Frigidarium  containing  its  Baptisterium. 

The  small  size  of  the  different  rooms  of  this  establishment, 
the  impossibility  of  giving  separate  baths  for  males  and  females, 
as  was  always  found  in  the  public  baths,  makes  me  suppose 
that  here  we  have  discovered  a  Babteum  or  private  bath 
forming  a  dependence  of  the  villa  found  under  the  Mound  B, 
which  has  just  been  described  in  the  preceding  chapter. 

What  leads  me  to  believe  that  any  other  conclusion  is 
untenable  is  that  the  west  wall  of  the  villa  and  the  west  wall  of 
the  baths  form  one  and  the  same  wall,  and  are  of  identical  con- 
struction.    (See  the  general  plan  of  the  Bossenno.) 

Of  the  south  wall,  near  the  letter  H  of  the  ground-plan, 
there  remained  little  more  than  the  foundations.  What  seemed 
to  have  been  a  wide  entrance  could  here  be  made  out,  not 
sufficiently  distinct  to  admit  of  its  being  laid  down  on  the 
ground-plan,  but  still  leaving  the  impression  that  it  was  the 
place  by  which  access  was  had  from  the  court  into  the 
passage  No.  i. 

As  in  the  constructions  found  under  the  Mounds  A  and  B, 
so  in  all  the  parts  of  this  building,  the  proofs  of  the  fire  which 
had  destroyed  all  these  edifices  were  everywhere  abundant. 

In  order  to  avoid  repetition,  I  will  henceforth  give  to  each 


< 

a 

O 


a 
< 


< 

u 
z 

Ed 
•J 


I 


EXCAVATIONS    IN   THK   MOUND   C.  55 

room  the  number  which  it  bears  on  the  plan,  also  the  name 
by  which,  according  to  its  destination,  it  was  designated  by 
the  Romans. 

The  passage  No.  i  measured  47  feet  in  length  by  5  feet 
6  inches  in  breadth,  and  gave  access  by  two  doorways  to  the 
rooms  Nos.  2  and  8.  The  floor  was  formed  of  cement,  as 
were  all  the  floors  of  the  different  parts  of  this  building 
excepting  the  room  No.  9.  As  has  been  already  mentioned, 
the  traces  of  a  large  doorway,  which  had  been  the  principal 
entrance  to  the  baths,  were  visible  in  the  south  wall  near 
the  letter  H,  but  were  not  sufficiently  distinct  to  admit  of 
their  being  laid  down  on  the  plan. 

The  room  No.  2  appears  to  me  to  have  been  the  Apody- 
terimn'''  where  the  bathers  undressed  and  deposited  their 
clothes.  It  forms  a  square  measuring  13  feet  6  inches  of  a 
side.  The  remains  of  the  four  walls  had  an  average  height  of 
3  feet  4  inches.  On  the  north  side  are  two  doorways  com- 
municating with  the  Frigidarium,  No.  7,  and  on  the  east  side 
a  doorway  giving  access  to  the  room  No.  3.  The  regularity 
of  the  courses  and  excellence  of  construction  of  these  walls 
excited  the  attention  and  admiration  not  only  of  my  workmen 
but  also  of  the  numerous  visitors  who  came  to  see  the 
diggings. 

Some  portions  of  the  walls  had  a  coating  of  plaster,  deco- 
rated, at  three  feet  from  the  floor,  with  a  red  band  two  inches 
in  breadth. 

Underneath  the  cement    which  formed  the  floor  was  a 

*  Apodyteriinn  An  undressing-room  ;  especially  a  chamber  in  the  baths, 
where  the  visitors  undressed  and  left  their  clothes  whilst  bathing. — Dictionary 
0/ Jioma/i  and  GreeiAnti^uiO'es,  by  Anthony  Rich.  London,  i860.  Longman. 

E3 


66  THE   BOSSENNO. 

deep  bed  of  small  round  stones,  having  a  few  pieces  of  char- 
coal and  pottery  interspersed.  This  bed  appeared  to  have 
been  prepared  so  as  to  form  a  medium  of  drainage  for  the 
apartment.  On  digging  down  to  a  depth  of  six  feet  the 
natural  soil  was  not  reached. 

The  room  No.  3  measured  13  feet  6  inches  in  length  by 
8  feet  3  inches  in  breadth. 

In  the  middle  of  this  room  we  came  upon  a  long  bench 
formed  of  cement,  but  in  a  very  soft  and  dilapidated  condition : 
notwithstanding  all  the  care  that  was  taken  for  its  preservation, 
it  fell  to  pieces  on  being  exposed  to  the  air.  Several  polished 
slabs  in  a  fine  white  calcareous  stone  were  embedded  on  the 
upper  face,  and  five  pieces  of  marble  slabs,  white  veined  with 
red,  scattered  on  the  floor,  were  probably  the  remnants  of 
what  had  once  been  the  covering  of  this  bench.  This  room 
appeared  to  me  to  have  been  the  Elceothesium*  and  that  it  was 
on  the  bench  above  described  that  the  bather  placed  himself 
in  order  to  be  rubbed,  manipulated  with  strigils,  and  anointed. 
This  supposition  was  so  far  strengthened  by  our  having  after- 
wards discovered,  when  clearing  the  south  wall,  numerous 
fragments  of  vases,  in  a  recess  there,  which  may  have  been 
the  place  for  keeping  the  oils  and  ointments  with  which  the 
bather  was  anointed  after  he  had  been  rubbed  and  manipu- 
lated. 

On  the  floor  a  few  feeble  traces  remained  of  a  thin  parti- 
tion, separating  this  room  from  the  Tepidarium,\  No.  4.     It  is 

*  Elaothesium.  The  oiling-room  in  a  set  of  baths,  where  the  oils  and 
unguents  were  kept,  and  to  which  the  bather  retired  to  be  rubbed  and 
Anointed. — Dictionary.     A.  Rich. 

+  Tepidarium.  A  chamber  in  a  set  of  baths  kept  at  a  moderate  degree 
of  temperature,  in  order  to  prepare  the  body  for  the  great  heat  of  the  Suda- 


BtfJ'ft.". 


i 


.■•.•Jaw 


•< 


fc.  H 


i! 


i 


b. 

O 

2 
O 

0 


i».'.% 
»» 


I 


EXCAVATIONS   IN   THE   MOUND   C.  57 

quite  possible  that  the  rooms  No.  3  and  4  may  have  had 
large  openings  in  the  partition  between  them,  so  as  to  be 
considered  as  forming  only  one  apartment.  This  was,  be- 
sides, the  most  usual  arrangement  in  the  private  baths ; 
according  to  Rich,  the  Elcsothesium  and  the  Tepidarium  often 
formed  one  and  the  same  room. 

The  room  No.  4  measured  13  feet  in  length,  by  9  feet 
6  inches  in  breadth.  The  floor,  formed  of  a  bed  of  a  red- 
coloured  cement  9  inches  in  thickness,  had  been  covered  with 
large  polished  slabs  of  bluish-gray  schist.  Several  of  these 
remained  imbedded  in  the  cement,  which  also  bore  the  im- 
press of  those  that  were  wanting. 

Under  this  bed  of  cement  a  hypocaust  was  discovered, 
having  square  pillars  2  feet  2  inches  in  height,  placed  at  a 
distance  of  16  inches  from  each  other.  These  pillars  were 
formed  of  bricks,  measuring  8  and  9  inches  square,  set  in  a 
thick  bed  of  mortar. 

The  hypocaust  was  choked  up  with  soot,  charcoal,  cinders, 
and  earth,  mingled  with  a  few  fragments  of  pottery. 

Two  steps,  rudely  cut  in  the  rock,  were  discovered  in  the 
south-west  corner,  near  the  Sudatorium ;  the  use  of  these  is 
not  quite  apparent. 

In  the  north-west  corner  two  vertical  flues  formed  of 
hollow  bricks,  similar  to  the  one  found  at  the  commencement 
of  the  diggings,  and  figured  at  page  53,  served  to  convey  the 
heated  air  from  the  hypocaust. 

There  can  be  little  doubt  as  to  the  destination  of  the 
room  No.  4  ;  it  was  the  Tepidarium,  a  room  kept  at  a  mode- 
rate temperature.    The  communication  from  this  room  to  No. 

torium  or  vapour  bath,  and  to  break  the  sudden  transition  after  it,  before 
returning  into  the  open  air. — Dictionary.     A.  Rich. 


58  THE   BOSSENNO. 

5  was  by  a  small  stair,  of  which  a  few  steps  remained  when 
the  diggings  were  executed. 

The  room  No.  5,  nearly  square  in  form,  measured  5  feet  in 
length  by  4  feet  8  inches  in  breadth.  Its  destination  was  not 
evident  until  it  had  been  completely  cleared  out,  when  it 
became  apparent  that  it  was  the  Sudatorium  *  or  Sudatio  con- 
camerata.  The  height  of  the  walls  on  the  north,  south,  and 
east  side  was  6  feet  8  inches,  on  the  west  side  7  feet  6  inches. 
It  was  constructed  over  a  hypocaust,  and  was  supported  by 
five  square  pillars.  The  floor  and  the  walls  were  faced  with 
polished  slabs  of  blue  slate.  Two  steps,  superposed,  had 
been  worked  into  the  north  wall ;  these  also  were  faced  with 
polished  slate. 

Double  rows  of  flues,  formed  of  hollow  bricks,  ascending 
through  the  walls  from  the  hypocaust  below,  served  to  circu- 
late the  heated  air.  These  hollow  bricks,  as  may  be  seen  on 
referring  to  the  section  C  D,  were  supported  by  crotchet 
tiles,  tegulcs,  fastened  by  iron  double-headed  nails  driven  into 
the  mortar,  and  covered  over  all  by  a  layer  of  cement  and  by 
the  facing  of  polished  slate  already  mentioned.  This  arrange- 
ment of  flues  was  not  broken  into  on  the  south  wall,  as  I 
always  endeavoured,  whilst  disengaging  these  ruins,  to  pre- 
serve them  as  much  as  possible  intact.  The  system  for  circu- 
lating the  heated  air  was  besides  perfectly  shown  in  the  east 
and  west  walls. 

In  the  bottom  of  this  small   room,  a"  lead  pipe,  passing 

through  the  south  wall  at  the  level  of  the  floor,  had  served  to 

run  off  the  condensed  water. 

*  Sudatorium.  The  sudatory  or  sweating-room  in  a  set  of  batlis,  wliich 
was  heated  by  flues  arranged  under  the  flooring  (suspensurd),  and  sometimes 
also  constructed  in  the  walls  of  the  chamber,  when  it  was  specially  termed 
Sudalio  concamerata. — Dictionary.     A.  Rich. 


EXCAVATIONS   IN  THE   MOUND   C.  59 

A  granite  stone  pillar  was  let  into  slabs  of  slate  forming 
the  floor,  so  as  to  make  a  pedestal  or  seat.  Facing  this  pillar, 
in  the  east  wall,  was  a  recess,  having  an  opening  8  inches 
wide,  which  may  have  served  to  regulate  the  temperature,  or 
to  admit  fresh  air  from  the  exterior  at  the  will  of  the  bather. 

The  room  No.  6  measured  13  feet  in  length  by  5  feet  in 
breadth,  and,  like  the  rooms  Nos.  4  and  5,  was  also  con- 
structed over  a  hypocaust. 

A  small  bath  or  reservoir  for  holding  warm  water,  measur- 
ing 3  feet  6  inches  in  length  by  2  feet  9  inches  in  breadth, 
was  discovered  on  clearing  out  the  north  side  of  this  room. 
Another  bath  of  the  same  kind,  measuring  3  feet  10  inches 
by  2  feet  6  inches,  was  found  on  the  south  side. 

The  bottoms  of  these  baths  were  laid  with  polished  slabs 
of  a  fine  white  calcareous  stone,  which  is  not  found  in  the 
environs  of  Carnac.  The  sides  were  faced  with  polished  slabs 
of  blue  slate. 

Round  the  sides  of  each  bath  six  vertical  flues,  formed  of 
hollow  bricks,  served  to  convey  the  heated  air  from  the  hypo- 
caust below,  and  to  warm  the  water. 

The  situation  and  arrangement  of  this  chamber  indicate 
its  having  been  the  Caldarium*  or  room  into  which  the  bather 
passed  from  the  Sudatorium  to  be  washed  with  hot  water 
after  the  action  of  the  hot-air  bath  had  induced  a  sufficient 
perspiration. 

A  reference  to  the  ground-plan  of  the  Mound  C  will  show 
that  the  flooring  between  the  baths  just  described  had  fallen  in 
ruins,  and  thereby  exposed  the  pillars  of  the  hypocaust  below. 
According  to  Rich,  the  Labrum  would  have  been  situated 
between  these  baths,  but  nothing  was  found  there  save  some 
*  Caldarium.   The  thermal  chamber  in  a  set  of  baths. — Dictionary.   A.  Rich. 


60  THE  BOSSENNO. 

fragments  of  a  large  vase  and  a  few  curious  pieces  of  frescoes 
decorated  with  shells,  one  of  which  is  figured  in  the  chromo- 
lithograph C,  pi.  VI. 

The  general  aspect  and  character  of  this  room  denoted  that 
great  care  had  been  bestowed  on  its  construction,  and  it  was 
still  in  a  good  state  of  preservation  when  first  cleared  out. 
Unfortunately,  numbers  of  tourists  and  country  people  came 
to  see  the  ruins.  They  soon  carried  off  the  fine  white  stones 
of  the  baths,  stripped  and  overset  the  walls,  and  demolished 
the  pillars  of  the  hypocaust. 

The  room  No.  7  measured  15  feet  in  length  by  11  feet  6 
inches  in  breadth.  It  contained  on  the  north  side  a  cold  bath 
or  Baptisterium,'^'  having  reservoirs  for  cold  water  at  each  end. 

The  cold  bath  measured  10  feet  6  inches  in  length  by  5 
feet  in  breadth.  Its  depth  below  the  level  of  the  floor  of  the 
room  was  4  feet.  A  conduit  passing  through  the  east  wall, 
at  the  bottom  of  the  bath,  had  served  to  run  off  the  waste 
water.  Two  steps,  superposed,  were  worked  into  the  south 
side ;  the  first  at  i  foot  8  inches,  the  second  at  3  feet  1 1 
inches  from  the  bottom,  destined,  probably,  to  assist  the 
bather  in  ascending  and  descending.  The  sides  and  bottom 
were  formed  of  a  thick  coat  of  cement.  See  the  section 
No.  I,  G  H,  Cpl.  III. 

The  reservoirs  or  cisterns  measured  each  5  feet  in  length 
by  I  foot  6  inches  in  breadth.  The  depth  of  the  reservoir 
situated  at  the  west  end  of  the  bath  was  4  feet  10  inches, 
whilst  that  at  the  east  end  was  only  3  feet  4  inches.  This 
difference  is  caused  by  the  conduit  or  discharge  pipe  from 
the  bottom  of  the  bath  passing  below  the  latter  reservoir. 
See  the  section  No.  4,  A  B,  C  pi.  III. 

*  Baptisterium.  A  cold  plunging  bath  constructed  in  the  ccUafri^daria. 
— Dictionary.    A.  Rich. 


EXCAVATIONS   IN   THE  MOUND  C.  61 

The  sides  of  the  two  reservoirs  were  faced  with  cement 
only,  whilst  the  bottoms  were  carefully  laid  with  slate  cm- 
bedded  in  cement. 

On  ascending  from  the  bath  to  the  room  above,  another 
conduit  is  to  be  seen  in  the  section  No.  i,  G  H,  passing 
through  the  east  wall  at  the  level  of  the  floor,  and  serving  to 
run  off  the  water  used  by  the  bather  :  two  seats  or  benches 
were  worked  into  the  walls — one  on  the  east,  the  other  on  the 
west  side. 

The  construction  here  leaves  but  little  doubt  that  it  was 
the  room  called  by  the  Romans  the  Frigidarium'^ 

Two  doorways  on  the  south  side,  separated  by  a  square 
pillar,  gave  access  to  it  from  the  Apodyterium. 

When  the  clearing  out  of  this  room  was  completed,  the 
pillar  was  in  a  good  state  of  preservation,  faced  with  plaster, 
on  which  a  red  band,  i^  inch  in  breadth,  was  painted  i6 
inches  from  the  floor. 

In  clearing  out  the  debris  which  choked  up  this  room, 
numerous  fragments  of  curious  frescoes  were  discovered. 
These  appeared  to  me  to  have  been  the  remains  of  what 
had  once  formed  the  ceiling  of  the  Frigidariuni,  and  which 
had  fallen  down  at  the  time  of  its  destruction. 

The  greater  portion  of  these  fragments  were  quite  soft  and 
friable,  so  much  so  that  many  had  to  be  sacrificed  in  order  to 
extricate  a  single  specimen. 

These  fragments,  as  may  be  seen  on  referring  to  the 
accompanying  chromo-lithographs,  were  painted  in  geometric 
designs  red,  blue,  green,  yellow,  and  white ;  decorated  with 
shells  embedded  in  the  plaster.    Many  of  these  shells  were 

*  Frigidarium.  It  was  certainly  distinct  from  tlie  cold-water  bath  {fri- 
gido  lavatio),  with  which  it  was  enumerated,  but  situated  in  an  opposite  angle 
of  the  edifice  and  adjoining  the  oiling-room  (Eluiothaium). 


62  THE  BOSSENNO. 

broken,  and  had  fallen  off  the  plaster.  In  some  instances  the 
place  which  they  had  occupied  on  the  plaster  bore  no  trace  of 
colour,  which  shows  that  they  had  been  placed  on  the  plaster 
before  it  was  painted. 

The  marks  of  the  compasses  used  by  the  painter  in  working 
out  his  design  were  still  visible  on  some  of  the  fragments.  I 
mention  this  on  account  of  a  remark  made  by  many  of  the 
numerous  visitors  who  came  to  see  the  collection  of  objects 
discovered  in  the  course  of  the  diggings.  A  pair  of  iron 
compasses  was  found  in  the  Mound  D,  which  they  declared 
to  be  an  instrument  of  comparatively  modern  date,  and  they 
also  stated  that  it  was  doubtful  if  compasses  were  known 
in  Brittany  during  the  Roman  occupation.  On  seeing 
the  marks  on  the  fragments  above  alluded  to  they  at  once 
acknowledged  their  error.'"' 

The  colours  of  these  fragments  were  bright  and  clear  when 
found,  but  after  a  few  days'  exposure  they  became  dull  and 
faint. 

With  the  view  of  simplifying  the  description  of  these 
frescoes  and  of  the  reconstruction  of  the  design  of  the  ceiling, 
I  shall  first  direct  the  attention  of  the  reader  to  some  of  the 
more  important  specimens,  as  shown  in  the  three  chromo- 
lithographs which  follow. 

1.  Fragment  of  plaster,  the  decoration  formed  of  parallel 
bands,  containing  geometric  figures  in  polychrome,  with  shells 
of  different  species  inserted.  (Chromo-lithograph  C,  pi.  V., 
natural  size.) 

2.  Fragment  of  plaster,  the  decoration  formed  of  un- 
dulating  bands  in  polychrome,  having  shells  embedded. 
(Chromo-lithograph  C,  pi.  VI.,  natural  size.) 

*  Circinus.  A  pair  of  compasses  employed  by  carpenters,  architects, 
masons,  and  sculptors,  for  describing  circles,  etc.  etc.,  similar  to  those  still  in 
use. — Dictionary.    A.  Rich. 


I 


O 


si 


I 
f 


a 

o 

•S 
2 


o 

Id 
U. 


I 


?L  a. 


PL. 4. 


j^_^  #  #  m  ft/ 


Cappe.Del. 


Imp  Leroy  S.  Richon .  Paris 


EXCAVATIONS   IN  THE   MOUND   C.  63 

3.  Fragment  of  plaster,  the  decoration  in  polychrome, 
forming  part  of  a  border  surrounding  an  octagonal  design, 
having  shells  embedded.  (Chromo-lithograph  C,  pi.  VII.  fig. 
4,  half  size.) 

The  different  fragments  discovered,  of  which  these  three 
chromos  afford  fair  specimens,  enabled  me,  with  the  aid  of 
M.  Henry  du  Cleuziou  and  M.  Louis  Capp6,  to  reproduce 
the  decoration  of  certain  portions  of  the  ceiling,  which  are 
represented  in  the  following  chromos. 

1.  Part  of  the  ceiling  reconstructed,  the  decoration  in 
polychrome,  composed  of  a  rosace  surrounded  by  an  octagon. 
The  central  part  of  the  rosace  is  divided  into  eight  compart- 
ments of  varied  colours  ;  over  the  whole  shells  of  the  genus 
turbo  and  tellina  are  embedded.     (Chromo  C,  pi.  VIII.  fig.  9.) 

2.  One  of  the  original  fragments  made  use  of  for  the 
preceding  reconstruction.  (Chromo  C,  pi.  VIII.  fig.  10,  reduced 
one  half.) 

3.  Part  of  the  border  of  the  ceiling  reconstructed,  the 
decoration  in  polychrome,  composed  of  a  large  yellow  band, 
having  shells  of  the  Cardium  echitiaium  embedded,  and  of 
other  smaller  bands  in  various  colours  divided  into  compart- 
ments, with  shells  of  the  turbo  and  tellina  embedded.  (Chromo 
C,  pi.  IX.,  reduced  one  fourth.) 

4.  Part  of  the  ceiling  restored,  the  decoration  in  poly- 
chrome, containing  a  diamond-shaped  figure  divided  into 
compartments,  in  which  are  embedded  shells  of  the  Cardium 
echinatum,  turbo,  and  tellina.     (Chromo  C,  pi.  X.) 

M.  H.  du  Cleuziou,  after  studying  the  combinations  that 
could  be  obtained  with  these  fragments,  succeeded  in  making 
a  design  of  the  entire  ceiling. 

M.  L.  Capp6,  in  following  the  same  method  but  making  use 


64  THE   BOSSENNO. 

of  other  fragments  subsequently  found,  made  the  reconstruction 
represented  in  C,  pi.  XI.,  which  I  believe  to  be  more  exact. 

I  regret  that  the  size  of  this  volume  does  not  admit  of  his 
design  being  given  on  a  large  scale  in  chromo. 

Several  fragments  of  frescoes  similar  to  those  just  described 
were  discovered  a  few  years  ago  by  M.  R.  F.  le  Men,  when 
excavating  the  Gallo-Roman  baths  at  Poul-Ker,  near  Ben- 
Odet,  below  the  town  of  Quimper.  Specimens  of  these  are 
exhibited  in  the  museum  at  Quimper. 

The  apartment  No.  8  probably  served  as  a  waiting-room 
for  the  bather  until  the  bath  was  ready,  or  for  repose  after 
taking  it.    The  entrance  was  by  the  doorway  in  the  south  wall. 

The  average  height  of  the  walls  was  on  the  north  side 
2  feet  6  inches,  on  the  south  4  feet,  on  the  west  3  feet.  On 
the  east  side  the  foundation  alone  remained. 

These  remains  of  walls  were  in  good  preservation  and  had 
a  coating  of  plaster  still  preserving  some  traces  of  painting. 
On  the  north  wall,  at  the  height  of  10  inches  from  the  floor, 
and  on  the  right  hand,  was  a  horizontal  red  band  6  inches  in 
breadth.  In  the  middle  of  the  wall  this  was  replaced  by  a 
yellow  band  6  inches  in  breadth  ;  8  inches  higher  there  was 
another  red  band  of  the  same  breadth. 

On  the  east  wall  traces  were  found  of  green  leaves  painted 
on  a  white  ground,  and  of  a  red  sort  of  fruit  on  a  black  ground. 
(Chromo  B,  pi.  V.) 

Specimens  of  plaster  similar  to  those  here  described,  and 
found  in  different  Roman  and  Gallo-Roman  establishments, 
are  exhibited  in  the  museums  at  London,  Paris,  etc.  etc.  It 
would  seem  that  the  most  common  style  of  mural  decoration 
in  the  Gallo-Roman  epoch  consisted  of  bands  in  primitive 
colours  painted  on  a  white  ground. 


o 


J 


J 


v\ 


\x 


To  fact  page  (n,  2d.  (j,    PLATE   IX. 

RECONSTRUCTION,   BORDER  OF  CEILING  IN   FRESCO. 


r^"  .y^ 


rK/n.-f  ^^r  6i,  j,f.  ^:^  plate  x. 

RECONSTRUCTION,   PART  OF  CEILING  IN    FRESCO. 


(",  i'l  \v 


rCappt 


To  face  page  64,  \tk. 


C.  PLATE  Xr. 
RECONSTRUCTION,  DESIGN  OF  CEILING. 


E,  Moriipu^  j-c^ 


EXCAVATIONS    IN   THE   MOUND   C.  65 

The  floor  of  this  apartment  was  formed  of  a  bed  of  fine 
smooth  cement,  which  gave  a  hollow  sound  on  walking  over 
it.  On  digging  down  below  it  for  some  distance,  nothing  was 
found  but  small  stones  laid  for  drainage  in  the  same  way  as 
below  the  Apodyterium. 

The  room  No.  9  measured  13  feet  in  length  by  12  feet  in 
breadth.  The  walls  were  constructed  with  irregularly-shaped 
stones  of  different  sizes,  in  inferior  workmanship,  and  had  no 
coating  of  plaster.  The  floor  was  without  cement.  It  seems 
to  me  that  this  room  had  been  intended  for  the  use  of  the 
slaves  who  attended  on  the  baths,  more  especially  for  those 
who  attended  to  the  heating.  The  furnace  whence  the  heat 
was  distributed  through  the  baths  was  placed  in  the  middle  of 
the  west  wall.  I  n  the  north-west  corner  there  was  a  square 
construction,  which  appeared  to  have  been  the  chimney. 
Several  visitors  suggested  that  the  room  No.  9  had  been  an 
open  court,  but  the  quantity  of  roofing  tiles  found  on  clearing: 
out  the  floor  showed  that  it  had  been  roofed  in  part,  if  not 
entirely. 

The  construction  No.  10  was  an  enigma  to  all  who  saw  it. 
It  had  no  connection  with  the  baths,  although  it  was  joined  on 
to  them.  It  was  situated  at  a  depth  of  2  feet  8  inches  under 
the  pasture  which  exists  between  the  Mounds  B  and  C, 
already  alluded  to  as  a  court.  Three  or  four  courses  of  rude 
masonry  in  irregularly  shaped  stones  were  all  that  remained 
of  its  surrounding  walls.  In  the  middle  were  two  vaulted 
constructions  which  appeared  to  have  been  furnaces,  measuring 
3  feet  in  length  by  i  foot  8  inches  in  width.  One  of  these 
was  filled  with  charcoal,  ashes,  and  earth,  the  other  with  lime 
and  pounded  brick  dust. 


66  THE   BOSSENNO. 

Various  ideas  as  to  the  use  of  this  construction  sugf^ested 
themselves. 

Seeing  that  it  was  below  the  level  of  the  floors  of  either 
the  villa  or  the  baths,  might  it  not  have  been  the  place  where 
the  cement,  which  would  be  required  in  large  quantities,  had 
been  prepared  anterior  to  the  building  of  these  edifices,  and 
which  had  been  covered  over  after  their  completion  ?  Or 
might  it  have  been  used  for  firing  the  tiles  or  coarse  pottery- 
required  for  the  use  of  the  establishment  ?  This,  however, 
could  hardly  have  been  agreeable  to  the  inhabitants  of  such  a 
luxurious  dwelling.  Seeing  that  none  of  its  masonry  bears 
any  trace  of  Roman  workmanship,  it  may  have  been  con- 
structed after  the  destruction  of  the  Bossenno,  for  some 
purpose  now  unknown ;  but  whatever  its  destination  may 
have  been,  the  workmen  gave  it  the  name  of  the  Furnaces, 
which  it  retained.     (C,  pi.  XII.) 

Having  now  finished  the  description  of  the  various  parts  of 
the  building  discovered  under  the  Mound  C,  I  shall  proceed 
with  the  enumeration  of  the  different  objects  found  in  it, 
commencing  with  those  found  on  the  outside  of  the  walls. 

On  the  north-east  face  of  the  mound,  near  the  place  where 
the  conduit  tile  mentioned  at  the  commencement  of  this 
chapter  was  found,  a  number  of  square  tiles  were  collected, 
ornamented  with  hollow  lines,  forming,  concentric  circular 
figures,  ovals,  and  diamond-shaped  patterns.  Similar  tiles 
found  in  the  Roman  ruins  at  Carhaix  and  Benodet  are 
exhibited  in  the  museum  of  Quimper,  one  of  which  is  repre- 
sented in  the  engraving  at  the  end  of  this  chapter  (page  73). 

At  the  foot  of  the  north  wall  of  the  room  No.  4,  on  the 
outside  of  the  building,  was  a  large  quantity  of  broken  window- 


EXCAVATIONS    IN  THE   MOUND   C.  67 

glass  of  a  green  colour,  having  one  face  polished,  and 
the  other  rough  as  if  it  had  been  cast  on  sand.  On  the 
border  of  some  of  the  fragments  a  line  of  red  cement  still 
remained.  Alongside  of  these  was  an  iron  bar  furnished  with 
cross  pieces  in  lead.  (C,  pi.  XIII.  fig.  i.)  These  were  the 
remains  of  a  window  which  had  been  broken  at  the  "time  of 
the  destruction  of  the  building.  The  chromo-lithograph  C, 
pi.  VII.  No.  2,  represents  the  reconstruction  of  a  portion  of 
this  window. 

At  a  distance  of  about  five  feet  from  the  wall  of  the  room 
No.  4  there  was  found  a  small  bronze  coin  of  Constantine  the 
Great,  in  a  good  state  of  preservation  : — 

CONSTANTINVS.  AVG.  Bust  turned  to  the  left, 
crowned  with  laurel,  having  the  imperial  mantle,  and  holding 
a  sceptre  surmounted  by  an  eagle. 

Reverse:  BEAT  A.  TRANQVILLITAS.  An  altar 
surmounted  by  a  globe,  above  which  are  three  stars :  on  the 
altar  VOTIS  XX.     (Cohen,  193.) 

Several  fragments  of  red  lustrous  ware,  and  of  an  amphora 
in  yellow  earth,  were  found  at  a  short  distance  from  the  north 
side  of  the  wall  of  the  room  No.  9.  All  the  earth  turned  up 
here  was  passed  through  sieves,  with  the  view  of  collecting  all 
the  fragments  of  a  vase  similar  to  those  already  mentioned  as 
having  been  found  in  London.  It  required  a  good  deal  of 
perseverance  to  select,  adapt,  and  cement  these  different 
fragments,  so  as  to  complete  the  reconstruction  of  this  vase, 
which  is  represented  in  the  chromo-lithograph  A,  pi.  IV. 

There  were  also  found  here  a  small  bronze  ring  like  a 
marriage-ring,  the  head  of  a  bronze  button  or  ornament  of 
hemispherical  form  similar  to  the  one  found  in  the  Mound  A, 
several  iron  nails  of  different  sizes,  and  a  few  fragments  of 
wall  plaster  painted  red. 


68  THE   BOSSENNO. 

In  digging  round  the  exterior  of  the  Sudatorium,  a  large 
bronze  coin  of  Lucilla  Augusta  was  found  on  the  east  side, 
near  to  the  foot  of  the  walls  of  No.  9  : — 

LVCILL^.  AVG.  ANTONINI.  AVG.  F.  (Lucillce 
Augustse  Antonini  August!  filiae).     Bust  turned  to  the  right. 

Reverse:  VENVS.  S.  C.  (Venus  senatus  consulto.) 
Venus  erect,  turned  to  the  left,  holding  an  apple  and  a  sceptre. 
(Cohen,  79.) 

Near  the  south-east  corner  of  the  Sudatorium  we  came 
upon  an  antler  of  the  common  red  deer  {Cervus  elaphus),  and 
several  fragments  of  deers'  horns  broken  and  cut. 

The  teeth,  ribs,  and  other  bones  of  oxen,  which  had  been 
of  a  small  race. 

Bones  and  teeth  of  the  sheep. 

Jaw-bones  complete  with  teeth,  and  tibia  of  the  red  deer 
{Cervus  elaphus). 

Boars'  tusks  ;  teeth  and  bones  of  the  pig. 
Bones  of  hares  and  rabbits. 

Mingled  with  these  bones  were  the  debris  of  edible  shell- 
fish, viz. — 

The  whelk         .         .     {Buccinum  undatum). 
Oyster       .  .         .     {Ostrea  edulis). 

Limpet      .         .         .     {Patella  vulgatd). 
Scallop  or  palmer  shell  {Pec ten  yacobeus). 
Ormer       .  .  .     {Haliotis  tuber ctdaris). 

Mussel      .         .         .     {Mytilus  edulis). 
Snail         .         .         .     {Helix  pomatica.) 

,j  Mr.  Wright,  in  his  work  The  Celt,  Roman,  and  Saxon, 
refers  to  the  fact  that  the  proximity  of  Roman  sites  in 
England  is  almost  always  shown  by  the  presence  of  immense 
quantities  of  the  shells  of  the  oyster,  cockle,  and  mussel.      He 


EXCAVATIONS    IN    THE   MOUND   C.  69 

also  mentions  the  curious  circumstance  that  a  large  species 
of  snail  is  often  found  still  existing  about  Roman  stations. 

The  manufactured  articles  found  here  were — 

Part  of  a  tool  in  tempered  steel. 

Numerous  fragments  of  Gallo- Roman  pottery,  consisting 
of  pieces  of  handles,  bottoms,  and  rims  of  vases  in  red,  gray, 
and  black  earth. 

In  the  interior  of  the  building  there  were  found  in  the 
passage  No.  i  several  fragments  of  common  gray  pottery, 
and  also  of  a  plate  in  red  ware. 

In  the  Apodyterium,  No.  2,  only  a  few  fragments  of  very 
coarse  pottery. 

In  the  Elceothesium  and  Tepidarium,  Nos.  3  and  4,  several 
flakes  of  black  flint,  a  flat  hone  or  sharpening-stone,  and 
numerous  fragments  of  pottery  of  different  kinds.  Amongst 
these  were  the  bottom  of  a  tripod  bowl  in  the  red  ware,  called 
false  Samian.  In  the  whole  course  of  the  diggings  only  one 
other  tripod  bowl  was  found,  viz.  in  the  Mound  A.  Some  of 
the  fragments  were  in  common  gray  earth,  ornamented  with  a 
series  of  circular  horizontal  bands  painted  black. 

In  the  Sudatorium,  No.  5,  nothing  was  found  save  a 
quantity  of  bricks,  tiles,  and  earth. 

In  the  Caldartum,  No.  6,  there  were  two  bodkins  formed 
of  deer's  horn,  each  two  inches  in  length. 

Two  fragments  of  a  marble  slab,  blue  with  white  veins. 

Fragments  of  a  large  vase  in  gray  earth,  which  enabled 
me  to  reconstruct  the  upper  half  of  a  vase  similar  to  that 
figured  B,  pi.  VII.  fig.  2. 


70  THE   BOSSENNO. 

In  the  Frigidarium,  No.  7,  several  burnt  bones  were  found 
in  the  cold  bath,  also  a  tool  formed  from  a  deer's  horn,  having 
the  point  bevelled  off,  and  several  fragments  of  small  vases  in 
fine  black  lustrous  ware. 


In  the  room  No.  8,  near  the  centre,  a  penannular  brooch 
of  Celtic  type  in  bronze,  formed  from  a  flat  ring,  having  a 
simple  but  not  ungraceful  ornament  engraved  on  the  upper 
flat  of  the  ring,  and  having  a  short  pin.  (C,  pi.  XIII.  fig.  3, 
natural  size.) 

A  small  armlet  in  plain  thin  bronze  wire. 

In  the  north-east  corner,  the  neck  of  a  small  bottle  in  clear 
glass. 

A  small  opaque  bead  of  a  turquoise  blue  colour,  half  an 
inch  in  diameter,  probably  part  of  a  necklace. 

Several  iron  nails  and  pieces  of  iron  of  different  forms — 
use  unknown. 

Piece  of  a  steel  drill,  similar  to  the  drills  used  by  carpenters 
at  the  present  time.     (C,  pi.  XIII.  fig.  4,  natural  size.) 

Fragment  of  a  marble  slab,  white  with  red  veins. 

The  different  marbles  found  at  the  Bossenno  were  sub- 
mitted to  the  inspection  of  experts  in  London  and  Paris,  with 
the  view  of  ascertaining  the  locality  from  which  they  had 
been  brought.  They  declined  to  give  a  decided  opinion, 
seeing  that  they  had  marbles  exactly  similar,  found  both 
in  Italy  and  in  Africa,  of  which  they  produced  specimens. 
This  is  an  interesting  question,  for  as  there  are  no  quarries 
of    marble   in   the    Morbihan,    and   as    marbles    have   been 


To  face  page  70. 


EXCAVATIONS  IN   THE   MOUND   C.  71 

frequently  found  in  excavating  the  Roman  ruins  of  that 
department,  it  points  to  a  foreign  commerce  of  some  extent 
during  the  Roman  occupation.'^ 

Several  whorls  in  terra-cotta,  and  one  made  out  of  a  piece 
of  blue  slate,  were  found  scattered  on  the  floor.  These  had 
been  placed  on  a  wooden  spindle  and  used  for  spinning  thread. 
To  this  day  in  Brittany,  the  women  watching  their  flocks  on 
the  moorlands  may  be  seen  spinning  in  this  way.  Whorls 
exactly  similar  have  been  used  till  quite  recently  in  some 
parts  of  the  Highlands  of  Scotland,  and  in  Shedand. 

Several  of  these  found  during  the  course  of  the  diggings 
at  the  Bossenno  were  not  pierced  in  the  centre,  but  had  an 


oblique  perforation  near  the  edge ;  this  precludes  the  idea  of 
their  having  been  used  for  spinning  purposes.  Perhaps  they 
may  have  been  used  as  weavers'  weights,  or  sinkers  for  nets 
or  fishing-lines.  Stone  sinkers  similar  to  these,  though  of 
larger  size,  are  still  used  by  the  Shetland  fishermen. 

*"I1  n'existe  done  du  terrain  de  transition,  dans  le  Morbihan,  que 
deux  etages,  le  Cambrien  et  le  Silurien,  separtfs  I'un  de  I'autre  par  I'eruption 
des  granits  k  petits  ^l^ments.  L'etage  cambrien  est  form^  de  grfes  h, 
grains,  fins,  de  schiste  talqueux  ou  chloritiques  et  de  mica  schistes  stauro- 
tidiftres." 

"  L'etage  silurien  comprend  le  gneiss,  les  poudingues,  les  quartzites,  les 
schistes  argileux,  les  grauwaches  schisteux  et  les  mica  schistes  macliftres." — 
Bulletin  de  la  Sociiti  Polymathique  du  Morbihan,  pour  I'ann^e  i860. 


72  ,      THE   BOSSENNO. 

Several  pieces  of  tiles  ornamented  in  the  same  manner  as 
those  found  on  the  north-east  side  of  the  Mound  C  were 
found  in  clearing  out  this  room ;  also  several  fragments  of 
pottery  in  common  gray  earth,  in  fine  black  earth  having  a 
lustrous  glazing,  in  red  lustrous  ware,  and  rims,  bottoms,  and 
handles  of  vases  of  varied  sorts.  From  all  these  fragments 
only  one  vase  could  be  reconstructed,  a  hollow  dish  in  common 
gray  earth  similar  to  that  described  in  the  Mound  A.     (A,  pi. 

III.  figs). 

In  the  room  No.  9,  near  the  south-east  corner,  were  a 
quantity  of  rounded  pieces  of  tiles,  from  3  to  4  inches  in 
diameter,  probably  sinkers  or  pieces  for  playing  at  some 
game.  To  this  day,  in  Brittany,  the  game  oi paUt  is  a  favourite 
amusement.  The  workmen,  on  finding  the  rounded  pieces  of 
tile,  exclaimed,  "  They  played  at  paldt  then,  these  ancients  as 
we  do  now."  The  earth  and  stones  cleared  out  here  were,  as 
in  all  the  other  rooms,  mixed  with  numerous  fragments  of 
bricks  and  roofing  tiles,  tegulce  and  imbrices.  Near  the  base 
of  the  north  wall  were  a  few  small  fragments  of  wall  plaster, 
coloured  red  and  yellow,  which  had  probably  fallen  from  the 
adjoining  room  at  the  time  of  the  destruction  of  the  building. 

Near  the  north-east  corner  was  a  small  bronze  coin, 
slightly  degraded,  of  Constantius  the  Second. 

D.  N.  CONSTANTIVS.  P.  F.  AVG.  (Dominus  noster 
Constantius  pius,  felix  Augustus.)  Bust  .to  the  right ;  diadem 
and  paludamentum. 

Reverse:  FEL.  TEMP.  REPARATIO.  (Felix  tem- 
porum  reparatio.)  Soldier  in  a  fury,  erect  to  the  left,  piercing 
with  his  spear  and  spurning  with  his  foot  an  enemy  who, 
holding  a  shield,  has  fallen  below  his  horse  in  endeavouring 
to  hold  on  to  the  mane.    A  shield  on  the  earth.  (Cohen,  223.) 


EXCAVATIONS   IN   THE  MOUND   C. 


73 


Near  to  the  east  wall  were  several  iron  nails  of  different 
sizes,  also  three  implements  in  steel,  resembling  punches  and 
drills. 

Numerous  fragments  of  coarse  pottery  enabled  me  to 
reconstruct  a  flat  deep  dish,  already  described  as  er  cass,  and 
another,  8  inches  in  diameter,  pear-shaped,  in  gray-brown 
earth,  with  black  bands.  Several  fragments  of  vases,  in 
gray  earth,  similar  to  those  described  in  the  Mound  A, 
having  a  decoration  resembling  Moorish  pottery,  were  also 
found  in  this  room  ;  specimens  of  these  are  represented,  C, 
pi.  XIII.  figs.  5  and  6. 

The  fragments  of  pottery  collected  in  the  Mound  C  filled 
five  baskets,  and  weighed  143  lbs. 


TILE  FOUND  AT  CARHAIX. 


V. 

EXCAVATIONS    IN    THE    MOUND   D. 


s 


THE    MOUND    D. 


Bearing  in  mind  that  the  Romans  generally  placed  a  temple, 
dedicated  to  Venus  or  Mars,  in  the  vicinity  of  their  baths ; 
so  soon  as  the  exploration  of  the  Mound  C  was  terminated, 
I  sought  all  round  for  traces  of  a  building  that  might  have 
had  such  a  destination. 

There  seemed  to  be  some  prospect  of  finding  this  (taking 
into  account  the  persistence  of  names  and  traditions  in 
Brittany),  when  I  learned  from  the  peasants  that  the  Mounds 
D  and  E  were  known  in  the  country  by  the  name  of  the 
temple.     This  statement  was  confirmed  by  my  workmen. 

On  placing  poles  some  distance  apart  on  the  north  wall  of 
the  baths,  it  could  be  seen  that  the  southern  face  of  the 
Mound  D  was  in  the  prolongation  of  a  line  drawn  through 
these  poles.  On  digging  holes  in  this  line,  in  the  cultivated 
land  between  the  Mounds  C  and  D,  the  foundations  of  the 
wall  which  united  the  baths  to  the  building  buried  under  the 
Mound  D  were  discovered. 

The  excavation  of  the  Mound  D  was  commenced  on  the 
14th  July  1875,  and  abundant  proofs  were  soon  found  that  it 
covered  the  ruins  of  a  small  temple  or  Lqrarium* 

*  Lararium.  A  sort  of  shrine,  small  chapel,  or  apartment,  where  the  statues 
of  the  Lares  or  guardian  spirits  of  a  household,  as  well  as  other  sanctified  or 
deified  personages,  were  placed  and  worshipped. — Lamprid,  Alex.  Sei>.,  29 


78  -    THE   BOSSENNO. 

This  little  mound  was  of  a  roundish  form,  and  almost  flat : 
it  measured   44  feet  in  diameter  and  2   feet  in  height.     In 
appearance  it  was  so  insignificant  as  to  cause  it  to  be  over- 
looked at  first,  when  searching  for  indications  of  a  temple,  but 
the  results  obtained  from  its  exploration  were  of  great  interest. 
Work  was  commenced  on  the  south  side,  and  in  a  short 
space  of  time  a  wall  was  struck  upon,  right  in  the  prolonga- 
tion of  the  line  indicated  by  the  poles.     We  continued  work- 
ing round  the  Mound,  following  and  clearing  the  outside  of 
the  wall  until  the  ruins  of  a  square  building,  measuring  32 
feet  6  inches  of  a  side,  about  2  feet  in  height,  and  having  an 
entrance  from  the  south,  were  completely  exposed  to  view. 
The  clearing  out  of  the  interior  was  then  proceeded  with,  and 
soon  disclosed  the  remains  of  another  square  building,  measur- 
ing 14  feet  of  a  side,  about  2  feet  in  height,  with  walls  31 
inches  in  breadth,   and  without   any  entrance.      These  two 
constructions  represented  (see  the  ground-plan  of  the  Mound 
D)  two  squares,  one  within  the  other,  having  a  free  passage 
8  feet  wide  between  their  four  sides.     On  the  floor  of  the 
inner  square,  at  a  distance  of  2  feet  from  the  north  wall  a 
slab  of  fine  white  calcareous  stone,  2  feet  3  inches  square,  3 
inches  in  thickness,  and  having  mouldings  cut  on  three  sides, 
was  found  embedded  in  a  layer  of  cement.     It  appeared  to  me 
that  this  had  served  as  the  base  of  a  pedestal  on  which  had 
been  placed  the  statue  of  the  divinity  to  whom  this  little 
temple  had  been  dedicated. 

As  the  walls  surrounding  the    inner  square  showed   no 
indication  of  an  entrance,  it  may  be  supposed  that  the  access 

and  31.  Such  an  arrangement,  however,  was  probably  peculiar  to  particular 
individuals,  or  to  great  houses  and  persons  of  wealth,  for  the  usual  situation 
for  images  of  the  Lares  was  over  or  beside  the  hearth  {focus)  in  the  great 
hall  or  atrium  of  the  house. 


cud 


■»,)■!.■• 


'.Jfc'SJ 


^;^fc^:; 


.■fc-.-^n- 


««t- 


'  x/ 


-t-'u'-'&.l' "^  - 

•4.'  ■>; 

';:^  "'^-  •'«;-  ■'^^  . 

,.  A:5_...~^.S-  ■     .-. 

■ -s^^-^  ■■■■■ 

■  ■.■.■>*.  .'-^  ■ 


Mctrvs   0 


'f^wwN^wm'i:(;  r(M 


K  S.-. 


rfto  .'•^ 


*.&rv 


S^" 


'■«^- 


_i3z; 


,1,.  ■  ■■•.':.■••..„;•."■,■  „.-'*■ 


To /ace  page  78. 


D,   PLATE    I.— PLAN   OF  THE   LARARIUM,    MOUND   D. 


EXCAVATIONS   IN   THE   MOUND   D.  79 

had  been  by  wooden  steps,  which  have  long  since  disappeared, 
leaving  no  trace  of  their  existence. 

The  masonry  of  this  building,  constructed  in  the  small 
cubic  stones  used  by  the  Romans,  was  not  by  any  means  so 
carefully  finished  as  those  found  under  the  Mounds  B  and  C. 
It  had  a  much  older  appearance.  The  floor  was  of  a  hard 
concrete,  formed  from  argillaceous  earth  and  small  water-worn 
pebbles. 

The  following  objects  were  found  during  the  excavation 
of  this  mound.  On  the  outside  of  the  building,  near  the 
entrance,  a  pair  of  iron  compasses,  very  much  oxidised.  (D, 
pi.  II.  fig.  I,  natural  size.) 

Several  fragments  of  wall  plaster  painted  blood-red. 

Several  fragments  of  pottery,  in  fine  gray  paste,  well  fired, 
ornamented  with  a  red  trellis-work  in  relief,  on  a  dark 
ground.     (D.  pi.  II.  fig.  2,  natural  size.) 

On  the  outside  of  the  west  wall  of  the  building  several 
fragments  of  pottery,  which  served  to  reconstruct  the  form  of 
a  bowl,  in  reddish-brown  paste,  of  rude  workmanship,  and 
badly  fired.     (D,  pi.  II.  fig.  3.) 

Fragments  of  statuettes,  in  white  terra-cotta,  of  the  god- 
dess of  maternity,  and  of  Venus  Anadyomene.  (D,  pi.  IV., 
v.,  and  VI.) 

On  the  outside  of  the  north  wall  of  the  building  : 
Fragments  of  coarse  pottery,  in  gray  and  brownish-black 
paste,  badly  fired. 

On  the  outside  of  the  east  wall  of  the  building  : 
Fragments  of  statuettes,  in  white  terra-cotta,  of  the  god- 
dess of  maternity,  and  of  the  Venus  Anadyomene. 


80  THE   BOSSENNO. 

Fragments  of  a  vase,  in  yellow  paste,  having  a  three-lobed 
mouth.     (D,  pi.  II.  fig.  4.) 

Several  fragments  of  rude  pottery,  and  bottoms  and  rims 
of  vases,  in  gray  and  brown  paste,  badly  fired. 

In  clearing  out  the  interior  of  the  building  there  were 
found  in  the  passage  or  enceinte  on  the  south  side  : 

A  small  piece  of  a  marble  slab,  red,  with  white  veins. 

Fragments  of  vases,  in  coarse  yellowish-red  paste. 

Part  of  the  handle  of  a  vase,  having  vertical  strice  in 
relief,  separated  by  lines  of  little  holes  which  perforate  the 
handle;  paste  dark  brown.     (D,  pi.  II.  fig.  5.) 

The  upper  part  of  a  vase  with  a  wide  mouth,  having  a 
rude  ornament  formed  on  the  neck  by  the  prints  of  the  potter's 
fingers,  in  coarse  paste,  and  badly  fired.     (D,  pi.  III.  fig.  i.) 

Several  fragments  of  the  same  kind,  with  which  two  similar 
vases  were  reconstructed.  The  smallness  of  the  prints  of  the 
potter's  fingers  on  all  these  vases  leads  one  to  suppose  that 
they  had  been  made  by  women.  In  the  potteries  of  Malansac 
and  Rieux  in  Brittany  it  is  the  women  who  make  and  fire  all 
the  varieties  of  the  coarser  domestic  pottery  manufactured  in 
these  establishments  ;  while  the  work  of  the  men  is  limited  to 
preparing  the  paste  and  modelling  the  larger  and  heavier 
vases,  as  has  been  already  described.  Brogniart,  in  his  Traitd 
dcs  Arls  Ccramiqties,  gives  a  very  interesting  description  of 
this  manufacture. 

In  the  passage  on  the  east  side  : 
'•    Fragments  of  coarse  pottery,  and  of  statuettes  in  terra-cotta. 

The  tooth  of  a  bear,  hollowed  out  and  perforated  with  a 
hole  at  the  half  of  its  length,  so  as  to  form  a  sort  of  whistle 
or  hunting-call.     (D,  pi.  III.  fig.  2,  natural  size.) 


m 


To  fuel  fait  So. 


D,  PLATE  II. 


-'-^t^ 


To  face  page  8i. 


D,    PLATE    II 


EXCAVATIONS   IN  THE   MOUND   D.  81 

Within  the  inner  square: 

The  half  of  a  stone  axe  or  hammer,  in  polished  granite, 
having  a  hole  perforated  for  the  handle. 


A  necklace  bead  in  black  glass,  opaque,  ornamented  with 
circular  bands  in  white  enamel,  one  of  which  is  undulating. 
(D,  pi.  III.  fig.  3,  natural  size.) 

A  few  fragments  of  thin  clear  glass. 

Fragments  of  pottery,  from  which  the  three  following 
vases  were  reconstructed  : — 

A  sort  of  bowl,  6  inches  in  diameter,  2^  inches  deep,  in 
coarse  brown  paste,  badly  fired ;  sides  thick  and  nearly 
vertical;  rim  with  a  bevelled  edge.     (D,  pi.  III.  fig.  4.) 

A  flat  dish,  9^  inches  in  diameter,  i^  inch  deep,  in 
coarse  brown  paste,  badly  fired,  and  with  deep  bevelled  edges. 
(D,pl.  III.  fig.  5.) 

A  flat  dish,  diameter  10^  inches,  depth  |  inch,  in  fine  blue 
paste,  well  fired,  of  nearly  the  same  form  as  the  preceding 


82  THE   BOSSENNO. 

vase,  but  having   the   sides   more  spread  out.      (D,  pi.    III. 
fig.  6.) 

Numerous  fragments,  in  white  terra-cotta,  of  statuettes  of 
the  Venus  Anadyomene  and  of  the  Goddess  of  Maternity. 

Many  of  the  fragments  of  statuettes  found  inside  the 
building  united  exactly  with  those  found  on  the  outside,  and 
thus  enabled  me  in  a  measure  to  complete  the  various 
statuettes  figured  in  the  accompanying  engravings.  (D,  pi. 
IV.  V.  and  VI.,  one  fourth  of  the  actual  size.) 

These  statuettes  are  not  exactly  alike,  and  although  rudely 
modelled,  are  not  entirely  destitute  of  artistic  feeling.  The 
Venus  Anadyomene  is  represented  standing  on  a  hemi- 
spherical base,  the  right  hand  twining  the  long  tresses  of 
hair,  whilst  the  left  holds  the  drapery.  The  goddess  of 
maternity  is  represented  by  a  female  figure  clothed  in  a 
long  tunic,  seated  in  a  sort  of  arm-chair  formed  of  wicker 
work.  In  some  figures  she  is  represented  suckling  one,  in 
others,  two  infants. 

Similar  statuettes,  which  have  been  found  in  many  parts 
of  France,  have  been  described  by  M.  Mazard  in  his  de- 
scriptive study  of  the  ceramics  of  the  Museum  of  Gallo- Roman 
Antiquities  at  St.  Germain-en-Laye,  as  imitations  of  Greek 
and  Roman  statues.  Other  writers  speak  of  them  as  repre- 
senting Latona,  the  protectress  of  mothers  and  nurses ; 
Lucina,  who  presided  at  accouchements ;  and  also  as  repre- 
senting Leda,  Juno,  and  even  Isis.  De  -Caumont  states  that 
sometimes  these  have  been  taken  for  statues  of  the  blessed 
Virgin,  and  that  in  some  places  their  discovery  has  been 
Regarded  as  miraculous,  and  has  given  rise  to  pilgrimages.'"' 

*  Ere  Gallo-romaine,  2de  edition,  p.  586.  Par.  M.  A.  de  Caumont 
Caen,  1870.     F.  le  Blanc  Hardel. 


H 
Z 

H 

I 


X 


o 


i 


Ed 
H 


4 


EXCAVATIONS   IN   THE   MOUND    D.  83 

The  reunion  here  of  so  many  statuettes  representing  the 
same  divinity  leads  me  to  suppose  that  the  little  temple  in 
which  they  were  found  had  been  dedicated  to  Venus 
Genetrix.  The  pedestal,  of  which  the  base  w£is  found  ?'« 
siiu,  supported,  in  all  probability,  a  statue  of  this  goddess, 
and  one  may  look  upon  the  numerous  small  statuettes  as 
votive  offerings  which  had  been  deposited,  and  of  which 
some  had  been  broken  and  others  carried  off,  and  with  these 
the  principal  statue,  at  the  time  of  the  pillage  and  destruction 
of  the  Bossenno. 

M.  Tudot  finds  a  proof  that  the  worship  of  Venus  was 
general  among  the  Gauls,  from  the  reproach  addressed  by 
Saint  Augustine  to  his  contemporaries,  that  they  filled  a 
lararium  with  divinities,  amongst  whom  Venus  always  pre- 
sided/"' 

The  pottery  found  in  the  Mound  D  is  of  a  different 
character  from  that  found  in  the  Mounds  A,  B,  and  C.  It  is 
nearly  all  of  primitive  forms,  badly  fired,  in  a  coarse  paste, 
which  had  a  greasy  unctuous  feeling  to  the  touch.  The 
weight  of  the  fragments  collected  was  27  lbs. 

The  earth  we  removed  from  the  interior  of  this  building 
was  laid  aside  and  afterwards  passed  through  sieves.  This 
operation  yielded  thirteen  Roman  coins.  This  is  a  much 
greater  number  than  were  found  in  the  Mounds  B  and  C. 
May  we  suppose  of  these,  as  of  the  small  statuettes,  that  they 
had  been  offerings  made  to   the  presiding   divinity  of  the 

*  Collection  de  figurines  in  argile,  oeuvres  premieres  de  I'art  Gauloise, 
avec  les  noms  des  ceramistes  qui  les  ont  executees,  par  Edmond  Tudot,  p. 
270.     Paris  :  RoUin  et  Feuardent. 


84  THE  BOSSENNO. 

temple  ?  These  coins  are  all  in  bronze,  and  embrace  a  period 
of  184  years,  from  the  year  a.d.  169,  the  date  of  the  third 
consulate  of  Marcus  Aurelius,  to  a.d.  353,  the  epoch  of  the 
death  of  Magnentius.  The  following  is  a  detailed  description 
of  these  coins  in  chronological  order  : — 
Two  of  Marcus  Aurelius,  large  brass. 

1.  M.  ANTONINVS.  AVG.  TR.  P.  XXIII.  (Marcus 
Antoninus  tribunitice  potestate  23°.)  The  head  laurelled, 
turned  to  the  right. 

Reverse:  SALVTI.  AVG.  COS.  III.  S,  C.  (Saluti 
Augusti  consul  tertium  senatus  consulto.)  Health,  erect,  and 
turned  to  the  left,  holds  a  sceptre  and  sacrificial  cup,  in  which 
a  serpent  drinks.     (922,  J.  C.  169.)     (Cohen,  618.) 

2.  M.  ANTONINVS.  AVG.  TR.  P.  XXVII.  (Marcus 
Antoninus  Augustus  tribunitiee  potestate  27.)  Bust  laurelled 
and  turned  to  the  right. 

Reverse:  RELIG.  AVG.;  on  the  exergue  IMP.  VI. 
COS.  III.;  on  the  field  S.  C.  (Religio  Augusti.  Imperator 
sexto  consul  tertium,  Senatus  consulto.)  Mercury  turned  to 
the  left,  erect,  on  a  pedestal,  holding  a  caduceus.  An  exchange 
in  a  temple,  with  four  columns  and  arches.  The  four  columns 
on  the  pediment  are  represented,  a  turtle,  a  ram,  a  caduceus, 
a  cock,  a  plumed  helmet,  and  a  purse.  Eckhel  explains, 
according  to  Diodorus  Siculus,  the  reason  why  Mercury  is 
represented  as  the  type  of  religion  on  the  coins  of  Marcus 
Aurelius.  "In  Egypt  Mercury  was  the  director  of  the  wor- 
ship of  the  gods  and  of  sacrifices."  (Cohen,  614;  Liv.  i., 
chap,  xvi.) 

•I 

A  large  brass  of  Septimius  Severus,  very  much  defaced. 

Four  of  Gallienus,  small  brass. 


EXCAVATIONS   IN   THE   MOUND   D.  85 

1.  GALLIENVS.  AVG.  (Gallienus  Augustus.)  Bust 
radiated,  turned  to  the  right,  with  a  cuirass. 

Reverse:  FORTVNA  REDVX.  (Fortuna  redux.) 
Fortune  erect,  turned  to  the  left,  holding  a  rudder  and 
cornucopia. 

2,  3,  4.  GALLIENVS.  AVG.  (Gallienus  Augustus.) 
Bust  radiated,  turned  to  the  right,  with  cuirass. 

Reverse:  MARTI  PACIFERO.  (Marti  pacifero.) 
Mars  helmeted,  erect,  turned  to  the  left,  holding  an  olive 
branch,  leaning  on  a  shield  ;  his  spear  placed  on  his  left  arm, 
in  the  field  A.     (Cohen,  354.) 

A  small  brass  of  Tetricus  the  elder,  much  defaced. 

Two  of  Tetricus  the  younger,  small  brass,  both  alike. 

C.  P.  E.  TETRICVS.  CAES.  (Caius  Pius  Esuvius 
Tetricus  Caesar.)  Head  radiated,  turned  to  the  right,  with 
the  paludamentum. 

Reverse:  PIETAS.  AVGVSTO.  (Pietas  Augustorum.) 
Aspersor,  simpulum,  sacrificial  vase  turned  to  the  left,  sacri- 
ficial knife  and  divining  rod.     (Cohen,  32.) 

A  small  brass  of  Constans  I. 

D.  N.  CONSTANS.  P.  F.  AVG.  (Dominus  noster 
Constans  Pius  Felix  Augustus.)  Bust,  with  diadem,  turned 
to  the  right,  with  the  paludamentum  and  cuirass. 

Reverse:  FEL.  TEMP.  REPARATIO.  (Felix  tem- 
porum  reparatio.)  Constans  erect,  to  the  left,  in  military 
costume,  on  a  vessel  going  to  the  left,  holding  a  globe  sur- 
mounted by  a  phoenix  and  imperial  standard  ;  to  the  right,  on 
the  vessel.  Victory,  seated,  holds  the  rudder  and  regards  the 
emperor.     (Cohen,  114.) 


86 


THE   BOSSENNO. 


A  second  brass  of  Magnentius. 

IMP.  CAE.  MAGNENTIVS  AVG.  (ImperatorCsesar 
Magnentius  Augustus.)  Bust  nude,  turned  to  the  right, 
with  the  paludamentum. 

Reverse:  PEL.  TEMP.  REPARATIO.  (FeHx  tem- 
porum  reparatio.)  Magnentius  in  military  costume  erect, 
turned  to  the  left,  on  a  vessel  going  to  the  left,  holding  a 
Victory  and  the  imperial  standard.  To  the  right,  on  the 
vessel,  Victory  seated  holding  the  rudder.     (Cohen,  35.) 


LECH  AT  PLOUHARNEL. 


VI. 
EXCAVATIONS    IN    THE    MOUND   E. 


■>'^''v>i" •■{IVAH 


00 


o 

o 

OS 

CD  83 
a  00 


J 


OR 


.TL., 


■  mt M^^itafti^Wfn 


I 


^NorcL--^^-. 


.V.^.w/.f.'-, 


-■.vvi'.'J'.'.'ri" 


■■"v.Vv;','-''-'"''''- 

"-■' .'iF^- :■.■■.■..■' 


£  Morteio  so. 


E,  PLATE   I.-PLAN  OF  THE  VILLA  AGRARIA. 


THE    MOUND    E 


The  Mound  E,  of  an  oblong  form,  and  covered  with  dwarf 
trees  and  bushes,  measured  66  feet  from  north  to  south,  33 
feet  from  east  to  west,  and  had  an  average  height  of  6  feet. 
It  was  situated  to  the  west  of  the  Mound  B,  and  lay  nearly 
parallel  to  it.  Corn-fields  surrounded  it  on  the  north,  south, 
and  west  sides,  and  a  road  passed  along  the  east  side.  The 
exploration  of  this  mound  was  commenced  on  the  23d  July 

1875- 

The  remains  of  the  walls  of  a  house  were  soon  exposed, 

built  with  the  small  cubic  stones  used  by  the  Romans,  bound 
with  lime  mortar,  and  having  at  intervals  a  layer  of  large 
bricks.  It  soon  became  evident  that  these  ruins  had  been 
encroached  upon  by  the  cultivation  of  the  surrounding  corn- 
fields, and  by  the  formation  of  the  road,  both  of  which  had 
destroyed  the  walls  in  several  places.  Afterwards,  when  the 
mounds  E  and  F  had  been  excavated,  and  the  buildings  found 
under  them  exposed  to  view,  we  could  see  that  the  walls  of  E, 
if  prolonged  to  F,  would  join  exactly  to  the  buildings  found 
under  that  mound.  The  proprietors  of  the  corn-fields  kindly 
permitted  a  few  holes  to  be  dug  after  the  harvest  was  over, 
and  in  these,  at  a  depth  of  3  feet  6  inches,  the  continuation  of 
the  foundations  of  the  wall  between  E  and  F  were  found. 
In  the  adjoining  field,  on  the  north  side  of  the  building,  it  was 


90  THE  BOSSENNO. 

found,  in  a  similar  way,  that  the  foundations  of  the  walls  were 
also  prolonged  to  the  north. 

Permission  could  not  be  obtained  to  pursue  these  researches 
in  a  regular  way,  and  this  prevents  my  being  able  to  give 
either  the  complete  form  of  the  building,  or  to  indicate  with 
certainty  the  destination  of  the  different  apartments.  The 
accompanying  ground-plan  of  the  Mound  E  represents  these 
ruins  in  the  state  in  which  they  were  when  newly  excavated, 
and  the  following  description  of  the  different  rooms  is  given 
in  the  order  in  which  they  were  discovered. 

In  the  room  No.  i  the  west  and  south  walls  alone  remained, 
and  of  these  only  four  or  five  courses  of  masonry.  There  was 
neither  plaster  on  the  walls  nor  cement  on  the  floor,  which, 
however,  was  sufficiently  hard  and  had  been  formed  apparently 
from  beaten  earth.  The  walls  were  in  a  bad  state  of  preserva- 
tion, as  were  all  the  other  walls  of  this  house.  A  large 
quantity  of  Roman  roofing-tiles  {tegul^  and  imbj'ices),  for 
the  most  part  broken  in  fragments,  lay  scattered  on  the  floor. 
There  were  also  to  be  seen,  as  in  all  the  buildings  hitherto 
explored,  the  unmistakable  proofs  of  the  fire  which  had 
destroyed  them. 

The  division  No.  2  extended  along  the  west  side  of  the 
building,  and  seemed,  judging  from  a  few  faint  traces  on  the 
floor,  to  have  been  divided  into  a  number  of  small  rooms. 
The  west  wall  had  only  its  two  lower  courses  remaining,  so 
that  it  was  impossible  to  ascertain  whether  there  had  been  any 
doors  on  this  side.  The  east  wall  had  some  portions  of  the 
plaster  which  had  once  covered  it  still  adhering,  and  the  fact 
that  it  was  not  bonded  at  the  corners  of  the  room  No.  4 
indicated  that  that  room  had  been  constructed  before  the  other 
parts  of  the  house. 


EXCAVATIONS   IN   THE  MOUND   E.  91 

The  room  No.  3  measured  20  feet  9  inches  in  length  by 
8  feet  3  inches  in  breadth.  Three  courses  of  masonry  alone 
remained  of  the  north  wall.  The  south  and  west  walls  had  an 
average  height  of  3  feet  6  inches,  and  were  in  a  better  state  of 
preservation.  A  few  pieces  of  plaster  remained  adhering  to 
the  south  wall.  No  trace  of  even  the  foundation  of  a  wall 
was  found  on  the  east  side.  The  floor  was  formed  of  a 
mixture  of  earth  and  small  water-worn  pebbles.  In  the  middle 
of  this  room  the  foundation  of  a  wall  in  large  roughly-dressed 
stones  traversed  the  apartment  in  a  slightly  slanting  direction. 
The  top  of  these  stones  was  about  six  inches  above  the  level 
of  the  floor. 

The  room  No.  4  measured  19  feet  in  length  by  17  feet  in 
breadth.  The  average  height  of  what  remained  of  the  walls 
was  2  feet  9  inches.  It  was  larger  and  in  a  better  state  of 
preservation  than  any  of  the  other  rooms  of  this  building. 
A  doorway  on  the  east  side  gave  access  from  the  exterior.  The 
walls  had  been  covered  with  plaster,  and  on  the  floor,  which 
was  similar  to  that  of  the  room  No.  3,  was  the  continuation  of 
the  foundation  of  the  wall  described  in  connection  with  that 
room.  This  foundation  was  afterwards  found  to  be  continued  in 
the  floors  of  the  rooms  Nos.  5  and  6.  On  the  right-hand  side 
of  this  foundation,  in  the  room  No.  4,  was  a  piece  of  masonry 
of  an  oblong  form,  the  stones  of  which  were  reddened  by  the 
action  of  fire.  It  was  covered  with  cinders,  scoriae,  and  lumps 
of  iron,  and  seemed  to  be  the  remains  of  a  furnace  or  forge. 

The  room  No.  5  measured  20  feet  9  inches  in  length  by 
8  feet  3  inches  in  breadth.  No  trace  of  a  wall  was  found 
on  the  east  side ;  those  remaining  on  the  north,  south,  and 
west  side  had  an  average  height  of  3  feet.     A  doorway  in 


92 


THE   BOSSENNO. 


the  south  wall  gave  access  to  the  room  No.  6.      No  trace  of 
plaster  was  found  on  the  walls  nor  of  cement  on  the  floor. 

The  dimensions  of  the  room  No.  6  could  not  be  ascer- 
tained, as  it  extended  under  the  adjoining  field,  where  I  had  no 
permission  to  continue  the  diggings.  The  floor  was  formed 
of  earth  and  small  rounded  water-worn  pebbles. 

The  room  No.  7  was  under  the  same  conditions  as  No.  6. 
The  floor  was  exceedingly  hard. 

The  following  objects  were  found  in  working  round  the 
outside,  and  in  clearing  out  the  different  rooms  of  this 
buildinor  ; — 


.  Two  fragments  of  a  curious  brick,  in  grayish  earth,  pierced 
with  circular  holes  and  having  their  exterior  edges  polished 
by  friction,  were  found  on  the  east  side  of  the  building,  at  the 
foot  of  the  wall  of  the  room  No.  4. 


To  face  page  93. 


K.  PLATE  II. 


EXCAVATIONS    IN   THE   MOUND   E.  93 

This  brick  had  formed  one  of  a  series  which  admitted  of 
being  placed  in  and  withdrawn  from  the  window  of  an  apart- 
ment into  which  the  round  holes  served  to  circulate  light  and 
air.  Two  similar  bricks  were  found  by  M.  Parenteau  in  the 
diggings  at  Pouzauges.* 

Near  these  fragments  of  a  brick  were  the  following 
objects  : — 

A  pestle  or  rubbing-stone  in  granite,  length  5^  inches. 
(E,  pi.  II.  fig.  I.) 

Part  of  a  small  cup,  3^  inches  in  diameter,  in  iridescent 
glass.       (E,  pi.  II.  fig.  2.) 

Pieces  of  an  iron  sword-blade,  very  much  oxidised. 

Iron  clamps  and  nails  of  different  sizes. 

In  the  room  No.  i  : 

Fragment  of  a  thin  bronze  plate,  2  inches  long,  covered 
with  a  fine  patina,  and  having  two  rivets  affixed. 

Numerous  discs  formed  from  brick  tiles,  similar  to  those 
found  in  the  Mounds  B  and  C,  varying  in  diameter  from  i^ 
inch  to  3^  inches. 

Several   fragments   of  pottery   of  Celtic   type,   in  coarse 

*  "  Grande  brique  en  terre  cuite  niodel^e  h  la  main,  i  base  large.  Elle 
est  percee  de  grands  trous  dispose's  rcgulierenient  sur  une  ligne  circulaire ; 
ses  deux  faces  sont  couvertes  d'omements  graves  en  creux,  avec  une  pointe 
seche,  avant  la  cuisson,  et  faisait  partie  d'un  tout  compose  de  deux  briques 
semblables  placces  I'une  sur  I'autre,  et  dont  Ics  trous  se  raccordaient  Les 
dessins  offrent  la  plus  grande  analogic  avec  les  feuilles  de  fougeres  de  notre 
pays,  et  les  guillochures  des  bracelets  gaulois,  que  Ton  rencontre  sou  vent 
dans  nos  contrees.  Cette  brique  a  ete  ramassee  par  moi  sous  les  ruines  du 
vicus  de  Bournigal,  au  pied  du  vieux  chateau  de  Pouzauges  (Vendee),  parmi 
des  debris  gaulois  sans  nombre  :  murs  construits  en  pierres  sechcs  ;  fragments 
de  poteries,  dpees,  fers  de  flfeches  et  poignard  en  fer." — £ssat  sur  des  Poteries 
antiques  deroucst  de  la  France,  par  F.  Parenteau.     Nantes,  1865. 


94  THE   BOSSENNO. 

orange-coloured    paste,  decorated  with    close    vertical    striae 
engraved  by  hand.     (E,  pi.  II.  fig.  3,  natural  size.) 

Several  fragments  of  large  amphor^e  in  a  yellow  paste. 

In  the  room  No.  2  : 

A  large  quantity  of  the  bones  of  ruminants,  teeth  of  the 
ox  and  pig,  and  shells  of  edible  molluscs. 

A  bodkin  in  polished  bone  similar  to  those  found  in  the 
Mounds  B  and  C ;  length  9  inches. 

The  upper  part  of  a  vase,  larger  diameter  4^  inches,  in  a 
grayish-brown  paste,  having  a  large  trilobed  orifice  ;  the  handle, 
with  cords  in  relief,  joins  on  to  the  edge  of  the  rim.  (E,  pi. 
II.  fig.  4.)  Vases  of  this  form  are  to  this  day  manufactured  in 
Brittany :  the  orifice  is  obtained  by  the  compression  of  the 
anterior  part  of  the  neck  by  the  thumb  and  forefinger. 

In  the  room  No.  3  : 

Numerous  discs  formed  from  tiles,  diameter  i-^  and  3-J 
inches. 

Several  nails  and  pieces  of  rod  iron,  much  oxidised. 

Several  fragments  of  cups  and  bottles  in  white  and  blue 
glass. 

In  the  room  No.  4 : 

A  small  pestle  formed  of  granite. 

Fragment  of  an  ornament  cut  in  rock  crystal. 

A  rounded  flint  stone  like  a  beach  pebble,  perforated  by  a 
circular  hole,  in  which  a  bronze  ring  is  inserted.  This  curious 
object  may  probably  have  been  worn  as  an  amulet. 

A  bronze  object,  use  unknown,  but  possibly  intended  to 
be  worn  as  an  ornament.  This  interesting  piece  of  fine  work- 
manship   is    formed    by    flat    bands    forming    an    equilateral 


To /ace  page  95. 


E,  PLATE    III.. 


EXCAVATIONS   IN  THE  MOUND   E.  95 

triangle,  and  at  the  angles,  circles  and  dragons'  heads.  The 
base  is  formed  by  another  band  forming  a  cross  with  four 
circles  cut  open.  The  whole  object  is  engraved  with  an  orna- 
mentation in  lines  and  points.    (E,  pi.  III.  fig.  2,  natural  size.) 

A  Roman  coin,  second  brass,  re-struck.  Part  of  what 
appears  to  have  been  a  tin  buckle. 

A  statuette  in  bronze  was  found  in  the  south-east  corner 
of  this  room  which  somewhat  resembles  the  small  statuettes 
of  the  bull  Apis  exhibited  in  the  Egyptian  rooms  of  the 
British  Museum,  and  also  in  the  Museum  of  the  Louvre. 
The  chromo-lithograph  E,  pi.  VI.,  represents  this  curious 
object,  natural  size.  It  will  be  further  alluded  to  at  the 
conclusion  of  this  chapter. 

A  quantity  of  iron  rings,  clamps,  nails,  and  pieces  of 
rod  iron,  were  scattered  about  near  the  construction  which 
resembled  a  forge  or  furnace. 

An  iron  lance  or  arrow  head,  having  a  hollow  stem  for 
receiving  the  shaft,  much  oxidised.  (E,  pi.  III.  fig.  3,  natural 
size.) 

A  large  iron  hook,  apparently  a  fishing-hook,  much  oxi- 
dised.    (E,  pi.  III.  fig.  4,  natural  size.) 

An  iron  knife,  much  oxidised.  (E,  pi.  III.  fig.  5,  natural 
size.) 

Several  pieces  of  ironwork,  which  seemed  to  have  been 
door  fastenings. 

Neck  of  a  bottle  in  bluish-coloured  glass,  and  a  few  frag- 
ments, some  of  fine  clear  glass,  and  others  of  a  blue  colour. 

Several  whorls  rudely  formed  of  a  coarse  red  paste,  having 
in  some  cases  the  holes  which  perforated  them  situated  near 
the  edge  and  obliquely  inclined ;  similar  to  those  already 
alluded  to  in  the  Mounds  B  and  C,  as  having  been  probably 
used  by  fishermen. 


96  THE   BOSSENNO. 

Numerous  fragments  of  rudely-formed  pottery  of  Celtic 
type  in  a  grayish-brown  micaceous  paste. 

In  the  room  No.  5  : 

Three  pestles  or  rubbing-stones  in  granite  from  5  to  6 
inches  in  length. 

A  signet  ring  in  bronze.  (E,  pi.  III.  fig.  6,  natural  size.) 
This  ring  contains  a  setting  in  blue  glass,  on  which  is  engraved 

the  accompanying  figure,    [)a') 

Fragments  of  pottery  in  a  brownish  paste,  from  which 
a  hemispherically-shaped  cup  was  constructed ;  diameter  6 
inches,  height  3^  inches,  having  a  collar  on  the  exterior  of 
the  rim,  and  another  rim  lapping  over  from  the  middle  part 
of  the  vase.     (E,  pi.  IV.  fig.  i.) 

A  bowl,  also  reconstructed,  7  inches  in  diameter  and  3 
inches  in  height,  in  a  reddish-yellow  paste,  having  a  hemi- 
spherical base  and  vertical  sides.  On  the  middle  part  are 
three  collars  in  relief,  the  intervals  between  which  are  orna- 
mented with  diagonal  striae  cut  hollow.     (E,  pi.  IV.  fig.  2.) 

Fragment  of  a  vase  in  red  paste,  having  a  vitreous  glazing, 
bearing  in  relief  the  figure  of  the  sea-horse.  (E,  pi.  V.  fig.  i, 
natural  size.) 


Bottom  of  a  vase  in  red  lustrous  ware,  on  which  is  the 
potter's  mark,  represented  in  the  accompanjing  engraving. 


E,  PLATE  IV. 


To  face  page  97. 


E,   PLATE  V. 


EXCAVATIONS    IN   THE   MOUND   E.  97 

Fragment  of  Celtic  pottery  in  brownish-gray  paste,  orna- 
mented with  points  and  horizontal  lines  incised.  (E,  pi.  IV. 
fig.  3,  natural  size.) 

In  the  room  No.  6  : 

Several  fragments  of  vases  in  red  lustrous  ware  of  the 
same  kind  as  those  figured  in  the  engraving,  B,  pi.  XIV. 
fig.  2. 

Fragment  of  a  vase  in  gray  paste,  pierced  with  small 
circular  holes  which  had  been  made  after  the  firing.  (E,  pi. 
V.  fig.  2,  natural  size.) 

Fragment  of  Celtic  pottery  in  brownish-gray  paste,  orna- 
mented with  a  large  band  of  juxtaposed  undulating  lines, 
incised.     (E,  pi.  IV.  fig.  4,  natural  size.) 

In  the  room  No.  7  : 

One  half  of  the  bottom  of  a  vase  in  red  lustrous  ware, 
bearing  part  of  the  potter's  stamp. 


Several  fragments  in  red  lustrous  ware,  ornamented  in 
relief  with  garlands  and  running  animals. 

Several  other  fragments,  also  of  Gallo- Roman  type,  in  a 
fine  yellow  paste,  having  a  black  vitreous  glazing,  ornamented 
with  figures,  etc.,  in  relief,  two  of  which  are  represented  (E, 
pi.  V.  figs.  3  and  4,  natural  size). 

Several  fragments  of  a  vase  of  similar  type  to  the  two 

preceding  specimens  were  found  at  the  foot  of  the  wall  on 

the  outside  of  the  house,  near  the  entrance  of  the  room  No.  4  ; 

H 


98  THE   BOSSENNO. 

represented  for  comparison  with  the  others  (E,  pi.  V.  fig.  5, 
natural  size). 

The  fragments  of  pottery  collected  in  the  Mound  E 
weighed  196  lbs.  net. 

Having  now  finished  the  enumeration  of  the  objects  found 
under  the  Mound  E,  I  may  be  permitted  to  revert  to  the 
statuette  of  an  ox  in  bronze  (E,  pi.  VI.)  found  in  the  room 
No.  4,  and  as  having  some  connection  therewith  to  narrate 
some  customs  still  observed  at  Carnac,  which  would  appear 
to  have  been  handed  down  from  a  very  remote  epoch. 

When  the  statuette  was  found  in  the  corner  of  the  room, 
the  workmen  all  crowded  round  it  in  a  state  of  excitement, 
and  exclaimed,  "  Here  is  a  discovery ;  we  have  found  the  ox 
of  St.  Carnely." 

This  requires  an  explanation.  The  patron  Saint  of  the 
parish  of  Carnac  is  Saint  Cornelius,  the  protector  of  bestial, 
who  is  supposed  to  have  been  pope  during  the  third  century. 

In  the  Breton  dialect  of  Carnac  his  name  is  pronounced 
Carndly. 

The  great  fete  of  the  year  at  Carnac  is  the  anniversary  of 
Saint  Carnely,  which  takes  place  at  the  autumnal  equinox. 
A  pilgrimage,  or  as  it  is  named  in  Brittany,  the  pardon  of  St. 
Carnely,  is  then  held,  and  goes  on  for  a  week.  Numerous 
services  are  held  in  the  church,  and  processions  march  from 
the  church  with  banners  flying  to  the  fountain  of  St.  Carnely 
(E,  pi.  VII.),  and  thence  round  the  village.  A  fair  is  held  in 
a  field  adjoining  the  village  for  the  sale  of  bestial  ;  the  streets 
are  lined  with  booths,  shows,  merry-go-rounds,  and  the  usual 
accompaniments  of  a  country  fair.  Numerous  pilgrims  resort 
to  this  from  all  parts  of  Brittany,  clad  in  the  costumes  of  their 
respective  districts  ;  they  come  to  implore  the  protection  of 
Saint  Carnely  for  their  bestial. 


u 

N 

z 
o 


o 

u. 
o 


s 


k 


EXCAVATIONS   IN  THE   MOUND   E.  99 

On  arriving  at  Carnac  they  at  once  enter  the  church  and 
kneel  down  before  a  gilded  bust  containing  the  relics  of  Saint 
Carnely  ;  thence  they  proceed  to  the  outside,  where  a  numerous 
band  of  mendicants  assail  them  with  cries  and  lamentations 
for  alms.  These  are  granted  sometimes  on  the  conditions 
that  the  recipient  makes  the  round  of  the  church  on  his  knees. 
The  pilgrims  then  proceed  slowly,  solemnly,  and  in  silence, 
round  the  outside  of  the.  church.  They  kneel  down  before  a 
statue  of  Saint  Carnely,  supported  by  two  oxen,  placed  above 
the  west  door,  and  repeat  inwardly  a  prayer ;  thence  they 
proceed  in  the  same  solemn  manner  to  the  fountain  of  Saint 
Carnely,  which  is  situated  about  200  yards  to  the  west  of  the 
church.  Here  numerous  boys  belonging  to  the  village,  for 
the  remuneration  of  a  few  sous,  present  them  with  bowls  of 
water  freshly  drawn  from  the  fountain.  The  pilgrims  kneel 
down  before  the  fountain,  taste  the  water,  wet  their  face  and 
hands,  and  then  elevating  their  hands  towards  heaven,  allow 
the  water  to  trickle  down  their  arms. 

When  this  ceremony  is  finished  they  return  in  the  same 
solemn  manner  to  the  church  ;  there  they  deposit  their  offer- 
ings in  the  box  placed  alongside  of  the  gilded  bust  of  the 
Saint ;  should  the  donation,  however,  happen  to  be  of  a 
considerable  amount,  it  is  placed  in  the  hands  of  the  church- 
warden, and  the  amount  is  named  from  the  pulpit  on  the 
following  Sunday. 

Another  curious  ceremony,  also  having  reference  to  the 
health  of  their  bestial,  is  sometimes  performed  by  the  peasants 
in  the  neighbourhood  of  Carnac.  It  is  called  the  nocturnal 
procession,  and  is  performed  generally  near  midnight. 

So  soon  as  the  cure  of  sick  animals  has  been  eftected,  the 
proprietors  arrange  for  a  nocturnal  procession. 

On  the  following  night  all  the  bestial  of  the  homestead 


100  THE   BOSSENNO. 

are  assembled,  and  the  procession  marches  solemnly,  and  in 
strict  silence  to  Carnac.  A  halt  is  made  before  the  north 
door  of  the  church,  where  the  conductors  kneel  down  and 
repeat  inwardly  a  prayer ;  thence  they  proceed  round  the 
church,  halting  at  the  west  door,  and  then  go  on  to  the 
fountain  of  St.  Carnely.  The  conductors  again  kneel  down 
for  a  few  minutes,  then  draw  water  from  the  fountain,  and 
pour  a  little  over  each  of  the  animals.  This  ceremony  over, 
the  procession  returns  to  the  north  door  of  the  church,  and 
thence  always  in  strict  silence  to  their  homes. 

Another  curious  custom  always  observed  in  Carnac  and 
the  neighbouring  communes  at  the  summer  solstice,  and  in 
which  also  the  bestial  are  made  to  perform  a  part,  is  the 
lighting  up  of  bonfires  in  the  evening,  after  sunset.  This  is 
called  in  the  Breton  of  Carnac  tan  heol  (the  fire  of  the  sun), 
and  also  tan  Sant  Jan  (the  fire  of  Saint  John). 

The  young  people  of  Carnac  go  from  house  to  house 
during  the  day,  receiving  contributions  of  faggots  of  wood  and 
bundles  of  furze,  which  they  transport  to  the  summit  of  the 
tumulus  or  cairn  which  tops  the  Mont  St.  Michel.  Towards 
sunset  numerous  spectators  proceed  there,  nearly  all  of  whom 
assist  in  preparing  the  bonfire. 

Just  as  the  sun  sets  long  clouds  of  smoke  are  seen  rolling 
along  the  ground  from  the  neighbourhood  of  adjoining  farms. 
If  you  ask  the  cause  of  all  this,  you  are  told  that  these  are 
fires  prepared  expressly  for  the  cattle,  with  green  broom  and 
fern,  so  as  to  produce  a  dense  smoke.  In  fact  it  is  at  this 
time  that  the  cattle  are  brought  home,  and  before  being 
housed  for  the  night  are  made  to  pass  across  these  fires, 
the  doing  of  which  is  supposed  to  preserve  them  from  all 
maladies  for  a  year  to  come. 

But  let  us  return  to  the  preparation  of  the  bonfire.     It  has 


id 


Z 


z 

D 
O 

b. 

U 

X 


u 
< 


EXCAVATIONS   IN  THE  MOUND   E,  101 

increased  in  size  rapidly,  many  willing  hands  lending  assistance, 
and  is  at  length  finished  ;  before  lighting,  however,  we  must 
wait  until  the  fires  of  the  surrounding  country  have  shone  out. 
These  soon  begin  to  shoot  out  from  every  direction,  at 
Quiberon,  Plouharnel,  Erdeven,  Ploemel,  Crach,  Locmariaker 
Arzon,  St.  Gildas  de  Rhuis,  in  the  islands  of  Houat,  Hedic, 
and  Belle  Isle, — everywhere,  as  far  as  the  eye  can  reach,  is  one 
immense  illumination. 

The  proper  moment  for  lighting  the  fire  of  the  Mont  St. 
Michel  has  arrived  ;  when  it  is  desired  to  honour  a  stranger, 
he  is  asked  to  set  fire  to  the  huge  pile  of  furze,  which,  blazing 
up  in  an  instant,  lightens  up  the  whole  hill  and  neighbourhood, 
amidst  shouts  of  joy  from  the  spectators. 


CROSS  ON  THE  MONT  ST    MICHEU 


VII. 
EXCAVATIONS    IN    THE   MOUND   F. 


»3 


:Nord 


3-:^ 


op  o 

i>— 1  mil    t^vi  iff 


^J      €iC3  >'^j  *^      *^ 


5       '1, 


12/3     "^-  -■ 


'«.,  ' 


-     ^i  "-"^  ^s-  <y^:  ^?s". '  "^  -.^  •.  ^" 

"^    €it>  r-,  ^i'   ^^    ?^£-'  -^^^     .^"S^^-  V--^' 

■■■-  •-w;.,j5^^^-^-  ^^^  ,;o  s§^  •  ■  -^^"-^ 


■Jr^  ■■■■■■' -    ■■■■.-'■■■■    -A^^^^SS.}^^'  --'^-n  -^^'^'^^'^' 

'K     ■■■■     --^y-  v^-.'-QA^'^-^-^j-*^"' ■■-•;.•■■:■■.■..:::- ■■••.v-.-j>- 


Mrtr«>  0 


Briluh  Imp!  Feet  0 


E  Moric%^  tc 


To  face  pngp  105. 


F,   PLATE   I— PLAN  OF  THE   BUILDINGS  IN  THE  MOUND  F. 


THE    MOUND    F. 


The  exploration  of  the  Mound  F  was  begun  on  the  loth  of 
August  1875.  It  consisted  of  several  irregular  heaps  of  earth 
covered  with  furze  and  brambles,  bounded  on  the  north  by  the 
road  already  mentioned  in  the  diggings  of  the  Mound  E,  and 
on  the  south  by  the  ancient  road  leading  from  Carnac  to  the 
Trinitd  sur  Men  The  widening  and  repairing  of  these  two 
roads,  and  the  extension  of  the  cultivated  fields  on  the  east 
side  of  the  Mound,  have  so  cut  in  upon  the  ruins  which  my 
diggings  have  exposed  to  view,  that  very  little  is  left  to  give 
an  idea  of  their  original  construction. 

The  ancient  road  just  mentioned  was  widened  and  repaired 
when  the  Duke  of  Nemours  passed  this  way  in  1842.  Whilst 
the  work  was  being  done,  there  were  discovered,  at  the  place 
where  it  passes  close  to  the  Mound  F,  remains  of  walls  built 
in  small  cubic  stones  bound  with  mortar,  Roman  roofing-tiles, 
and  numerous  fragments  of  pottery. 

It  was  not  until  1849  and  1850  that  the  new  road  between 
Carnac  and  the  Trinite  sur  Mer  was  made.  When  this  was 
being  executed,  there  were  discovered,  near  where  it  passes 
the  Bossenno  and  about  300  yards  to  the  north,  several  Roman 
coins,  one  of  which  was  in  gold,  having  on  one  side  the  figure 
of  a  horse,  on  the  other  the  effigy  of  Caligula.  Close  to  these 
were  found  remains  of  constructions  in  small  cubic  stones, 


106  THE   BOSSENNO. 

Roman  bricks  and  tiles,  and  numerous  fragments  of  different 
kinds  of  pottery.  These  discoveries  gave  rise  to  a  good  deal 
of  discussion  at  the  time  they  were  made,  but  nothing  was 
done  to  follow  up  such  sure  indications,  and  they  were  soon 
forgotten.  It  was  only  after  the  diggings  of  the  Mound  F 
were  commenced  that  I  first  heard  of,  and  subsequently 
verified,  the  above  statements. 

The  ground-plan  of  the  Mound  F  shows  the  state  of  the 
buildings  when  the  diggings  were  completed.  The  walls  of 
these  buildings  were  all  constructed  with  small  cubic  stones 
bonded  with  lime,  with  the  exception  of  the  wall  between  No. 
2  and  No.  4,  which  appeared  to  be  a  continuation  of  the 
southern  enceinte,  and  was  built  of  large  irregularly-shaped 
stones  bound  with  a  mortar  formed  of  mud  or  argillaceous 
earth. 

The  building  No.  6  was  first  excavated.  There  could  be 
little  doubt  as  to  its  having  been  used  as  a  blacksmith's  work- 
shop, for  a  construction  measuring  4  feet  in  length,  2  feet  10 
inches  in  breadth,  and  i  foot  10  inches  in  height,  which 
appeared  to  have  been  the  forge,  was  built  in  large  dressed 
stones  against  the  south  wall.  The  upper  surface  was  wasted 
and  reddened  in  the  part  which  had  been  occupied  as  the 
fireplace,  and  was  covered  with  lumps  of  iron,  scorise, 
ashes,  and  pieces  of  charcoal.  A  bar  of  iron  one  inch  in 
breadth  and  half  an  inch  in  depth  was  cemented  with  lead 
into  the  west  side  of  this  construction  just  above  the  lower 
course  of  masonry.  It  projected  for  twelve  inches,  and  ter- 
minated in  a  bend  extending  for  two  inches  at  right  angles. 
Clbse  to  the  forge  was  the  water-trough.  It  was  constructed 
against  the  west  wall  with  slabs  of  granite  bound  at  the  corners 
with  a  rose-coloured  cement. 

The  floors  of  all  the  building^s  found  under  the  Mound  F 


To  face  page  107. 


EXCAVATIONS   IN  THE  MOUND   F.  107 

were  formed  of  a  sort  of  concrete,  and,  with  the  exception  of 
No.  5,  were  covered  with  fragments  of  roofing-tiles,  charcoal, 
ashes,  and  the  debris  which  had  fallen  on  them  at  the  period 
when  they  had  been  burnt.  As  no  other  feature  worth 
mentioning  was  observed  in  the  buildings  Nos.  i,  2,  3,  4,  5,  I 
shall  now  proceed  with  the  enumeration  of  the  different  objects 
found  in  excavating  the  Mound  F. 

In  the  building  No.  i  : 

Several  fragments  of  common  pottery  in  gray  and  in  black 
paste. 

A  fine  polished  stone  axe  in  chloro-melanite  *  was  dis- 
covered in  the  angle  formed  by  the  two  walls.  This  fine 
specimen  was  unfortunately  much  injured  by  the  blow  of  the 
workman's  pick :  what  remains  of  it  measures  5  inches  in 
length  by  2\  inches  in  breadth. 

In  the  building  No.  2  : 

A  solid  bronze  ring  perforated  with  a  circular  hole.  (F, 
pi.  II.  fig.  I,  natural  size.) 

Fragment  of  a  small  object  in  bronze,  having  an  orna- 
mentation of  circles  and  points  engraved.  (F,  pi.  II.  fig.  2, 
natural  size.) 

Fragment  of  a  very  thin  bronze  plate  perforated  with  small 
circular  holes.     (F,  pi.  II.  fig.  3,  natural  size.) 

Several  other  smaller  fragments  of  the  same  description, 

*  Chloro-melanite  approaches  to  jadeite  in  its  hard,  dense,  and  fusible 
properties.  It  is  a  dark  green  mineral,  which  at  first  sight  appears  black, 
but  when  the  thin  edge  of  a  fracture  is  exposed  to  strong  light,  is  trans- 
parent and  green.  It  may  therefore  be  considered  as  a  variety  of  jadeite,  in 
which  a  certain  proportion  of  alumina  is  replaced  by  oxide  of  iron. — 
Damour. 


108  THE   BOSSENNO. 

and  another  fragment  plated  in  silver.  A  stem  of  iron  with  a 
round  bronze  head ;  this  seemed  to  have  formed  part  of  the 
handle  of  a  dagger, 

A  small  bronze  coin  of  Claudius  the  Second,  in  a  bad  state 
of  preservation. 

Two  small  bronze  coins,  illegible. 

Fragments  of  a  vase  in  fine  black  paste,  having  a  vitre- 
ous lustre,  large  mouth,  a  collar  on  the  exterior  of  the  rim ; 
badly  fired,  very  fragile.  The  glazing  dissolves  on  being 
washed.     Length  6  inches.     (F,  pi.  II.  fig.  4.) 

Handle  of  a  vase  in  red  paste,  the  ornamentation  formed 
by  twisting,  similar  to  that  figured  (B,  pi.  VIII.  fig.  3). 

Rims  of  terrines  in  a  fine  red  paste. 

The  neck  of  a  large  amphora  in  yellow  paste. 

Part  of  the  handle  of  a  similar  amphora. 

Bottom  of  a  vase  in  red  lustrous  ware  termed  Samian, 
ornamented  with  a  herring-bone  pattern  in  relief,  obtained 
from  moulds. 

Several  fragments  of  the  same  kind  of  pottery  ornamented 
with  garlands,  running  animals,  and  the  leaves  of  aquatic  plants 
in  relief,  obtained  by  moulding. 

Several  fragments  which  served  to  reconstruct  the  greater 
part  of  a  bowl,  diameter  9  inches,  height  3  inches,  in  a  dull 
red  paste,  rudely  ornamented  with  irregular  zones  formed  of 
coarsely  punctulated  Hnes.     (F,  pi.  II.  fig. .5.) 

Two  small  cups  measuring  4-J  inches  in  diameter  by  2^ 
inches  in  height  were  also  reconstructed  from  fragments  of 
red  lustrous  ware. 

'•  Four  dishes  measuring  from  6  inches  to  8  inches  in 
diameter,  in  a  grayish-brown  paste,  were  also  reconstructed 
from  fragments.  These  had  been  common  culinary  vessels, 
similar  to  that  figured  (A,  pi.  III.  fig.  5.) 


EXCAVATIONS   IN  THE  MOUND   F.  109 

In  the  building  No.  3  : 

Some  coarse  fragments  of  common  pottery  of  Celtic  type 
in  a  gray  paste  badly  fired  : 

In  the  building  No.  4  : 

An  iron  bullock  shoe  very  much  oxidised,  having  three 
square-headed  nails  in  each  side.     It  is  here  figured,  full  size. 


The  bones  of  oxen  found  in  the  other  Mounds  have  been 
recognised  by  Professor  Paul  Gervais  as  those  of  a  small 
race.  This  shoe  has  also  been  that  of  a  small  animal.  The 
bovine  race  to  this  day  in  Brittany  are,  as  is  well  known, 
celebrated  for  their  small  and  fine  proportions.  We  have 
then  in  this  shoe  and  in  the  bones  alluded  to,  an  indication 
that  there  has  been  no  great  change  in  the  size  of  the  Breton 
oxen  since  the  Roman  occupation. 


110  THE    BOSSENNO. 

Several  iron  nails  of  different  sizes,  very  much  oxidised. 
Numerous  fragments  of  common  Celtic  and  Gallo- Roman 
pottery,  consisting   of  bottoms,   sides,   and   rims    of  culinary 

vessels. 

t. 

In  the  building  No.  5  : 

An  amber  bead  nearly  opaque,  diameter  i^  inch,  per- 
forated with  a  circular  hole. 

Several  fragments  of  common  pottery  in  a  micaceous 
grayish-brown  paste. 

In  the  building  No.  6  : 

Numerous  objects  in  iron  were  found  scattered  about  the 
floor.  These  were  of  different  forms,  round,  flat,  and  concave, 
but  all  so  much  oxidised  that,  notwithstanding  every  pre- 
caution, they  could  not  be  extracted  from  the  earth  without 
crumbling  into  small  pieces. 

Numerous  nails  and  pieces  of  rod  iron  of  different  sizes, 
very  much  oxidised. 

Numerous  fragments  of  coarse  pottery  of  Celtic  type,  in  a 
greyish-brown  paste,  badly  fired. 

Several  fragments  of  vases  in  a  brown  paste,  ornamented 
with  black  vitreous  bands. 

Several  fragments  of  vases,  in  a  yellow  paste,  ornamented 
with  undulating  lines  similar  to  those  figured  (B,  pi.  VIII. 
figs.  4  and  5). 

Several  fragments  served  to  reconstruct  a  vase  7^  inches 
in  diameter,  in  fine  black  paste,  with  a  vitreous  glazing  similar 
to  that  figured  (B,  pi.  VIII.  fig.  2). 
*•  The  bottom  of  a  large  bowl  in  red  lustrous  ware, 
ornamented  with  parallel  zones  of  lozenge -shaped  figures, 
stamped  with  a  herring-bone  pattern.  The  length  of  this 
fragment  is  7  inches.     (F,  pi.  II.  fig.  6.) 


EXCAVATIONS   IN  THE   MOUND   F. 


Ill 


Several  fragments  of  red  lustrous  ware,  ornamented  with 
garlands,  figures  of  running  animals,  and  leaves  of  aquatic 
plants. 

Other  fragments  of  red  lustrous  ware  served  to  re- 
construct a  vase  7^  inches  in  diameter,  having  a  rim  slanting 
over  from  the  middle  part,  the  same  as  that  figured  (B,  pi. 
XIV.  fig.  2). 

The  fragments  of  pottery  collected  in  the  Mound  F 
weighed  99  lbs.  nett. 


CROSS  AT  COET-A-TOUS. 


VIII. 
EXCAVATIONS    IN    THE    MOUND   G. 


THE    MOUND    G. 


A  VERY  small  mound,  topped  by  an  old  hawthorn  tree,  was 
situated  in  the  southern  enceinte,  at  a  distance  of  28  yards 
from  the  ancient  road  which  traverses  the  Bossenno.  It  is 
marked  on  the  general  plan  of  the  Bossenno  by  the  letter  G. 

In  cutting  a  wide  trench  from  north  to  south  across  this 
mound,  we  came  upon  numerous  small  cubic  building  stones, 
large  dressed  stones,  portions  of  overturned  walls,  fragments 
of  roofing-tiles  {tegulce  and  imbrices),  and  the  debris  of  a 
building  which  had  evidently  been  completely  destroyed. 
Here  also,  as  in  all  the  mounds  hitherto  explored,  were  the 
evidences  of  a  violent  conflagration,  viz.  ashes,  charcoal,  and 
granite  stones  vitrified. 

The  following  objects  were  collected  during  the  cutting  of 
the  trench,  viz. — 

Several  pieces  of  window-glass  of  a  greenish  colour, 
polished  on  one  face  and  rough  on  the  other,  similar  to  those 
found  in  the  Mound  C  (the  baths). 

Fragments  of  a  glass  bottle  of  square  form,  thick,  and  of  a 
bluish  colour. 

A  few  fragments  of  fine  pottery  in  a  fine  black  paste,  with 
vitreous  glazing,  tender  and  badly  fired. 

Numerous  fragments  of  common  gray  pottery. 

Handle  and  part  of  the  body  of  a  vase  in  yellow  paste. 


116  THE   BOSSENNO. 

well  fired,  decorated  with  diagonal  bands,  and  between  these 
numerous  circles,  irregularly  placed,  obtained  by  stamping. 
A  vase  measuring  6  inches  in  diameter  and  3  inches  in  height, 
identically  similar  to  this  fragment,  was  found  in  the  excava- 
tions of  the  Gallo- Roman  constructions  of  Jublains  and  is 
now  exhibited  in  the  museum  at  Mayenne.  It  is  figured  in 
the  accompanying  engraving. 


■'r.yi^ 


As  no  remains  of  any  construction  worth  following  could 
be  found,  we  filled  up  the  trench  and  abandoned  the  Mound  G. 

Two  other  trenches  were  next  cut  across  the  enceinte  at 
different  points  between  the  Mounds  F  and  G,  which  yielded 
similar  results. 

Up  to  this  time  we  had  explored  seven  mounds,  in  doing 
which  the  ruins  of  the  dwellings  of  people  of  a  former  age  had 
been  exposed  to  view,  and  numerous  objects  collected,  all 
tending  to  throw  some  light  on  their  mode  of  life  and  occu- 
pation. It  had  frequently  occurred  to  me,  not  only  when 
examining  these  ruins,  but  also  the  indications  of  others  which 
extended  far  on  every  side,  that  the   population   must  have 


EXCAVATIONS    IN  THE  MOUND   G.  117 

been  of  considerable  extent,   and  that  some  evidence  as  to 
their  mode  of  sepulture  ought  to  be  found  in  the  vicinity. 

The  researches  made  of  late  years  by  the  Polymathic 
Society  of  the  Morbihan  have  proved  that  the  dolmens  of  that 
country  had  been  places  of  sepulture,  in  some  of  which  cre- 
mation, in  others  inhumation,  had  been  used.  The  age  of 
these  monuments,  however,  is  still  a  mystery,  although  recent 
discoveries  show  that  some  of  them  had  been  used  as  places 
of  sepulture  in  the  third  century. 

The  discovery  made  of  late  years  of  cinerary  vases,  ashes 
and  charcoal,  under  a  few  of  the  menhirs,  tends  to  show  that 
these  had  been  funeral  monuments,  whilst  it  does  not  prevent 
others  from  having  a  different  signification. 

Caesar,  who  was  not  only  a  great  captain*  but  an  able  writer, 
mentions  that  the  funerals  in  Gaul  were  magnificent  for  that 
country,  that  the  body  of  the  defunct  was  burnt  with  every- 
thing that  he  had  most  cherished,  even  his  animals,  and 
formerly  his  slaves  and  freedmen.f  The  Commentaries, 
however,  preceded  the  date  of  the  ruins  of  the  Bossenno  by 
four  centuries,  judging  from  the  evidence  of  the  coins  found 
there.  Time  enough  had  elapsed  for  many  changes  to  have 
taken  place  in  the  manners  and  customs  of  a  people. 

The  following  researches  were  made  with  a  view  of 
obtaining  some  information  on  the  mode  of  sepulture  which 
had  been  practised  by  the  inhabitants  of  the  Bossenno. 

*  Tacitus,  who  wrote  of  Caesar  Summus  auctorum  divus  Julius,  differs  from 
him,  nevertheless,  in  many  particulars,  particularly  so  as  to  the  funeral  rites. 
The  discrepancy  may  perhaps  be  accounted  for  by  changes  having  occurred 
during  the  time  which  separates  these  authors.  Tacitus  wrote  about  the  end 
of  the  first  or  beginning  of  the  second  centurj',  fully  a  hundred  years  after  the 
time  when  Caesar  wrote  the  Commentaries. 

t  Caesar's  Commentaries,  6  lib. 


118  THE   BOSSENNO. 

On  the  west  side  of  the  Mound  G  was  the  commencement 
of  a  row  of  very  small  menhirs  which  extended  to  the  west- 
ward from  where  the  traces  of  the  enceittte  stop.  At  first 
sight  they  appeared  to  have  been  large  stones  which  had  been 
cleared  away  from  the  neighbouring  fields  and  placed  on  the 
low  earthen  wall  which  separates  the  fields  937  Er  Prat 
(the  meadow),  and  938  Narlier.  But  how  came  it  that 
the  greater  portion  were  sunk  in  the  earth  so  as  to  stand  in 
an  upright  position  ?  No  peasant  farmer  would  have  done 
this,  when  the  laying  them  lengthways  would  have  answered 
his  purpose  so  much  better. 

A  trench  was  cut  along  the  south  side  of  these  menhirs  : 
from  this  we  worked  round  and  underneath  those  still  left 
standing.  We  found  that  they  had  been  carefully  built  round 
with  stones,  so  as  to  maintain  them  in  an  erect  position.  In 
digging  round  these  menhirs  we  collected  several  pieces  of 
charcoal,  fragments  of  coarse  pottery  of  a  Celtic  type  in  gray 
and  in  black  paste,  several  pieces  of  roofing-tiles  {tegulce),  and 
from  right  underneath  the  menhirs  fragments  of  vases  in  red 
lustrous  ware  called  Samian. 

Seeing  that  nothing  more  could  be  done  here,  we  redressed 
the  menhirs  which  we  had  overturned,  filled  up  our  trenches, 
and  proceeded  to  the  north  side  of  the  Bossenno. 

The  remains  of  a  ruined  dolmen  were  situated  on  an 
eminence  in  the  field  639  Er  Roch  (the  rock),  about  150  yards 
to  the  north  of  the  Mound  C  (the  baths).  We  commenced 
excavations  both  on  the  inside  and  on  the  outside  of  the  ruins, 
and  soon  found  a  few  pieces  of  charcoal  and  common  gray 
pottery.  These,  however,  were  discarded  as  of  no  value, 
when  I  learned  that  the  fire  of  Saint  John  was  made  here  at 
midsummer;  and  as  this  dolmen  had  evidendy  been  pre- 
viously   ransacked,    we    renounced    farther    work    here    and 


Metjres"  o 


p.  So 


British  Iinp|,Fe0t  013 


3  j»  5  6  7  8 

To /ace  page  I  ig.         G.    PLATE   I.— LARGE   MENHIR   NEAR  THE   BOSSENNO. 


EXCAVATIONS   IN  THE  MOUND   G.  119 

proceeded  westward  to  examine  a  large  menhir  in  the 
vicinity. 

This  menhir  measured  17  feet  in  length,  of  which  13 
were  above  ground.  It  stood  in  the  middle  of  a  field  (see 
the  general  plan  of  the  Bossenno,  No.  619  Er  Menhir — the 
menhir),  200  yards  west  from  the  ruined  dolmen,  which  it  is 
supposed  by  some  antiquaries  to  indicate. 

We  commenced  digging  on  two  sides  of  the  menhir  in  the 
field  No.  619,  and  soon  found  that  it  was  built  round  with 
dry  stones.  These,  however,  had  failed  to  keep  it  upright, 
for  it  was  so  much  off  the  perpendicular  that  I  was  afraid  to 
continue  the  diggings  all  round  it.  Underneath  the  menhir 
was  a  bed  of  rich  black  earth  1 2  inches  in  depth  ;  below  this 
was  the  primitive  rock.  Amongst  the  stones  which  served  to 
prop  up  the  menhir  we  found  the  bottom  of  a  vase,  in  the 
fine  red  ware  usually  called  Samian,^'  the  glazing  of  which 
was  destroyed  ;  a  rough  piece  of  unworked  marble,  red,  veined 

•  A  few  years  ago,  M.  the  Abbe  du  Marc'hallach,  Vicar-General  to  the 
Bishop  of  Quimper,  executed  some  researches  at  the  foot  of  a  large  menhir, 
forming  part  of  an  alignment  of  menhirs  situated  a  few  miles  from  that  city, 
in  the  parish  of  Ploumelin.  Underneath  this  enormous  stone  he  discovered 
a  Roman  coin  (middle  brass)  and  several  fragments  of  Roman  roofing-tiles 
(tegula). 

In  187 1,  M.  the  Abb^  Collet,  vicaire  of  Ploemel,  had  some  diggings 
made  in  the  tumulus  of  Man<^  Ploerig,  situated  to  the  north  of  Han  Hon,  in 
the  parish  of  Carnac.  He  discovered  in  these  diggings  two  iron  lance-heads, 
an  iron  ring,  two  flint  arrow-heads,  a  piece  of  clear  glass,  several  fragments 
of  roofing-tiles  {tegulce),  a  large  quantity  of  fragments  of  pottery  of  diff'erent 
kinds,  including  a  large  portion  of  a  fine  vase  in  red  lustrous  ware  (called 
Samian),  ornamented  with  flowers  and  garlands  in  reUef.  He  also  found 
fragments  of  Roman  roofing-tiles  in  the  tumulus  of  Mane  Botgade,  situated 
to  the  west  of  Ploemel ;  and  in  the  tumulus  of  Mand  Bihuic,  situated  to  the 
east  of  Ploemel.  I  am  indebted  for  these  facts  to  M.  the  Abbd  du  Marc'- 
hallach, and  to  M.  the  Abb^  Collet. 


120  THE  BOSSENNO. 

with  white ;  a  worked  flake  of  dark  flint,  and  several  frag- 
ments of  roofing-tiles  {tegulce). 

I  confine  myself  for  the  present  to  giving  the  above  state- 
ments, which  I  have  verified  de  visu,  without  attempting  to 
draw  any  deduction  therefrom.  It  would  require  a  number 
of  analogous  facts,  constituted  by  careful  observers,  to  enable 
one  to  hazard  a  conjecture  on  this  association  of  objects  and 
monuments  of  such  different  origin. 

In  the  neighbourhood  of  Carnac,  where  there  are  so  many 
dolmens,  a  sharp-pointed  menhir  is  generally  situated  either 
on  the  top  of  the  tumulus  surmounting  the  dolmen  or  in  its 
immediate  vicinity.  The  menhirs  at  the  end  of  the  great 
alignments  are  also  of  a  pointed  form,  and  are  supposed  to 
mark  the  rising  and  setting  of  the  sun,  in  some  at  the  solstices, 
and  in  others  at  the  equinoxes,  to  an  observer  situated  within 
the  alignments.  After  having  spent  some  time  in  making  draw- 
ings of  the  different  alignments,  one  becomes  convinced  that 
the  forms  of  the  menhirs  are  comprised  in  a  few  varieties, 
which  are  continually  recurring,  viz.  pointed  or  needle-shaped 
stones,  square  blocks,  long  slabs,  with  their  upper  edge  form- 
ing an  obtuse  angle,  pear-shaped  monoliths  set  on  their 
narrow  ends. 

In  the  previous  portion  of  this  chapter  the  Gallo-Roman 
antiquities  of  Jublains  have  been  alluded  to  ;  and  as  these 
highly-interesting  remains  are  not  so  generally  known  as  they 
ought  to  be,  perhaps  the  following  notice  may  serve  to  draw 
the  attention  of  archaeologists  towards  them,  or  induce  the 
tourist  to  visit  what  will  amply  repay  the  slight  deviation  he 
will  have  to  make  from  the  ordinary  railway  route  between 
Paris  and  Rennes, 

The  village  of  Jublains  has  a  population  of  1846  inhabit- 
ants, and  is  situated  between  Mayenne  and    Evron,   in  the 


EXCAVATIONS   IN   THE   MOUND   G. 


121 


department  of  Mayenne.  At  the  time  when  Caisar's  legions 
invaded  the  country  Jublains  was  a  place  of  some  importance 
— Nceodtmum,  the  capital  of  the  Aulerces  Diablintes.  Under 
the  Roman  civilisation  the  Gaulish  town  became  a  Roman 
one  of  some  splendour,  having  its  castra  stativa,  temples, 
theatre,  forum,  aqueducts,  baths,  and  having  roads  communi- 
cating with  Tours,  Angers,  the  valley  of  Mayenne,  Rennes, 
and  Corseul.  This  Gallo-Roman  town  was  destroyed  about 
the  beginning  of  the  fifth  century,  and,  like  the  Bossenno, 
was  forgotten  until  the  excavations  of  the  last  few  years 
brought  its  remains  to  light. 


CROSS  AT  HAN  HON. 


IX. 

EXCAVATIONS    IN    THE   MOUND   H. 


>     ■    ■': 


::    i 


w 


m 


0 


-wj 


•I 


THE    MOUND    H. 


On  the  wall  which  has  already  been  alluded  to  in  the  intro- 
duction as  the  northern  enceinte  there  was,  at  a  distance  of 
230  feet  west  from  the  Mound  D  (the  temple),  another  mound, 
marked  in  the  plan  of  the  Bossenno  by  the  letter  H. 

This  Mound  was  of  an  elliptical  form,  measured  83  feet 
in  length,  20  feet  in  breadth,  and  4  feet  6  inches  in  height. 
The  height  seemed  to  be  partly  due  to  the  stones  and  rubbish 
gathered  on  the  adjoining  fields  having  been  thrown  on  it. 

On  the  17th  August  1876  we  commenced  the  excavation 
of  this  mound  by  opening  up  the  east  side,  and  soon  exposed 
the  large  dry  stone  wall  of  the  enceinte.  A  few  feet  to  the 
eastward  it  stopped  short,  with  its  end  squared  off;  then  an 
interruption  for  1 1  feet,  when  it  again  recommenced.  This 
break  in  the  wall  was  observed  on  the  ground  by  the  differ- 
ence of  level  before  the  commencement  of  the  diggings.  It 
appeared  to  me  to  have  been  one  of  the  entrances  or  ports  to 
the  houses  situated  within  the  enceinte,  which  could  be  easily 
barricaded.     (See  the  plan  of  the  Mound  H,  pi.  I.) 

Leaving  the  entrance  we  again  commenced  on  the  east  end 
of  the  mound,  working  to  the  westward  along  the  wall  of  the 
enceinte.  We  soon  came  upon  a  wall  2  feet  4  inches  in  breadth, 
built  in  small  cubic  stones  bound  with  lime  mortar,  running 
parallel  to  the  enceinte  on  the  south  side,  at  a  distance  from  it 


126  THE   BOSSENNO. 

of  2  feet.  At  the  foot  of  the  eastern  end  of  this  wall  was  a 
remnant  of  pavement  formed  of  square  tiles.  This  wall 
continued  for  8  feet ;  at  that  distance  it  was  traversed  at  a 
right  angle  by  another  wall  of  the  same  description,  but  of 
which  the  south  portion  had  been  destroyed  by  the  cultivation 
of  the  adjoining  field. 

Working  round  the  transverse  wall,  we  came  upon  another 
of  the  same  description  running  parallel  to,  but  situated  2 
feet  farther  from  the  enceinte,  so  as  to  form  a  second  narrow 
passage.  We  followed  this  wall  to  the  west,  and  came  on  its 
south  side  upon  another,  also  of  the  same  description,  and 
forming  another  narrow  passage  3  feet  in  width.  A  doorway 
was  found  in  this  last  wall,  near  its  western  extremity,  where 
the  cultivation  of  the  adjoining  field  had  destroyed  it.  An 
examination  of  the  plan  of  the  Mound  H  will  convey  a  better 
idea  of  the  position  of  these  walls  than  can  be  given  by  any 
description. 

In  excavating  this  mound  we  found  that  it  was  composed 
for  the  most  part  of  large  unshapely  stones.  A  little  below 
the  surface,  on  the  top  of  the  mound,  we  came  upon  the 
upper  half  of  a  stone  axe  in  polished  diorite. 

The  following  objects  were  found  lower  down,  on  the  floor 
of  the  passages. 

A  bronze  coin,  illegible. 

Part  of  a  bronze  buckle.     (H,  pi.  II.  fig.  3,  natural  size.) 

Portion  of  a  bronze  clasp  inlaid  with  silver.  (H,  pi.  II. 
fig.  I,  natural  size.) 

Several  iron  nails,  much  oxidised. 

A  small  ingot  of  lead. 

Two  fragments  of  cups  in  fine  thin  glass,  the  rim  turned 
slightly  outwards. 


Tofacepagt  i2(5. 


H,  PLATE  II. 


EXCAVATIONS   IN  THE   MOUND   H.  127 

Fragment  of  a  cup  in  fine  thin  glass,  with  straight  rim, 
and  having  ribbed  cannelures  in  the  middle. 

Fragment  of  clear  glass  with  incised  ornaments. 

A  granite  stone,  measuring  4  inches  in  length,  and  weigh- 
ing 2  lbs.  2  oz.  The  form  reminds  one  of  the  plummet  used 
by  carpenters  and  masons.  At  first  sight  it  seemed  to  be  a 
weight,  but  the  weight  of  the  Roman  pound  {6144  grains) 
does  not  bear  out  that  idea.  It  may  possibly  have  served  as 
a  sinker  for  large  fishing  nets  (sa^en^).     (H,  pi.  II.  fig.  2.) 

A  sharpening  stone  or  hone,  4  inches  in  length,  much 
abraded  by  use. 

An  unfinished  spindle  whorl,  2  inches  in  diameter,  in  a 
paste  of  coarse  brick  earth,  nearly  half  pierced  through  on 
each  face. 

Several  fragments  of  red  lustrous  ware,  without  ornament, 
from  which  a  vase,  5  inches  in  diameter,  was  reconstructed. 
It  is  figured  in  H,  pi.  II.  fig.  5. 

Several  fragments  of  a  vase,  in  a  fine  black  paste,  with  a 
vitreous  glazing,  and  having  straight  rim  slightly  turned  out- 
wards;  diameter  6^  inches.     (H,  pi.  II.  fig.  4.) 

Several  fragments  which  gave  the  form  of  a  dish,  in  a 
grayish  paste,  the  sides  spreading  slightly  outwards,  and  the 
rim  bevelled  off  to  the  outside;  diameter  8  inches.  (H,  pi. 
II.  fig.  6.) 

Several  fragments  of  red  lustrous  ware,  some  of  which 
were  plain,  others  ornamented  with  leaves  of  aquatic  plants 
and  figures  of  the  Equus  marinus  on  the  middle  part,  with 
flutings  superposed ;  the  same  as  the  fragments  found  in  the 
mounds  previously  described. 

Fragments  of  large  vessels  having  a  spout  on  the  rim,  in 
a  yellow  paste. 

Handles  of  amphorae,  in  a  yellow  paste. 


128 


THE   BOSSENNO. 


Neck  and  handle  of  a  bottle,  in  yellow  paste. 

Fragments  of  different  vases,  in  fine  black  paste,  with 
vitreous  glazing ;  plain. 

Other  fragments  in  black  paste,  ornamented  with  zones 
formed  of  points  incised. 

Several  bottoms  and  other  fragments  of  vases,  in  gray 
paste  and  red  paste ;  plain.  Other  fragments  in  gray  paste, 
ornamented  with  vertical  and  diagonal  striae. 

The  weight  of  the  pottery  collected  in  this  mound 
amounted  to  28  lbs.  nett. 


DOOR  AT  KERGOUELLARD. 


X. 
SUMMARY   AND   CONCLUSIONS. 


SUMMARY    AND    CONCLUSIONS. 


Having  described  in  the  previous  chapters  the  results  of  the 
excavations  in  the  Mounds  of  the  Bossenno,  I  now  proceed 
to  draw  conclusions  from  them  in  regard  to  the  age  and 
character  of  the  buildinofs,  the  condition  and  modes  of  life  of 
their  occupants,  and  the  probable  date  of  the  final  destruction 
of  the  settlement. 

It  will  be  sufficiently  obvious,  from  the  details  already 
given,  that  in  these  buildings  we  have  the  remains  of  a  Gallo- 
Roman  establishment.  The  evidence  of  this  is  found  in  the 
construction  of  the  walls  with  small  cubic  stones  regulated  at 
intervals  with  layers  of  long  bricks,  in  the  roofing-tiles,  in  the 
Gallo- Roman  pottery,  and  in  the  Roman  coins. 

The  excavation  of  the  Mound  A  disclosed  a  small 
dwelling  divided  into  four  apartments.  In  these  were  found 
objects  of  bronze,  iron,  and  glass,  pottery,  and  food  refuse, 
all  of  which  indicated  a  high  degree  of  civilisation  and 
prosperity. 

The  removal  of  the  Mound  B  disclosed  a  house  of  eleven 
apartments,  carefully  constructed ;  its  walls  plastered  and 
decorated.  In  its  rooms  were  pottery  of  remarkable  fineness, 
objects  of  bronze  and  iron,  fine  glass  ware,  Roman  coins,  and 
food  refuse,  all  of  which  indicated  a  greater  amount  of  wealth 


132  SUMMARY  AND   CONCLUSIONS. 

and    luxury    than    was    implied    in    the    contents    of    the 

Mound  A. 

Under  the  Mound  C  there  was  disclosed  a  building, 
forming  a  dependance  of  that  in  the  Mound  B,  carefully 
constructed,  the  walls  plastered,  and  richly  decorated  with 
painting  and  curious  shell  frescoes.  It  also  yielded  articles  of 
bronze  and  iron,  glass,  pottery,  Roman  coins,  and  food  refuse. 

In  the  Mound  D  there  appeared  another  dependance  of 
the  Mound  B, — a  small  square  construction  surrounding  an- 
other of  the  same  form,  in  the  floor  of  which  was  a  slab, 
which  seemed  to  be  the  base  of  an  altar.  Its  contents  differed 
widely  from  those  in  the  other  buildings,  not  only  in  the 
absence  of  food  refuse,  but  in  the  presence  of  numerous 
statuettes  of  the  Venus  Anadyomene  and  the  Venus  Gene- 
trix,  Roman  coins,  and  peculiar  pottery. 

The  Mound  E  contained  a  building,  of  which  only  seven 
compartments  were  determined,  less  carefully  built  than  those 
in  the  Mound  B.  It  was  distinguished  from  the  others  by 
the  absence  of  decoration  on  the  walls,  and  the  presence  of  a 
statuette  and  other  objects  in  bronze,  articles  of  iron,  pottery, 
glass,  and  food  refuse. 

Under  the  Mound  F  was  a  construction  consisting  of 
several  buildings,  part  of  which  appeared  to  be  a  continuation 
of  those  under  the  Mound  E,  but  including  a  separate  one,  in 
which  were  a  forge,  a  stone  trough,  scoriae,  and  remains  of 
iron  implements  and  pottery. 

The  Mounds  G  and  H  yielded  traces  of  buildings,  with 
objects  in  bronze  and  iron,  and  pottery. 

The  following  quotations  from  authors  who  are  regarded 
"as  authorities  on  the  Gallo-Roman  epoch   may  assist  us   in 
deducing  conclusions  as  to  the  destination  of  some  of  these 
buildings.  4» 


SUMMARY   AND   CONCLUSIONS.  133 

De  Caumont  speaks  of  certain  villa  as  being  so  large  as 
to  be  more  like  camps  than  country-houses,  and  states  ''^  "  that 
the  finest  of  the  Roman  country  houses  had  only  one  storey ; 
in  other  respects  they  did  not  differ  from  the  houses  in  the 
cities.  The  greater  part  of  the  villa  were  not  only  residences 
for  pleasure,  but  also  included  what  was  requisite  for  the  pur- 
suit of  agriculture,  whether  as  houses  for  the  cultivators  of  the 
soil,  for  the  bestial,  or  for  storing  the  harvest." 

"Columella  points  out  three  divisions  in  the  country 
house  which  had  its  farm  attached,  and  the  greater  part  of  the 
Gallo- Roman  villa  would  come  under  that  category.  These 
three  divisions  were — the  villa  urbana,  or  dwelling  of  the  pro- 
prietor ;  the  villa  agraria,  or  dwelling  for  the  labourers  and 
the  bestial  required  for  the  farm  ;  and  the  villa  fructuaria, 
where  the  grain  and  other  products  were  stored." 

Applying  these  descriptions  to  the  results  of  my  excava- 
tions, it  appears  to  me  that  the  dwelling  found  under  the 
Mound  B  may  be  considered  as  filling  the  conditions  of  a 
villa  urbana.  The  careful  way  in  which  it  had  been  built,  its 
decoration,  the  fineness  of  its  pottery,  and  the  luxury  implied 
by  the  whole  facts,  lead  to  this  inference.  Its  communication 
with  the  Mound  C  (the  baths)  and  with  the  Mound  D  (the 
Lararium)  may  also  be  considered  as  lending  additional 
support  to  this  view. 

Comparatively  few  constructions  have  been  discovered 
similar  to  that  of  the  Mound  D,  and  of  some  of  these  the 
destination  is  doubtful ;  hence  de  Caumont  classes  them  as 
"  Temples  incertaines,"  and  recommends  the  further  study  of 
such  edifices  to  all  who  explore  Gallo-Roman  remains.  But 
I  should  be  altogether  at  a  loss  to  attribute  to  this  building 
any  other  destination  than  that  of  a  Lararium. 

*  Ere  gallo-romaine,  page  376. 


134  SUMMARY   AND   CONCLUSIONS. 

The  building  under  the  Mound  E  may  probably  be 
regarded  as  the  villa  agraria.  Its  construction,  as  has  been 
already  stated,  is  inferior  to  that  of  the  villa  urbana,  and  there 
is  neither  decoration  nor  other  evidence  of  luxury  apparent  in 
it.  Some  of  the  rooms,  from  their  having  plaster  on  the  walls 
and  concrete  on  the  floors,  may  be  presumed  to  have  been 
inhabited  by  the  labourers ;  others,  destitute  of  these,  would 
seem  to  have  been  used  as  stables  and  storehouses. 

Remembering  the  persistence  of  names  in  Brittany,  it 
may  be  observed  that  the  field  which  adjoins  this  building  on 
the  west  is  named  Pare  er  poul  (the  field  of  the  waterpool). 
No  pool  of  water  exists  there  now,  but  it  may  have  retained 
the  name  from  its  having  been  the  compluvium  for  watering 
the  bestial. 

In  the  Mound  F,  the  only  portion  of  the  building  to  which 
a  destination  could  be  assigned  with  certainty  was  the  work- 
shop of  the  smith.  The  fireplace,  with  cinders  and  scoriae, 
the  trough  alongside  of  it,  and  the  quantity  of  iron  scattered 
about,  left  no  doubt  as  to  its  object  and  use. 

The  ruins  found  under  the  Mounds  G  and  H  were  so 
much  dilapidated  that  no  special  destination  could  be  certainly 
assigned  to  them.  Seeing  that  the  latter  are  situated  so  close 
to  the  entrance  in  the  enceinte,  it  is  possible  that  they  may  be 
the  remains  of  a  military  post. 

De  Caumont,  in  speaking  of  ^«^(?z«^^.y,  says'" — "When  the 
incursions  of  barbarians  became  frequent,  I  will  ask  if  it  was 
not  necessary  to  have  not  only  camps  for  the  troops,  but  also 
places  of  refuge  where  the  inhabitants  of  the  country  most 
exposed  to  being  plundered  could  unite  and  place  themselves 
under  cover  in  the  time  of  danger,  and  if  this  system  of 
defence  was  not  extended  even  to  particular  habitations.     My 

Ere  gallo-rotnainc,  page  613. 


SUMMARY  AND   CONCLUSIONS.  135 

opinion  is  that  many  of  the  enceintes  which  are  left  to  us  were 
the  enclosures  of  Gallo- Roman  habitations,  which  from  their 
importance  were  more  exposed  to  pillage,  and  which  could 
even  serve  as  a  place  of  refuge  to  the  inhabitants  of  the  sur- 
rounding country.  Thus  there  were,  even  from  the  fourth 
century,  small  towns  and  habitations  fortified  as  in  the  Middle 
Ages." 

It  may  be  supposed  that  in  the  troublous  times  and  dis- 
ordered state  of  the  country  during  the  latter  part  of  the 
Roman  occupation  some  system  of  mural  defence  would  have 
been  then  erected  by  the  inhabitants  of  the  Bossenno  if  they 
had  not  done  so  previously ;  but  the  most  of  these  have  been 
destroyed  by  the  tillage  of  the  land.  On  referring  to  the 
general  plan  the  reader  will  see  what  is  still  left  there  which 
may  be  regarded  as  an  enceinte. 

From  the  exposed  situation  of  the  Bossenno,  the  inhabit- 
ants were  exposed  to  attack,  not  only  from  enemies  by  land, 
but  by  sea  also ;  for,  as  has  been  already  shown,  the  sea  came 
close  up  to  the  Bossenno,  and  besides  a  landing  in  its  vicinity 
could  have  been  easily  effected  anywhere  in  the  Bay  of 
Quiberon. 

Besides  the  ruins  which  my  diggings  have  exposed,  there 
must  certainly  have  been  numerous  other  constructions,  both 
within  and  without  the  enceintes,  possibly  built  with  less  care, 
and  which  have  long  ago  disappeared.*  The  clearing  of  the 
land  for  tillage  has  left  no  trace  of  these  save  in  the  names  of 
the  fields,  and  in  the  fragments  of  tiles  and  pottery  strewn 
over  their  surfaces.     Thus,  on  referring  to  the  general  plan, 

*  The  proprietors  of  the  Bossenno  adopted  this  view,  and  stated  that  they 
had  not  cleared  away  the  mounds  which  I  have  excavated  because  the 
expense  of  doing  so  would  have  amounted  to  more  than  the  value  of  the 
land. 


136  SUMMARY   AND    CONCLUSIONS. 

there  are  two  fields,  Nos.  658  and  659,  situated  to  the  east  of 
the  Mound  B,  which  bear  the  significant  names  of  Helle-duen 
(the  cinders)  ;  farther  on  are  No.  727,  Ker-in-goh  (the  old 
town),  No.  665,  Er  goh  fetan  tal pare piard  (the  old  fountain 
near  the  field  of  stones)  ;  and  many  others  might  be  cited,  not 
only  inside,  but  outside  the  enceintes. 

About  the  year  1 790  the  mother  of  the  present  proprietor 
of  the  H6tel  des  Voyageurs  at  Carnac  dwelt  in  the  village  of 
Bomer,  close  to  the  Bossenno.  She  often  spoke  to  her 
daughter  of  having  seen  hollow  bricks  and  a  sort  of  conduit 
which  had  been  then  discovered  in  working  the  fields  of  the 
Bossenno.  This  discovery  created  much  astonishment  in  the 
country  at  the  time,  but  no  one  attempted  to  follow  it  up. 

The  existence  of  the  remains  of  buildings  to  the  south 
of  the  Bossenno  has  been  already  alluded  to  in  the  descrip- 
tion of  the  Mound  F.  This  shows  that  the  town  had 
extended  at  least  so  far  in  that  direction. 

In  an  east  and  west  direction  it  had  extended  from  the 
field  Ker-in-goh  to  the  foot  of  the  Mont  St.  Michel,  the 
importance  of  which  as  a  commanding  point  would  not  have 
been  overlooked  by  the  Romans.  This  eminence  (which  will 
be  fully  described  in  the  following  chapter)  overlooks  all  the 
surrounding  country  and  the  sea.  It  may  be  thus  inferred 
that  it  would  be  utilised  as  a  post  for  observation.  In  fact 
the  levelling  to  which  the  top  of  the  tumulus  has  been  sub- 
jected has  not  altogether  obliterated  the  traces  of  ancient 
works ;  and  the  occurrence  of  Roman  tiles  and  pottery  also 
serves  to  bear  out  this  inference. 

Other  Gallo-Roman  ruins  have  been  discovered  about 
200  yards  to  the  south  of  this  tumulus  in  the  field  named 
Grah  ba  dou  (heaps  of  debris).  The  following  objects,  which 
have  been  found  in  this  field  of  late  years,  are  now  deposited 


SUMMARY  AND   CONCLUSIONS.  137 

in  the  Mairie  of  Carnac — viz.,  fragment  of  a  statuette  of  the 
Venus  Anadyomene ;  fragments  of  vases  in  fine  red  lustrous 
ware,  and  in  grey  and  in  black  ware ;  a  bronze  axe,  a  waist 
buckle,  and  a  coin  of  Alexander  Severus. 

All  the  fields  on  the  south  side  of  the  Mont  St.  Michel 
are  strewn  with  fragments  of  Gallo- Roman  pottery,  and  the 
small  cubic  stones  used  in  building  by  the  Romans  may  be 
seen  in  the  walls  which  form  their  boundaries. 

The  quantities  of  bones  of  ruminants  and  other  animals, 
and  numerous  shells  of  edible  molluscs  everywhere  found  in 
these  excavations,  save  in  the  Mounds  D  and  H,  supply  the 
evidence  of  what  had  been  the  staple  food  of  the  inhabitants. 
Hunting  and  fishing  would  thus  seem  to  have  been  largely 
practised,  if  we  judge  from  the  frequent  recurrence  of  bones 
of  the  deer,  hare,  and  rabbit,  and  from  the  remains  of  their 
fishing  gear.  Hunting  scenes  and  animals  running  form  a 
frequent  ornamentation  on  the  Gallo- Roman  pottery  found 
here,  as  they  generally  do  on  that  found  elsewhere. 

The  fact  of  so  many  bricks  having  been  found  bearing  the 
prints  of  the  feet  of  dogs  which  had  passed  over  them  in  the 
soft  state,  shows  that  many  of  these  animals  had  been  kept, 
and  the  difference  in  the  size  of  the  prints  also  shows  that 
they  had  been  made  by  dogs  of  all  sizes — from  the  small  pet 
or  lap-dog  to  the  great  watch-dog  and  hound. 

The  luxury  of  the  table  at  Rome  during  the  third  century 
has  been  frequently  described.  Oysters  were  brought  there 
from  the  Dardanelles,  the  Adriatic,  and  Armorica.*  At 
present  ostriculture  forms  a  prominent  industry  in  the 
Morbihan.     Large  sums  have  been  expended  on  the  oyster- 

*  Sunt  et  Aremorici  qui  laudant  ostrea  ponti. — Auson.  Ep.  xiii.  v.  35. 


138  SUMMARY   AND   CONCLUSIONS. 

beds  thus  cultivated,  which  give  employment  to  numerous 
hands,  and  their  produce  is  regularly  sold  in  Paris  as  huitres 
Armoricaines. 

Horace  makes  mention  of  snails  as  a  stimulant  to  be  taken 
with  wine/'  Pliny  the  younger  alludes  to  them  as  having 
been  served  at  table,  although  not  so  much  esteemed  as  the 
oyster.t 

On  looking  over  the  ceramics  of  the  Bossenno  we  see 
that  while  some  of  the  pottery  is  of  a  rude  Celtic  type,  the 
greater  portion  is  Gallo- Roman  pottery,  nearly  all  of  which,  I 
should  be  inclined  to  hold,  had  been  made  in  Brittany.  The 
Gallo- Roman  potter  had  attained  a  high  degree  of  excellence 
by  adopting  the  Roman  mode  of  working,  while  still  preserv- 
ing the  ancient  forms  and  the  ornamentation  characteristic 
of  his  country,  viz.  undulating  lines  and  concentric  circles. 
The  leaves  of  aquatic  plants  and  the  figure  of  the  sea- 
horse occur  frequently  among  the  fragments  found.  The 
hippocampus  is  still  frequently  caught  by  the  fishermen  in  the 
Bay  of  Ouiberon. 

The  Roman  law  obliged  potters  to  put  their  trade  mark 
or  stamp  on  their  products,  but  this  does  not  seem  to  have 
been  enforced  in  Gaul.  Although  all  the  bricks,  tiles,  and 
fragments  of  these  found  at  the  Bossenno  were  carefully 
examined  for  such  stamps  or  names,  not  one  was  found.  The 
only  potters'  marks  discovered  were  on  the  two  fragments  of 
vases  in  the  Mound  E. 

*  Tostis  marcentem  squillis  recreabis  et  Afra 

Potorem  cochleae.  Horace,  Lib.  ii.  Satire  iv. 

t  Heu  tu,  promittis  ad  coenam,  nee  venis  !  paratse  erant  cochlese  teniae. 
.     .     .     At  tu  apud  nescio  quem  ostrea.     .     .     .     maluisti.     (Ep.  i.  xv.) 


SUMMARY   AND  CONCLUSIONS.  139 

Great  care  was  bestowed  by  the  Romans  on  the  manufac- 
ture of  bricks  and  tiles.  Vitruvius  states  that  they  sometimes 
remained  two  years  drying  in  the  shade,  and  that  the  firing 
occupied  from  fifteen  to  twenty  days,  with  an  extreme  heat  at 
the  end.  The  bricks  and  tiles  found  at  the  Bossenno  were  in 
as  good  a  state  of  preservation  as  if  they  had  been  freshly 
made.  Roman  tiles  are  found  in  the  neighbourhood  of 
Guerande,  and  are  still  occasionally  used  by  the  paludiers  to 
close  the  water  channels  in  the  saltfields,  in  preference  to 
modern  tiles,  which  only  last  a  few  years. 

The  red  lustrous  ware  called  Samian  is  frequently  alluded 
to  by  Roman  authors,  and  has  been  found  wherever  the 
Roman  dominions  extended.  It  is  supposed  to  have  been 
made  from  B.C.  1 50  down  to  the  fifth  century  of  our  era,  and 
it  has  been  proved,  by  the  discovery  of  the  potteries,  to  have 
been  manufactured  in  several  parts  of  France,  amongst  others 
on  the  right  bank  of  the  Allien  The  red  ferruginous  earth 
necessary  for  its  fabrication  has  been  found  in  several  parts  of 
Brittany  where  there  are  potteries  still.  Brongniart  mentions 
the  magnificent  glazing  of  this  ware  as  the  only  one  known  to 
the  ancients,  and  one  which  cannot  now  be  produced.  He 
describes  it  as  being  principally  composed  of  a  silicate, 
rendered  fusible  by  the  introduction  of  an  alkali,  such  as  potash 
or  soda,  and  attributes  the  colour  to  a  metallic  oxide  which 
had  been  either  introduced  into  the  composition  or  derived 
from  the  primitive  paste/'' 

The  same  authority  states  t  "  that  three  modes  of  orna- 
mentation were  followed  by  the  Roman  potters  : — \st,  Mould- 
ing from  single  or  from  independent  patterns  representing 
the   same   or   different   subjects ;    2d,    The   employment   of 

*  Traite  des  Arts  Ceramiques,  tome  t,  p.  545.  f  Ibid.  p.  424. 


140  SUMMARY   AND   CONCLUSIONS. 

roulettes  for  forming  circular  zones  on  the  circumference  of 
the  vase,  isolated  ornaments  being  made  by  impressions  from 
a  seal  or  stamp  ;  ^d,  The  forming  of  an  ornament  in  relief  on 
the  vase,  vifith  slip  flowing  from  a  pipette,"  a  method  pecu- 
liarly characteristic  of  Roman  potteries. 

Numerous  examples  of  the  first  and  second  modes  of 
ornamentation  were  found  in  all  the  mounds. 

It  is  somewhat  significant  that  specimens  of  the  third 
mode  of  ornamentation  were  only  found  in  the  Mounds 
A,  B,  C,  and  D.  The  chromo-lithograph  A,  Plate  IV., 
represents  a  vase  which  had  been  ornamented  by  this  curious 
process. 

In  examining  the  objects  in  bronze,  we  find  the  two 
civilisations,  Gaulish  and  Roman,  represented,  as  we  have 
just  seen  in  the  pottery;  for  whilst  the  two  brooches  (B,  pi.  III. 
fig-  3  ;  C,  pi.  XIII.  fig.  3),  and  also  most  of  the  other  bronze 
ornaments,  are  of  Celtic  type,  the  coins  are  all  Roman. 

The  curious  statuette  of  an  ox  (E,  pi.  VI.),  resembling  the 
bronze  statuettes  found  in  Egypt  which  have  no  disc  between 
the  horns,  recalls  the  fact,  as  the  pottery  did,  that  the  Romans 
had  Moorish  soldiers  stationed  at  Vannes.  Are  we  to  attri- 
bute the  statuette  of  the  Mound  E  to  the  Egyptian  mytho- 
logy, to  the  Celtic  mythology,  or  to  the  Mithraic  worship  ? 
The  worship  of  Mithras  was  introduced  about  the  time  of  the 
emperors  at  Rome,  and  thence  spread  over  all  parts  of  the 
empire.  The  figure  of  an  ox  or  bull  frequently  occurs  on 
Gaulish  coins.  In  the  Celtic  mythology  the  two  oxen  of 
Hu-Gadarn,  a  divinity  of  the  ancient  Bretons,  are  fabled  to 
have  drawn  out  of  the  waters  of  the  deluge,  by  means  of 
strong  chains,  the  Avank,  a  monstrous  crocodile  which  had 
caused  the  submersion  of  the  universe.     This  is  alluded  to  in 


SUMMARY  AND   CONCLUSIONS.  141 

one  of  the  popular  legendary  ballads  of  Brittany,  known  by 

the  grotesque  title  of  "The  Frogs'  Vespers,"*  characterised 

by  Villemarqud  as  one  of  the  most  singular,  and  perhaps  the 

most  ancient  of  Breton  Ballads.     It  consists  of  a  dialogue 

between  a  Druid  and  a  child,  in  which  a  summary  of  the 

Druidical  mythology  is  given  and  recapitulated  in  a  series  of 

twelve  questions  and  answers.     The  second  of  these  is  as 

follows : — 

Ar  Bugel : 

Kan  d'in  euz  a  zaou  ranu 

Ken  a  oufenn  breman. 

Ann  Drouiz  : 
Daou  ejenn  dioc'h  eur  gibi ; 
O  sachat,  o  souheti. 
Edrec'hit  aun  estoni ! 

The  Gaul  of  the  Bossenno,  in  adopting  the  religion  of  his 
conquerors,  had  not  entirely  abandoned  his  former  deities. 
The  Gallo-Roman  altar  found  under  the  cathedral  of  Notre 
Dame  at  Paris  has  on  two  of  its  sides  the  Celtic  divinity 
Hesus  and  the  Taurus  trigaranus ;  on  the  other  two  sides 
the  Roman  divinities  Jupiter  and  Vulcan. 

It  has  been  said  of  coins,  that  one  of  the  most  important 
uses  to  which  they  can  be  applied,  when  the  circumstance  of 
their  discovery  on  a  particular  site  is  beyond  question,  is  in 
approximating  dates.  The  coins  found  at  the  Bossenno, 
extending  over  the  long  space  of  one  hundred  and  eighty-four 
years — viz.  from  the  third  consulate  of  Marcus  Aurelius  to 
the  year  three  hundred  and  fifty-three,  the  epoch  of  the  death 
of  Magnentius — thus  bring  us  down  to  the  middle  of  the 
fourth  century. 

*  Barzas  Brdz,  par  le  Vicomte  H.  de  la  Villemarqud.     Paris,  1867. 


142  SUMMARY   AND   CONCLUSIONS. 

Historians  are  in  accord  as  to  the  deplorable  state  of  Gaul 
in  the  latter  part  of  the  fourth  century,  when  its  towns  and 
villages  were  burned  and  pillaged,  and  its  rural  districts 
ravaged  by  invasions  of  barbarians  both  by  sea  and  land. 
The  population  of  the  towns  occupied  themselves  in  con- 
structing enceintes  and  walls  of  defence,  not  formerly  needed, 
but  now  become  of  the  first  importance  as  an  absolute  neces- 
sity of  existence. 

While  the  country  was  weighed  down  by  these  misfor- 
tunes, the  government,  taking  no  steps  to  remedy  them,  only 
thought  of  collecting  more  taxes.  Then,  in  the  beginning  of 
the  fifth  century,  came  the  general  rising,  which  took  place  in 
Armorica,  against  the  Roman  government,  and  it  appears  to 
me  that  it  is  to  this  epoch  that  the  violent  destruction  of  the 
Bossenno  may  be  assigned. 

In  the  beginning  of  the  fifth  century  Christianity  had 
made  considerable  progress  in  Armorica,  but  no  trace  or 
indication  of  it  was  found  at  the  Bossenno.  On  the  other 
hand,  we  have  seen  unequivocal  evidences  of  paganism  in  the 
statuettes  of  Venus  found  in  the  Mounds  A  and  D,  and  in  the 
statuette  of  the  ox  found  in  the  Mound  E. 

It  may,  perhaps,  be  surmised  that,  for  some  misdeeds,  the 
pagan  inhabitants  of  the  Bossenno  had  been  driven  away, 
and  that  their  habitations  had  been  burned  by  their  Christian 
neighbours,  and,  in  so  far,  the  legend  of  the  Bossenno  would 
be  an  echo  of  a  forgotten  event.  That  portion  of  the  legend, 
however,  which  states  that  they  were  slain,  is  not  borne  out 
by  the  results  of  the  excavations,  for,  among  all  the  numerous 
bones  collected,  not  a  single  fragment  of  a  human  bone  occurred. 
This  fact  seems  to  indicate  that  the  inhabitants  had  not  been 
surprised  and  slain  by  those  who  destroyed  their  dwellings, 
but  that  they  had  found  time  to  gain  a  refuge  elsewhere. 


SUMMARY  AND   CONCLUSIONS. 


143 


In  concluding  these  remarks  on  the  excavations  of  the 
Bossenno,  I  may,  perhaps,  be  permitted  again  to  draw  atten- 
tion to  the  persistence  with  which  legendary  incidents  and 
forms  of  ornamentation  are  transmitted  in  Brittany  from 
generation  to  generation.  A  striking  example  of  the  latter  is 
given  in  the  accompanying  engraving. 


CHALICE  ENGRAVED  ON  A  TOMBSTONE. 


XI. 


THE   MONT   ST.  MICHEL. 


THE    MONT    ST.  MICHEL 


In  the  preceding  chapter  I  have  already  alluded  to  the 
vestiges  of  Gallo- Roman  constnictions  found  on  the  flank  of 
the  Mont  St.  Michel.  This  eminence,  from  its  commanding 
position,  must  have  been  an  important  dependence  of  the 
Bossenno,  if  only  as  a  post  for  observation. 

During  the  summer  months  of  1876  we  could  not  work  at 
the  Bossenno  until  the  crops  were  cleared  off  the  fields,  so  the 
months  of  June  and  July  were  passed  in  making  researches  at 
the  foot  of  the  tumulus  surmounting  the  Mont  St.  Michel, 
which  yielded  results  different  from  those  found  at  the 
Bossenno. 

The  Mont  St.  Michel  is  situated  at  the  distance  of  half  a 
mile  to  the  east  of  the  village  of  Carnac  ;  from  its  commanding 
position  and  peculiar  form  it  stands  out  as  a  striking  feature 
in  the  landscape,  as  seen  from  any  point  in  the  surrounding 
country. 

It  is  the  first  resort  of  the  tourists  who  arrive  at  Carnac, 
and  they  cannot  make  a  better  commencement  in  acquiring  a 
knowledge  of  the  country  than  by  giving  a  short  time  to  the 
examination  of  this  hill,  and  of  the  fine  panoramic  view  which 
is  best  seen  from  the  summit  of  the  tumulus. 

Facing  the  south  the  view  extends  over  the  sea  studded 
with  islands  and  broken  by  promontories.     On  your  left  hand 


148  THE   MONT   ST.   MICHEL. 

you  see  Locmariaker,  by  some  writers  supposed  to  have  been 
Dariorigum ;  farther  on,  in  the  same  direction,  the  tumuli  of 
Arzon  and  Tumiac,  excavated  by  the  Polymathic  Society,  may 
be  made  out  with  a  telescope  ;  and  still  farther  on  the  point  of 
St.  Gildas  de  Rhuis  brings  up  the  memory  of  Abeilard. 
Facing  you  are  the  islands  of  Houat  and  H^dic  ;  to  the  right- 
hand  Belle  Isle,  the  largest  of  the  islands  of  the  gulf  of  the 
Morbihan ;  the  promontory  of  Quiberon,  the  Fort  Penthievre, 
and  isthmus  leading  to  it,  associated  with  the  disastrous 
landing  of  the  emigres  in  1795.  Turning  to  the  right  you 
see  the  isle  of  Groix,  the  spires  of  Plouharnel,  Erdeven,  and 
Etel. 

Facing  the  north,  the  spires  of  Ploemel,  Auray,  Saint 
Anne,  Arradon,  and  Crach,  are  to  be  seen  in  the  distance : 
nearer  at  hand,  and  flanked  by  numerous  dolmens,  are  the 
three  strange  alignments  of  menhirs,  or  groups  of  gigantic 
standing  stones,  viz.  Mdnec  (the  place  of  stones,  or  in  another 
rendering  the  place  of  remembrance)  ;  Kermario  (the  place 
of  the  dead);  and  Ker-lescan  (the  place  of  burning.)  Under 
your  feet  almost,  and  to  the  right,  are  the  Gallo- Roman  ruins 
of  the  Bossenno,  and  behind  these  the  finely-wooded  hill  and 
celebrated  dolmen  of  Ker-Cado. 

The  base  of  the  tumulus  which  surmounts  the  Mont  St. 
Michel  forms  an  oval,  measuring  400  feet  in  its  major  axis, 
and  200  feet  in  its  minor  axis.  The  present  height  of  the 
tumulus  above  the  crest  of  the  hill  is  "33  feet,  but  it  may  be 
supposed  that  it  had  been  much  higher  in  times  previous  to 
4|  the  different  levellings  to  which  it  has  been  subjected  :  very 
•  possibly  some  of  these  may  have  occurred  during  the  Roman 
occupation,  and  certainly  in  later  times,  for  the  preparation  of 
the  site  of  the  chapel  dedicated  to  St.  Michael,  which  now 
occupies   part  of  the   summit.     Near  the   chapel   stands   a 


(,'•' 


#; 


M  . 


f- 
< 

-J 
a< 

J 

X 
■■J 


H 
O 


THE  MONT  ST.   MICHEL.  149 

curious  cross,  rudely  sculptured  in  granite.*  At  the  west  end 
of  the  summit  are  the  ruins  of  a  semaphore  which  was  worked 
in  the  beginning  of  this  century. 

This  tumulus  is  similar  to  the  mounds  of  stones  called  in 
the  Celtic  Cam,  in  the  lowland  dialects  cairn.  Hence,  it 
seems  to  me,  is  the  origin  of  the  name  of  the  neighbouring 
village  Carnac  (the  place  of  the  cam),  and  this  idea  is 
strengthened  by  the  name  of  the  village  at  the  foot  of  the  hill, 
Cru-Carnact  (the  rocky  hill  of  the  cam). 

M.  Rene  Galles,  in  his  report  on  the  diggings  of  Mont 
St.  Michel  in  September  1862,  estimates  that  a  mass  of  earth 
and  stones  equal  to  40,000  cubic  yards  had  been  transported 
to  the  summit  of  this  hill,  the  highest  in  the  district,  for  the 
construction  of  the  tumulus.  I  shall  here  quote  a  passage 
from  the  same  report,  which  alludes  to  the  construction  of  the 
tumulus,  a  view  and  section  of  which  is  shown  in  pi.  I. 

"  With  the  view  of  facilitating  our  preparatory  researches 
as  much  as  possible,  we  marked  on  the  platform  of  the  tumulus 
the  line  of  its  major  axis.  A  series  of  pits  were  next  sunk 
from  this  line,  which  passed  through  a  layer  of  stones  for 
2  feet  8  inches,  and  then  came  upon  a  bed  of  fine  clay  dried, 
and  probably  beaten  hard.  A  similar  envelope  of  fine  clay 
has  been  found  in  the  tombs  which  follow  the  line  of  the 
coast.  This  for  a  long  time  was  regarded  as  composed  of 
ashes.  It  had  evidently  been  formed  with  the  view  of  having 
a  compact  and  solid  covering  over  the  mass  of  dry  stones,  so 
as  to  prevent  the  infiltration  of  rain-water.  We  determined 
by  trials  that  along  the  summit  the  depth  of  this  bed  of  fine 

*  See  the  figure  at  the  end  of  this  Chapter. 

f  The  inhabitants  call   this  village    indifferently  either  Cru-Carnac  or 
Clou-Camac.     In  the  ancient  titles  it  is  written  Cru-Carnac 


150  THE   MONT   ST.   MICHEL. 

clay  was  5  feet  4  inches,  and  that  below  it  a  cairn  of  dry  stones 
extended  all  along  the  tumulus. 

"  Having  determined  the  situation  of  a  point  a  little  to  the 
east  of  the  centre  of  the  tumulus,  I  commenced  to  sink  a  pit, 
having  an  orifice,  measuring  3  feet  4  inches  by  6  feet  8  inches, 
and  which,  according  to  our  calculations,  ought  to  pass  very 
close  to  the  chamber  in  the  interior  of  the  monument,  the 
proximity  of  which  would  likely  be  indicated  by  some  change 
in  the  aggregation  of  the  heaped-up  stones.  Near  this  place 
we  expected  from  our  levels  to  find  the  summit  of  the  hill  which 
supports  the  tumulus,  is  prolonged  under  it,  and  where  we 
expected  to  find  that  the  central  chamber  had  been  constructed. 
This  difficult  work  was  performed  by  skilful  workmen,  who 
had  been  placed  at  our  disposal  by  the  kindness  of  the  director 
of  the  tin-mines  of  La  Ville-d'Er,  for  it  was  found  necessary 
to  take  energetic  measures  to  protect  ourselves  against  the 
falling  in  of  the  heaped-up  stones  which  rolled  about  us  like 
lead  shot  in  a  sack."^^ 

M.  Rene  Galles  then  goes  on  to  state  that  at  a  depth  of 
26  feet  3  inches  they  came  upon  the  chamber,  and  found 
therein  eleven  stone  axes  in  jade,  two  large  stone  axes  in  a 
coarser  material,  twenty-six  small  stone  axes  in  fibrolite,  nine 
pendants,  and  one  hundred  and  one  beads ;  some  of  which 
were  in  jasper,  others  in  turquoise  ;  two  flakes  of  flint,  and  a 
number  of  little  beads  formed  of  a  sort  of  ivory.  These 
objects  are  now  exhibited  in  the  Museum  of  the  Polymathic 
Society  of  the  Morbihan  at  Vannes. 

One  evening  in  the  month  of  April   1875,  when  passing 

*  Fouilles  dti  Mont  St.  Michel  en  Carnac,faitcs  en  Scptembre,  1862,  par 
Rene  Galles,  etc.     Vannes,  3<^  edition. 


Si  ^ 


THE  MONT  ST.   MICHEL.  161 

along  the  south  side  of  the  tumulus,  I  remarked  for  the  first 
time  under  the  effect  of  a  peculiar  light  some  inequalities  in 
the  surface  of  the  ground  which  surprised  me,  as  I  had  so 
often  passed  there  before  without  observing  them.  In  poking 
amongst  the  grass  with  my  walking-stick  I  struck  upon  some 
stones  which  appeared  to  be  arranged  in  a  line,  and  turned  up 
some  fragments  of  roofing-tiles  (tegulce)  and  Gallo-Roman 
pottery.  A  short  inspection  of  the  dry  stone  wall  forming  the 
demarcation  of  the  adjoining  fields  showed  that  it  contained 
numerous  dressed  stones.  These  indications  made  me  resolve 
to  prosecute  some  researches  here  so  soon  as  time  permitted 
and  the  necessary  permission  could  be  obtained. 

We  commenced  these  researches  in  the  month  of  June 
1876  ;  the  results  were  the  discovery  of  four  curious  construc- 
tions running  in  an  east  and  west  direction,  which  are  severally 
noted  in  the  accompanying  plan  of  the  Mont.  St.  Michel  by 
the  letters  L,  M,  N,  and  O. 

We  commenced  by  opening  up  the  ground  near  the  stones 
in  line  above  mentioned,  and  soon  found  remains  of  dwellings. 

The  construction  L,  on  being  laid  bare,  was  found  to  be 
of  a  rectangular  form,  measuring  54  feet  in  length  by  1 7  feet 
in  breadth.  What  remained  of  its  walls  had  an  average  height 
of  2  feet,  and  i  foot  8  inches  in  breadth. 

The  walls  of  this  building,  and  also  those  of  the  construc- 
tions M,  N,  and  O,  were  all  rudely  built  of  undressed  stones, 
bound  with  a  mortar  of  argillaceous  earth,  having  the  exterior 
but  not  the  interior  corners  rounded  off,  and  the  courses  of 
masonry,  instead  of  being  level,  followed  the  slope  of  the  hill. 
The  extraction  of  building  stone  from  a  quarry  cutting  into 
the  building  L  had  destroyed  the  greater  portion  of  it. 

The  following  objects  were  found  during  the  excavation 
of  the  construction  L  : — 


152  THE   MONT   ST.   MICHEL. 

Several  fragments  of  roofing-tiles  (iegulcs)  near  the  surface 
of  the  soil. 

Several  pieces  of  grey  schist,  measuring  i  foot  by  lo  inches 
and  half-an-inch  thick,  probably  parts  of  roofing-slates. 

Near  the  north-east  angle  a  sufficient  number  of  fragments 
were  found  to  determine  the  greater  part  of  the  form  of  a  vase 
rudely  moulded  by  hand,  and  still  bearing  the  marks  of  the 
potter's  fingers  all  over  it.  It  had  a  flat  bottom  and  upright 
sides,  the  rim  turned  out  at  a  right  angle,  the  paste  reddish- 
brown,  coarse,  with  scales  of  talc  visible,  and  badly  fired. 
The  diameter  across  the  exterior  of  the  rim  is  2  inches,  and 
across  the  interior  1 1  inches.  A  thick  coating  of  soot  on 
the  surface  indicates  that  it  had  been  used  for  cooking.  In 
one  of  the  fragments  of  the  bottom  a  band  of  iron  was  em- 
bedded, which  had  doubtless  served  to  support  it  over  the 
fireplace. 

Several  fragments  of  pottery  in  coarse  yellow  paste. 

A  few  fragments  of  vases  in  a  yellow  paste,  covered  with 
a  green  vitreous  glazing. 

Four  flakes  of  flint. 

A  small  round  bead  in  brick  earth. 

A  four-sided  whetstone,  having  a  groove  cut  round  the 
head,  probably  for  suspension.  (Mont  St.  Michel,  pi.  III. 
fig.  I,  natural  size.) 

A  whorl  formed  from  a  fragment  of  a  vase  in  red  paste, 
the  perforation  oblique  and  eccentric. 

In  clearing  away  the  ground  between  the  constructions  M 
and  N,  the  traces  of  fire,  viz.  ashes  and  charcoal,  were  found, 
.and  these  were  more  strongly  marked  at  the  north-east  corner 
of  M,  where  we  cut  into  the  tumulus.  It  appears  to  me  that 
these  traces  of  fire  had  no  connection  with  the  buildings  M 


Tofac€pagt  159. 


MONT  ST.  MICHEL,   PLATE  IIL 


THE  MONT  ST.   MICHEL.  153 

and  N,  but  may  be  attributed  to  the  time  of  tlie  construction 
of  the  Tumulus. 

The  following  objects  were  found  here  : 
A  flint  knife.     (PI.  III.  fig.  2,  natural  size.) 
A  piece  of  iron  measuring  6  inches  in  length,  4  inches  in 
breadth  and  ^-inch  thick,  much  oxidised  ;  use  unknown. 

Fragment  of  a  curiously  shaped  vase,  in  a  pale  yellow 
paste,  well  fired,  sonorous,  covered  with  a  light  green  vitreous 
glazing,  and  ornamented  with  a  line  of  lozenge-shaped 
markings.  (PI.  IV.  fig.  3,  natural  size.)  Pottery  of  this 
description  is  generally  believed  to  be  not  earlier  than  the 
twelfth  century. 

In  the  centre  of  the  large  apartment  No.  i  the  fireplace 
was  indicated  by  some  stones  embedded  in  the  floor  :  these, 
reddened  by  the  action  of  fire,  were  covered  with  a  small 
quantity  of  charcoal  and  ashes,  whilst  around  them  were 
several  flint  flakes  and  shells  of  the  limpet  {Patella  vulgata). 

At  the  foot  of  the  north  wall  we  found  : 

A  small  fragment  of  a  polished  stone  axe  in  diorite. 

A  piece  of  blue  slate  measuring  4  inches  in  length,  i^  inch 
in  breadth,  and  \  inch  in  thickness ;  rounded  at  one  end  and 
having  polished  edges. 

A  piece  of  vitrified  scoriae. 

A  small  stone  hammer  of  hemispheric  form  in  grayish 
flint,  2  inches  in  diameter. 

A  spindle  whorl  in  a  brownish  paste  mixed  with  small 
grains  of  quartz,  well  fired,  hollow  on  one  face.  (PI.  III.  fig. 
4,  natural  size.) 

Fragment  of  the  tibia  of  a  ruminant. 

Several    fragments  of    pottery  in  a  coarse  brown  paste. 


154  THE   MONT   ST.   MICHEL. 

covered  with  soot  on  the  exterior,  similar  to  the  vase  described 
in  the  building  L. 

Several  fragments  of  very  coarse  pottery,  some  being  in  a 
yellow  and  others  in  a  brown  paste,  badly  fired. 

Near  the  north-east  corner,  on  the  floor  : 
A  nucleus  or  core  of  silex,  from  which  flakes  had  been 
struck  off. 

Near  the  foot  of  the  south  wall  : 

A  small  fragment  of  fine  thin  glass. 

A  round  piece  of  thin  blue  slate,  having  the  edge  cut 
smooth,  3  inches  in  diameter. 

Several  pieces  of  gray  slate,  perforated  with  holes  J 
inch  in  diameter,  and  very  irregularly  formed ;  probably  part 
of  the  roof  of  the  building. 

In  the  room  No.  2,  on  the  floor  at  the  north-west  corner  : 
Four  flint  flakes. 

A  small  round  piece  of  slate,  smoothed,  f  inch  in 
diameter. 

Several  pieces  of  slate  partly  calcined. 

On  the  floor  of  the  doorway  opening  to  the  north  : 

A  flake  of  flint  and  a  fragment  of  a  glass  cup. 

The  building  N,  also  of  rectangular  form,  measures  50  feet 
in  length  by  22  feet  in  breadth.  It  is  composed  of  three 
apartments  of  unequal  dimensions,  having  no  communication 
with  each  other,  each  apartment  having  a  doorway  giving 
access  from  the  south.  The  walls  and  masonry  are  of  the 
same  description  as  those  of  the  buildings  L  and  M,  and  the 
floor  is  formed  by  a  bed  of  argillaceous  earth. 

The  room  No.  i  measured  20  feet  in  length  by  15  feet  in 
breadth. 


THE   MONT  ST.   MICHEL.  155 

No.  2  measured  15  feet  8  inches  by  10  feet. 

No.  3        „  15    ..     8      „        „   10    „      3  inches. 

The  following  objects  were  found  here  : 

In  the  room  No.  i,  on  the  floor,  a  flake  of  grayish  flint. 

Near  the  south-west  corner  : 

A  whorl,  two  inches  in  diameter,  formed  out  of  a  fragment 
of  a  vase,  in  a  yellowish  red  paste. 

A  small  ball,  in  brick  earth,  f  inch  in  diameter. 

A  piece  of  red  coarse  pottery  cut  into  a  disc,  i  inch  in 
diameter. 

Near  the  south-east  corner  : 

Fragments  of  vases  of  different  forms,  in  yellow  and  grey 
pastes. 

At  the  foot  of  the  east  wall ; 

Several  fragments  of  a  vase  in  a  yellow  paste,  hard  and 
sonorous,  covered  with  a  light  green  vitreous  glazing,  and 
ornamented  with  circular  fluted  bands. 

Near  the  north  wall : 

Part  of  the  tibia  of  a  ruminant. 

In  the  room  No.  2,  on  the  floor : 

Three  cores  or  nuclei  in  silex. 

Fragments  of  a  pestle  in  granite,  2|  inches  in  diameter. 

Two  round  stones  in  polished  nephrite. 

On  the  outside  of  the  doorway  of  this  room  : 
Several  fragments  of  vases  similar  to  that  found  in  the 
building  L. 


156  THE   MONT   ST.   MICHEL. 

Fragment  of  the  rim  of  a  plate  of  octagonal  shape,  having 
a  rude  ornament  at  each  angle  formed  from  the  print  of  the 
potter's  thumb. 

In  the  room  No.  3,  on  the  floor : 

One  of  a  set  of  discs  cut  in  granite,  2^  inches  in  diameter 
and  f  inch  thick. 

An  unfinished  whorl  formed  from  a  piece  of  coarse  red 
pottery,  half  perforated. 

On  the  outside  of  the  north  wall,  near  the  foot : 

A  few  fragments  of  ridge  tiles  of  a  pale  yellow  paste, 

having  an  ornament  on  the  upper  part  of  diamond-shaped 

figures  in  relief. 

The  building  O  forms  a  parallelogram  terminating  in  a 
hemicycle  at  the  east  end,  measuring  51  feet  in  length  by  22 
feet  in  breadth.  The  walls  are  of  unequal  thickness,  and  in 
the  north-east  portion  are  merely  blocked  into  the  tumulus,  and 
consequently  there  they  have  no  exterior  face.  This  also 
proves  that  the  construction  of  this  building  was  posterior  to 
that  of  the  tumulus.  The  average  height  and  style  of  masonry 
are  the  same  as  in  the  preceding  buildings. 

The  building  O  is  divided  into  two  rooms,  the  smaller  of 
which.  No.  I,  measures  16  feet  in  length  by  12  feet  in  breadth, 
and  communicated  with  the  room  No.  2  by  a  doorway  5  feet 
6  inches  in  width. 

The  room  No.  2,  measuring  36  feet  10  inches  in  length  by 
1 6  feet  in  breadth,  has  a  doorway  5  feet  6  inches  wide,  giving 
access  from  the  outside  on  the  south  side  of  the  building. 
Opposite  this  doorway,  and  embedded  in  the  floor  at  the  foot 
of  the  north  wall,  is  a  dressed  slab  of  granite  measuring  3  feet 
in  length  by  i  foot  6  inches  in  breadth. 


THE  MONT  ST.  MICHEL.  157 

When  commencing  the  excavation  of  this  building  a 
muskct-ball  was  found  near  the  surface  of  the  ground,  possibly 
a  souvenir  of  1 815.  At  that  time  both  the  village  of  Carnac 
and  the  Mont  St.  Michel  were  held  by  the  "  Blues,"  when  a 
strong  party  of  "  Chouans  "  arrived,  and  after  a  sharp  skirmish 
gained  possession  of  both  these  places. 

The  following  objects  were  found  during  the  excavation  of 
this  building. 

In  the  room  No.  i,  on  the  floor: 

Two  pieces  of  flint. 

Two  discs  made  of  brick  tiles,  2  inches  in  diameter. 

Half  of  a  spindle  whorl  in  brick  paste,  i  inch  in  diameter. 

Part  of  a  horse-shoe,  iron. 

Two  iron  nails. 

Several  fragments  of  ridge  tiles,  the  same  as  those  found 
in  the  building  N,  and  others  having  a  line  of  oval-shaped 
ornaments  on  the  top  in  relief. 

Two  teeth  of  the  pig. 

Knee-cap  bone,  and  part  of  the  thigh-bone  of  a  ruminant. 

In  the  room  No.  2,  on  the  floor : — 

Several  slates  ^  inch  in  thickness,  perhaps  part  of  the 
roof  of  the  building. 

Two  discs  formed  of  brick  tile  i^  inch  in  diameter. 

Small  round  piece  of  slate  |  inch  in  diameter,  having  the 
figure  of  a  cross  incised. 

Fragment  of  a  glass  cup  thin  and  clear. 

A  considerable  quantity  of  fragments  of  coarse  brownish- 
red  earthenware. 

Fragment  of  a  plate  of  an  octagonal  shape,  in  a  gray- 
brown  paste,  having  an  ornament  at  the  angles  formed  by  the 
print  of  the  potter's  thumb. 


158  THE    MONT    ST.    MICHEL. 

Fragment  of  a  vase  in  a  yellow  paste,  having  a  band  of 
oval-shaped  ornaments  in  relief,  formed  by  the  print  of  the 
potter's  fingers.     (PI.  IV.  fig.  4,  natural  size.) 

Several  fragments  of  a  vase  in  a  yellow-red  paste,  having 
thin  sides  and  the  rim  turned  inwards.  One  of  the  fragments 
is  riveted  with  brass  wire. 

The  neck,  handle,  and  other  fragments  of  a  vase  in  a 
yellow  paste,  of  the  form  of  a  water  bottle,  pierced  with  a 
number  of  small  holes.  (PI.  IV.  figs,  i  and  2,  natural  size.) 
Similar  pottery  was  found  in  the  Mound  D. 

Two  fragments  of  a  plate  in  yellow  earth  covered  with  a 
green  vitreous  glazing,  and  having  a  collar  round  the  rim. 

Bottom  of  a  small  vase  2^  inches  in  diameter,  in  a  red 
paste,  and  covered  in  the  interior  with  a  vitreous  glazing  of  a 
light  green  colour. 

A  large  quantity  of  fragments  of  coarse  pottery  in  yellow 
and  in  gray  paste. 

Near  the  north-west  corner  were  the  traces  of  a  fireplace, 
ashes,  charcoal,  and  shells  of  the  limpet  (Patella  vulgata). 

At  the  foot  of  the  north  wall : — 

Several  fragments  of  slate  having  an  ornament  formed  by 
incised  lines  rudely  cut  in  squares  and  lozenges. 

In  the  trench  cut  outside  the  semicircular  termination,  at 
the  depth  of  3  feet  4  inches  : 

A  polished  stone  axe  in  white  flint,  which  seemed  to  have 
undergone  the  action  of  fire.     (PI.  III.  fig.  3,  natural  size.) 

In  taking  a  general  survey  of  these  ruins,  and  the  objects 
found  in  them,  there  arises  a  dififiiculty  in  the  want  of  sufficient 
data,  which  prevents  any  exact  conclusion  as  to  their  date. 
The  evidence  of  the  ruins  is  only  of  a  negative  character ;  no 
tradition  exists  about  them,  no  document  mentions  them,  and 


Tf/aafof  158. 


MONT  ST.  MICHEL,   PLATE  IV. 


THE   MONT   ST.   MICHEL.  169 

so  far  as  I  can  ascertain  they  were  entirely  unknown  in  the 
country  before  the  excavations  just  described  brought  them 
to  light. 

At  the  Bossenno  we  had  the  remains  of  houses  carefully 
and  well  built  in  regular  courses  of  small  cubic  stones,  the 
walls  richly  ornamented,  and  floors  covered  with  cement. 
Here  the  constructions  are  in  rough  irregular  masonry,  the 
walls  are  destitute  of  plaster,  and  the  floors  of  cement.  They 
are  evidently  not  Gallo- Roman.  But  the  fragments  of  Roman 
tiles  and  pottery  found  on  the  tumulus,  and  the  small  cubic 
building  stones  in  the  wall  of  the  adjacent  field,  all  indicate 
that  there  must  have  been  a  Roman  or  Gallo- Roman  con- 
struction hereabouts,  probably  at  a  period  anterior  to  that  of 
the  ruins. 

The  rude  masonry,  the  rounding  off  at  the  corners,  the 
hearth  in  the  middle  of  the  floor, — all  of  these  forcibly  remind 
one  of  the  ancient  form  of  rudely  built  dwellings  still  con- 
structed in  the  Hebrides. 

In  cutting  below  the  floors  of  the  constructions  M,  N,  and 
O,  we  came  upon  the  bed  of  fine  clay  which  has  been  already 
mentioned  as  covering  the  tumulus,  then  the  wall  of  the  build- 
ing was  in  part  blocked  into  the  tumulus.  These  facts  are 
sufficient  to  show  that  the  buildings  were  erected  subsequently 
to  the  construction  of  the  tumulus. 

The  objects  found  in  and  about  these  buildings  belong  to 
epochs  so  very  different,  that  inferences  drawn  from  them  are 
necessarily  conflicting.  It  appears  to  me  that  there  is  no 
connection  between  these  buildings  and  the  stone  implements 
found  outside  their  walls,  which  may  be  classed  with  the 
date  of  the  sepulchral  rites  before  the  elevation  of  the 
tumulus. 

Some  of  the  pottery  collected  in  these  buildings  may  be 


160  THE  MONT  ST.   MICHEL. 

classed  as  of  Celtic  type,  but  alongside  of  these  fragments  were 
some  belonging  to  the  Middle  Ages,  and  others  which  cannot 
be  dated  before  the  seventeenth  century. 

The  ruins  may  thus  perhaps  be  the  remains  of  one  of  the 
primitive  monastic  establishments  which  were  founded  by  the 
emigrants  from  Great  Britain,  on  their  arrival  in  Armorica. 
Under  that  hypothesis  the  building  O  would  have  been  the 
church  of  the  convent ;  its  form  and  size  are  similar  to  the 
primitive  Christian  churches  in  Brittany.  On  the  other  hand, 
these  buildings,  after  having  been  abandoned  by  the  brother- 
hood, may  have  been  occupied  up  to  a  comparatively  modern 
time  by  men  of  different  generations  who  have  left  the  traces 
of  their  occupation  behind  them. 

De  Caumont  states  in  his  Architecture  Religieuse  that  the 
primitive  Christian  churches  were  copied  from  the  Roman 
basilicas,  which  served  the  double  purpose  of  tribunals  and 
commercial  exchanges. 

One  of  the  oldest  constructions  which  remains  in  Brittany 
is  the  chapel  of  St.   Agatha,    in  the  department  of  He  et 


12  FELT 

I   .    .   I    .    .    I   I    .   I 


NORTH 


GROUND-PLAN  OF  CHAPEL  OF  ST.  AGATHA. 

Vilaine.  It  is  situated  close  to  the  parish  church  of  Langon, 
about  a  mile  from  the  railway  station  of  Fougeray  Langon, 
on  the  line  between  Rennes  and  Redon.     The  general  form 


THE  MONT   ST.  MICHEL.  161 

of  this  chapel  is  that  of  the  ancient  basilicas.     The  nave 
measures  26  feet  3  inches  in  length  by  12  feet  in  breadth. 
The  apse  or  hemicycle  at  the  east  end  measures  6  feet  7 
inches  by  1 2  feet.     The  walls  are  of  Roman  work  built  with 
small  cubic  stones,  averaging  3^  inches  of  a  side,  and  having 
the  courses  separated  by  a  layer  of  lime  mortar  f  of  an  inch 
in  thickness.     These  courses  are  regulated  at  intervals  by 
double  rows  of  long  bricks.     The  entrance,  which  is  from  the 
south,  is  covered  by  a  Roman  arch,  which  seems,  however,  to 
be  of  more  recent  construction  than  the  body  of  the  church. 
The  windows  are  very  small,  and,  from  their  destroying  the 
uniformity  of  the  masonry,  appear  to  have  been  inserted  after 
the  erection  of  the  building.     These  are  four  in  number,  one 
in  the  apse,  two  in  the  north  wall,  and  one  in  the  front.     A 
few  years  ago,  on  removing  from  the  vault  of  the  apse  a  thick 
coat  of  plaster  covered  with  the  rude  painting  of  the  Middle 
Ages,  there  was  discovered  the  most  curious  fresco-painting 
which   the    Romans   have   left   in   Brittany.       It   represents 
Venus  rising  from  a  blue  sea,  surrounded  with  fishes,  among 
which  is  a  dolphin  playing. 

This  chapel  is  mentioned  in  a  charter  of  the  twelfth 
century  as  Ecclesia  Sancti  Veneris.  The  patron  of  Pluvigner 
near  Auray  is  Saint  Vener,  or  Vigner.  The  chapel  of  St. 
Agatha  must  have  been  erected  originally  as  a  Gallo- Roman 
temple  of  Venus,  and  afterwards  dedicated  to  a  saint  bearing 
a  similar  name.  The  Breton  name  for  Venus  is  Vener. 
Gregoire  de  Rostrennen  gives  it  as  Wetter,  Vener,  Gicefter.* 

This  superposition  of  constructions  of  so  different  a  nature 
on  the  Mont  St.  Michel  is  the  very  history  of  Brittany,  where 
at  every  point  you  meet  with  traces  of  three  great  periods 

*  Dictionnaire  Franpis-Cdtique  seu  Fran(ois-Breton,  par  le  P.  F.  Gregoire 
de  Rostrennen.     Rennes,  1732. 

M 


162 


THE   MONT  ST.  MICHEL. 


confused  together  in  the  minds  of  the  people — viz.  the  period 
of  the  stone  monuments,  usually  called  Celtic  ;  the  period 
of  the  Roman  domination ;  and  the  Christian  period.  The 
cam  or  tumulus  was  erected  on  the  hill ;  then  came  Roman 
constructions  ;  and,  lastly,  the  Christian  Church  and  cross 
which  now  crown  the  summit  of  the  tumulus. 


CROSS  ON  THE  MONT  ST.  MICHEL. 


in 


^S 


(tj 


CO 


ti 

5     ^ 
•-J     • 

-   ■*> 

i     •• 

i  N 


■5       H 


UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO 
LIBRARY 


Do    not 
re  move 
the   card 
from    this 
Pocket. 


Acme   Library   Card   Packet 

Under  Pat.  "  Kfl.  Index  Vile." 
Made  by  LIBKAEY  BUREAU 


